J67 15305209 103385
A HELP FOR THE UNDERSTANDING OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURE. Intended chiefly for the assistance and information of those that use constantly every day to reade some part of the Bible, and would gladly alwayes understand what they reade if they had some man to help them. The first part. Containing certain short notes of exposition upon the five books of Moses, to wit, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomie: Wherein First, all such passages in the Text are explained as were thought likely to be questioned by any Reader of ordinary capacity; Secondly, in many clauses those things are discovered which are need∣full and usefull to be known, and not so easily at the first reading observed; and Thirdly, many places that might at first seem to contradict one another are reconciled. By ARTHUR JACKSON, Preacher of Gods word in Woodstreet, LONDON. MATT. 24. 15. Who so readeth let him understand. Act. 8. 30. 31. And Philip ran thither to him and heard him reade the Prophet Esaias, and said, Understandest thou what thou readest? And he said, How can I except some man should guide me? Omnes qui legimus nitimur hoc indagare atque comprehendere quod voluit ille quem legimus. Aug. Confess. lib. 12. cap. 18. Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the University of Cambridge: And are to be sold at the signe of the Angel in Lumbards;treet. ANNO DOM. MDCXLIII.
To my well▪beloved friends and neighbours of my charge in WOOD STREET LONDON. Right dearly beloved in the Lord, THis poore work of mine, the first-fruits of my labours in this kind, must needs passe through your hands to the publick view, not onely in regard of the speciall interest you have in me, whom your selves were pleased many years since to chuse to be your Pastor to feed your souls, but also in regard the work it self was at first col∣lected, and composed purposely for your service and use. It is now above twenty years since the Lord was pleased to open a doore unto me for the preaching of the Gospelof Christ amongst you, wherein, though with much weaknesse, I have endeavoured to the utmost of my power, I blesse God, to build you up in the knowledge of God and of Christ▪ and need no other witnesses then yourselves, that I have not sought yours but you, as having indeed from my first entrance amongst you resolved with the Apostle, very gladly to spend, and to be spent for you, though the more abundantly I loved you the lesse I were loved by you.
Amongst other wayes wherein I have studied to be ser∣viceable to your souls, it pleased God to put into my heart that I would undertake the unfolding of such passages of the holy Scripture as were somewhat more difficult and obscure to such as would come in and partake of my labours therein; and the end I propounded to my self in this was, both that I my self might hereby be the better enabled in publick also to declare unto you the whole counsell of God, as occasion was offered; and that you likewise might with the more advan∣tage and comfort exercise your selves in your private reading of those sacred volumes. Now having for severall years spent some time every Lords day in this imploiment, I was at length importuned by some friends, that were partakers of my labours therein, to prepare those Annotations for the Presse, which were the chief substance of that which I had collected for that service. They alledged what satisfaction and comfort themselves had received in the hearing of them, and what an advantage it might be both to them and others, if they might have them ready at hand at all times to inform them in any thing they scrupled in their private reading; and so farre I was swayed with what they said, that I resolved in the publishing of one part of them to make triall whether they would find that ap∣probation and welcome abroad, that might give encourage∣ment to send orth the rest after them. These indeed come forth in a sad time, when arms are in farre more request then books; but we must herein submit to the good will of God. It hath fared with this Book in this, as with many a traveller that hath prepared for a journey when the sunne shined fair, and yet was constrained at last to go forth in a storm. When I began first to transcribe these
Notes for the Presse the skie was clear and shined upon us, and yet now when they should go forth, the whole kingdome is overspread with a cloud, that is like to poure down showrs of bloud upon the whole land: the Lord give us grace to turn to him, who hath promised to be a refuge from the storm. Well, but yet the book being passed the Presse, and being withall to go upon Gods businesse, I was unwilling to for∣bear the publishing of it, especially when I began to con∣sider, that the drift of it was to help men to reade the Scrip∣ture with profit, and that there is never more need for men to be much in studying Gods word then in troublesome and sad times, God having there stored up those cordialls for us which in such times must chear up the sick fainting spirits of his poore afflicted servants: unlesse thy Law had been my delight, saith David, Psal. 119. 92. I then had perished in my afflictions. Having therefore resolved to publish it, and to leave the suc∣cesse to the good providence of God, I here present it to you in the first place, to whom it doth of right belong. If it may prove a means to bring you, whose souls God hath com∣mitted to my charge, to be in love with the Scripture, or adde any thing to your stock of knowledge and grace, I have if not all, yet my chief desire. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our father, which hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting consolation and good hope through grace, comfort your hearts and stablish you in every good word and work. And so I commend you to Gods grace, and desire likewise your prayers unto God for him who is Yours in the surest band of Christian affection ARTHUR JACKSON.
from reading his word, because there are some places they shall meet with which they shall find above their reach; yet because of this we presse tem to be the more carefull to search diligently for the meaning of what they reade, to be wary of perverting the good word of God, and to that end both to pray unto Go often that he would therein reveal the truth unto them, and to make use of those for their help whom God hath furnished with gifts above others for the reolving of such doubts as they shall meet with in their reading. And indeed that I might be serviceable to the weaker sort of Gods people herein, hav I yielded to publish thee Annotations, which at first I ga∣thered for the more private use of my self and some others. Many I know there are that are carefull every day to redeem some time from their world∣ly imployments for the reading of the Bible, that yet eap not that profit they might by their reading, because they passe over many places which they understand not; and how usefull it would be for them if they had some larger Notes of exposition by them, then those can be that are in the mar∣gin of some Bibles, which they might jointly reade together with the chapter they reade, we may asily judge by the advantage which those short mar∣ginall notes have yilded to those that have made use of them. Now though I dare not hope to go through such a work as this would be (neither my strength nor years will allow me to propound such an aim to my self) yet I hope it will be accepted if I may but contribute somewhat towards it, and others may perhaps be stirred up to joyn their help to the same service. I hae aready through Gods assistance passed through the Historicall part of te old Testament, and would hope to go forward if the Lord would be pleased to remove from us that heavy judgement of the sword, and re∣store unto us eaceable times. But for the present I could onely transcribe for the Presse this first part, upon the five books of Moses; and besides, I am desirous to see what approbation this may find amongst those whose judge∣ment may be farre better then mine own, before I would adventure to send forth the rest. There are onely two particulars wherein I shall need to give satisfaction
for what I have done. First, I have not at all meddled with the many doubts tat have been raised by Interpreters concerning the different wayes of translating some passages in the Originall Text, but have onely endeavour∣ed to unfold the meaning of the Text according to our last Translation; one∣ly I have for the most part taken in that reading also which is added in the margin of our Bibles. If there be any man that stumbles at this, I desire him to consider that I intended this work chiefly for those that onely under∣stand their own language, and such knotty disputes concerning the Originall must needs have mightily puzzled such readers, but could never have been any way profitable for them. And this I trust will satisfie him. Again, having made use of many learned Expositours, in searching out the meaning of those places that I have undertaken to explain, some may perhaps wish that I had some way insrted their names, as I went along, to the end that for teir better satisfaction those that questioned any exposition might have had recourse to their works, to perue what they had written therein. And the truth is, that had I from the beginning intended to pub∣lish these Notes it is most like that I shoud have taken that course: but considering (as I said before) that I looked chiefly to the satising of those that are not skilled in such Authours, I could not think it worth the while to revise the whole book for the doing of this. This is all that I have to say; onely I shall desire that those that will vouchsafe to peruse thse my poore labours, would have a Bible by them, & still reade the text there as they go; for else I dare say they will not find that benefit by their reading, which observing that course I hope tey may find. I shall leave all to the good blessing of God, and desire that if any good be done hereby the glory may all redound to him, wo is able to do much good by weak means. To him I commend thee, Christian Reader, and rest, Thine in the Lord Jesus ARTHUR JACKSON. ERRATA. Pag. 133. l▪ 3. read mnner to appear to him. 135. l. 14 r. me; ths 152. . 25 r. t. 1. 2. 158▪ l. 2. r. re. 171. l. 2. r. Lord Jehvah. 96 l. 5. r. Hr. 202. l 4 r. Sanctuary and the 204 l. 2. twinne. 219. l. 7 del most. 244▪ l. 41. Levit. 1. 261. l. . hands 264 l▪ 20. light holy. 26 l. 41. commended. 278. l. 4. five sacr ices. 30. l. 30. dwelt. 2 l 3. our Gol. 328. l 4. he tent. 339▪ l. 18. Lv 2 2. 380. l. 4. Aaron. 382. l. 30 l ght holy. 385. l. 40. t wa. 97. 35, 38 Suphah. 40. 14, 15, 20. Chmosh 40. l. 14▪ right unto; thus. 430. l. 40. thi it. 4▪ 7. l. 33. dle l. y. 50. l 41. peson. 57. l▪ 30. a basket 48. l. 1. him, l. 14 affcted.
ANNOTATIONS On the first book of MOSES called GENESIS. CHAP. I. IN the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.] Many of our best Expositours, and that not without good probabilitie, conceive these words to be a generall proposition concerning the whole creation (which is afterwards more particularly unfolded, by setting down in what time, and in what order and manner this was done, and what were the se∣verall works of the six dayes;) to wit, That in the beginning God created the heaven and the earth, that is, that all things were at first created by God, the heavens, & the earth, and all the host of them, as it is afterwards expressed chap. 2. 1. or the world, and all therein, as S. Paul spake, Act. 17. 24. This Moses affirmeth here in the first verse; but then how, after what man∣ner, and in what order they were created, that is afterwards related in the follow∣ing part of the chapter. Yet others again (& that I think most probably) understand this which is here said, to be the work of the first dayes creation, to wit, that God in the beginning, on the first day, created the heaven, that is, the highest heaven, the dwelling place of the Angels, called the heaven of heavens, 1. King. 8. 27. and the earth, that whole confused Chaos of earth and water, which was as yet without form and void, as it is afterwards described in the second verse. And indeed because it is said, Job 38. 6, 7. that the morning starres sang together, and the sonnes of God shouted for joy, when God laid the foundations of the earth, which is meant of the Angels; it seems most probable, that this highest heaven, and so the Angels together with it, were first created, and so was a main part of the work of the first day. It is true, there is no mention made of the angels, neither here, nor in any other part of the chapter; but that is, because Moses purposely intended to relate
onely the creation of things corporall and visible, & that happily as having regard therein to the rudenesse and weaknesse of that infant-Church of the Jews, for whom he wrote this history. For that the angels were at first created by God of nothing, as all other things were, is evident by many other places of Scripture, as Psal. 104. 4. Who maketh his angels spirits. Col. 1. 16. By him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible, and invisible, &c. Psal. 148. 2▪ 5. Praise ye him all his angels, let them praise the name of the Lord, for he commanded, and they were created. And though we cannot expresly say, on which of the six dayes the angels were created, because there is no expresse mention made of them▪ yet it is most likely that they were created together with the highest heavens, the chief place of their habitation; and that on the first day, because then at the laying of the foun∣dations of the earth the angels did praise their Creatour, as was before noted, Job 38. Vers. 2. And the earth was without form, and void.] That is, the earth was on the first day created, and when it was at first created, it had neither the shap nor ornaments that it hath now: it was not round, solid, drie, distinguisht here and there with valleys and hills; it was without form, a rude and indigested lump; and again it was void, or emptie, not having trees, herbs, and slowers to adorn it, nor beasts, birds, or people to inhabit it▪ as it hath now. And darknesse was upon the face of the deep.] By the deep, is meant that confu∣sed Chaos, or indigested Masse of earth and water▪ of which before he had spoken; by darknesse▪ is meant a mere privation of light: this Chaos or deep was wholy hid and involved in darknesse; in the whole surface of it▪ there was no light at all, wherewith it should be seen. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.] The word here translated moved, is metaphoricall, taken from the motion of birds, that flutter over their young, and implies that the holy Ghost did sustain and cherish this Cha∣os, or Deep, by his secret, but effectuall power and motion, even as birds do their new-hatcht young ones, by so fluttering over them. Vers. 3. And God said let there be light.] That is, God the Father, having created of nothing, this confused Chaos of earth and water, did the same first day create also the light, which was a bright shining quality upon the face of this deep, whereby it became apparent and visible; and this he did by saying, Let there be light, that is, by his almighty word and command, Psal. 33. 6. By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth: not any word uttered or spoken after the manner of men, but by his ssentiall Word, the Sonne of God, who is the word and wisdome of the Father. John 1. 1. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God. 1. Cor. 1. 24. Christ the power of God, and the wisdome of God, and by whom the Father made all things whatsoever. John 1. 3. All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made. Vers. 4. And God divided the light from the darknesse.] Hereby is im∣plyed▪ 1. That God did not wholly abolish the darknesse all over the deep,
but divided the light from the darknesse, so that whilst there was light on one part of the deep, it was still dark on the other. 2. That he ordained that there should be for ever a naturall and formall repugnancy and contrariety between them, and that they should mutually succeed and expell one the other, that so every where about the bdy of the earth it should be successively, as the light and darknesse moved and fol∣lowed each other, sometimes day, and sometimes night. 3. That even in the three first dayes of the worlds creation, before the sunne was made (the motion whereof doth now measure out the day) there should be a successive going▪ and returning of light and darknes, according to the time of day & night, as well as afterwards when the sun was created to give light unto the world, as it moved about the body of the earth. Vers. 5. And God called the light Day, and the darknesse he called Night.] That is, he made this succession of light and darknesse to be for those distinct times▪ which his will was should afterward be called Day and Night, to wit, by Adam when he gave names unto all things. And the evening and the morning were the first day.] The evening, which is the beginning of the night, and the morning, which is the beginning of the day, are here put for the whole time of night and day, which joyned together are said to make one entire day, to wit, in a large sense comprehending both night and day, which is with us the space of 24 houres: whereas the time whiles the light shineth is the day strictly taken, in which sense Christ saith, There are twelve houres in the day, John 11. 9. Now the evening is set before the morning, because darknesse was in time before the light, and thereupon the Jews alwayes began their large day at evening: Levit. 23. 2. From even unto even shall ye celebrate your Sabbath. Vers. 6. And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, &c. The firmament God called Heaven, vers. 8. It is called in the Hebrew an expan∣sion, or stretching forth, because the Heavens are stretched forth as a curtain. Isai. 40. 22. God stretcheth forth the heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in: and in Greek, Latine, and English a firmament; because of the constant and enduring firmnesse of it which is not worn with its continuall motion, but remaineth such as it was framed of God in the beginning. So that by the firma∣ment here is meant, whatsoever is contained in that vast space from the surface of the earth, to the uppermost heavens, with the Regions of the aire and the heavenly Orbs, &c. Now of this firmament it is said, that it was made in the midst of the waters, and that to divide the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament; and from hence many learned men have concluded, that doubtlesse a great part of those waters that did at first cover the face of the deep were on this day lifted up by the almigh∣ty command of God, above all the heavenly orbs comprehended under this word firmament, and so there continue still as in the place appointed them of God, and are spread as an orb of water round about the highest part of the visible heavens. But because the main reason whereon they ground this opinion is, that by the words of Moses they say it is plain, that the whole firmament must be in the midst of the waters, and must divide the waters that are beneath from the waters that are above;
and this reason must needs also overthrow this conceit of theirs, seeing it is manifest that there are some waters alwayes in the middle region of the aire, even when it doth not rain (whence it is noted as one of the marvellous works of Gods provi∣dence, Job 26. 8. He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds, and the cloud is not rent under them) and in this regard it cannot be said that the whole firmament, comprehending the regions of the aire as well as the heavenly orbs, doth divide the waters above from the waters beneath, therefore it is certainly more probably held that it is said here that the firmament should divide the waters which were under the irmament from the waters which were above the firmament; not because there are any waters above the heavens, where the sunne, moon, and starres are set, vvhich are a part of the firmament, vers. 17. but because they are above that part of the firmament, vvhich is from the face of the earth and sea to the clouds, vvhich is also called the open firmament of the heaven, vers. 20. for by the waters which are above, vvatry clouds are meant, as is evident in many other places of Scripture: Psal. 18. 11. His pavillion round about him were dark waters, and thick clouds of the skies. Psal. 104. 3. Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters, who maketh the clouds his chariot, &c. Psal. 147. 8. Who covereth the heaven with clouds, who prepareth rain for the earth. Jer. 10. 13. When he uttereth his voice, there is a multitude of waters in the heavens. And so the firmament is said to be in the midst of the waters, because part of those vvaters of the deep forementi∣oned vvere lifted up by the mighty povver of God, and spread abroad into thin va∣pours bound up in thick clouds, Job 26. 8. and so that part of the firmament where∣in the birds ly (vers. 20.) vvas in the midst of the waters, and divided the waters above from the waters beneath. Vers. 9. And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appear.] God having the first day created the earth, but as yet without form, vers. 2. a rude and indigested lump of a slimy and muddie substance, and drowned, as it were, in a deep gulf of waters, now on the third day it was by the same almighty power of God compacted into a solid Masse and received its form, and so the waters descended to the place that God had found∣d for them, Psal. 104. 8. They go up by the mountains, they go down by the valleys to the place thou hast founded for them; to wit, those concavities, and vast hollow places in the body of the earth, wherein the Seas and other waters are now held, called therefore the Storehouses where God laid up the depth. Psal. 33. 7, He ga∣thereth the waters of the sea together as an heap; he layeth up the depth in Store∣houses: and thus the earth and vvater together made an entire Globe. Nor need vve be troubled that the vvaters are said to be gathered together into one place: for besides that all seas and rivers are but as so many branches and arms of the great O∣cean vvhere into they all runne (Ecl. 1. 7. All the rivers run into the Sea, yet the sea is not full; unto the place from whence the rivers come, thither they return again.) the meaning of those vvords may be onely this, that the waters under the heaven vvere to be gathered and runne together, each to their severall place. Vers. 11. And God said, Let the arth bring forth, &c.] And thus the Lord in
great vvisdome, 1. caused the earth to yield her increase before the sunne vvas cre∣ated, by the heat vvhereof novv the earth is vvarmed and so doth fructifie that here∣by we might learn to ascribe the fruits of the arth to God rather then to the sunne; 2. He made ready all kind of food for the living creatures that vvere aftervvards created on the sixth day. Vers. 12. And the earth brought forth grasse and herb yielding seed, &c.] Hereby is meant both that God did then by his almighty vvord give to the earth a povver to bring forth all kind of herbs and plants and trees unto the end of the vvorld, and also that he did at the present cause it actually to bring them forth, and that in their full perfection, the herb yielding seed, and the tree yielding fruit (as man aftervvards vvas created not a child, but a perfect man) and therefore vve see that vvhen the serpent tempted him (vvhich vvas immediately after his creation) the tree of knovvledge of good and evil had fruit fully ripe upon it. Chap. 3. 6. The woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant for the eyes; vvhich is indeed an argument of much vveight to prove that the vvorld began vvith the Autumne, and that at first the yeare vvas counted to begin then. And God saw that it was good.] That is, God approved them all to be good. And indeed even those poysonous herbs and plants vvhich vvere on this day created are good and usefull in their kind, and meat for some creatures; nor should have ever been hurtfull to man, if man had not sinned. Vers. 14. And let them be for signes.] That is, to signifie things to come, both naturall and ordinary, and supernaturall and extraordinary. For so we find by con∣tinuall experience, that the divers colour and hew of the Sunne and Moon, as like∣wise the rising and setting of divers Constellations of the starres, do foreshew fair and foul weather, storms and tempests, &c. and hereby both seamen and husband∣men and physicians receive very helpfull insinuations of the fittest opportunities for their severall affairs: yea oftentimes by Eclipses, Comets, and sometimes by other supernaturall signes, God foreshews the heavy calamities he intends to bring upon men, insomuch that those that dwell in the utmost parts of the earth are afraid at his tokens, Psal. 65. 8. so it is said, Luke 21. 25, 26. There shall be signes in the Sunne and in the Moon, and in the Starres, and upon the earth distresse of Nati∣ons with perplexitie, the sea and the waves roring, mens hearts failing them for fear. and Act. 2. 19, 20. I will shew wonders in heaven abov, and signes in the earth beneath, bloud, and fire, and vapour of smoke. The sunne shall be turned into darknesse, and the moon into bloud: & yet this is no warrant for fortune-tellers and such as by searching under what Planet men are born will undertake to fortell and divine what good and evil shall befall them both in their life and death: for this is a vanitie and wickednesse, which the Scipture doth every where deride and condemne, Deut. 18. 10. There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his sonne or daughter to passe through the fire, or that useth divination, or an ob∣server of times, or an enchanter, or a witch. Isa. 47. 13. Let now the Astrologers, the starregazers, the monethly prognosticatours stand up and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.
And for seasons.] To wit, Summer and Winter, Spring and Autumne, which come by the course of the Sunne, as that approcheth nearer to us▪ or goeth further from us: yea God hath appointed the Moon also for seasons, Psal. 104. 19. for thereby we account the moneths and their severall seasons; and the Starres likewise and Constellations which arise and set, some at one time of the yeare, and some at another. Vers. 16. And God made two great lights.] However the Sunne is indeed the greatest of all the heavenly lights▪ being 166. times bigger then the earth, yet it is well knovvn to the learned, that the Moon is the least but one of all the Planets, and that it hath little or no light of it self, but is made lightsome by the Sunnes shining upon it, and so by relection shines upon the earth, as a looking-glasse vvill do. But Moses here speaketh of the Sunne and Moon, as they appear to the eye of man▪ to vvhich the Moon seemeth the greatest light next to the Sunne, because it is neaest to the earth of all the Planets. Vers. 20. And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fow that may flie.] Some Expositours hold that this place doth no more prove that the vvaters vvere the matter of the vvhich the fovvls of the aire vvere made, or the place in vvhich they vvere created, and out of vvhich they came, then the same can be proved concerning the earth, because it is said, chap. 2. 19. Out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the aire. The meaning therefore is onely this, that as God commanded the waters to bring forth the moving creatures, to wit, that live in the water, as fishes, &c. so he also commanded that fowls should flie above the earth in the open firmament. But yet considering that the ature and quality of fish and fowl are so like in many regards, & that the one do move in the aire much as the other do move in the waters, I see not but that these words, Let the waters bring forth abundant∣ly, may have reference not onely to the fish that swimme in the water, but also to fowl that were to flie in the aire; especially if by the water we understand the upper waters, to wit, the vapours or mists that arose out of the waters which brought forth fowl abundantly, even as the waters did the fish, and the earth afterward the beasts. As for the place chap. 2. 19. Out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the aire; either these words, and every fowl of the aire, must have rference onely to those words, the Lord God formed, and not to those, out of the ground, as if it had been thus expressed, out of ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field, and likewise the Lord God formed every fowl of the aire; or else we must hold that the fowl are there said to have been formed out of the ground; because though the waters did at first bring them forth, yet there was in those waters of which they were made a mixture of earth, and in that re∣gard it might be said also that they were formed out of the ground. Vers. 26. And God said, Let us make man in our image after our likenesse.] Having made the whole world for mans use, at the last the Lord created man, for whom all those things were beforehand provided. And this he is here said to have done, not without deliberation and consultation, Let us make man, &c. wherein
God speaks of himself after the manner of men, thereby onely to imply the excel∣lency of the work he had now in hand. The persons consulting are doubtlesse the holy Trinitie, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, those three in heaven, which are one God, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, 1. John. 5. 7. who resolve to make man after their likenesse and in their image; not because God took upon him a humane shape when he created man, but because, in regard of the spiri∣tuall essence of his reasonable and understanding soul, in regard of his lordship and dominion over the creatures, but especially in regard of his wisdome, righte∣ousnesse and holinesse he was made like unto God, and resembled his Creatour: Col. 3. 10. Put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created him; and Eph. 4. 24. Which after God is created in righteous∣nesse and true holinesse. Vers. 29. And God said behold I have given you every herb bearing seed, &c.] This grant of the fruits of the earth to be for food both for man and beast may seem to imply that in the state of innocency, wherein man was at first created, there should have been no other meat requisite or desired for mans sustenance. But that this continued thus untill the Floud, when the eating of flesh was expresly allowed, Gen. 9. 3. Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you, &c. seems not so probable: for 1. they wore the skinnes of beasts, and therefore it is likely they eat also the flesh; 2. had they not made use of cattel for food in those sixteen hun∣dred years and upwards before the Floud, the earth would have been overburdened because of their great increase; 3. they then offered sacrifices of their cattel, Gen. 4. 4. Abel brought of the firstlings of his flock, &c. and they used not to sacrifice to God any thing but what God had granted to them for their own use. Vers. 31. God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good.] Hereby it appears, that even those wicked angels, whom we call devils, were at first created holy and good, though afterward they abode not in the truth, but sinned. John 8. 44. Ye are of your father the devil, he abode not in the truth because there is no truth in him, &c. 2. Pet. 2. 4. God spared not the angels that sinned, &c. and so kept not their first estate, but left their habitation, and were thrown down into hell. How soon after their creation it was that they sinned, the Scripture doth no where make known; onely that it was before Adam and Eve sinned we are sie▪ because by the devil in the serpent they were seduced, as is afterward related in the third chapter. CHAP. II. ANd all the host of them.] That is, all the creatures both in heaven and in earth: which are here called an host or an army, because there is of them an innumerable multitude, many severall troops, and all placed and ranked in admi∣rable order, even to the astonishment of those that behold and consider it, and are all under the command of God their Creatour, and as his servants, Psal. 119. 91. stand alwayes ready as in battel-array to execute his will, to fight against and de∣stroy
his enemies if he speaks but the word. Esai. 45. 12. I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I commanded. Judg. 5. 20. They fought from heaven, the starres in their courses fought against Sisera: And hence God is so frequently called in the Scripture the Lord God of hosts, Psal. 95. 5. and (where the Hebrew word is re∣tained) the Lord of Sabbaoth, Rom. 9. 29. Vers. 2. He rested on the seventh day from all the works which he had made.] That is, he did not on the seventh day create any thing as he had done on the fore∣going six dayes, because all was already finished which he had purposed to make. The Creatour of the ends of the earth fainteth not, neither is neary, Isa. 40. 28. onely it is said that he rested on the seventh day, because he ceased from the work of creation: for as concerning the sustaining and governing of the creatures, the Father worketh hitherto, and Christ worketh, John 5. 17. Vers. 3. And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it.] The second word, sanctified, is added by way of explaining the first word, blessed; and the meaning is, that God set apart the seventh day for the speciall work of his service, and bles∣sed it, with this singular priviledge, that it should be wholy consecrate to him and his worship. Some Expositours indeed hold that there was not any law imposed upon Adam and his posterity for the keeping of the seventh day holy, till at mount Sinai it was commanded the Israelites; and so they take this here to be mentioned by Moses by way of Prolepsis, to wit, that because God rested from his work of creation upon the seventh day, therefore he did afterwards ordain, that every seventh day of the week should be kept holy by the Israelites as a Sabbath of rest unto the Lord. But the words will not bear this exposition; and there are many reasons be∣sides that do evidently enough discover that God did from the first creation appoint that the seventh day should be kept as a holy Sabbath: as 1. Because it is expressely spoken of the very next day after the Lord had ended the worlds creation: Now if that were a Sabbath sanctified and set apart for holy imployments, we cannot think that this ordinance beginning then was not afterward continued. 2. Because it is no way probable that the Church had for so many ages before the giving of the Law no set day set apart for holy imployments. What though there be no mention made in the Scriptures of the Patriarchs keeping a Sabbath? Many things they did which are not mentioned: and how could the distinction of severall weeks be kept till the Law? yea, how could they have known the weekly seventh day from the creation, if it had not been constantly kept from the Creation till that time? 3. Because it is plain that the Jews did keep the Sabbath defore the Lavv vvas gi∣ven: for before the Lavv vvas given, that vvas spoken by Moses, Exod. 16. 23. To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord. and 4. Because the Apostle Heb. 4. 3. doth evidently enough imply that there vvas a rest vvhich Gods people did observe sine the finishing of Gods vvork from the first foundation of the vvorld. Vers. 4. These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth, &c.] That is, in this order and manner, as hath been declared, vvere the heavens and the earth▪
at first created and made, and all the plants and herbs of the field, vvhen as yet there had been no such thing grovving thereon according to the course of nature as novv they do. Vers. 5. For the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, &c.] As if he should say, it must needs be yielded that God did at first by his absolute povver cause these things to grovv out of the earth, for there had been as yet none of those ordinary means vvhereby the earth is novv made fruitfull, no rain to vvater it, no man to till it. Vers. 6. But there went up a mist, &c.] Junius reades this negatively, Nor went there up a mist, &c. and takes it to be a further confirmation of that vvhich before vvas said, that the creating of things by the meer vvord of God cannot be denied▪ because as yet there had not been so much as a mist to vvater the ground. But if vve reade it, as in our Translation, it must be understood (as I conceive) to be added by vvay of preventing an objection: for vvhereas it might be said, Hovv then conti∣nued they to grovv after they vvere created, being there vvas neither rain to vvater the earth, nor man to till it? Moses telleth us, There went up a mist, &c. Vers. 7. And breathed into his nostrils the breath of life.] That is▪ by his al∣mighty povver the Lord did create and infuse into the yet livelesse body of Adam a living reasonable soul, vvhich being instantly united to the body in an incompre∣hensible manner, his body vvas quickened and enlivened, vvhich soon appeared by the breath in his nostrils. Thus the soul vvas not, as the body, made of the earth, but created of nothing, and so joyned to the body. Vers. 8. The Lord God planted a garden Eastward in Eden.] To vvit, on the third day of the Creation, vvhen the Lord commanded the earth to bring forth all herbs, trees, and plants vvherevvith it is novv adorned: for as he then made the earth all over to bring forth some kind of increase or other for the use of living creatures, and of Adams posterity, as they should increase; so for the present habita∣tion of these our first Parents, he then also made in Eden, a countrey that lay East∣vvard from Canaan, mentioned often in the Scriptures, Isa. 35. 12. Ezek. 27. 23. a most goodly pleasant and fruitfull garden, abounding vvith all things that could be therein desired, and so curiously ordered in every respect as if it had been planted by art, and hereinto Adam vvas put. This Garden is by the Greek Interpreters cal∣led Paradise, and is in the Scripture termed the garden of the Lord, Gen. 13. 10. and for the pleasantnesse of it made a figure of the heaven of heavens, vvhich is therefore called Paradise, Luke 23. 43. To day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. 2. Cor. 12. 4. He was caught up into Paradise, &c. Vers. 9. The tree of life, &c.] This tree was so called, 1. because it was a me∣moriall or monitorie signe of that life which he had received from God; 2. because it was a sacramentall signe annexed to the covenant of works, assuring life and glo∣ry upon condition of perfect obedience; 3. as some conceive, because of the power which God had given it to sustain the body of man in perfect strength without any decay untill they were translated to heavenly glory; which they take to be the ground of that which is said, Gen. 3. 22. Lest he take also of the tree of life and
eat and live for ever: therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden. Vers. 10. And the tree of knowledge of good and evil.] So called, not because the fruit thereof had any such quality or virtue, that being eaten it would work in man any increase of knowledge or quicknesse of wit; but because it was another sa∣cramentall signe annexed to the covenant of works, sealing death and damnation to them in case of disobedience, and so assuring them of the event that would follow if contrary to Gods command they should eat of it, namely, that they should to their cost experimentally know the difference between good and evil. Vers. 16. The Lord God commanded the man saying, &c.] Besides the morall law, the law of Nature written in Adams heart, whereby he knew exactly all things wherein he was bound to obey his Creatour, the Lord gave him also this positive and particular commandment concerning a thing of it self indifferent, but by Gods command made unlawfull, that the Lords absolute Dominion over him might be hereby made known, and his disobedience might become the more manifest. CHAP. III. NOw the serpent was more subtill then any beast of the field, &c.] That it was the devil who in and by the serpent did seduce Eve, is plain enough in other places of Scripture. John 8. 44. Ye are of your father the devil: he was a murde∣rer from the beginning. 2. Cor. 11. 3. But I fear lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtiltie, so your minds, &c. 1. John 3. 8. For the devil sinneth from the beginning. Rev. 12. 9. That old serpent called the Devil and Sa∣tan which deceiveth the whole world. But why then doth Moses speak no one word of the devil, but onely mentions the serpent? Surely for the same reason that before he had omitted the expresse mention both of the creation and fall of the angels, be∣cause his purpose is to report the story according to the outward visible carriage of it▪ herein accommodating himself to the rudenesse and capacity of that infant Church, who had need of milk, not of strong meat; and of this serpent it is said, that he was more subtill then any beast of the field, to imply the reason why the devil made choice of this instrument rather then any other. And he said unto the woman.] The serpent, speechlesse in himself, had his mouth opened by Satan, who caused him to speak, or spake in and by him, as the Lord by an angel opened the mouth of Balaams asse. Numb. 22. 28. And the Lord opened the mouth of the asse, and she said, &c. Why the woman was not astonished to heare a dumb creature speak, is but a curious and causelesse question: there is nothing said here to the contrary but that she might at first be afraid, and yet af∣terwards be imboldned to talk with him. Vers. 5. For God doth know that in the day that ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, &c. That is, God knows that upon the eating of this fruit ye shall obtain a further, yea a divine, degree of knowledge, equall unto that of God him∣self, the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost: and thus the serpent doth cunningly wrest
to a wrong sense, the name formerly given unto this tree, but upon another ground. Vers. 7. And the eyes of them both were opened, &c.] The eyes neither of body nor mind were opened by any virtue or eficacie of the fruit they had eaten: for why then were not the womans eyes opened so soon as ever she had eaten, before Adam was seduced? no, this was another kind of opening the eyes, then that which the serpent promised, to wit, an enlightning of their consciences to see the enormity of their sinne, and the misery whereto they had thereby brought themselves. And they knew that they were naked.] Naked both in soul and body, which were bereaved of the image of God, deprived of his glory, and subjected to inordi∣nate lusts, & thereupon to shame, according to that, Exod. 32. 25. Aaron had made them naked to their shame amongst their enemies. Questionlesse they saw, and knew that they were naked before; else why is it said, chap. 2. 25. that they were not asha∣med? but now they saw it with shame, which they did not before. Vers. 8. And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden, in the cool of the day.] There needs no scruple be made, either of the voice, or walk∣ing of God, if we conceive that he appeared in humane shape, as afterwards usual∣ly unto Abraham. And that this was in the cool of the day, is added, not onely to shew the time of the day (and it may be meant either of morning or evening; for in both cool winds are wont to arise) but also to imply by what means the voice came to them, to wit, by the whisking of the wind. And Adam and his wife hid themselves, &c.] Being conscious of their sinne, and therefore fearing the Majestie of God, stricken with horrour and amazednesse they know not what to do, but do what they can to hide them∣selves. Vers. 11. And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked?] As if he should have said, Thou wert naked before▪ without fear or shame; and therefore whence comes it that thou art now ashamed? surely because thou hast eaten of the forbidden fruit. Vers. 14. And the Lord God said unto the serpent, &c.] Though Moses names onely the serpent, for the reasons above mentioned, yet both are here condemned; the serpent as the instrument (even as a father breaks the sword wherewith his child was slain) and the devil as the chief authour: and therefore is the judgement so exprest, that whilst all is fitted to the serpent in a literall sense, some particulars (if not all) do most fitly also, though in a mysticall sense, include the curse inlict∣ed on the devil. Ʋpon thy belly shalt thou go, &c.] Either because he had extolled himself against man, his creeping and feeding on the earth (which before should not have been ignominious) is accursed and made reprochfull now; or (which is more agreeable to the plain meaning of the words) this going on his belly, and feeding on dust, was not the naturall gate and food of the serpent before, but now he is adjudged thereto because of this fact. Vers. 15. And I will put enmitie between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed.] This is spoken, 1. of the naturall Antipathy betwixt mankind, and those detestable beasts, the serpents; 2. of the naturall enmitie betwixt man∣kind and the devil and his angels (for though through Satans suiltie, covertly in∣sinuating himself under another person, men do indeed cleave to him and serve him, yet naturally all men do abhorre and slie the devil as an enemy) 3. of that holy enmity betwixt Christ, together with all true believers the members of Christ, and the devil and his angels, together with all the wicked as they are the seed of the ser∣pent▪ John 8. 44. Ye are of your father the devil, &c. It shall bruise thy head.] This is spoken, 1. of mens destroying serpents; 2. and especially of Christs destroying the kingdome and power of Satan, For as much then as the children are partakers of flesh and bloud, he also himself likewise took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil, Heb. 2. 14. whereby also all believers do become conque∣rours over those spirituall enemies of their souls. And thou shalt bruise his heel.] This is meant, 1. of the serpents lying in wait to sting and hurt mankind; 2. of the devils assaulting Christ in his temptations, aflictions, death and buriall; and the faithfull in their temptations and troubles, which to him and them is but as the bruising of the heel. Vers. 16. Ʋnto the woman he said I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception.] That is, thy painfull conceptions, or the sorrows of thy concepti∣ons, faintnesse, sick fits, perill of abortion, &c. Thy desire shall be to thy husband.] That is, thy desire shall be subject to thy husband, upon his will and pleasure all thy desire must depend. For in this sense the same phrase is used, Gen. 4. 7. concerning Abels subjection to Cain, as the firstborn. It istrue by the law of creation the woman should have lived in subordination under her husband & should have been governed by him: for Adam was first formed, then Eve, 1. Tim. 2. 13. and 1. Co. 11. 9. Man was not created for the woman, but the woman for the man: but being here denounced as a chastisement for sinne, it im∣plyeth a further degree of subjection then that which should have been by the law of Nature and Creation; as indeed by reason of the corruption of our nature it is made every where somewhat irksome and hard to be born, but amongst some a ve∣ry yoke of bondage. Vers. 18. And thou shalt eat the herb of the field.] And so neither the herbs or fruits of Paradise. Vers. 21. Ʋnto Adam also and to his wife did the Lord God make coats of skinnes, &c.] This may be meant of the Lords doing this presently, before they were turned out of Paradise, by the ministry of angels, or how else it pleased him, to wit, that by the skinnes of slain beasts he made them garments, and so clothed them therewith; or rather, that the Lord taught Adam and Eve, and gave them directi∣ons how they should of the skinnes of beasts make themselves garments for the co∣vering of their nakednesse, and to shelter their bodies from the injury of the wea∣ther: for seeing there is no question to be made, but that the Lord did immediately teach them the worship of offering sacrifices, as signes and types of that reconcilia∣tion
and atonement which was to be expected in the promised seed (and therefore we reade, in the following chapter, of the Sacrifices that were offered by Cain and Abel) it cannot be thought improbable that withall direction was given to make them coats of the skins of the beasts slain. However by this kind of clothing chosen for them, they were taught betimes not to have so much respect to delicacy as to usefulnesse in attiring themselves; 2. in the spoils of those dead beasts to wear the remembrances of their own mortality, yea of that brutish condition whereinto by their sinne they were fallen. And to this that bitter taunt seems to have reference in the following verse, Behold the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil, &c. Vers. 22. And now lest he put forth his hand and take also of the tree of life, &c.] Some Expositours conceive that the fruit of the tree of life being eaten by man should have prevented all decay of naturall strength, and have made him immor∣tall, or at least have kept him in perfect health and strength untill he was taken up from earth into heaven; and that either by means of a created power and efficacy, which to this end and purpose God had given to this fruit, or by an extraordinary and supernaturall blessing, which God had ordained should go along with the eat∣ing of this fruit: and hence they say it was that when Adam and Eve had sinned, God now resolved to turn them out of Paradise that they might not taste of the tree of life, either in mercy, to prevent their living for ever in misery; or in judgement, that the curse of Death which God had threatned as the reward of sinne might not be prevented by eating of this fruit. But this conceit is justly rejected by the best Expositours. It was no wayes possible that any created food should frustrate Gods decree, that Death should be the wages of Sinne. Whatever effect might have followed upon the eating of this ruit, had man continued in the state of Inno∣cency; yet when his body was dead because of sinne, as the Apostle speaks, Rom. 8. 10. it was not the eating of this fruit that could make his dead body to live for ever. The true reason why the Lord cast Adam out of Paradise to prevent his eating of the tree of life, was doubtlesse that having by his disobedience and sinne made himself liable to death, he might not now meddle with this sacramentall seal of life and salvation, which now because of sinne he had nothing to do with: Onely as before the Lord had upbraided them for their vain affectation of being like unto him in that ironicall expression, Behold the man is become as one of us to know good and evil, meaning that by his sinne they were become most unlike him; so in these words ironically he upbraids him after the same manner for that certainty of death he had brought upon himself, determining to cast him out of the garden of Eden, Lest (saith the Lord) he put forth his hand and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever; not because there was any danger of his living for ever, but in derision of any such hope or expectation, if happily he should entertain any such motion, as formerly of gaining an increase of knowledge by eating of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Vers. 24. And he placed at the East and of the garden, &c.] Where was the entrance into Paradise, there at the East end of the garden he placed Cherubims
and a flaming sword, that is, Angels armed with a flaming sword; for Moses useth this word, that he might speak to the capacity of the Jews, who had Cherubims fi∣gured in their temple to represent the angels. CHAP IV. Vers. 3. ANd in processe of time it came to passe, &c.] Abel and Cain had been doublesse taught of God, thus to worship him, and therefore it is said, Heb. 11. 4. that by faith, (to wit▪ grounded on Gods word) Abel offered sa∣crifice. Vers. 4. And the Lord had respect to Abel, and to his offering.] This Cain perceived; and therefore it was manifested by some outward signe, either ordinary, by giving good successe to Abel in all things and not to Cain; or extraordinary, as by sending fire from heaven to consume Abels sacrifice and not Cains, as we see the like, Levit. 9. 24. There came a fire out from before the Lord and consumed upon the Altar the burnt offering, &c. 1. Kings 18. 38. Then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the burnt sacrifice, &c. Vers. 7. And if thou dost not well sinne lieth at the doore.] That is, the punish∣ment of sinne, whether terrour of conscience, or externall plagues, will lie watch∣ing like a serjeant or thief ready at hand to lie upon thee and tear thee. And unto thee shall be his desire.] This is added to allay his anger towards his brother: still God had left Abel subject to Cain as the first-born, so that his desire must be subject to his brothers; and therefore it was fit that Cain should love and cherish him, as all men do those that are in subjection to them. Vers. 8. And Cain talked with Abel, &c.] To wit, in a brotherly manner, as he had wont to do, so dissembling his hatred and bloudy purpose of killing him, that he might the better effect it. Vers. 10. The voice of thy brothers bloud crieth, &c.] This expression is used to intimate to Cain his folly and madnesse in thinking to hide the murder of his brother, or to escape unpunished; since this crying and horrid sinne was as well known to God, and did as strongly ingage the justice of God to punish it, as if his bloud had had a voice to crie aloud upon God for vengeance. Vers. 11. And now thou art cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth, &c.] This is added by the way, 1. to aggravate the sinne of Cain; 2. to shew the fitnesse of the punishment: as if he should have said, the earth did as it were in compassion receive into her bosome that bloud which thou diddest cruelly hed; and therefore the earth, which hath thy brothers bloud, shall plague thee for shedding of it: a punishment the more proper also, because Cain was a Tiller of the ground. Vers. 12. A fugitive, and a vagabond shalt thou be, &c.] That is, thou shalt lie (as a banished man) from thy fathers family, from the Church; and being gone shalt be still pursued with thy conscience, and so still wander from place to place, as no where finding securitie and peace.
Vers. 14. Behold thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth.] This he saith, because he was excluded from the common right of men, God having left him never a corner of the earth, where he might rest quietly and safely, and so was inded condemned as no lawfull inhabitant of the earth. And from thy face shall I be hid.] Being banished from the presence of God in his Church, he takes himself to be quite cast out of his favour and protection. And it shall come to passe, that every one that findeth me shall slay me.] It is not probable that Adam and Eve, after Cain and Abel were born, continued barren un∣to this time: these onely are mentioned because of this famous story, but other sonnes and daughters no doubt they had, and childrens children perhaps to ma∣ny generations. Now these Cain feared, and withall, the posterity the earth should be peopled with in his time afterward, yea and peradventure the very beasts of the field. Vers. 15. Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him seven∣fold.] Therefore, that is, to prevent this: vvhereby vve see that God did not this in mercy to Cain but to prevent bloudshed, and the cutting up of that root from vvhence yet many serviceable branches might grow. And the Lord set a mark upon Cain.] What this mark vvas, it is but curiosity to enquire: some visible mark it vvas, vvhereby the Lord knevv men vvould be restrained from hurting him, happily some mark that made him a horrible spectacle of Gods vvrath and fury against so foul a sinne. Vers. 16. And Cain went out from the presence of the Lord.] God having thus examined him, and condemned him, no doubt (as usually at other times) in a visible apparition: so soon as ever he vvas gotten out of the presence of the Lord, he fled as a banished man from his fathers dvvelling place, and dvvelt in the land of Nod: and so it may be true also in another sense, that he went from the presence of the Lord, because he vvent from the place of his vvord and publick worship, the place vvhere he had wont to appear to Adam and his sonnes, of which it might be said, as Gen. 28. 17. This is no other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven. Vers. 17. And he builded a citie.] The question concerning them that should build or inhabit this citie is vain; for if Abrahams stock in lesse then 400 years amounted to six hundred thousand persons, what might Cains posteritie be ere he built this citie? Neither doth this work thwart that curse vers. 14. And I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth. It is probable he built it out of that inward horrour and fear from whence those words proceeded; neither do we reade that he found any inward rest or securitie in it, when he had done it, if he did ever fi∣nish it. Vers. 20. And Adah bare Jabal, he was the father of such as dwell in tents, &c.] So are they usually esteemed and named, that are either the first inventers of any art, or men of fame for excellent inventions in the skilfull use of such arts which were not practised till they found them out. Thus was Jabal the father of shepherds, and Jubal the father of musicians; at least amongst Cains posterity.
Vers. 23. I have slain a man to my wounding, &c.] An obscure place, and there∣fore many severall wayes expounded: but most ground their expositions upon some conceits or other that have no warrant in the text, all which must needs therefore be weak and uncertain. It is true indeed the Hebrew text admits two divers read∣ings, and accordingly two somewhat different expositions: for if we reade it as it is in the margent, I would slay a man in my wounding, and a young man in my hurt, then the words seem to have been a vaunt of Lamechs to his wives, perhaps fearing that his fiercenesse and violence would at some time or other so arre provoke those he wronged as to bring some mischief upon him, viz. that whosoever should meddle with him they should pay dearly for it; he would be the death of the stotest man that should strike or hurt him; adding withall that if he should be avenged sevenfold that should offer to kill Cain, farre heavier vengeance should be taken of him that should set upon Lamech: but following that whereunto our Translatours, it seems, did most incline, because they have set it in the text, the meaning of the place I conceive is this; Lamech a wicked proud fierce man had committed murder (for so he speaks in the preterp▪ fecttense, I have slain, &c.) and in doing of it had received some hurt: coming home in this plight, his wives are affrighted and in great perplexitie and fear: he labours to appease them, but in a fierce and insolent manner, as scor∣ning and despising their fear, and thinking it a disparagement to his greatnesse that they should be afraid of Lamech, and he gives a reason, if sevenfold vengeance should light upon him that killed Cain, what then upon him that should kill La∣mech? which is spoken either in a kind of Athesticall scorn, as if he should say, Why, women fear not, if God set a guard upon Cain, that he might not be killed, I will warrant you Lamech shall scape well enough; or else as supposing that he had juster cause for that which he had done, and therefore might be more secure, that if Cains death should be avenged, much more his. Vers. 25. For God, said she, hath appointed me another seed, &c.] Seth signifies appointed; by this it is clear that Cain slew Abel not long before the 130 year of Adams age, at which time Seth was born, as we see Gen. 5. 3. and therefore she re∣joyceth that her number was in him filled up again, the rather because it is likely, that by the spirit of God she foresaw that he should tread in the steps of faithfull Abel, and be the stock of that righteous progeny, wherein the Church was after∣ward established. Vers. 26. Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord.] Was not the name of the Lord called upon before, by Adam and Eve, Abel, Seth, and perhaps some others of Adams sonnes and daughters? yes undoubtedly: But it seems the greater part were corrupted with Cains wicked progeny, & now the family of the righteous encreasing in the dayes of Enos, the worship of God began to be more publick and solemn; there began to be a more notable separation and difference betwixt the righ∣teous and the wicked, and religion in this pious and now growing family of Seth seemed in a manner restored again, when it had been in the paucity and privacy of the truly faithfull almost buried.
CHAP. V. Vers. 2. ANd called their name Adam.] That is, Man. So Adam or Man was the common name both of man and woman, because both were of the earth (from whence the name Adam was taken) Man being immediately made of the earth, and Eve of Adam, and both by marriage so joyned again together, by the ordinance of God, that they were both one flesh. Vers. 22. Enoch walked with God.] That is, he lived a holy, just, and righteous life, and that in some degree of eminencie above other the servants of God that lived in those times; though the age wherein he lived grew very corrupt, yet he was not carried away with the stream of the times, but framed his life carefully accord∣ing to the will of God, with whom he enjoyed a sweet communion; the Lord in a more then usuall manner revealed his secrets to him (for he was a Prophet, and one clause of his Prophecies is recorded in the Scriptures, to wit, in the Epistle of Jude, vers. 14. 15.) and he on the other side did continually set the Lord before his eyes, and sought to approve himself to him in all his wayes. Vers. 29. And he called his name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us, &c.] That Noah vvas a man of eminent pietie, vve reade Chap. 6. 9. and this therefore I conceive to be a Propheticall presaging of the comfort, which this sonne in future times should yield unto his parents. By the work and toil of their hands, he means not onely that particular curse, Gen. 3. 17, 19. Cursed is the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shalt thou eat of it, &c. In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, &c. but also all the miseries vvhich the sinne of their first parents had brought upon them: So that I conceive the meaning of this speech f Lamech to be, as if he had thus said, Many are the miseries, labours, troubles and sorrovvs vvhich sinne hath brought upon us; vve live in a vvicked unjust vvorld, and suffer much in these un∣comfortable times, but you shall see this child vvill be a comfort to us in the midst of all these miseries, and by his goodnesse yield us quiet and rest in our minds, maugre all the sorrovvs vvhich vve shall othervvise sustain. CHAP. VI. ANd it came to passe when men began to multiply, &c.] This must reach fur∣ther then the age of Noah, of which he spake in the latter end of the foregoing chapter, namely to the first increase of Cains wicked progeny. As the world began to be filled with them▪ so did it more and more increase in wickednesse: for the men here spoken of, are those men whose daughters the sonnes of God married, as is clear by the last branch of this verse, namely those that were out of the Church, ne∣ver reputed members of Gods Church, or the sonnes of God, but (as I may therefore say) meer men: 1. Cor. 3. 3. Walk ye not as men? Vers. 2. That the sonnes of God saw the daughters of men, &c.] Though all other wickednesse did no doubt abound, yet this is noted as the chief cause of Gods displeasure, that even the sonnes of God also, that is, the men of the Church of God
(for such are esteemed the sonnes of God, Deut. 14. 1.) vvithout any respect of the Religion they professed, promiscuously matched vvith the daughters of those outcasts, Cains vvicked progeny, from vvhom they had been hitherto separated, taking them vvives, yea perhaps many vvives, of all that their eyes liked, not at all minding vvhat for matter of religion or manners they vvere. Vers. 3. And the Lord said, &c.] The Lord made known this his purpose to that wicked generation, namely by Noah, (yea and happely by Methuselah and Lamech, who were then also living) to whom he revealed so much that except they repented within 120 years the world should be destroyed. My spirit shall not alwayes strive with man.] That is, I have now a long time laboured to reclaim this wicked generation; my spirit hath contended with them both by the outward ministry in the mouthes of the Patriarches (as is expressed, 1. Pet. 3. 18, 19.) and also by inward motion and check of conscience: but all is in vain: and therefore I will no longer trouble my self with them, but at once sweep them all away with a generall deluge. For that he also is flesh.] That is, even man also, whom I created after mine own image, is become as brutish as the beasts that perish; he is wholy carnall, no course that I can take will do any good on him; therefore I will destroy him. Yet his dayes shall be 120 years.] 120 years are granted for triall of their repen∣tance; whence we see that this was revealed to Noah in the 480 year of his age: for he was 600 years old when the Flood came▪ chap. 7. 6. & consequently but 480 when he had this warning of 120 years, which was 20 years before the birth of his sonns Shem Ham and Japheth, though that be mentioned before in the former chapter. Vers. 4. There were giants in the earth in those dayes.] Men who for their ex∣traordinary stature and strength were even admired in those dayes, to wit, in that age before spoken of, when the sonnes of God did promiscuously match with the daghters of men; at that time and before that time, that is, in that age, there were these giants on the earth, who in the pride and confidence of their huge strength did without all fear of God or man (as lawlesse men) commit any villany, and like savage and wild beasts destroyed and wated the countreyes and people where they lived. Amongst other the corruptions of those times this Moses instances pe∣culiarly in, to let us see how insufferably wicked mankind was grown, when they did in a manner even fight against God. And also after that when the sonnes of God, &c.] Yea, and after that age, the progenie of these unlawfull matches, betwixt the sonnes of God and the daughters of men, became many of them such giants, the curse of God follovving such une∣quall mixtures of the seed of Seth vvith that of Cain. And hereby also Moses gives us to understand, that even among the outvvard members of the Church these vil∣lanies grevv rife, yea and after the holy Patriarchs had by Gods commandment threatened them vvith that delge vvhich aftervvards came upon them. Vers. 6. And it repented the Lord that he had made man, &c.] God is not as man, that he should repent▪ or that he should be grieved for any thing that is done, 1. Sam. 15. 29. The strength of Israel will not lie nor repent: for he is not as man,
that he should repent: and that because he is not mutable in his purposes, as being the Father of lights, Jam. 1. 17. with whom there is no variablenesse nor shadow of changing; neither can any thing happen to crosse him in his counsel, which he did not foresee from everlasting, nor can he be in danger to erre in his purposes, and to find out any thing in proces of time that is better then that which before he determined should be done: yet here, as elswhere in severall places of Scripture, the Lord is said to repent and to grieve, 1. because the Lord now intended to do what men, that repent and are grieved for that which they have formerly done are wont to do, that is, to undo what he had done, and to destroy the work of his own hands, and therefore speaks thus of himself, after the manner of men, as stooping to our capacity; and 2. to imply thereby the grievousnesse of their transgressions and provocations, that should move the Lord to destroy so great a part of those crea∣tures which he had made for his own glory, & as it were to repent of making man, in whom he had determined to honour himself above all the creatures besides: He must needs be a desperate wicked wretch that makes his father that tenderly loves him wish he had never been born. Vers. 16. And in a cubit shalt thou finish it above.] That is, the Ark. The meaning is this, When he had built up the Ark thirty cubits high, then he was to finish it, or cover it▪ which covering went up sloping, so that the ridge was a cubit higher then the side of the Ark. Vers. 19. Two of every sort, &c.] That is, pairs of every sort, a male and a fe∣male: the number is set down afterward, chap. 7. vers. 7. Of every clean beast by sevens, the male and his female, &c. here onely the kind, and that he should take them by twoes or by pairs. CHAP. VII. Vers. 2. OF every clean beast, &c.] That is, such as might be offered in sacri∣fice. Vers. 11. In the six hundredth year of Noahs life, &c.] So then the Floud be∣gan in the seventeenth day of the moneth Zin, which was about the beginning of our May, as some Authours think, Anno Mundi 1656. or the beginning of Octo∣ber, as others hold. Vers. 12. And the rain was upon the earth fourty dayes, &c.] It rained therefore unto the twentie seventh day of the third moneth. Vers. 16. And the Lord shut him in, &c.] That is, the Lord either by the mi∣nistrie of the angels, or by his own immediate power, caused the doore of the Ark on the outside to be sure and safe against the rain and violence of the waters; and so, what could not be done by any care, or skill, or labour of Noah himself, was supplied by Gods providence: whereas reading this history men might be ready to question in their minds, How Noah could possibly so shut the doore on the inside, but that still there would be danger of the waters working through the joynts and crevises on the outside, where Noah could not cover it with pitch, as it was within,
all such imaginations, which our own curiositie might suggest, are cut off with this short clause, that the Lord shut him in, that is, that the Lord by his own immedi∣ate hand and almighty power did as it were so fasten and shut up the doore upon them, that by no means the flouds of water beating upon it should be able to loo∣sen it, or any way break in to the endangering either of man or beast. Vers. 20. Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail.] That is, so much higher then any mountain did the waters rise. Vers. 24. And the waters prevailed on the earth an hundred and fifty dayes.] That is, for one hundred and fifty dayes after the beginning of the Flod, the waters did either increase or continue in their full strength▪ to wit, unto the end of the six∣teenth day of the seventh moneth. CHAP. VIII. Vers. 4. ANd the Ark rested in the seventh moneth, on the seventeenth day of the moneth, &c.] Which must needs be the next day at the furthest after the waters began first to decrease; for from the beginning of the Floud to this seventeenth day of the seventh moneth are but an hundred fifty and one dayes at the most. Nor is this strange that the Ark should rest so suddenly, if the Ark did draw thirteen cubits water, as is very likely; when the Floud was at the highest, the bottome of the Ark was not above two cubits higher then the highest mountains, and two cubits it might well fall in one day. Vers. 5. In the tenth moneth, on the first day of the moneth were the tops of the mountains seen.] That is, seventy three dayes after the Ark began to rest, not onely the top of that mountain was dry, the Ark standing there wholy out of the water, but also the tops of many lower mountains. Vers. 6. And it came to passe, at the end of fourty dayes.] That is, fourty dayes after the tops of the mountains were discovered; which was the eleventh day of the eleventh moneth. Vers. 8. Also he sent forth a dove from him.] Seven dayes after he had sent out the raven: (for vers. 10. he speaks of seven other dayes) and that was upon the eighteenth day of the eleventh moneth. Vers. 9. But the dove found no rest, &c.] Because the tops of mountains were yet muddy and standing with water: and besides the dove delights not in moun∣tains, but in the tops of houses and lower grounds. Vers. 10. And again he sent forth the dove.] Namely on the twentie fifth day of the eleventh moneth. Vers. 12. And he stayed yet other seven dayes, and sent forth the dove, &c.] Namely on the second day of the twelfth moneth. Vers. 13. And behold the face of the ground was drie.] That is, as is said be∣fore, the water was gone from the earth, so that the superficies, the face of the ground was drie; but lying under the waters a whole year it was not yet fit to bear the heavier bodies either of man or beast.
Vers. 14. And in the second moneth, &c. was the earth dried.] That is, it was now throughly dried, hard, and fit for the use both of man and beast; so that after the upper face of the ground was drie▪ Noah and the rest staied welnigh two moneths in the Ark. Vers. 20. And offered burnt offerings on the altar.] By way of thankfulnesse, and according to that form of worship, which God had before established in his Church. Vers. 21. And the Lord smelled a sweet savour.] Still we see that the Scri∣pture speaks of God after the manner of men, who are delighted and refreshed with sweet odours, Isa. 3. 24. The meaning is, that God having in his displeasure punisht man severely, was now at peace with these, and did graciously accept of this service which Noah had now performed. And the Lord said in his heart, &c.] That is, God decreed that he would never destroy the world as now he had done, speaking of that decree which was after∣ward revealed to Noah, chap. 9. vers. 8. For the imagination of mans heart is evil, &c.] The same words are used, cap. 6. vers. 5. as a reason why God would destroy the world, that are here used as a rea∣son why God would not destroy it, and in both fitly; there to shew the just cause the Lord had to punish; here to shew that even hence God in the riches of his mer∣cy resolved to spare them: for (sais he) they are corrupt altogether by nature, and should I deal with them according to their desert, I must be continually sweeping them away with a deluge; but I will henceforth deal more particularly with men, and not overturn the generall course of nature any more. CHAP. IX. Vers. 2. ANd the fear of you, and the dread of you, &c.] That absolute sove∣raignty over the creatures, which man lost by rebellion against God▪ is not now restored; onely that remainder of soveraignty, vvhich man had enjoyed since the Fall, vvas novv by promise confirmed unto Noah and his posteritie, vvhence it is that even the most savage of them do naturally fear the face of man, though sometimes by the just judgement of God they do as it vvere rebell, rise up upon him, and hurt him. Vers. 3. Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat, &c.] That is, you may eat of any of the creatures as freely as of the herbs that grovv out of the ground. Not that before the Floud they did eat nothing but herbs, &c. methinks (besides many other arguments that might be brought against this conceit) that vvhich is said Matth. 24. 38. implies a greater liberty in feasting, As in the dayes that were be∣fore the Floud they were eating and drinking, &c. onely God novv restores unto Noah the lavvfull use of these things vvhich vvere in a manner taken from them by the Floud; and the rather vvas this here made knovvn to Noah, to make vvay to that vvhich follovveth in the next verse, vvhich is added as an exception to this generall grant, to vvit, that though they might eat freely of any of the creatures,
yet not of things strangled, out of vvhich the bloud vvas not first let forth. Hovv∣ever it is sufficient for us hence to learn, that now it is lawfull to eat of any of the creatures, and that the law which made some beasts, &c. unclean, and not allowed for food was not yet given to the Church of God. Vers. 4. But flesh with the life thereof, which is the bloud, &c.] The bloud is called the life of the flesh, because it is, as it were, the seat of the life and the vitall spirits, Levit. 17. 11. For the life of the slesh is in the bloud. And therefore though they might eat the slesh of beasts, yet not with the bloud, that is, not except it were first orderly mortified and cleansed o the bloud; and this restraint doubtlesse was imposed upon them, to make them the more fearfull of shedding mans bloud: And we see the Apostles, Act. 15. 20. enjoyned the Christians of those times to observe this command, the rather happily because it had been of such ancient use, and so long observed amongst the people of God, and would not easily therefore be left on a sudden. Vers. 18. And Ham is the father of Canaan.] This is both here and after, vers. 22. added, both to imply the reason why▪ vers. 25. the curse is denounced against him, Cursed be Canaan; and also that the Israelites might know the accursed stock from whence those nations of the Caananites sprang, with whom they had so much to do in the dayes of Moses. Vers. 25. And he said, Cursed be Canaan.] Noah knowing what had passed (whether by revelation, or by the relation of his other sonnes, we need not en∣quire) doth as a Prophet by the inspiration of Gods spirit denounce this judge∣ment, that the curse of God should fall upon him and his posterity for this wicked fac, and namely upon the Canaanites, who are therefore particularly mentioned, ecause in them this curse should be most remarkably seen. A servant of servants shall he be, &c.] That is, a most base and vile servant: This is meant of the Canaanites, the progeny of Canaan, who were conquered and made bondslaves by the Israelites (therefore called Canaans brethren, because they were the posteritie of Shem the brother of Cham) yea and by those Western nations which were the posteritie of Japheth. Vers. 26. And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem.] Noah foresees by the instinct of Gods spirit, that God would enter into a speciall covenant with the po∣steritie of Shem, taking them to be his peculiar people, and binding himself to be their God. Now ravisht with joy in the consideration of this extraordi∣nary priviledge, he doth not barely pronounce this blessing, that God would be the God of Shem and his posteritie, but expresseth it covertly in this thanksgi∣ving, whereinto he breaks forth in the excesse of his joy, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem. Vers. 27. God shall enlarge Japheth.] This (according to our translation) must needs be a prediction of the great encrease of Japheths posteritie. And he shall dwell in the tents of Shem.] A prophesie of that which came not to passe till many hundred years afterward, namely, that the Gentiles, the posteritie of Japheth, having been along time separated from the Church of God, which was to
be established amongst the Isralits, Shems progenie, should at last be perswaded by the preaching of the Gospel to joyn with them in the worship of the same God, in the profession of the same saith & so to become fellow-members of the same Church. Ephes. 2. 13. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were farre off, are made nigh by the blod of Christ; which was fulfilled when the Gentiles became Chri∣stians. CHAP. X. NOw these are the generations of the sonnes of Noah.] We cannot with any probabilitie conceive that all the children, or grandchildren of Shem, Ham▪ and Japheth are here particularly named, but onely such as were in their generations men of renown, such as by their severall plantations gave name to severall nations descending from their loyns. Vers. 5. By these were the Isles, &c.] For the full understanding of this, we must know that the posteritie of Noah kept together for many years; till the great∣est part removed to that plantation in Shinar, whereof we reade, chap. 11. Now▪ sayes Moses, after the tongues were there divided, these sonnes of Japheth, according to their severall languages, did plant severall Colonies in all the regions and coun∣treys of Europe, and those that border the Mediterranean sea, now usually called, the Isles of the Gentiles: for this is all, which Moses intends in these words, that all those Sea-countries, severally divided amongst men of severall families, of severall languages, were all the posterity of Japheth, so placed by those of his issue formerly mentioned, after whose names they were many of them called. Vers. 8. And Cush begat Nimrod; he began to be a mighty one in the earth.] That is, whereas hitherto the heads of families did in a mild and gentle way guide and order the rest, rather by the voluntary submission of those that were governed then by the compulsion of power, this Nimrod with violnce usurped a more impe∣rious government, and enlarging still his dominions by forcing those about him to undergo his yoke, he became a mighty one, that is, a man of great power and might, famous in his time for the dominions he had. Vers. 9. He was a mighty hunter before the Lord.] In many places of Scripture persecutours and oppressours, such as invade any people, and by a strong hand sub∣due them, and then waste and oppresse them, are called hunters: as Jer. 16. 16. Be∣hold, I will send for many fishers, and they shall fish them; and for many huers, and they shall hunt them, &c. Lam. 4. 18. They hunt our steps that we cannot go in our streets. Such a one Moses under this Metaphoricall speech describes Nimrod to have been, a tyrannous invadr and oppressour of those that lived about him; and this he did before the Lord, to wit, openly without fear of God. Wherefore it is said, &c.] Thence it grew to be a common proverb, that when any man took the course of oppression and tyrannie, he was called, as I may say, another Nimrod. Vers. 11. Out of that land went forth Ashur, &c.] According to he transla∣tion
of Junius (which is added in the margin) the meaning is this, That Nim∣rod having built those foure cities before mentioned in the land of Shinar, en∣larged his dominions further, even in Ashur or Assyria, and there built Nineveh, Rehoboth, &c. But methinks this other translation is not without cause retained in the text, namely that Ashur (not the sonne of Shem, but one of the same name of Hams progeny, as in Gen. 4. we have many of Cains progeny of the same name with those of Seths) went forth out of Shinar, and built Nineveh, &c. in the king∣dome of Assyria: and indeed whence may we think it took the name of Assyria, if Nimro, not Ashur were the founder of that Empire? Vers. 18. And afterward were the families of the Canaanites spread abroad.] Having spoken of the sonnes of Canaan, Sydon, Heth, Jebus, &c. he addes that in after-times there were severall families spread abroad in the land of Canaan, which took their names as is before expressed from these sonnes of Canaan. These are the sonnes of Ham, after their families, &c.] That is, these are the sonnes of Ham, who according to their severall families and languages were the founders of severall nations in severall countreys. Vers. 21 The father of all the children of Eber.] That is, of the Hebrews. Vers. 25. The name of one was Peleg.] Peleg signifies division; and he was so called because about the time of his birth languages were divided. CHAP. XI. ANd the whole earth was of one language▪ and of one speech.] Now Moses re∣turns to relate more particularly that memorable story of the building of Ba∣bel, premising this in the first place by way of Introduction, that the whole earth was of one language, that is, that the men of the earth before the building of Babel spake all one language, and so had done 1757 years. Now that this language was Hebrew, it is by almost all learned men commonly agreed; and not without cause, both bcause all the names of the Patriarchs before and after the Floud are made of Hebrew words, and because it is not likely but the first language was continued by God amongst his Church, in that better progenie of Noah, that had no hand in the building of Babel. Vers. 2. And it came to passe as they, &c.] To wit, The men or the inhabitants of the earth before spoken of, which is thus generally expressed, onely because the greatest part of them removed in this Colony together with Nimrod the captain and chief of the Plantation; for that Noah, Shem, and the rest of Noahs better progene were not present at the building of Babel, this (if nothing else) would plainly prove, becaus the first language continued still in that holy line. The greatest dif∣ficultie of this place is, how it can be said of this Colony of men, that came now to the land of Shinar, which was Chaldea, that they journeyed from the East, since Armenia, where it is commonly held that Noah went out of the Ark, and near to which therefore the posteritie of Noah had doubtlesse hitherto dwelt, did not lie on the East of Chaldea where the tower of Babel was built. But to this I answer, that
if we take the hills of Taurus or Caucasus between the East Indies and Scythia to be those mountains of Ararat, where the Ark rested (for so some conceive) then this place is clear; for they lie Eastward from the land of Chaldea, here called the land of Shinar: If we retain the common opinion, that those mountains of Ararat were the hills of Armenia, we must conceive that they had removed formerly from the place where the Ark rested, and settled themselves in some countrey that lay East of Chaldea, and thence turned again Westward, and planted themselves in this place. Vers. 3. And slime had they for morter.] A kind of naturall lime plentifull in those parts, and slimie like pitch. Vers. 4. Lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the earth.] That is, left hereafter when this place proves too strait for us, we be scattered abroad upon the face of the earth in severall Colonies to severall places, let us now whilst we are to∣gether do some thing that may get us a name, leave some monument standing that may be famous throughout the world. Vers. 5. And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower.] Here, as ordinarily elsewhere in the Scripture, God speaks of himself after the manner of men. God is every where present, and seeth all things at all times that are done upon the face of the earth, neither can he be properly therefore said to remove from one place to another; so that this expression of the Lords coming down to see the city and the tower, &c. is onely to imply, 1. That however the Lord did awhile wink at this their madde and proud attempt, and suffered them to go on, as if he took no notice of it; yet at length by his judgement upon them he discovered that he was present with them, and saw all their proceedings; and 2. That this arrogant attempt of these Babel-builders was such, as did indeed upon exact enquiry, de∣serve the severity of Gods ensuing proceedings against them, and that God was most just and righteous in all that he did to them. Vers. 26. And Terah lived seventy years and begat Abram, Nahor▪ and Ha∣ran.] That is, he began to beget them; one of these his sonnes was then born, to wit, Nahor: for that Abram was not born till the hundred and thirty year of his father Terahs age, is most plain, if we compare diligently these places together: Gen. 11. 32. And the dayes of Terah were wo hundred and five years; and Te∣rah died in Haran. Gen. 12. 4. And Abram was seventy five years old when he departed out of Haran. Act. 7. 4. And from thence when his father was dead he removed him into this land, &c. For had Abram been born in the seventieth year of his fathers age, when his father died two hundred and five years old, he must needs be one hundred thirty five years old: which cannot be. For when A∣bram went into Canaan, which was after his fathers death, Acts 7. he was but seventy five years old, Gen 12. 4. But on the contrary, if Abram was seventy five years old when his father died in Haran two hundred and five years old, it must needs follow that Abram was born when his father Terah was one hundred and thirty. Vers. 29. Milcah the daughter of Haran.] If this were (as some conceive) an∣other
Haran, and not the brother of Abram, and so the following clause, the father of Milcah, the father of Iscah, be added to distinguish this from that other Haran, the brother of Abram; then is there no difficulty in this place. But the most of Ex∣positours conceive otherwise▪ namely that both Mlcah and Sarai (otherwise called Iscah) were the daughters of Haran the sonne of Terah, and married to their un∣cles Abram and Nahor; and yet is this no proof that such matches were then lawfull. Rather we may think that both Nahor and Abram were in a manner ne∣cessitated to marry their nieces, the sisters of Lot, and daughters of their brother Haran, because they would not match with strangers in those corrupt times that vvere generally fallen from the tue Religion; and that these matches vvere by spe∣ciall toleration or dispensation from God, either at first permitted, or at least af∣tervvard allovved and approved, though othervvise unlavvfull by the common rule and lavv of Nature. Vers. 31. And Terah took Abram his sonne.] To vvit, Abram having first discovered to him, hovv the Lord had in a revelation charged him to leave his countrey, and go into a land vvhich he vvould shevv him, to vvit, Canaan: for it is clear▪ Act. 7. 2. that God appeared to Abram in Ʋr of the Chaldees, before he came to Haran, and commanded him to go into Canaan; so that Abram first mo∣tioned this remove, though Terah be here first named, because he vvas the father of the family. And they came unto Haran and dwelt there.] This first remove vvas vvith a purpose to go into Canaan; but being stricken in years, or othervvise disabled for travel, he stayed there in Haran, and after a fevv years died. CHAP. XII. NOw the Lord had said unto Abram, &c.] Novv Moses returns to shevv the cause both of Terahs removall vvith his family from Ur of the Chaldees, and of Abrams removall, after his father vvas dead, from Haran, vvhere for some years they had stayed: for vvhy did he not abide in Haran? Moses telleth us, because vvhen God appeared to him in Ur of the Chaldees he had (as is here related) ap∣pointed him to go unto a land that he would shew him, namely, unto Canaan; vvhich though God did not at first reveal unto him, yet aftervvard he told him. Vers. 2. And thou shalt be a blessing.] That is, He shall not onely be blessed, but a blessing it self, namely, to his posterity, to vvhom it should be a blessing that Abram vvas their father; yea so blessed should he be, that he should be a form of blessing, men saying ordinarily, The God of Abraham blesse thee, &c. and so making Abram an example of one singularly happy and blessed. Vers. 6. And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem.] Moses calls these places whither Abram removed by the names whereby they were after∣ward known, as sitting his speech to the men of that age werein himself lived. Vers. 11. Behold now I know that thou art a fair woman to look upon.] It is eviden that Sarah was at this time above threescore years old: for Abram was
seventy five years old when he came first into the land of Canaan, vers. 4. and Sa∣rah was but ten years younger then Abram, Gen. 17. 17. yet no wonder it is though Sarah was at these years fair, yea, (vers. 14.) very fair, not in the eye of her hus∣band onely, but of the Egyptians also; even her barrennesse was doubtlesse some help to the continuance of her beauty. But besides in those times when they lived so long the strength and beauty of women we may well think continued longer fresh and without any great decay then in these dayes; whereto if we adde, that it is most likely that God did also by his Providence in a more speciall and extraordinary manner blesse Sarah in this regard, even in her otherwie declining years, it will not seem any way improbable, that Sarah should at this time be so wondrous beautifull. Vers. 13. Say, I pray thee, thou art my sister.] That the Egyptians, knowing her to be his wife, might not kill him that then they might marry her, Abram ad∣viseth Sarah not to deny but to conceal this truth, that she was his wife, and to say onely that she was his sister. Now though this were in a sense true, as Abram af∣terwards told Abimilech, Gen. 20. 12. because she was his near kinswoman, his brothers daughter, and such in those times were usually called brothers and sisters; yet because by saying she was his sister, Abram intended that the Egyptians should conceive that she was not his wife, but free to be married to any other, and so did expose her to great danger in this regard, the course he took could not be warrant∣able, but proceeded from weaknesse of faith and humane frailty, though withall he might have some hope that God would prevent that mischief. Vers. 15. The Princes also of Pharaoh saw her.] Pharaoh was the common name of all the Kings of Egypt, as Cesar was of all the Romane Emperours. And the woman was taken into Pharaohs house.] I take it for grant∣ed, 1. That she was not abused by Pharaoh, because the Lord did so tenderly pre∣serve her chstity upon a second exposing her to this danger, chap. 20. 4. But Abi∣melech had not come near her; 2. That notwithstanding, she was some time in Pharaohs house: the particulars afterward mentioned of Pharaohs enriching A∣bram, and God plaguing Pharaohs Court, cannot be conceived to be all upon a sudden done. It is likely therefore that this taking her into the house was, both that the king might make known his pleasure of taking her to be his wife, and that she might be prepared for the match (as we see the like, Esther 2.) and that she might be entertained as beseemed her that was so beloved of Pharaoh. Vers. 17. And the Lord plagued Pharaoh, &c. with great plagues.] What hese plagues were, the Scripture being silent, it is but a foolish curiositie to in∣quire. Vers. 18. And Pharaoh called Abram and said, &c.] Pharaoh understanding either by revelation, as Abimelech, chap. 20. 3. God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said, &c. or by the confssion of Sarai her self, or by some other means that Abram was Sarais husband, he presently apprehends that for this it was that he and his house vvere so plagued; and therefore makes haste to re∣store her.
Vers. 20. And Pharaoh commanded his men, &c.] The reasons of this dismissing Abram and Sarah out of Egypt may be probably these: 1. Because he desired to have Sarah gone out of his sight; 2. Because of his present displeasure, vvho no doubt vvas offended that by their means he vvas thus punished; 3. Lest his houshold-servants or people stung vvith the sense of vvhat they had suffered, or envying the riches vvhich Abram had there gathered, should offer them violence, and so the land should be again plagued for them. And therefore vve see he doth not onely dismisse them, but also gives his servants charge to see them safely conducted out of his Dominions. CHAP. XIII. ANd Abram went, &c. into the South.] Meaning the Southern parts of Ca∣naan, vvhich lay next to Egypt, Gen. 12. 9. And Abram journeyed going on still towards the South: for othervvise, vvhen he vvent out of Egypt tovvard these parts, he vvent Northvvard. Vers. 5. And Lot also that went with Abram had flocks, and herds, and tents.] Which implies also many servants that dvvelt in those tents. This Moses vvould imply, that although Lot had hitherto gone along still vvith Abram, yet he had an estate, a stock apart by himself; they had their severall tents, flocks, herds, and ser∣vants, &c. Vers. 6. And the land was not able to bear them.] There vvas not pasture and vvatering places enough for such a multitude of cattel; and thence it seems the strife arose betvvixt their herdsmen. Vers. 7. And the Canaanite and the Perizzite, dwelled then in the land.] This is added to shevv, that by reason the Canaanites and the Perizzites (vvhich seem to be a family or colony of the Canaanites, Gen. 10. 18. Afterward were the families of the Canaanites spread abroad) had settled themselves long before in that part of Canaan, and taken up the greatest and best part of the pasture, therefore Abram and Lot vvere straitned for their cattel; and besides there may be a reason implied in these vvords, vvhy Abram vvas so carefull to stop all dissention betvvixt them, lest it might have been an offence to the Heathen. Vers. 10. And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan, &c. like the land of Egypt, as thou comest unto Zoar.] This clause, as thou comest unto Zoar, must in the sense of it be joyned to the first part of the sentence, and beheld all the plain of Jordan: for the meaning is this, That all the plain of Jordan even unto Zoar vvas exceeding fruitfull and pleasant like to Paradise and Egypt, vvhich by the overflovving of Nilus vvas ever esteemed a most fruitfull countrey. Vers. 15. For all the land which thou seest.] That is, the whole land of Cana∣an: for he saith not, so much of the land as thou seest; but, all the land which thou seest. To thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever.] To clear this place fully, we must knovv that in this promise of the land of Canaan, as under the sacramentall
signe, the true and heavenly Canaan was also included. Heb. 11. 10. For he looked for a City which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Again, we must know that by the seed of Abram may well be meant, 1. the people of Is∣rael, as usually; 2. Christ, as Gal. 3. 16. And to thy seed which is Christ; and 3. all the faithfull members of Christ, both Jews and Gentiles, who in Christ are made the seed of Abram, children by promise. Rom. 9. 6, 7, 8. In Isaac shall thy seed be called. That is, they which are the children of the flesh, these are not the chil∣dren of God: but the children of the Promise are counted for the seed. Now as the heavenly Canaan is here implied, this clause, for ever, we may extend to eter∣nitie: for it is conferred upon Christ, and those that believe in him, the true seed of Abram for ever and ever. But the Promise hath primarily respect unto Canaan, that land which Abram now beheld with his eyes: and so conceiving the words, we must know that it is promised to Christ absolutely, who is the true Lord and owner not onely of the land of Canaan, but of the whole earth, and so shall be for ever. Psal. 2. 6, 7, 8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession; and then to the Israclites it is promised for ever; but conditionally, if they should ever walk in obedience before God. But there is no such condition expressed. I answer, 1. that the condition of temporall promises and threatnings is not alwayes expressed: as Jonah 3. 4. Yet fourty dayes and Nineveh shall be overthrown; 2. that this condition is expressed elsewhere, Deut. 4. 25, 26. When thou shalt beget children, and childrens children, and shalt have remained long in the land, and shall corrupt your selves, and make a graven Image, or the likenesse of any thing, and shall do evil in the sight of the Lord thy God, to provoke him to anger: I call heaven and earth to witnesse against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish from off the land whereunto ye go over Jordan to possesse it; and then 3. that it is implyed here though not expressed: I will give it (saith the Lord) to thy seed for ever: implying that if once they be∣gan to degenerate, and proved not a right faithfull seed, John 8. 39. then he vvould be no longer tied to this promise. CHAP. XIV. ANd it came to passe in the dayes of Amraphel king of Shinar, &c.] It is not possible certainly to determine vvho these kings vvere, and vvhat their tecrito∣ries vvere; but most probable it is, that they vvere but onely governours of ci∣ties. And Tidal king of Nations.] In the Hebrevv it is, King of Gojim, vvhich may be kept unchanged, but the Greek and Chaldee translate it Nations. It seem∣eth they vvere of sundry families or populous; as Galilee in that regard is called Galilee of the Nations, Isa. 9. 1. Vers. 3. All these were joyned together in the vale of Siddim, which is the salt sea.] That is, in the dayes of Moses, vvhen he vvrote this history, this vale of Sid∣dim, vvhere this battel vvas fought by the kings before named, vvas become a lake∣o
sea, and called the Salt sea. For after the destruction of Sodome and Gomorrah, and those other cities that stood in this vale, either by the confluence of many vva∣ters and brimstone into it (being before full of slime pits, or salt pits, as some reade it▪ vers. 10.) or by some other speciall and extraordinary vvork of God, that it might remain a continuall monument of Gods fierce indignation against the vvicked inhabitants of that place, it became a standing pool of putrid and unsavo∣ry vvaters, and vvas therefore called the Salt sea, Josh. 3. 16. as likevvise the lake Asphaltites, and the Dead sea; because in those corrupt and stinking vvaters not so much as a fish could live; yea, as Histories report, the birds that flevv over it vvere usually stifed vvith the noisome exhalations that did thence arise. Vers. 5. And smote the Rephaims.] A people in the land of Canaan, Gen. 15. 20. And doubtlesse the chief reason vvhy Moses relateth hovv those foure con∣federate Kings did subdue and destroy both these and the other nations here men∣tioned, is the more to magnifie the goodnesse of God to Abram, in making him vi∣ctorious over an army that had so easily before subdued and overrun so many strong and potent nations. And the Emims.] A people inhabiting formerly the countrey vvhich after the Moabites possessed, Deut. 2. 9, 10. And the Lord said distresse not the Moabites, &c. For I will not give thee of their land for a possession, &c. The Emims dwelt there in times past. Vers. 6. And the Horites.] A people that dwelt in mount Seir untill the chil∣dren of Esau drove them thence. Deut. 2. 22. As he did to the children of Esau that dwelt in Seir, when he destroyed the Horims from before them. Vers. 7. And smote all the countrey of the Amalekites.] That is, all that countrey which in after-times was inhabited by the Amalekites. Amalek, of whom the Ama∣lekites descended, was the grand-child of Esau, Gen. 36. 12. who was not yet born. It was not therefore the Amalekites that were now subdued by these Kings, but some other people that did now inhabit that countrey wherein afterward the Ama∣lekites dwelt. Vers. 10. And the vale of Siddim was full of slime pits.] This is mentioned as that which was an hinderance in their slight, and so a means of their greater losse. And the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and fell there.] That is, were vanquished and overthrown there; many of their souldiers slain, many falling into those pits, as we may well conceive they needs must, being once routed and in that disorder chased by the enemie. But the king of Sodom escaped, we see, vers. 17. And the king of Sodom wet out to meet him. Vers. 14. He armed his trained men.] This word, trained, may be meant both of civil, military, and religious discipline. But however since these men that Abram now carried forth with him were armed for warre, it is likely that he chose such of his men as were fittest for that service, & that had been trained up in the use of their arms, and are in this sense therefore called his trained men. Concerning the justice of this enterprise of Abrams, some question may be made: But for that we must
consider, that though Chederlaomer had a just quarrell against the king of Sodom and the other neighbouring kings, whom he had now vanquished (which cannot be certainly assirmed, because it is not expressed upon what grounds they had now cast off his yoke, having 12 years before been his vassals and tributaries) yet A∣brain undertaking this expedition onely for the rescuing of his kinsman Lot, and that doubtlesse by the speciall instinct of the spirit of God, this is abundantly enough to justifie what Abram now did in pursuing and vanquishing these kings that had taken Lot prisoner, and were carrying away both him and his and all that they had. And pursued them unto Dan.] One of the springs of Jordan, where was also a town afterward called by that name of Dan. Vers. 18. And Melchisedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine.] That is, He brought forth provision vvherewith to refresh both Abram and those that were with him: for so the like phrase is used, Deut. 23. 3, 4. An Ammonite or a Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord, because the met you not with bread and with water in the way when you came forth out of Egypt. Being one of the neighbouring kings of Canaan, king of Salem (which seems to be the same that was afterwards called Jerusalem. Psal. 76. 3. In Salem also is his, tabernacle) by way of congratulating Abrams victory over these kings, whose prevailing power might otherwise have proved very prejudiciall to them all, he brought forth provision of severall sorts wherewith to feast Abram, and his con∣federates, and their souldiers. Michisedek signifieth king of righteousnesse; and king of Salem, is by interpretation king of Peace. In both which respects S. Paul makes this Melchisedek, Heb. 7. 2. a type of Christ, who is the King of his Church, the king of Israel, John 1. 49. and not onely perfectly righteous in his own per∣son, and therefore called Jesus Christ the righteous, 1. John 2. 1. but also, Rom. 10. 4. The end of the Law for rghteousnesse to every one that believeth, as was of old prophesied, Jer. 23. 6. This is his name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our righteousnesse: and so likewise, The Prince of peace, Isa. 9. 6. who hath by his death reconciled us unto God, and made our peace through the bloud of his Crosse, Col. 1. 20. Again, because the Scripture no where tells us who he was, or who were his parents, or of what stock he came; nor makes any mention either of his birth or death, but presents him to us as one without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of dayes nor end of life, Heb. 7. 3. and that purposely that he might be a figure of the Messiah (which cannot be said of Job, Daniel, and others, vvho, though there be no mention made of their stock, birth and death, yet they vvere not also Kings and Priests unto God, as Melhise∣dek vvas) therefore in regard of these also the Apostle makes him a notable type of Christ; or one made like to the Sonne of God, vvho vvas indeed in regard of his humane nature without father, and in regard of his Godhead without mother, with∣out descent, having neither beginning of dayes nor end of life. And he was the priest of the most high God.] That vve may not vvonder at that vvhich follovvs, that a Canaanitish king should speak so religiously of the
most high God, and vvithall take upon him to blesse Abram, as one much inferiour to himself, (Heb. 7. 7. Without all contradiction, the lesse is blessed of the better;) or that Abram should pay him tithes, &c. Moses therefore tells us that this Mel∣chisedek was not onely a vvorshipper of the true God, but also a Priest of the most high God, most eminent in those times undobtedly, in regard of that speciall di∣gnitie, that he was both king of Salem, and Priest of the most high God. And herein also the Apostle maketh him a most remarkable type of Christ, Heb. 7. 2, 3. because he was both king & Priest, and especially because he is here presented to us without any partner in his Priesthood as the Priests of Aarons order had, without any mention of any to whom he succeeded in his Priesthood, or that succeeded him, & so as one that typically abideth a Priest for ever, as the Apostle there speaks: for so indeed Christ is the one eternall Priest of his Church, as the Apostle saith, Heb. 7. 24. This man, because he liveth for ever, hath an unchangeable Priesthood. Very strange indeed it may seem that such a King and Priest should be found amongst the cursed nation of the Canaanites: but God can raise unto himself faithfull servants whereever he pleaseth, and conferre upon vvhomsoever he vvill an eminent measure of grace; yea though the Church vvas to be continued in the posteritie of Abram, yet there is little question to be made, but that as yet there vvere some fevv of other families that vvere the true servants of God, as Job and his friends aftervvard were amongst the Edomites. Vers. 19. And he blessed him and said, &c.] By the authoritie of his office, and in the name of God, he gives Abram his blessing, as the Priests in the lavv did the people, Num. 6. 23, 27. Speak unto Aaron and to his sonnes saying, On this wise ye shall blesse the children of Israel, &c. vers. 27. And they shall put my name up∣on the children of Israel, and I will blesse them. It is likely he used a more ample form, and manner of blessing, then is here expressed: But if so, in this abbridgement which Moses gives us we have no doubt the summe of all: for this manner of bles∣sing, though uttered prayer-vvise, implyeth an assured promise that the most high God should most abundantly blesse him. Vers. 20. And he gave him tithes of all, &c.] He, that is, Abram, Heb. 7. 4. gave Him, that is, Melchisedek, tithes of all, that is, the tenth of all the spoil, Heb. 7. 4. Now consider how great this man was unto whom even the Patriarch Abram gave the tenth of the spoils: for though he vvould take nothing of the spoil, vvhich had been carried from Sodom, unto himself, yet he might give of it to Melchisedek; and besides he took questionlesse much from the vanquished vvhich belonged not to Sodom. However the tithes he gave unto Melchisedek, & that surely by way of homage & thankfulnes to God: for what was given to him in regard of his office was given to God: for Melchisedek himself being a king had no need of them. Vers. 22. I have lift up my hand to the Lord, &c.] This may be meant either of an oath that he had taken, for that was an usuall custome in swearing to lift up the hand to heaven, Dan. 12. 7. And I heard the man clothed in linnen which was upon the waters of the river, when he held up his right hand, and his left hand unto heaven, and sware by him that liveth for ever; or (which differs very little) of a vow made to God in his prayer.
Vers. 23. Lest thou shouldst say, I have made Abram rich.] That is, lest thou (or any other) should hereafter say, that by this victory I enriched my self, and so the extraordinary blessing of God upon me and mine should not be discerned and acknowledged; and withall lest thou shouldst think or say hereafter, that I pretend∣ed the rescue of the afflicted, but did indeed look after the prey. Thus he preferres the glory of God, and the honouring of his Religion before his spoil which by right of warre belonged to him. CHAP. XV. Vers. 1. THe Lord came unto Abram in a vision.] By this word vision, is sometimes meant a Revelation of God given to his servants in their sleep by a dream, which are also for distinction sake called nightly visions, Gen. 46. 2. And God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night: but this I cannot conceive to be such, chiefly because we have such a vision afterwards following this, vers. 12. A deep sleep fell upon Abram, and lo an horrour, &c. Again, by visions, are sometimes meant those apparitions which the servants of God have had being cast into a trance, which were onely spirituall objects of the mind, not of the bodi∣ly sense: This seems not to be such neither; for many things are here said to have passed betwixt God and Abram, which cannot well be thought to have been onely in a trance, and not really done, as the killing and dividing of the heifer of three years old, &c. vers. 9, 10. and besides, there would not have been then so great difference betwixt this vision, and that dream or trance mentioned vers. 12. and therefore I rather conceive this vision to have been an open apparition, which A∣bram beheld waking with the eyes of his body, though happely the Lord appeared in a more glorious manner then usually; and therefore it is now added, that this was done in a vision. Fear not Abram, &c.] This is spoken both that he might not be afraid of the ma∣jesty of God, who now in this vision appeared to him; and also to comfort him in regard of that fear and trouble of mind wherewith he was oppressed, in regard that after so many promises from God he continued still childlesse, as appeareth by his answer; and happely also to chear him up against the fear of those kings he had vanquished, who might now threaten revenge; and therefore God tells him that he would be a shield to him to defend him against his enemies. Vers. 2. And the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus.] Abram doth not herein complain that Eliezer of Damascus, that is, who was born of pa∣rents of Damascus, was his steward; but that he had no other stay of his house, that is, that he being childlesse wanted the comfort which other fathers had, he had not a sonne under him the guide and stay of his family, but all was in the hands of a servant at present, and would be enjoyed by him, he being dead, for want of an heir. Vers. 3. And Abram said, Lo, one born in my house is mine heir.] The summe of this complaint is onely thus much; That he had no other heir in his house, none to inherit that which he had, but onely his home-born servant, (for we need not
suppose that Abram had adopted any servant and made him his heire) which Abram here bewails as one perplexed betwixt hope and fear, not as rejecting the promises of God concerning his seed, but as commending to God his sad estate and conditi∣on, and intimating his desire that God would at length remember the promise he had made to him, and send him an heir. Vers. 5. And he brought him forth abroad, &c.] This therefore was done when the starres might be seen, either early in the morning (and if so, then was there a whole day spent, as there might well be, in those passages afterward rela∣ted) or else in the evening; and then it is here related beforehand, not in the order of time wherein it was done: for afterwards Moses speaks of what was done at sun∣setting, vers. 17. And it came to passe, that when the sunne went down, and it was dark, &c. Vers. 9. And he said, Take me an heifer, &c.] God appoints these things to be thus done, partly as a sacrifice to be offered to him, partly that they might be as signes of the covenant which he now makes with Abram; for, because it was the manner of men when they made a solemn covenant to cut beasts in twain, and to passe between the parts thereof, as it were wishing the like to themselves if they brake the covenant, Jer. 34. 18. And I will give (to wit, into their enemies hands) the men that have transgressed my covenant, which have not performed the words of the covenant, which they had made before me, when they cut the calf in twain, and passed between the parts thereof; therefore is the Lord pleased to use the same manner here with Abram. Vers. 13. Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them, &c.] This must be understood to be spoken not onely of their bondage in Egypt, but also of the whole time of their sojourning both in Canaan and Egypt. The whole time of Jacobs going thither till the Israelites went forth with Moses cannot be found above two hundred and fifteen years. The foure hundred years therefore here spoken of must begin with Isaacs birth: He was born Anno Mundi 2109. and from thence to the year of Israels going out of Egypt is but foure hundred and five years, which small odde number is not reckoned, as it is usuall in the Scriptures to leave out such small numbers in computation of times. Vers. 14. And also that nation whom they shall serve, will I judge.] This is ad∣ded particularly concerning Egypt, because there they suffered the heaviest affli∣ction. Vers. 16. But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again.] By Genera∣tions, I conceive, is meant the succession of children, grandchildren, and so forth in their severall ages; and in reckoning of these foure generations we must begin with the children of the Patriarchs, who with their father Jacob went down into Egypt, and were ever reckoned the twelve severall stocks, out of which the Israel of God did grow in their severall tribes: so that the children of the twelve Patriarchs we account the first generation, their children the second, and so forward; and this promise we see evidently performed, where we find Eleazar parting the land of Ca∣naan. Josh. 14. 1. And these are the countreys which the children of Israel inhe∣ited in the land of Canaan, which Eleazar the Priest, &c. distributed for ihri∣tance
unto them. For Cohath the sonne of Levi who went with Jacob into Egypt, Gen. 46. 11. we must reckon of the first generation, Amram his sonne of the se∣cond, Aaron his sonne of the third, and Eleazar his sonne of the fourth. Vers. 16. For the iniquitie of the Amorites is not yet full.] That is, the Amo∣rites and those other sinfull nations mentioned afterwards; this one, amongst whom Abram now dwelt, being by a figuative speech put for all. Vers. 18. In that same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram.] This is added to shew the end of those visions formerly related, namely, that they were signes of the covenant which that day God had made with Abram. Ʋnto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, &c.] That is, from the river Sihor unto the great river Euphrates. Some think that by the river of Egypt here Nilus is meant: but because we reade not that ever the Dominion of the Israelites reached so farre, and elsewhere in describing the bounds of this land, to wit, Josh. 13. 3. the river Sihor is mentioned as the ri∣ver of Egypt, and Jer. 2. 18. Sihor and Euphrates are as here opposed one against the other, What hast thou to do in the way of Egypt to drink the waters of Sihor, or what hast thou to do in the way of Assyria to drink the waters of the river? that is, Euphrates, called by way of eminency the river; therefore most probably it is thought that by the river of Egypt Sihor is meant. A more difficult question con∣cerning this place is, whether the bounds of the Israelites land did ever reach the other way so farre as Euphrates. But for this we must know that though the land which they inhabited reached no further Northward then Hamath, Numb. 34. 8. which was farre on this side Euphrates; yet in the dayes of David and Solomon all that countrey as farre as Euphrates became tributarie to them, as we may see 2. Sam. 8. 3, &c. and 1. Kings 4. 21. Solomon reigned over all the kingdomes from the river, (that is, Euphrates) unto the land of the Philistines; and in this regard Euphrates is sometimes made the utmost bounds of the Dominions promised to Abrams posteritie. CHAP. XVI. Vers. 2. ANd Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now the Lord hath restrained me from bearing.] This shews when Sarai began to think of pro∣curing the promised seed by this course, namely, when it ceased to be with her after the manner of women, chap. 18. 11. for so much the words imply, as if she had said, As long as there was any hope I have waited, but now the Lord hath restrained me from bearing, that is, I perceive now there is no hope, the Lord hath locked up my wombe now for ever bearing; and therefore we must seek the promise some other vvay. Vers. 5. And Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong be upon thee, &c.] Though it be not expressed hovv Hagar discovered her contempt of her mistresse, yet consi∣dering that Sarai vvas so grave a Matron, of a svveet and meek spirit, and for her obedience therefore propounded as a pattern to other vvives, 1. Pet. 3. 6. by the violence of her passion at present expressed in such bitter language to her husband,
we may probably gather that it was some notable insolencie in Hagar that had so highly provoked Sarai: for if we note them well, every word she speaks is ex∣cessively sharp; for in these words, my wrong be upon thee, either she layes all the blame upon him, as if she had said, Thou art the cause o all the wrong I have suf∣fered, I blame not her so much as thee, thereby implying that either by shewing her too much respect, or by his connivance at her petulancy, he had emboldned her to carry her self with that insolence as she did; or else she wisheth that her wrong, that is, the punishment of that injury, which she had sustained, might fall upon him, who had been the cause of it; yea and perhaps she particularly desired, that since Hagar had despised her, and he had suffered it, that she might likewise at length carry her self as insolently toward him, and so her wrong might be upon him: And then again in the next words she upbraids him for his unworthy requitall of that respect she had shown to him in giving her handmaid into his bosome, that he might have children by her, and thereupon concludes with an imprecation, that God would judge and punish him for it, & so make it manifest what wrong he had done her: for that is the drift of those last words, The Lord judge between me and thee: all which discovers how strangely Sarai was at present overborn with passion: But thus in these bitter effects of Hagar being given to Abram, God was pleased to correct both Abram and Sarai for seeking to gain children to Abram by such an unwar∣rantable way. Vers. 7. And the Angel of the Lord found her by a fountain of water, &c.] This Angel is expresly called Jhovah, vers. 13. And she called the name of the Lord, or Jehovah, that spake to her, Thou God seest me; and he ascribeth unto him∣self that which is the onely proper work of God, vers. 10. And the Angel of the Lord said unto her, I will multiply thy seed excedingly, &c. both which are unde∣niable arguments, that this Angel was no other but Christ the sonne of God, who is also called the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. Nether is it without cause that the place where Hagar was found is here thus particularly described; for we may hence probably gather, 1. that she was flying home to Egypt her native countrey, for Shur was a town in the wildernesse between Canaan and Egypt, Exod. 15. 22. So Moses brought Israel from the red sea, and they went out into the wildernesse of Shur. 2. That wandring in this desert, where she might best escape, though they sent out after her, she was wearied and afflicted with travel and thirst, and thereby brought to rest her self at a fountain of waters; & hereby the bitternesse of her spirit is seen, in that she was content to indure such inconveniences rather then abide in her mistris house. Vers. 11. Because the Lord hath heard thy affliction.] He intendeth both Sarai's rough usage, and the misery wherein at present she was; this affliction the Lord is said to have heard; her afflictions spake when she held her peace, and God heard, that is, took pity of her in her trouble. Vers. 12. And he will be a wild man.] This is principally spoken concerning Ish∣mael, but in a second place concerning his posteritie also. In the originall it is a man like a wild asse; the meaning of it is this, he shall be of a fierce, warlike, untamed disposition, so that his hand shall be against every man, &c. that is, of such power
and invincible courage and strength shall he be, that though all about him set them∣selves against him, he alone shall match them all, they shall get no good by oppo∣sing him; and this must needs be a comfort to Hagar, to heare that her sonne should be of such might: And this therefore I conceive is especially meant by these words, though happely the vvild and savage condition of his life may also be implied. Gen. 21. 20. And God was with the lad, and he grew, and dwelt in the wildernesse, and became an Archer. And he shall dwell in the presence of his brethren.] That is, He and his posteri∣tie shall dwell near unto his brethren, the other sonnes of Abram and their poste∣ritie: As if he had said, Though Abram shall have other children, yet shall Ishmael thy sonne be great amongst them: for in these words is implyed▪ 1. that his seed as a severall Nation should dwell apart by themselves; 2. that this their countrey should border upon that of their brethren; 3. that he should be of that power, that though his brethren should envy his prosperity, he should yet dwell i their pre∣sence, and they should not be able to overbear him. Vers. 13. And she called the name of the Lord that spake unto her, Thou God seest me.] That is, under this name, and for this cause, she magnified the Lord, that his eye of providence had watched over her, to comfort her in this her afliction, and to reduce her again into the right way: As if one should say of David, in re∣gard of that we reade, Psal. 65. 2. O thou that hearest prayer, &c. that he called the name of the Lord, Thou God that hearest prayer. For she said, Have I also here looked after him, that seeth me?] This is ren∣dred as a reason, why she magnified God under that attribute, Thou God seest me, to wit, because by this appearing of God to her she now ound by experience that the eye of God did watch over her for good; and this she expresseth by way of an interrogation, the better to set forth the joy of her heart, Have I also here looked after him that seeth me? as if she should have said, How can I enough wonder at this favour, that the Lord Jehovah, whose eye doth ever behold me, should afford me the honour to behold him, even me that am a poore bondmaid, and that here in the wildernesse, when I was run away from my mistris, yea and that I should see him too without perill to my life, being still alive after I have seen the Lord my God, and so able to look after him. And indeed this phrase which she useth, of looking after him, seemeth to have reference to her gazing after him when he ascended up from her; and by this phrase, it is likely she expresseth her beholding God rather then by any other, because at his departing he manifested his glory more then before, which made her gaze after him: as the angel did to Gedeon, and therefore it is said that when the angel departed Gedeon perceived that he was an angel of the Lord: And Gedeon said, Alas O Lord God: for because I have seen an angel of the Lord face to face, Judges 6. 22. & Christ at his ascension, which made the angels say, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? Acts 1. 11. This I conceive is the plain meaning of this place. Yet there is another exposition which seems not improbable, namely, that Hagar doth in these words acknowledge the mercy of Gods preventing grace, in that he ad taken care of her even when she minded not him, and blames her own blockishnesse and disregard of Gods provi∣dence
over her: Have I here, saith she, looked after him that seeth me? as if she had said, God hath long watched over me for good, and I never regarded it; it is vvell that yet at length through Gods preventing grace, in appearing to me here in my distresse, I have been quickened to take notice of his fatherly care over me, and so to look after him that seeth me. Vers. 14. Whrefore the well was called Beer-lahai-roi.] That is, the well of him that liveth and seeth me; and thus Hagar makes the name of this well a me∣moriall to all posterity, how the eye of the ever-living God did vvatch over her in the time of her affliction. CHAP XVII. Vers. 1. I am the almighty God, walk before me and be thou perfect.] That is, I am thy God, almighty and all-sufficient to do all those great things which I have promised thee, however impossible they may seem in the eye of reason, and whatever can be expected from me; and therefore trust in me, and let thy whole conversation be alwayes as in my presence, perfect, that is, upright and sincere, to do all that I have commanded thee. Vers. 4. And thou shalt be a father of many nations.] This is meant both of Abrams naturall posteritie (for out of his loyns came the Ishmaelites, the Edomites, and many other nations by the children of Keturah) and also of all Christian na∣tions in the world, as Paul expoundeth it, Rom. 4. 16, 17. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that onely which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham who is the father of us all, as it is written, I have made thee a father of many nati∣ons. Gal. 3. 28. Ye are all one in Christ; and if ye be Christs, then are ye Abra∣hams sed, and heirs according to the promise. Vers. 5. Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, &c.] Abram sig∣nifieth a high father; and the fist letter of Hamon (an Hebrew word signifying a multitude) being put to it maketh Abraham, as if it were Abrahamon, that is, a high father of a multitude of nations. Vers. 10. This is my Covenant, &c.] The circumcising of the Israelites male children, here enjoyned Abraham and his posterity, is said to be Gods covenant, because it was a token of the covenant, as is expressed in the following verse; a signe and seal both on Gods part, that he would give them the Lord Christ, the pro∣mised seed out of the loins of Abraham, and in him accept of them for his peculiar people, forgive their sinnes, and cleanse them from their naturall corruptions (which was signified by the paring away of their foreskins) and on their part that they would believe in this their Messiah, and as Gods peculiar people put off the old man with all his deceiveable lusts, and as new creatures serve the Lord their Creatour in holinesse and righteousnesse all the dayes of their life; and there∣fore is circumcision called the sal of the righteousnesse of faith, Rom. 4. 11. Vers. 13. And my covenant shall be in your flesh, &c.] That is, Circumcision shall be in your flesh unto the coming of the Messiah, as long as ever the Church
shall continue onely in thy naturall seed; for an verlasting covenant, that is, for a signe of that everlasting covenant which I have made with you: for though the outward signe was changeable, yet the covenant it self remaineth one in substance for ever. Vers. 14. And the uncircumcised man-child, whose flesh of his foreskinne is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off, &c.] That is, That man, who not being circumcised in his childhood did afterward also wilfully and contemptuously neglect that signe of Circumcision, shall be cut off from his people; and that because▪ as is expressed in the following words, such men had broken and wilfully despised Gods ovenant, which cannot be said of infants dying in their infancie. Now the cutting off from Gods people here threatned, was, 1. that God would not reckon him one of his people, nor receive him hereafter into the societie of the Saints in heaven; and 2. that the Israelites were to esteem also of him as an heathen; for that the Magistrate was appointed to cut off such an one by the sword, we do not any where certainly find. Vers. 15. Thou shalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah.] The same letter is added to her name, that was to her husbands before, that it might be to both a pledge and signe of the same promise, to wit, that out of them should come a multi∣tude of people: which the name also in part signifies; for Sarah signifies a Lady or Princesse. Vers. 17. Then Abraham fell upon his face.] This bowing of himself, was not onely an expression of reverence, but also of thankfulnesse and was therefore a signe that he believed, what God now promised. And laughed.] He laughed not at the promise, as thinking it a fable, and con∣cluding it impossible, but as being overjoyed and even amased with those welcome tidings. Rom. 4. 19. And being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now dead, &c. nor yet the deadnesse of Sarahs wombe. And said in his heart, Shall a man-child be born to me, &c.] By this it appears that his carnall reason began to struggle against his faith: neither yet is this con∣trary to that which the Apostle saith, Rom. 4. 20. That he staggered not at the pro∣mise of God through unbelief: for he did not stand in suspence whether he should believe the promise or no, he did not thus stagger; but even whilest he imbraced the promise with joy, his reason made this objection: and thereby his faith becomes more glorious, that his carnall reason thus opposing it self, yet his faith prevailed so farre, that he would not hearken to this suggestion, but resolved to hope even againt hope. Vers. 18. And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee!] Abraham speaks not this as rejecting Gods promise, as if he had said, having Ish∣mael I desire no more; nor as despairing of the promise,, as if he had said, I should have but little hope, if I had not more hope in Ishmael already born, then in the promised sonne of Sarah; indeed it is not possible that we should have a sonne at this age, and therefore, O that Ishmael might live, &c. but these words proceed chiefly from Abrahams fatherly affection towards Ishmael; being thus assaulted by those forementioned thoughts of his carnall reason, whilest his faith opposed them,
suddenly his affections, moved with the thought of Ishmael, make him as it were to forget all other things to beg for him: as if he had said, Though I cannot con∣ceive how it should be, yet I gladly imbrace the promise; but however, oh that Ishmael might live in thy sight! do not cast off Ishmael, but let him live in thy favour: So that this is spoken out of a mind that did yield to the promise, but yet was troubled, and perplext, and solicitous for Ishmael. CHAP. XVIII. Vers. 1. ANd he sat in the tent doore in the heat of the day.] That is, at noon∣tide. This is expressed, both to shew the occasion of his sitting in the tent doore, to cool and refresh himself; as also to imply the reason of the courtesie he proffered to these Angels (whom he supposed to be strangers) because at such time travellers are wont to wax faint and hungry. Vers. 2. And to, three men stood by him, and when he saw them he ranne to meet them.] Their appearance being undoubtedly such, as made it manifest to Abraham both that they were strangers travelling that way, and also such strangers as were worthy both of that entertainment and respect which he afforded to them. Vers. 3. And said, my Lord, if now I have found favour in thy sight, &c.] He di∣rects his speech to one, as it seems, because he appeared in more excellency and with signes of greater worth then the rest. Vers. 6. Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal.] That is, as it is probably thought, three pecks, or thereabouts, whether more or lesse. Vers. 8. And they did eat.] For as these Angels had true bodies for the time, and did truly walk and speak, so they did also truly eat: if there were no necessitie of food, for the sustenance of those their assumed bodies, which were erewhile hap∣pely to be dissolved again by the power of God, yet it was requisite for the present dispensation of that service, which God had imposed upon them, to wit, their ap∣pearing to Abraham, that he might not yet know but that they were men, till God was pleased to discover it to him. Vers. 9. And they said unto him, Where is Sarah thy wife.] Thus by naming Sarah they first discover themselves to be not men but angels. Vers. 10. And he said, I will certainly return unto thee according to the time of life.] We do not find that this return was by the angels appearing again, but by the accomplishment of the thing promised, in regard whereof it is said, chap. 21. 1. And the Lord visited Sarah as he had said, to wit, when Isaac was born. And by this phrase, according to the time of life, cannot be meant any thing but this, that so many moneths thence, as is usually (according to the ordinary course of Nature) from a womans first conception to the birth of her child, Sarah his wife should have a sonne: for that promise when God appeared before in the former chapter was just a year before Isaac was born, chap. 17. 21. But my covenant will I esta∣blish with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear unto thee at this set time in the next year; since when Abraham had been circumcised, and had recovered the pain and sore∣nesse thereof.
Vers. 12. Therefore Sarah laughed within her self.] Because she deemed it so unlikely, if not impossible, that she should now have a child, she did inwardly laugh at what she heard spoken. She laughed within her self, she did not break out into loud and open laughter, but was inwardly affected as those use to be that laugh at any thing related, which they desire but cannot believe it will ever be: and this concerning the secrecy of her laughter, that it was within her self, is thus parti∣cularly expressed, to intimate, 1. Why she did so readily deny it, because it was indeed an invvard smiling rather then an outvvard direct laughter, and such as could not therefore by others be heard or discerned; 2. Why she vvas afraid vvhen he took notice of it, to vvit, because she began novv to conceive that doubtlesse he vvas more then man that could discern the invvard affections of her heart. Hovv∣ever, doubtlesse she laughed, not as Abraham before did for joy, but as doubting the accomplishment of vvhat vvas spoken, and vvas therefore reproved; though af∣tervvard she believed, vvhen she knevv vvho it vvas that said it: and therefore is her faith commended, Heb. 11. 11. Through faith also Sarah her self received strength to conceive seed, &c. Vers. 13. Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I of a surety bear a child which am old, &c.] Though these be not the very words of Sarah, mentioned v. 12. yet they are the very same in effect: for in those words, After I am waxed old shall I have pleasure, my Lord being old also? by affirming that both she and her husband, by reason of their great years were now past the naturall pleasure of the marriage-bed, her aym was to imply how much more unlikely it was, that she should conceive at those years and bear a child; yea, perhaps these very words here alledged by the Lord, were then also added by Sarah, though they be not there ex∣pressed: for the Scripture in setting down such passages of the History doth not al∣wayes expresse all that was spoken, but onely the summe and substane of what was spoken. Vers. 14. At the time appointed, &c.] Compare this place with chap. 17. 21. and the 10. verse of this chapter. Vers. 18. Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation & all the nations, &c,] This is the first reason vvhy the Lord vvould not hide from Abraham vvhat he meant to do unto Sodom, to vvit, because he vvas so precious in his eyes, and one vvhom he had hitherto honoured above others as his speciall fa∣vourite. Having appointed him to be the stock of so great and mighty a nation, his peculiar people, yea the stock out of vvhom that blessed seed should spring, in whom all the nations of the earth should be blessed, he vvould not execute so notable a judgement upon a people so near to him, and not acquaint him vvith it: vvhich agreeth vvith that, Amos 3. 7. Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reveal∣eth his secrets unto his servants the prophets. Vers. 21. I will go down now and see, &c.] This is a figurative speech, usuall in the Scriptures, wherein God stooping to our capacity speaks of himself after the manner of men. He being every where present, cannot move from one place to an∣other; and knowing and seeing all things, needs not make any search or inquisition to inform himself; yet thus is he pleased here to speak of himself, 1. To shevv that
there vvas manifest and just cause for the Lords severitie in punishing the Sodo∣mites, as aftervvards he did; 2. To intimate hovv patient and long-suffering the Lord vvas tovvards them, and hovv unvvilling to destroy them; had they not been so extremely and desperately bad, as they vvere; and 3. To teach Judges by his ex∣ample not to punish rashly, but alvvayes to try and examine causes before they passe sentence. Vers. 22. But Abraham was yet before the Lord.] In the beginning of the cha∣pter vers. 2. mention is made of three men that appeared to Abraham, as he sate in his tent doore, to vvit, the Lord Christ, vvho is often in this chapter called Jeho∣vah, and tvvo angels that attended him; and vers. 16. that they vvent avvay from Abrahams tent, and that Abraham accompanied them: But novv the Lord having (as they vvent along) imparted to Abraham vvhat he meant to do to Sodom, tvvo of the three vvent avvay tovvards Sodom, to vvit, the tvvo angels, as they are ex∣pressely called, chap. 19. 1. And there came two angels to Sodom; and the third, vvho is here called the Lord Jehovah, stayed still vvith Abraham, and that (as these vvords seem to imply) because Abraham (though they had as it vvere dismis∣sed him, and taken their leave of him) yet stood still before the Lord, as men use to do, that being to part, yet stirre not, because they have somevvhat to say; and so the Lord abode still vvith him, and condescended to heare the requests vvhich he made for that sinfull citie. Vers. 25. That be farre from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked, &c.] The righteous are sometime taken away in the same publick calamitie together with the wicked, but the end is diverse: the one are taken away by the hand of justice, the other in mercy; as the chaff and wheat are beaten by the same flail. Now God had spoken of the Sodomites as men to be destroyed by his hand of justice, and in a way of vengeance; and in this sense does Abraham re∣ply, assured that God would not so cut off the righteous with the wicked. CHAP. XIX. Vers. 2. ANd they said, Nay but we will abide in the street, &c.] Thus by this civill refusing at first the courtesie prosfered, they make the better try∣all of the affection of this holy man; and besides, it is likely their purpose was in∣deed to abide in the streets, that so they might observe the manners of the people, had not Lot been so importunate with them. Vers. 3. And they did eat.] See chap. 18. vers. 8. Vers. 4. But before they lay down the men of the city, even the men of Sodom, compassed the house round, &c.] Doubtlesse the outward appearance of the two angels that were come to Lot was as of young men of rare and extraordinary beauty and comlinesse of person, whereof there being notice taken by some of the profane inhabitants of the city, the report thereof was soon spread abroad in the city, and so presently they flocked together from all places, and joyned together in this hor∣rible and abominable attempt which is here related. Vers. 8. I have two daughters which have not known man; let me, I pray you,
bring them out unto you, &c.] Questionlesse this prosfer of Lots was unwarranta∣ble and sinfull: for though in evils of punishment we may chuse a lesse to avoid a greater, yet in the evils of sinne all choice is unlawfull: if we may not do evil that good may come of it, Rom. 3. 8. much lesse may we do any evil to prevent others from doing some greater evil. It would not have been lawfull for Lots daughters to have yielded themselves to have been defiled by these varlets, thereby to have taken them off from that fouler sinne of Sodomy, which they had resolved upon; much lesse was it lawfull for him to resolve that he would bring them forth and de∣liver them up to the lust of this rabble, that they might do what they list to them: for he had no such power over his daughters, especially if he had already espoused them to husbands, though they were not married, as many Expositours think he had. But yet it was no wonder at all that Lot, though a righteous man 2. Pet. 2. 7. and highly beloved of God, should thus forget himself, considering 1. that in such a sudden disturbance caused by the fear of such a horrid villany so violently pursued, he could scarce have so much liberty as to ponder any thing that came into his mind; 2. that his zealous care for preserving his guests against such a horrid wick∣ednesse might so farre transport him as to make him on a sudden judge it better to yield to any thing then to give way to their detestable desires; and 3. that he might deceive himself with a vain hope that in this strange proffer made by a father they would reade so much of the grievous distraction of his mind, as would make them relent, and neither desire what he had proffered, nor prosecute what they had at first desired. Vers. 9. This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge.] By this it may appear that Lot had not onely grieved inwardly and vexed his righte∣ous soul with the unclean conversation of these wicked men, but had also, as occa∣sion was offered, reproved them for their wickednesse, and done what he could to teach them better, and to disswade them from those lewd courses, which were other∣wise likely to bring Gods judgement upon them; and hence it is that they now twit him with taking upon him to be a judge amongst them, and with thinking (a stranger though he were) to govern them and to order them in every thing as he pleased. Vers. 11. And they smote the men that were at the doore of the house with blindnesse.] Their continuing to seek for the doore, and departing home when they had wearied themselves in vain, argues that they were not utterly deprived of sight; onely their eyes were dazled in such a manner that they were as men blind in regard of that object they looked after; though they saw other things, they could not see his doore; or happely though they saw the doore before them, they knew not where it sto, nor how to come at it. Vers. 14. And spake unto his sonnes in law.] Some understand this of certain men in the city that were contracted to his two virgin daughters, of whom mention was before made, vers. 8 and that they were yet therefore in their fathers house; but others understand it of the husbands of other daughters of his, that were already married into the city, which seems best to agree with the text. But if so, then we must farther consider though his sonnes in law are here onely mentioned, as the
heads of the families, yet their wives if living were also spoken to. And hence it may seem was Lots lingring, that he should leave his children to be destroyed; and the Angels command, vers. 15. Take thy two daughters that are here, intimating that he might not wait for the other that were not there. Vers. 17. And it came to passe, &c. that he said, &c.] To wit, one of the An∣gels; to whom Lot therefore afterward directs his speech in the singular number, be∣cause it was he that had given him the charge of flying to the mountain. Look not behind thee.] This was enjoyned Lot, 1. thereby to expresse how de∣testable the inhabitants of Sodom were, a people hated of God, and unworthy of the commiseration of good men, for whom it was not fit he should take the least thought or care; 2. To teach him hereby, that he was so to be affected with Gods mecy in delivering him from that wicked cursed place, and the judgement that was now to fall upon them, that he was not to mind nor regard his house, cattel, or whatever other riches he was to leave behind, or in the least degree to repent of his coming away; and accordingly is the very same phrase used, Luke 9. 62. No man having put his hand to the plow and looking back is fit for the kingdome of God; 3. To intimate with what speed they were to haste away, not to hinder their flight so much as by looking back upon the city. Vers. 19. And I cannot escape to the mountain, &c.] Because the mountain was so farre off, he fears lest ere he could get thither the destruction should be poured forth, and he should be overtaken in it; and therefore desires that Zoar might be the place of refuge for him, which was nearer at hand. Vers. 21. And he said unto him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this thing.] The Angel, not without Gods direction undoubtedly, yields to the weaknesse of his faith, and grants his request; but as God doth usually grant his servants those requests which he doth not approve of, that they may by their own experience see their folly, and that it is still better for them to follow his direction: for thus it was with Lot, who afterwards vers. 30. feared to dwell in Zoar, and then therefore found that he had done best it at first he had followed the angels counsel in fly∣ing to the mountain. Vers. 22. Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.] Which signifies little: before it was called Bela, chap. 14. 2. And the king of Bela, which is Zoar. Vers. 23. The sunne was risen upon the eart, &c.] This I conceive is thus ex∣pressed, 1. To shew how narrowly Lot escaped the destruction that fell upon the Sodomites: It was break of day when the Angels hastened him and his to get them out of Sodom, vers. 15. And when the morning arose, then the Angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise, &c. and by that time the sunne was risen, the judgement threat∣ned fell upon Sodom, whereby no doubt Lot was brought to see and acknowledge both his own folly in lingring so long, and the goodnesse of God in forcing him away, and not suffering him to stay there any longer; and 2. to make it the more manifest that this judgement was extraordinary and supernaturall, and how sud∣denly the inhabitants of these wicked cities were overwhelmed with the storm of Gods fiery indignation, without any warning given them, when doubtlesse they had not the least fear of any such mischief that was coming upon them. The sunne
rose as fairly that day, as upon other dayes: and yet presently a showr of fire and brimstone fell upon them, and consumed them all. Vers. 24. Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah, &c.] Sodom and Gomorrah are here mentioned as the chief; but withall Admah and Zeboiim were also destroyed. Deut. 29. 23. Like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboiim, which the Lord overthrew in his anger, &c. Now, from the Lord is here added in the end of this clause, Then the Lord rained upon So∣dom and upon Gomorrah brimstone, and fire from the Lord, the more emphatical∣ly to expresse that it was not by any ordinary course of nature, but by the immedi∣ate almighty power of God. And doubtlesse it was the supernaturall and miracu∣lous work of the Lord, and not from any naturall cause, that such showers, not of water, as when the old world was drowned, but of fire and brimstone should fall from heaven upon these cities, who did therein fit the punishment to the sinnes of those that were destroyed thereby. They burned vvith vild and unnaturall lusts, and therefore against the ordinary course of nature fire falls down from heaven and de∣vours them, and their stinking abominable filthinesse is punished with the stench of brimstone mingled vvith fire; yea this fire and brimstone vvas but a forerunner of their everlasting punishment in that lake which burneth with fire and brimstone, for evermore, Rev. 21. 8. for so the Apostle S. Jude saith that Sodom and Go∣morrah suffered the vengeance of eternall fire, Jude 7. Vers. 26. But his wife looked back from behind him, &c.] That is, Lot going before, and his wife follovving behind him, she looked back from behind him to∣vvards Sodom, to vvit, as doubting vvhether any such judgement vvould fall upon Sodom as vvas threatned, or lingring in her desires after those friends, that vvealth and estate vvhich they had left behind them; and thus she did rebell against the ex∣presse commandment of the Lord given before to Lot, vers. 17. and in him unto all that vvere with him, and that vvhen God had afforded her such an extraordina∣ry mercy to fetch her avvay by his angels from Sodom vvhen it vvas to be destroy∣ed, and so vvas turned into a Pillar, or statue, of salt, not such salt as vve ordinari∣ly use, vvhich being vvet vvill melt and turn into vvater (for it vvas to stand as a monument of her infidelity and disobedience) but a kind of rockie minerall salt, vvhich vvill endure all vveathers and not vvaste avvay. Vers. 29. God remembred Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the over∣throw.] That is, God remembred his promise, vvhereby he had ingaged himself to Abraham, not onely to blesse him in his own person, but those also for his sake that were dear unto him, chap. 12. 2. And thou shalt be a blessing: I will blesse them that blesse thee: and he remembred the requests vvhich Abraham had made to him for Sodom, and that in the behalf of those fevv righteous ones, that might be in that citie, pressing him particularly vvith this, that the righteous might not be destroyed vvith the vvicked, and so he saved Lot for Abrahams sake. It is true in∣deed that God had respect to the piety and righteousnesse of Lot in delivering him: for so the Apostle faith, 2. Pet. 2. 7, 8. That he delivered just Lot, and that because the righteous soul of this good man was vexed from day to day in seeing and hear∣ing the filthy conversation of those vvicked vvretches; but this doth not exclude
that vvhich is here said concerning Abraham. There may be divers causes of one and the same effect: the main cause of all vvas Gods free grace both to Abraham and Lot, and not any merit in them; but subordinate hereunto there vvere also other inducements, to vvit, the joynt respect that the Lord had to the righteousnesse of Lot his faithfull servant, and to the intercession of Abraham, as here is expressed. Vers. 30. For he feared to dwell in Zoar, &c.] The cause of this fear is not ex∣pressed, but may probably be thought to have been, either that seeing the abomi∣nable sinnes of that citie, he feared lest God vvould also destroy that; or else, that he doubted lest because of his escape the people vvould fall upon him, as the cause of the overthrovv of those neighbouring cities: and indeed his hiding himself in the cave makes this most probable. Vers. 31. And there is not a man on the earth to come in unto us, &c.] Some conceive that they did verily think that all nations of the earth vvere destroyed by fire; but many things make this improbable: 1. Their knovvledge that Zoar vvas not destroyed, and that the Angels had promised that it should not be destroyed; 2. Their seeing that the shower of fire, which had burnt up those cities of the plain, reached not so farre as the mountains wherein at present they were; 3. The re∣membrance of Abraham their uncle, a righteous man, not like to be destroyed; and 4. That last clause, after the manner of all the earth, which seems to be spoken of the time present, that they were deprived of that society with man which every∣where else they did enjoy. Others conceive that she meant onely this, that there was not a godly man, with whom onely they durst marry. They take the perish∣ing of their sisters in Sodom, to be a punishment of God upon them for their mar∣rying with the wicked Sodomites; not daring to do so therefore, and grieving by this means to be deprived of the common blessing of mankind, they resolve upon a more wicked course. But I rather conceive thus of the place: Lot and his daugh∣ters flying in some great fear into the mountain, and being there in a manner mu∣red up in a cave, his eldest daughter utters these words as a complaint that by this solitary life they were deprived of all hope of marriage (the common blessing of all the earth) There is not a man in the earth to come in unto us: That is, here we live in a cave without society of any but our selves, and it is to us all one, as if there were not a man upon the earth; Come let us make our father drink wine, &c. But indeed any of these expositions may be imbraced: for whatever absurdity there is in their resolutions, must be ascribed to their fear, that passion blinding men, and driving them upon any absurd thoughts or courses. Vers. 32. Let us make our father drink wine.] To wit, the wine which they had brought from Zoar. Vers. 37. And called his name Moab, &c.] Moab, is by interpretation, of the father, and Benammi, is sonne of my people, or sonne of my kindred. In both names here was a memoriall of their incestuous procreation: That which these daughters of Lot it seemed boasted of, was their having children of their own kinne, not of the fithlesse and cursed nations.
CHAP. XX. Vers. 1. ANd Abraham journeyed from thence, &c.] The cause of this remove is not expressed; but in likelyhood it was, because of some inconve∣niency arising from the late fearfull destruction of Sodom. Vers. 2. And Abimelech, king of Gerar, &c.] Abimelech was the common title of the kings of Palestina, as Pharaoh was of the kings of Egypt. Psal. 34. the title, A Psalme of David when he changed his behaviour before Abimelech. Vers. 3. But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night.] By that which we reade, verse 17. So Abraham prayed unto God, and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his maid-servants, &c. it appears that presently upon the taking of Sarah, the Lord struck Abimelech with a dangerous sicknesse, and plagued his Court with a strange disease: Now in his sicknesse the Lord by a dream (the ex∣traordinary glory whereof was undoubtedly such, that Abimelech might easily per∣ceive it came from heaven) informs him of the cause, and tells him he was a dead man, which must be understood conditionally, unlesse he restored Abrahams wife, vers. 7. Now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live: and if thou restore her not, know thou, that thou shalt surely die, &c. Vers. 4. Wilt thou slay also a righteous nation.] That is, him and his people, vers. 18. For the Lord had fast closed up all the wombes of the house of Abi∣melech. Vers. 7. For he is a Prophet.] They are called Prophets in the Scripture to whom the Lord did more familiarly reveal his will, then to other men, and by whom he did teach and instruct others: Such was Abraham, Gen. 18. 17, 18, 19. And the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do? seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great nation, &c. For I know that he will com∣mand his children and his houshold after him, &c. And of this the Lord gives no∣tice to Abimelech, 1. That he might not dare to detain Sarah, because her husband was not an ordinary man, but a Prophet, one in speciall favour with God, whose wrongs God would surely avenge, Psal. 105. 15. Touch not mine Anoynted, and do my Prophets no harm; 2. That he might hope by his prayers (being a man so prevalent with God) to have the plague removed that was laid upon them. Vers. 12. And yet indeed she is my sister, &c.] He addes, to excuse himself, that it was not altogether false which he had faid, because it was true in a sense, that she was his sister (as in the same sense Lot and he are called brethren, Gen. 13. 8. For we be brethren) namely, because she was the daughter of his father, though not of his mother: And for the clearing this, the Hebrews hold that Sarah was that Iscah, the daughter of Haran, Abrahams brother, as being the sonne of Terah, though by another woman; for this being yielded, she was indeed the grandchild of Terah, Abrahams father, and so might be called the daughter of his father (as Jethroes daughters are called Revels, who was their grandfather, Exod. 2. 18.) and yet withall not be the daughter of his mother, because descended from the former of Terahs wives, whereas Abraham was born of a latter wife.
Vers. 16. Behold he is to thee a covering of the eyes, &c. thus she was repro∣ved.] This place is diversly translated, and accordingly there are severall expositions given of it, but according to this translation of ours, the meaning must needs be this; Abimelech puts her in mind that her husband ought to be as a veil unto her, to cover her as it were from the eyes and desires of all others; and therefore Moses addes, thus she was reproved, that is, though this speech of his may not seem at first to imply so much, yet in truth he did thereby though covertly yet sharply re∣prove her; for it was all one as if he had told her, that by denying her husband, she had in a manner unveiled her self, and laid her self open to the unlawfull desires of other men, and was guilty her self of those dangers, whereinto she had fallen. God had made her husband the guardian of her chastity, and by denying him she had exposed her self to the lusts of others. Thus was godly Sarah, to her greater shame, reproved by a profane king, and instructed how better to carry her self hereafter. Vers. 18. For the Lord had fast closed up all the wombes of the house of Abi∣melech.] What closing up of the wombe this was, it is hard to say. Some think onely that God had restrained them from conceiving: and this may be; for this judgement might be inflicted and cured, & yet not discerned by themselves. But I ra∣ther think it was some other extraordinary closing of the wombe, 1. Because of that word fast closed, which implies a judgement unusuall; 2. Because all were closed up; 3. Because it is related as an apparent noted cure that followed Abrahams prayer. CHAP. XXI. Vers. 3. ANd Abraham called the name of his sonne, Isaac.] Which signifieth laughter, to wit, because of the joy they had in this their sonne. Vers. 9. And Sarah saw the sonne of Hagar, &c. mocking, &c.] Ishmael looking with an envious eye upon Isaac at all times, was, as it seems, stung with the joy and jollity that was made at the weaning of him, and this repining of his heart brake forth at this time (as no doubt it had done often formerly) into some scornfull language and derision of him, mocking him as their young master, and he that must forsooth be heir of all. Vers. 10. For the sonne of this ondwoman shall not be heir with my sonne.] Sarah therefore perceived that this mocking proceeded both from Hagars and Ish∣maels repining that Isaac the younger sonne should be the heir. Vers. 12. And God said unto Abraham.] By a vision in the night, as appears by vers. 14. And Abraham rose up early in the morning, &c. Vers. 14. And took bread, and a bottle of water, &c.] For the full understanding of this, we must know, 1. That the casting of them out, which Sarah required, was not onely putting them out of his house, but an absolute casting them off, as if he had had nothing to do with them (for might he have provided for them in another place it would not have been so grievous to him) 2. That God had enjoyned him to hearken to Sarah in all things, the rather, no doubt, that the misery of their cast∣ing out might punish them for their sinne, who in mocking Isaac had despised the
blessed seed promised in him. 3. That Abraham thus yielding to cast her off, doth onely give her what she could not be without (because she was to go through the wildernesse that lay in the way to Egypt) bread, that is, such victualls as she could carry with her, for this in the Scripture is usually called bread, as we may see Mark 6. 36. This is a desert place, and now the time is farre passed, send them away, that they may go into the countrey round about, and into the villages, and buy them∣selves bread; vvhich bread, Matth. 14. 15. is termed victualls, His Disciples came to him, saying, This is a desert place, and the time is now past, send the multitude away, that they may go into the villages, and buy themselves victualls; and a bot∣tle of water, which she might else want in those dry barren places. Vers. 14. And she wandred in the wildernesse of Beersheba.] The bottle of vva∣ter might have sufficed till she had come to some place of succour, had she not missed the direct way, and wandred up and down, as they might well in those de∣sert places, not knowing where they were, nor which way to go. Vers. 15. And she cast the child under one of the shrubs.] He that vvas grovv∣ing apace to mans stature is often in Scripture called a child, as Ishmael here, vvho vvas about eighteen years old; and Hagar is said to cast the child under a shrub, because she left him being sick and fainting for thirst, vvhereas before she had sup∣ported and cherished him. Vers. 17. What aileth thee, Hagar?] Words of expostulation, as if he had said, What meanest thou thus to take on, having had experience of Gods providence over thee? Feare not for God hath heard the voice of the lad, where he is.] Both here and before mention is made of the lads voice, not Hagars; because he it was that was in extremity, and her weeping was for him. God hath heard the voice of the lad, that is, God hath taken notice of his misery, and will preserve him: and these words where he is, are added to expresse, the better to Hagars apprehension, that God had taken notice of his danger, and would help him; as if he had said, The child which you have yonder cast off, as hopelesse of his life, God hath heard, and will preserve and succour him. Vers. 19. And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well, &c.] That is, she vvas brought to observe and take notice of it, which she did not before, either by reason of passionate grief, or for some other reason. For thus it is said of the Disciples that talked with Christ, Luke 24. 16. But their eyes were holden that they should not know him: And, vers. 31. their eyes were opened, and they knew him. Vers. 20. And became an archer.] This is expressed to shew, not onely that he did by this means nourish himself with beasts killed by shooting, but also that he was a warriour, and so that oracle was fulfilled, Gen. 16. 12. And he will be a wild man, &c. Vers. 21. And he dwelt in the wildernesse of Paran.] next adjoyning to the desart of Sinai, through which the Israelites went. Num. 10. 12. And the children of Israel took their journeys out of the wildernesse of Sinai, and the cloud rested in the wildernesse of Paran. Vers. 24. And Abraham said, I will swear.] Though this countrey of Abime∣lechs
was a part of the land promised to Abraham, yet he knowing that it was his posterity onely, that were in time to come actually to enjoy it, and to root out the inhabitants thereof, and that himself was to live as a stranger and sojourner in the land, no marvell it is though he acknowledged Abimelechs sovereigntie in that land, and took an oath for himself, that he would no way hutt either him, or his sonne, or his sonnes sonne after him. Vers. 27. And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and sent them unto Abimelech.] Besides that it was the custome to give some such gifts at the making of covenants, these seem to have been given by Abraham by way of Homage to Abimelech, as the king of the countrey. Vers. 30. For these seven ew-lambes shalt thou take of my hand, That they may be a witnesse unto me, &c.] That is, the receiving of these seven ew-lambes, shall be as a witnesse that this well formerly taken from me, vers. 25. is now acknowledged to be mine, that so all controversie about it for the time to come may be prevented. Vers. 3. And they returned into the land of the Philistines.] That is, That part of the land where the Philistines dwelt: for otherwise Beersheba, where they had now covenanted with Abraham, was also in the land of Palestina, vers. 34. And Abraham sojourned in the land of the Philistines many dayes. Vers. 33. And Abraham planted a Grove in Beersheba, and called there on the name of the Lord, &c.] That is, in the Grove▪ which he had planted in Beersheba, which no doubt he purposely planted for this religious use, that under the shade of those trees they might the more commodiously offer up sacrifices, and perform all other the publick duties of Gods worship and service, which within their tents they could not do. And hereby Moses gives us to understand, 1. That Abraham did at length here enjoy some settled rest, and dwelt here a long time together, to vvit, whilst his new planted Grove was grown up and fit for the service he intended it; 2. That at this time the use of Groves in Gods worship was not unlawfull: However afterward, vvhen men began to esteem such places holy, and to think superstitiously that God vvas better vvorshipped there then in other places, and so it became a ge∣nerall custome amongst all Idolatrous nations to set up their Idoles in Groves, and there to sacrifice to their false Gods, the Lord did thereupon by his lavv forbid the Israelites all planting of Groves for religious uses, Deut. 16. 21. Thou shalt not plant thee a Grove of any trees near unto the Altar, &c. & this planting of Groves became one of the chief abominations for vvhich God reproved the Israelites in fu∣ture times, Judg. 3. 7. And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and forgat the Lord their God, and served Baalim and the Groves. 1. Kings 14. 15. For the Lord shall smite Israel, as a reed is shaken▪ in the water, and he shall root up Israel out of this good land, which he gave to their fathers, &c. because they have made their Groves, provoking the Lord to anger; yet, I say, at present it vvas no sinne in Abraham; both because as yet God had not forbidden it, and Abraham did it onely for conveniency to shelter them from the heat, not as think∣ng God vvas better vvorshipped in Groves then in other places.
CHAP. XXII. Vers. 1. GOd did tempt Abraham.] That is, he did try and prove him. It is said, James 1. 13. that God tempteth no man, to vvit, by seeking to se∣duce them, by soliciting and provoking them to do that which is evil. Thus men are tempted by Satan, vvho is therefore called, The Tempter, Matt. 4. 3. and, by their own lusts, James 1. 13. but God, in this sense, tempteth no man. He is there∣fore here said to have tempted Abraham, onely because by enjoyning him to sa∣crifice his sonne Isaac (in vvhom God had promised to make his seed as the starres of heaven, and that in his seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed) God did singularly prove and try his obedience and faith, to wit, vvhether he vvould believe still the promise made him concerning Isaac, even vvhen he was enjoyned to do that vvhich might seem utterly to overthrovv that promise, and do vvhat God commanded, even vvhen reason must needs conclude, that if he did obey, the promise concerning Isaac could not be performed: Thus God did tempt Abraham. And because the command of such an inhumane fact, as vvas the sacrificing of his own sonne, might not startle those that should reade it, or make them think that it vvas rather some fit of sudden phrensy, or some delusion of Satan, that made him undertake such a thing as this▪ in the very entrance of this story this is therefore ex∣pressed, that God commanded this, but it vvas onely to try him. God required in Abraham a readinesse of will, really to do vvhat vvas spoken to him, but never in∣tended that he should do it; onely as men use to make experiments of the faithful∣nesse of their friends, so now God made proof of Abrahams faith and obedience; and that, not because God needed any such way of discovering it to himself▪ for he knows hovv the hearts of all men stand affected, but because he would hereby have it manifested to others: so that herein also the Scripture speaks of God after the manner of men. And he said, Behold, here I am.] That is, ready to do whatever thou wilt enjoyn me. Vers. 2. Take now thy sonne, thine onely sonne.] So called, both because he was the onely sonne of the freewoman, and also because Ishmael was now quite cast out. Chap. 21. 14. And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a bottle of water, and gave it unto Hagar and the child, and sent her away, and she departed, &c. And get thee into the Land of Moriah.] Which was the place, where after∣wards the temple was built, as 2. Chron. 3. 1. Then Solomon began to build the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, in Mount Moriah, &c. Vers. 4. Abraham lift up his eyes, and saw the place afarre off.] For by this time God had told him, according to the promise before mentioned, vers. 2. in what particular place of the land of Moriah he was to sacrifice his sonne, as it is plain∣ly afterward expressed, vers. 9. They came to the place that God had told him of▪ Now Abrahams seeing the place before he came at it, is thus particularly expressed, because doubtlesse the first sight of this place, where he was to perform such a dole∣full
work, did exceedingly wound his heart, and yet notwithstanding he shrunk not, but persevered constantly in his resolution of doing what God had enjoyned him. Vers. 5. Abraham said to his young men, Abide you here with the asse, &c.] That his servants might not oppose and hinder him in the vvork he had to do, he enjoyns them to stay with the asse at the foot of the hill, to wit, the asse whereon himself rode, or whereon they had brought the wood they were to use in the sacri∣fice▪ for happely they all went on foot, and onely used the asse for the carrying of the wood, or perhaps onely Abraham by reason of his age did ride, and the rest went on foot. And I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.] Thus by the all-ruling Providence of God he prophesieth of that, whereof he knew nothing. It cannot be that he distinctly knew that he should bring back his sonne again; for then what great matter was there in this that he did? rather surely he spake this as a man astonished and amazed: neither need we be so carefull to clear Abraham from seeking by this dissembling to keep his servants from suspecting that vvhich he vvent about; rather let us admire the wisdome and goodnesse of God, that he suf∣fered Abraham in this greatest of all humane actions to shew a little frailty, that we might not look for perfection here. Vers. 6. And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac his sonne.] But how vvas he able to carry so much wood as vvould serve for the burning up of the sacrifice? I answer, 1. it appears by this that he was novv a youth well grown; 2. it may well be that Abraham carried with him some lesser quantity of dry choice wood to begin the fire, resolving to furnish himself with the rest upon the mountain; 3. happely Isaac carried it at severall times, though that be not here expressed, but onely so much as would serve to shew how even in this he vvas a Type of Christ, John 19. 17. And he bearing his crosse, went forth, &c. Vers. 9. And bound Isaac his sonne.] It is not likely that all particulars are here expressed: no doubt Abraham, before he bound him, acquainted him with the commandment of God, and urged the necessitie of obedience, the promises and power of God, and vvhatever might prepare him to yield himself to be sacrificed, as God had commanded: but these Moses relates not, but onely that Abraham bound him, &c. that so vve might know that in not resisting▪ but meekly suffering his father to proceed, Isaac was also a Type of Christ; Mark 15. 1. The chief Priests held a consultation, &c. and bound Jesus. Acts 8. 32. He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and like a lamb dumb before the shearer, so opened he not his mouth. Vers. 11. And the Angel of the Lord called unto him.] That is, Christ the ternall word of his father, who speaketh of himself as God, vers. 12. For now I know thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy sonne, thine onely sonne, from me; and is called Jehovah, vers. 6. And the Angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven the second time, and said, By my self have I sworn, saith the Lord, &c. Vers. 13▪ And Abraham lifted up his eyes.] Hearing this voice from heaven,
he looked about, and behind him he espies this ram, which he took as sent of God, to supply Isaacs room; or, it may be, he lifted up his eyes purposely to look for a sacrifice. Vers. 14. As it is said to this day, In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen.] In the mount, that is, in de time and place, or in like manner as once to Abra∣ham; in the mount it shall be seen, that is, it shall be provided for, God will help, and that his children shall see: for both these were implyed in this Proverb, which upon this occasion grew so ordinary in following times, to wit, both that God vvould provide for his servants in their extremities, and that it should be done in such a manner, that they should plainly see it came from God. Vers. 16. By my self have I sworn, saith the Lord.] This doth not prove that it was not Christ, the eternall word of the father, vvho novv spake to Abraham; the like we have, Psal. 2. 7. The Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my sonne, &c. Vers. 17. And thy seed shall possesse the gate of his enemies.] That is, thou shalt subject them, and bring both their strength and government under command; for by the gate of the enemie is here meant their strength and government; their strength, because there they had their strongest fortifications; their government, because there the Magistrates sate in judgement, Deut. 22. 15. Then shall the father of the damsell, and her mother, take and bring forth the tokens of the damsells virginitie, unto the Elders of the City in the gate. Vers. 24. And his Concubine, whose name was Reumah, &c.] The Hebrew vvord translated Concubine signifieth a half wife, or divided and secondary wife, vvhich vvas a vvife for the bed (and therein differing from a vvhore) but not for honour and government of the family; 1. Kings 11. 3. And he had seven hun∣dred wives Princesses, and three hundred Conubines. CHAP. XXIII. Vers. 2. ANd Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, &c.] The most of Exposi∣tours hold that both Abraham and Sarah had novv removed their dwelling from Beersheba to Hebron; and that this therefore vvhich is here said, that Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, is onely to be understood of his coming to Sarahs tent: for Abraham and she had severall tents, Gen. 24. 67. And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarahs tent. Yet many also hold that Abraham dwelt still at Beersheba, & that Sarah, upon some occasion not expressed being at Hebron, fell sick and dyed, and so Abraham hearing of it came thither to lament and bury her: which is the more probable, because vers. 4. as a stranger he ses for a burying place, which he would not in that manner have done if he had been a dweller among them (as it is expresly noted of Ephron that he was) and also because Isaac dwelt afterward near Lahai-roi which was not farre from Beersheba. Vers. 3. And spake unto the sonnes of Heth.] That is, the Governours, and El∣ders of the Hittites, the inhabitants of Hebron. Vers. 4. Give me a possession of a burying place with you, &c.] That is, give m liberty to purchase, though a stranger, a possession of a burying place.
Vers. 10. And Ephron dvelt amongst the children of Heth.] Others reade, And Ephron sat amongst the children of Heth, not unfitly: Abraham, not knovving the man, had spoken of him as of one absent: ere Ephrons ansvver therefore be in∣serted, Moses shevvs that he sat there amongst the other Elders, and so immediately replied to Abrahams demand. Hovvever if vve reade it as our translations render it, And Ephron dwelt amongst the children of Heth, it comes all to one. For his dvvelling among them is expressed onely to imply, that he being himself one of the chief inhabitants of that city sat at that time amongst the other Governours and Elders, and so presently ansvvered for himself to that request vvhich Abraham had made. Vers. 13. But if thou wilt give it, &c.] Other translations supply this imperfect speech thus, if thou be that Ephron, &c. vvhich seems to imply, that he had onely formerly heard of him, not seen his face. I will give thee mony for the field.] Abraham persists to refuse it of gift; because he vvould not by any bounty of theirs enjoy one foot of that land vvhich God had given him entire for his possession. Vers. 17. And the field of Ephron, &c.] That this vvas not that purchased bu∣rying place, vvhereof Stephen spake, Act. 7. 16. is evident; because that vvas in Sichem, this in Hebron; that vvas bought of Emor the father of Sichem, this of Ephron. CHAP. XXIV. Vers. 1. ANd Abraham was old, &c.] His age puts him in mind to provide for his sonnes marriage, he being novv an hundred and fourty years old: for Isaac vvas fourty, Gen. 25. 20. And Isaac was fourty years old when he took Rebekah to wife, and he vvas born vvhen Abraham vvas an hundred, Gen. 21. 5. Abraham was an hundred years old, when his sonne Isaac was born unto him. Vers. 2. And Abraham said unto his eldest servant, &c. This in likelyhood vvas his stevvard Eliezer, vvho vvas born in his house, Gen. 15. 2, 3. And the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus. And Abraham said, Behold to me thou hast given no seed; and lo one born in my house is mine heir. Put I pray thee thy hand under my thigh, &c.] A signe vvhich Jacob also requi∣red of his son Joseph, Gen. 47. 29. either in token of homage, and to signifie subjecti∣on, that as their hand lay under the thigh of him that enjoyned the oath, so they acknovvledged themselves under his povver, bound to obey his command; or for a further mystery of the covenant of Circumcision, or rather of Christ the promised seed, vvho vvas to come out of Abrahams loyns or thigh. Gen. 46. 26. All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his loyns, &c. Vers. 3. That thou wilt not take a wife unto my sonne of the daughters of the Canaanites, &c.] Not onely because they vvere a profane idolatrous people, but especially because he vvould not have his seed mix themselves vvith that accursed nation, in vvhose place they should succeed, vvhen God had destroyed them ac∣cording to his promise.
Vers. 5. Must I needs bring thy sonne again unto the land from whence thou camest?] Abraham having required his servant to swear (as is related in the fore∣going verses) that he should not take a wife for his sonne of the daughters of the Canaanites, but that he should go unto the land from whence he came, and there amongst his kindred provide a wife for him, in these words the servant objects a case that might happen, and desires direction therein, to wit, if there were not a fit wise found amongst his kindred, that would leave her countrey to come into Ca∣naan, nor yield to marry Isaac, but upon condition that he should leave Canaan, and come into the land where she dwelt, whether in this case he should be so strict∣ly bound by his oath to provide him a wife amongst his kindred, that of necessity he must consent to this condition, rather then not to marry him to one of them; this I say is doubtlesse the drift of these words, Must I needs bring thy sonne again unto the Land from whence thou camest? Onely further yet to clear them, two things must be noted: 1. That those words, Must I bring thy sonne again into the land, &c. must not make us think that Isaac was now by reason of his tender years under this servants government, and at his disposing to be carried up and down whither he pleased, for he was now well-nigh fourty years old, Gen. 25. 20. Isaac was fourty years old when he took Rebekah to wife. but are onely meant as an en∣quiry whether he should in treating about a wife for him consent to that condition of Isaacs removing to dwell amongst his fathers kindred, and perswade Isaac to it, who it seemed had undertaken to his father to be guided by this servant in the busi∣nesse of his marriage; and 2. Though Isaac was born in Canaan, and had never dwelt in the land from whence his father came, yet he saith, Must I bring thy sonne again into the land from whence thou camest? to wit in relation to his fathers for∣mer dwelling there, as with the like phrase, Gen. 15. 16. it is said that the Israe∣lites should in the fourth generation come again into the land of Canaan, out of Egypt, though their fathers onely, not themselves, had been there before. Vers. 6. Beware thou that thou bring not my sonne thither again.] That is, yield not to any such condition, undertake no such thing when you treat with my kind∣red about a wife for him: I will by no means have my sonne leave this land, and go thither to dwell; and therefore be sure that you yield to no such condition, nor perswade my sonne to it when I am gone. Now this Abraham doth thus earnestly give in charge to his servant, not onely because he knew his kindred were not so free from Idolatrous corruptions in Religion as he desired, though they worshipped the true God, and therefore had respect to his sonne therein; but especially because he knew that the Lord had called him out of that Land into Canaan, to take pos∣session of it, as it were, both for him and his posterity, and that therefore his sonnes going to dvvell elsevvhere would be a kind of renouncing the land of promise: As therefore himself by faith had hitherto abode there, Heb. 11. 9. so he vvould have his sonne do also, choosing rather to have him live as a stranger and sojourner in the land of promise, then to have him live amongst his kindred in the land of his forefathers nativity. Vers. 10. And the servant took ten camels, &c.] The reason vvhy he took so many camels and servants also ansvverable, as is expressed, ver. 59. They sent a∣way
Abrahams servant and his men, vvas doubtlesse partly because the journey vvas very long▪ and much of it through desart places, and so it vvas necessary that he should take store of provision along vvith them; partly because he vvas to car∣ry many rich presents vvith him of all sorts, to give amongst his Masters kindred; and partly because it vvas fit he should go the more richly attended, that thereby his Masters kindred might see vvhat a mighty man of vvealth his Master vvas, and the more readily imbrace the motion of a match to be made vvith his sonne. And because it might happely seem strange that he should so freely take for his journey of his Masters goods vvhat he pleased himself, this clause is added, For all the goods of his Master were in his hand, that is, they vvere alvvayes at his command, so that he might take vvhat he thought fit, to vvhose vvisdome and care the managing of this businesse vvas vvholy left. And went to Mesopotamia.] As Mizraim is in Greek and other tongues called Egypt, Gen. 12. 10. so Aram-Naharaim is in Greek called Mesopotamia, be∣cause it lay between the rivers. Ʋnto the citie of Nahor.] That is, the city where Nahor dwelt; so that is called Christs city wherein he dwelt, Mat. 9. 1. And he entred into a shippe, passed over, and came into his own citie: And this city here spoke of was Haran: where∣by it is evident that if Nahor came not to Haran with Abraham from Ur of the Chaldees (as it seems he did not, Gen. 11. 31. Terah took Abraham his sonne, and Lot the sonne of Haran, and Sarah his daughter in law his sonne Abrams wife, and they went forth with them from Ʋr of the Chaldees, &c. and they came unto Haran and dwelt there) yet afterwards he removed thither. Vers. 11. And he made his camels to kneel down.] That is, it being now even∣ing, he caused them to lie down to rest themselves. This phrase of kneeling down, is used, because after this manner camels use to lie down, first to fall down on their knees, and then to cast their bodies on the ground to rest themselves. Vers. 12. And he said, O Lord God of my master Abraham, &c.] It is said this was but a speaking in his heart, vers. 45. As for that which he now desired of God, to wit, that the damsel who should when he desired drink of her, answer him, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also, might be the maid whom God had appointed to be Isaacs wife, no doubt it came into his mind to desire this by the speciall instinct of Gods spirit; yet he chooseth such a token as might be withall a probable signe of an ingenuous disposition in her that did it. Vers. 17. And the servant ran to meet her.] He was at the well before Re∣bekah came thither, vers. 13. Behold I stand here by the well, &c. but having stood a little aloof off the well, till she had filled her pitcher and was going away, he then ranne to meet her, &c. Vers. 28. And the damsel ranne and told them of her mothers house these things.] It seems that it was the custome of those times and places for the women to dwell apart by themselves, vers. 67. And Isaac brought her into his mother Sa∣rahs tent. Vers. 29. And Laban ranne out unto the man to the well.] By the appointment happely both of his father Bethuel, and his mother.
Vers. 48. To take my masters brothers daughter unto his sonne.] For Rebekah was the daughter of Bethuel, the sonne of Nahor, Abrahams brother: and it is usu∣all in the Scriptures to call grandchildren, sonnes and daughters. Vers. 49. Tell me, that I may turn to the right hand or to the left.] That is, that I may somewhere else look out for a wife for my masters sonne. And thus he op∣poseth the right hand and the left, to that right way mentioned in the former verse, wherein the Lord had led him to take his masters brothers daughter unto his sonne. Vers. 50. Then Laban and Bethuel answered.] The sonne is set before the fa∣ther, because, as it seems, he spake in the name of them all, his father being old, and therefore, it may well be, not so able to return the answer. We cannot speak unto thee bad, or good.] That is, we cannot speak any thing at all against it: he speaks good against any thing propounded, that contradicts it upon good ground; he evil, that speaks against an apparent good motion out of some evil affection: Laban therefore in this proverbiall speech acknowledgeth that good could not be said against this motion, and evil he would not speak. Vers. 51. Let her be thy masters sonnes wife, as the Lord hath spoken.] That is, we perceive plainly by the whole carriage of this businesse that this match is made in heaven, God hath decreed that she shall be his wife; and therefore God forbid that we should oppose it, Let it be as the Lord hath spoken. The same phrase David useth, speaking of Gods decree, 2. Sam. 16. 10. The Lord hath said unto him, Curse David. Vers. 59. They sent away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse.] Whose name was Deborah, Gen. 35. 8. But Deborah Rebekahs nurse died, &c. Vers. 60. Let thy seed possesse the gate of those that hate them.] See the notes upon Gen. 22. 17. Thy seed shall possesse the gate of his enemies. Vers. 65. Therefore she took a veil and covered her face.] A sgne of modestie, as also of subjection: 1. Cor. 11. 5, 6, 10. But every woman that prayeth or pro∣phsieth with her head uncovered, dishonoureth her head: for that is even all one as if she were shaven▪ for if the woman be not covered, let her also be shorn: but if it be a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven let her be covered. For this cause ought the woman to have power on her head, &c. Vers. 67. And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarahs tent, and took Rebe∣kah.] That is, having conducted her into the tent of Sarah his deceased mother (which it seems had been reserved ever since Sarahs death for Isaacs wife) within some convenient time after, he took her, that is▪ he was in a solemn manner, after the rites of those times, married to her, and so she became his wife. CHAP. XXV. Vers. 1. THen again Abraham took a wif, and her name was Keturah.] That is, after Sarah was dead, and that weighty businesse of his sonnes mar∣riage dispatcht. But how then doth the Apostle say, that Abrahams body was dead, in the hundredth year of his age, for matter of begetting children, if now by
another he have so many children fourty years after? I answer, 1. By the deadnesse of his body is meant his unlikelyhood to have children in regard of great age, not that it was absolutely impossible by the ordinary course of nature; 2. That grace of God that strengthened him for the generation of Isaac did continue unto him this vigour of nature, for many years after, for farther procreation of children. Indeed considering, 1. that there is no mention neither of Keturah nor of her children, in all the foregoing story; 2. that Sarah caused Hagar and Ishmael to be cast out, and therefore much lesse would have endured another; 3. that when Isaac was to be sa∣crificed he is called Abrahams onely snne, I see not how we can hold that Abraham married Keturah, in Sarahs life-time. Vers. 6. But unto the sonnes of the concubines, which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, &c.] That is, unto the sonnes of Hagar and Kturah. The Hebrew word signifieth a half-wife or a divided and secondary wife; and it seems by this place, that not onely they were called concubines, who (as Hagar) were taken af∣ter a man was married, to be, as it were, partner-wives for the right of the bed, though not for honour and government of the family, but also second wives marri∣ed after the first was dead, because their children also had no right of inheritance. And sent them away from Isaac.] Thus testifying his faith, that Isaac and his seed should onely enjoy the land of Canaan. Ʋnto the East-countrey.] A part of Arabia; and hence is mention made of the sonnes of the East. Job 1. 3. it is said of Job, that he was the greatest of the sonnes of the East. Vers. 8. An old man, and full of years.] Hereby is meant a willingnesse to die, without desiring longer life on the earth. And was gathered nto his people.] This phrase signifieth the immortality of the soul, and that men, when they die, die not like beasts, but that their souls passe to an everlasting estate and condition. Vers. 16. These are the sonnes of Ishmael, and these are their names, by their towns, and by their castles.] That is, after these names were their severall castles and towns called. Vers. 18. And he died in the presence of all his brethren.] Some reade, and he dwelt: however, see chap. 16. 12. He shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren: for certainly the same is intended here as accomplisht, that was there foretold. Vers. 20. The daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Padan-aram.] By Padan-aram, is meant a part of Syria, the same that is called, Gen. 24. 10. Aram-naharaim in the Hebrew; for the Greek turneth them both, Mesopotamia of Syria. Padan, in the Syrian tongue signifieth a pair or couple; and it seems therefore that this part of Aram or Syria vvas so called, because it lay betvvixt tvvo rivers. vvhence also the Greek vvord Mesopotamia, as it vvere, in the midst of the rivers. Vers. 21. And Isaac intreated the Lord for his wife.] That is, he prayed many years together, and at length God heard his prayers. Vers. 22. And she said, If it be so, why am I thus?] These vvords I conceive to be spoken out of an admiration, and fear; If it be so, why am I thus? that is, if I be vvith child, as I have hitherto believed, vvhat is the reason of this strange and ex∣traordinary
struggling in my vvomb, this is not like the motion that other vvomen feel at their quickning, and what should I think is the reason of it? And therefore is it, that she presently went to enquire of the Lord, that is, she went into some se∣cret place to pray, and received the following answer by some revelation from God. Vers. 23. Two nations are in thy womb, &c.] This answer God returned Rebekah to satisfie her concerning that strange and supernaturall struggling of the children that were in her womb: wherein she is informed, 1. that she had two sonnes in her womb that should be the heads of two severall nations, the Edomites, and the Israe∣lites, the one the posterity of Esau, the other the posterity of Jacob; 2. that these two nations should differ much the one from the other, and not agree together, but be crosse and contrary, one to the other: the which is implyed in these words, two manner of nations shall be separated from thy bowels: as they should be divi∣ded in regard of their habitation, seated in two severall countreys; so they should differ much in their laws, Religion, and manners, and be so farre from living at unity, as brethren that descended from the same loyns, that they should be almost alwayes at variance one with the other; and indeed to signifie this it was that these two Twinnes did now so struggle together in her womb; 3. that the one people should be stronger then the other, that is, the Edomites, the posterity of Esau the el∣der brother, should be stronger then the Israelites, the posterity of Jacob; the truth whereof the story of these two Nations doth sufficiently manifest. As Esau was stronger then Jacob, and therefore Jacob was forced to fly from his fury, Gen. 27. and at his return From Mesopotamia to crouch to him, and by presents to seek his favour, Gen. 32. and Gen. 33. 3. He passed over before them, and bowed himself to the ground seven times, untill he came near unto his brother; so the Edomites were a long time a Nation farre more potent then the Israelites, as may be seen by their churlish answer to the Israelites, Num. 20. 18. And Edom said unto him, thou shalt not passe by me, lest I come out against thee with the sword; and 4. that not∣withstanding the elder should be the stronger, yet in the conclusion the younger should prevail, and get the better of the elder, and so the elder should serve the younger. How this was accomplisht carnally, to wit, in the Israelites subduing of the Edomites, is evident in severall places of sacred story, 2. Sam. 8. 14. He put garrisons in Edom, throughout all Edom put he garrisons, and all they of Edom became Davids servants. 1. Kings 22. 47. There was then no King in Edom a Deputy was King. Obadiah. 17. 18. And the house of Jacob shall possesse their possessions: And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau for stubble, and they shall kindle in them, and devour them, and there shall not b any remaining of the house of Esau, &c. But withall we must know that under this expression (which most evidently hath respect to fleshly pre∣rogatives) there is also covertly foretold the preheminence and superiority of the younger brother and his posterity above the elder, in regard of spirituall privi∣ledges, as, 1. that his should be the birthright; 2. that the inheritance of the land promised to Abraham should be settled upon him; 3. that out of his loyns the Mes∣siah should spring; and 4. that the blessing of the Adoption and Covenant, &c. should be conferred upon him and his posterity: To these spirituall priviledges
S. Paul applies these words, Rom. 9. 11, 12. For the children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to electi∣on might stand, not of works but of him that calleth, it was said unto hr, The el∣der shall serve the younger. And though it is evident that saac did not thus under∣stand this Oracle, because he sought to conferre the blessing upon Esau, chap. 27. and it were unreasonable to think that Rebekah did not acquaint her husband with this which God had revealed to her concerning her children, or that he would wittingly seek to crosse that which God had made known to them; yet it may be most pobably conceived that Rebekah did thus understand this prediction con∣cerning the preheminence of the younger, and upon that very ground, because she knew it was so decreed of God, did so confidently afterward plot to have the bles∣sing conferred upon the younger, against Isaacs intention. Vers. 25. And the first came out red all over like an hairy garment; and they cal∣led his name Esau.] Which signifieth made or perfected; because he was born hairy, more like a man then a child. Vers. 26. And his hand took hold on Esau's heel; and his name was called Ja∣cob.] That is, one that held by the heel, or supplanted; because when he was born he came out of his Mothers womb immediately after his brother that was born be∣fore him, holding him by the heel, as if he would have pulled him back, that he might be born before him: which doubtlesse was purposely so disposed by the pro∣vidence of God, as a signe presaging what should afterward come to passe, to wit, that he should by cunning supplant his brother, and get the preheminence of the birthright and blessing from him. Vers. 27. And Esau was a cunning hunter, &c.] Their different conditions are herein expressed: Esau was a man that followed his pleasure, a cunning man and valourous; Jacob, a plain man, that is, a man of little note in comparison of his bro∣ther, there was not that shew of outward strength and valour in him; he was a good plain man dwelling in tents, that is he lived a plain shepherds life, and was not so conspicuous for outward glory. It is true indeed that the word in the Origi∣nall, here translated plain, signifies upright, sincere, and without gulle; neither do I deny but that this also may be intended in this place, to wit, that Jacob was a candid, plain-hearted man: for such Jacob was doubtlesse in his whole conversation, though in that particular of getting away the blessing from his brother, being car∣ried away with his mothers counsel, and his desire of the birthright, he failed through infirmity, and used more dissebling and fraud then upright and plain∣hearted men can in any businesse well endure to use. But yet I say, that exposition concerning the plainnesse of his course and condition of life doth best suit vvith the drift of this place, as is evident by the opposition vve may note betvvixt that which is said of Esau and that vvhich is said of Jacob, Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field, and Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents. Vers. 28. And Isaac loved Esau because he did eat of his venison.] That is, he loved him best, his affection vvas most to him, as Rebekahs vvas most to Jacob, though she loved Esau too. Novv because it may vvell be thought, that it did not beseem so great and so good a man as Isaac vvas, to preferre Esau in his affection
npon so slight a ground, and so pore a reason as this was, because his venison plea∣sed his palate; it is conceived by some Expositours, that it was not merely for the venison sake that he loved him so dearly, but because his sonne Esaus care and di∣ligence in providing for him the meat which he saw he delighted in, was in his apprehension a signe that he did greatly reverence, respect, and love his father, and that he would prove the most able and active, the fittest for great imployments, and the best and stoutest stay and support of their family. Vers. 30. And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me I pray thee with that same red pot∣tage.] The word Pottage is not in the Hebrew, but onely the word red is doubled, with that red red; and the cause of this, was either that not knowing what to call it, he onely describes it by the colour, and that doubtlesse, because it was very red; or else, because coming home weary and ready to faint, vers. 29. he speaketh as one in haste and greedily longing for it: undoubtedly he might have had other food in his fathers house, and therefore this so sudden and earnest desire of that food, which his brother had provided for himself, must needs proceed, 1. from the extremity he was in, being ready to faint; 2. from the eager desire of his appetite towards that meat which in this extremitie his eye first pitched upon. Therefore was his name called Edom.] That is, Red. When, and by whom this name was given him, it is uncertain, happely it was in processe of time when he had lost his birthright, which might make this passage the more seriously thought on: but however this was the occasion, because of this his immoderate de∣sire of this red broth he was called Edom; and so this name was a kind of brand set upon him for his greedinesse and profanenesse. Vers. 31. Sell me this day thy brithright.] The birthright made them first in honour under their parents, Gen. 49. 3. Reuben, thou art my first-born, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignitie, and the excellencie of power; 2. it gave them a double portion of their fathers goods, Deut. 21. 17. He shall acknowledge the sonne of the hated for the first-born by giving him a double portion of all that he hath; 3. it advanced them to the government of the family, Gen. 4. 7. Ʋnto thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him; and, as some think, to the Priesthood too; and withall, it was an outward signe and pledge of being one of those first-born, Heb. 12. 23. which are written in heaven, fellow-heirs together with Christ of the heavenly kingdome, the heavenly Canaan. Jacob therefore upon this advantage of Esaus desiring his pottage bargains with him for the birthright, and gets it from Esau; in the managing whereof to free him from sinne is a needlese labour, since we know that God is often wont to bring good out of evil. Vers. 34. And he did eat and drink, and rose up, &c.] Never troubled at all for that which he had done. CHAP. XXVI. Vers. 1. ANd Isaac went unto Abimelech, &c.] See the note upon  chap. 20. vers. 2.
Vers. 2. Go not down into Egypt, &c.] God would not allow him to remove into Egypt, whther it seems he was purposed to have gone, but limits him to Palesti∣na; both because he would thereby shew him how his affections should cleave to the land promised to him and to his seed, and also that he might try his faith, with bringing him to rest upon his promises whilst he lived in a land where the famine did perhaps in part prevail. Vers. 3. And I will perform the oath which I sware, &c.] To wit, the oath which I sware to thy father Abraham whilst thou wert by. For immediately after Isaac should have been offered as a sacrifice did the Lord swear this to Abraham, chap. 22. 15, 16, 17, 18. Vers. 9. And Abimelech called Isaac, and said, Behold, of a surety she is thy wife.] This he had said because, vers. 8. he saw Isaac sporting with Rebekah: so holy and unblamable was Isaacs life, that worse then this he never suspected. Vers. 15. All the wells which his fathers servants had digged, &c. the Phi∣istines had stopped them, &c.] This injury was great, because of the scarcitie of wa∣ters, and against their covenant and oath, Gen. 21. 30. For these seven ew-lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a witnesse unto me that I have digged this well, &c. Vers. 24. And the Lord appeared unto him the same night.] As it seems, to comfort him in regard of the envious proceedings of the Philistines against him. Vers. 29. Thou art now the blessed of the Lord.] This also is spoken to further the peace desired: as if he had said, Thou hast here prospered amongst us, we sent thee away in peace, and so now through the blessing of the Lord thou art grown great, and therefore let there be a Covenant betwixt us. Vers. 33. And he called it Sheba, &c.] To wit, the well which his servants had found: This well was formerly so called by Abraham, Gen. 21. 31. He called that place Beersheba, because there they sware both of them, to wit Abraham and Abi∣melech▪ but having been stopped by the Philistines, and now opened again by Isaacs servants, the old name is again imposed upon the same occasion. CHAP. XXVII. Vers. 1. ANd his eyes were dimme.] Blindnesse is incident to old age; yet was this, no doubt, thus disposed in Isaac by the speciall providence of God, that Jacob might be blessed: for he lived after this above fourty years. Vers. 4. Make me savoury meat, &c. that my soul may blesse thee before I die.] That is, that I may blesse thee; for so Rebekah repeats these words of Isaac, vers. 7. Make me savoury meat, that I may eat and blesse thee before my death. Many se∣verall wayes men are said to blesse others in the Scripture: as, by praying to God to blesse them, Blesse those that curse you, saith our Saviour, Luke 6. 28. by pro∣nouncing a blessing upon them, and that by warrant of authority derived from God, as when the priests blessed the people, of which the Apostle speaks, Heb. 7. 7. Without all contradiction the lesse is blessed of the better; and by a propheticall prediction of the blessings that should come upon men, as when Moses by the spe∣ciall
instinct of Gods Spirit did foretell how the twelve Tribes should be blessed of God, Deut. 33. 5. And this is the blessing wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the children of Israel. But this blessing here spoken of, was peculiar to the Paiarchs. They, having received a promise of the Covenant of grace for them and their seed after them, were wont before they died, in the name of God, and by the guidance of the holy Ghost, to foreshew upon which of their seed this Covenant of grace should be continued; and so did, as it were by will and testament, passe over the right of the Covenant and promise of grace to those of their children, who were to be heirs of the Covenant, and in whose families the Church and the Covenant of grace was to be propagated unto the coming of Christ; whence is that phrase of inheriting the blessing, Heb. 12. 17. And thus Isaac intended now to blesse Esau; and that doubtlesse because he knew not Gods will and purpose herein; for it is not probable, that so good a man would wittingly seek to crosse the known decree of God concerning his sonnes. It cannot be but Rebekah acquainted Isaac with that Oracle, Gen. 25. 23. where the Lord said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; the one people shall be stronger then the other, and the elder shall serve the younger; and being her self perswaded thereby that God intended the blessing to the younger, did what she could to convince her husband likewise that it was so. But, it seems, though God were pleased thus farre to enlighten her mind, and powerfully to incline her heart to believe this truth, yet still he suffered him to erre herein; yea, even now at the last, though he enlightned his understanding by a propheticall illumination as con∣cerning the blessing he pronounced, yet withall at the same time he did neither en∣lighten his understanding, nor bend his will to the right person, but left him here∣in to his own spirit; and so being carried by his carnall judgement concerning the prerogative of Esaus being his first-born, and by his affection to him, intended him the blessing, but was disappointed by Gods providence, that it might be the more evident that it was not by the will of man, but of Gods free grace and singular fa∣vour, that Jacob had the blessing and not Esau. Why Isaac desired savoury meat, such as he loved, before he performed this work, it is hard to say. The most pro∣bable reason given is this, that being aged and feeble, he desired this refreshing to cheer up his spirits, that he might be the fitter instrument of the holy Spirit of God in pronouncing this propheticall blessing; as Elisha, when he was moved against king Jehoram, called for a musician to allay his passion, and quicken his spirit, be∣fore he prophesied to them in the name of the Lord, 2. Kings 3. 14, 15. However doubtlesse God by this means intended to give Rebekah the advantage of this time, to plot for the transferring of the blessing in Esaus absence upon Jacob, to whom of right it did belong. Vers. 6. Rebekah spake unto Jacob her sonne, &c.] Rebekah being strongly per∣swaded that the blessing belonged to Jacob, to wit, 1. By Gods answer to her at the struggling of the children in her womb, Gen. 25. 23. The elder shall serve the younger; 2. By that remarkable passage of Gods providence, when Jacob was born holding his brother by the heel; 3. By Esaus selling the birthright to Jacob; and 4. By Esaus profanenesse, and Jacobs piety; and perceiving that her husband was
now ready, as much as in him lay, to crosse the counsel and purpose of God, she resolves to assay to disappoint her husband, and that by subtilty and deceit, and so instructs Jacob how to deceive his father; wherein, though she did many things that are not warrantable (unlesse she were moved by the speciall instinct of Gods Spi∣rit, which doth not appear) yet thus farre she is praise-worthy, that understanding rightly the Oracle of God, she sought to prevent the errour of her husband, and to procure the blessing to him for whom God had appointed it. Vers. 13. And his mother said unto him, On me be thy curse, &c.] Relying upon that which God had revealed to her, she was fearlesse of that which Jacob feared, not doubting but God would prosper their designe, whilst they sought to effect that which was according to Gods counsel, and to further that which he had decreed: yet because the way cannot be judged warrantable whereby she sought it, to wit, by deceiving her blind husband, and causing her sonne by dissembling and lying to beguile his father, doubtlesse she was over-confident, and had no just ground for what she said; onely God was pleased of his own free grace to let it be according to her hope. Vers. 20. Because the Lord thy God brought it to me.] Jacob perceiving that his father began to be jealous of some deceit, because the venison came so soon, won∣dering how Esau should take it by hunting, and dresse it in so short a space, he an∣swers that it was by the speciall providence of God that he took it so suddenly: and to intimate that God therein had testified his usuall provident care over his father and those things that concerned him, he saith not, The Lord God brought it to me, but, The Lord thy God, &c. and thus still he is further and further insnared in do∣ing that which was not lawfull, that his father might not discover the fraud, but might give him the blessing. Vers. 27. He smelled the smell of his rayment, and blessed him.] Rebekah had put upon Jacob Esaus choycest garments, goodly rayment, vers. 15. which it seems according to the customes of those times and countreys were perfumed (for that land abounded with sweet spices) which Isaac smelling, he took that occasion to be∣gin the blessing thus, See, saith he, the smell of my sonne is as the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed. Vers. 28. Therefore God give thee of the dew of heaven, &c.] This is both a prayer and a prophecy; neither must we understand it onely of the person of Jacob, but of his posterity (for the Lordship over his brethren promised, vers. 29. Be Lord over thy brethren, &c. was not literally fulfilled till many years after, when the Idumeans were servants to the Israelites) nor onely of temporall blessings which are onely expressed: we must know that in those times God did chiefly make known his will concerning Christ, and those spirituall and heavenly gifts that are given us in Christ, darkly and obscurely, under the promises of earthly things, as types of heavenly blessings; and therefore though these outward things be onely mentioned, yet this prophecy must be extended to all that was included in the promise of A∣braham. Vers. 33. And Isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, &c.] The following words uttered by him in this perplexity and fear, do best shew what was the ground
of his fear: that enquiry which in his astonishment he makes after the party bles∣sed, Who where is he that hath taken venison, and brought it me, &c. argues me∣thinks plainly a sudden fear that seised on him, lest he had settled the inheritance of the blessing where he should not; and yet withall his confirming of the blessing un∣to Jacob in the close of his speech, implies as plainly, that remembring what God had said, Gen. 25. 23. The elder shall serve the younger, &c. and comparing it with this which now happened, it struck him with a great fear that he had gone about as farre as in him lay to crosse the purpose and decree of God. Thus therefore I conceive of this place, That Isaac, as a man suddenly astonisht and amazed, is at first distracted with severall fears, and knows not what to fear most; yet at last percei∣ving how evidently the hand of God was in this businesse, he shakes off all carnall affections, and confirms the blessing to Jacob; I have eaten of all before thou camest, and have blessed him; yea and he shall be blessed. Vers. 34. Blesse me, &c.] Esau in his passion and bitternesse of spirit craves his share in the birthright-blessing, though he could not have it alone. But this was spoken in a passion; otherwise he could not be ignorant that this could but be con∣ferred upon one: for though Jacob blessed all his sonnes, yet this with the birthright went to Judah, Gen. 49. Vers. 35. Thy brother came with subtilty, and hath taken away thy blessing.] That is, the blessing of the birthright, which according to the ordinary course of nature, unlesse God did otherwise dispose of it, belonged to the elder, and which Isaac had before promised Esau, and did really intend to conferre upon him, though now it were settled upon Jacob, to whom by Gods decree and purpose it did of right appertain. Vers. 36. Hast thou not reserved a blessing for me?] Finding himself wholly ex∣cluded from the birthright-blessing, he enquires whether no blessing were reserved for him. Vers. 37. And what shall I do now unto thee my sonne?] As if he should say, comparatively all other blessings are nothing. Vers. 39. Behold thy dwelling shall be the fatnesse of the earth.] Upon Esaus bitter lamentation and weeping, mentioned in the former verse, Isaac now foretells the earthly blessings that should befall Esaus posterity: but as for the prime and chief blessing, that was settled upon Jacob, neither had Isaac the least thought of altering what he had done herein, as the Apostle saith concerning Esau, Heb. 12. 17. When he would have inherited the blessing he was rejected; for he found no place of re∣pentance, though he sought it with tears; that is, all his crying and weeping could not move Isaac to repent of what he had done, or reverse the blessing, which, though unwittingly, he had conferred upon Jacob. Yea some note a difference betwixt Esaus blessing here concerning outward things, and that of Jacobs, vers. 28. to wit, because though the same outward blessings be here promised to Esau that were before promised to Jacob, the dew of heaven and the fatnesse of the earth; yet they are promised to Jacob in another manner then they are to Esau: for to Esau it is onely said that he should have these things, thy dwelling shall be the fatnesse of the earth, and of the dew of heaven, to wit, by the ordinary dispensation of Gods providence;
but now to Jacob it is said, that God should give him these things, namely as gifts and pledges of his singular love and favour towards him, vers. 28. God give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatnesse of the earth, &c. Vers. 40. It shall come to passe when thou shalt have the dominion, &c.] That is, after the Edomites, thy posterity, shall have been a long time in subjection to the Israelites, they shall at length become more mighty then they had been, and then shall cast of the yoke of the Israelites; which was accomplished in the dayes of Jehoram king of Judah, 2. King. 8. 20, In his dayes Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah. Vers 41. Esau said in his heart, The dayes of mourning for my father, &c.] Yea afterwards he spake what at first he onely purposed in his mind, and by that means, as is noted in the next verse, these words of Esau her elder sonne were told to Rebekah: at first he onely determined this in his mind, but afterward not able to contain himself, nor to conceal his purposes, he uttered what he intended in the hearing of some body, and so it was known, and at last told Rebekah. Vers. 42. Thy brother Esau, as touching thee, doth comfort himself, purposing to kill thee.] Esau is here said to comfort himself with his thoughts of killing Jacob, either 1. because not onely revenge it self is sweet to men that are greatly enraged; whence the Lord speaking of himself, after the manner of men, saith of the Jews, Ezek. 5. 13. I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be comforted, but even the very resolution and purpose of revenge in time to come doth somewhat ease the minds of men enraged, when they have determined within themselves how and in what manner they will revenge themselves upon those that have wronged them; or else, 2. because he chuckerd himself with some kind of hope, by this means to recover his birthright again: for indeed wicked men do usually harden themselves against the known word and will of God, as we see in Saul, who sought by all means to cut off David, though he were fully convinced in his mind that God had chosen him, 1. Sam. 18. 28. Saul saw and knew that the Lord was with David; yet he became Davids enemy continually. Vers. 45. Then I will send and fetch thee from thence.] Some Expositours con∣ceive that though Rebekah hoped that Esaus anger would be soon forgotten, yet it proved otherwise, and that when Jacob had stayed in Padan-Aram about twen∣ty years, at his return Esaus malice was as hot and violent against him as ever, had not God miraculously changed his heart; which if it be granted, no wonder it is though Rebekah sent not for Jacob all that time, as here she promised him, since she found it not safe, and therefore was content to be without him rather then to hazard his life; and so indeed never saw her Jacob again, but dyed about three years before his return home. Vers. 45. Why should I be deprived also of you both in one day?] That is, Jacob, by being murdered; and Esau, by the vengeance of God, which she knew would follow him because of that fact, or by the sword of Justice (for by the common law of Nations such an execrable murther would even then have been punished with death) or at least by Esaus voluntary withdrawing himself from the presence of his Mother, as not daring to look her any more in the face.
Vers. 46. And Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth, &c.] That is, Esaus wives, which Gen. 26. 35. were a continuall grief of mind both unto Isaac and to Rebekah: Because she would not grieve her husband in his old age, nor enrage him against Esau, she deemed it not best to im∣part to him what she had heard concerning his cruell and bloody resolution for the slaying of his brother, but took another occasion to procure from Isaac that Jacob might be sent away to Padan-Aram, to wit, lest he should marry amongst the Ca∣naanites, as Esau had done, to their great and continuall vexation and sorrow. CHAP. XXVIII. Vers. 1. ANd Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him.] Thus the blessing, for the better confirming of Jacobs faith, is by his father again settled upon him; and indeed Jacob had need of it, considering how many straits and difficul∣ties he afterwards went through, wherein, notwithstanding the Prerogative of the blessing, he might think himself in a farre vvorse condition then his brother Esau. Vers. 4. That thou mayest inherit the land, wherein thou art a stranger.] This is added to prevent the weaking of his faith, that he might not think the blessing vain, vvhen he should spend all his life as a stranger and sojourner in that land, and never come to the possssion of any part of it: It is as if he had said, Tis true, thou shalt be as a stranger in this land, vvandring here and there; yet, be not discoura∣ged, thine it is, and to thy seed it shall be given. Vers. 9. Then went Esau unto Ishmael.] That is, unto the Ishmaelites: for Ish∣mael himself vvas already dead. Gen. 25. 17. These are the years of the life of Ish∣mael, 137 years, and he gave up the ghost and died. The sister of Nebajoth, &c.] Nebajoth vvas, Gen. 25. 13. the first born of Ish∣mael, and here mentioned, because Esau had his sister to vvife from him, Ishmael being now dead: And the ground of Esaus taking this vvife seems to be, that either he might insinuate himself into his fathers affection, and so procure that the birth∣right might be reversed and settled upon him; or at least that by this affinity vvith the Ishmaelites he might strengthen himself against his brother Jacob. Vers. 11. And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all night, be∣cause the sunne was set, &c.] Travelling on foot with his staff in his hand, as is expressed chap. 32. 10. he vvas overtaken vvith the night, and could not get to the city Luz, vvhich vvas not farre from this place, ver. 19. and so lay all night alone in the field. It may vvell indeed seem strange that Jacob should be sent avvay to procure him a wife amongst his Mothers kindred in so mean a manner, especial∣ly if we consider with what attendance and large provision Abraham sent his ser∣vant thither about the same businesse, Gen. 24. But for this we must know, 1. That since Abraham left Haran, & was come into the land of Canaan, it was not known to his kindred he left there behind him how God had blessed Abraham, and in what state and condition he lived; and therefore it was fit that Abraham should send his servant in such a manner as might discover how wealthy he was become in Canaan, that so they might the more willingly condescend to match with his
sonne: But since that time doubtlesse Bethuel and Laban knew well enough in what condition Isaac and Rebekah lived, and therefore there was no need in this regard to send their sonne Jacob in such a manner. 2. That Abrahams servant went to fetch a wife immediately for Isaac, but Jacob went purposely to stay and sojourn with his uncle for a time, till his brothers fury was over, and therefore Rebekah might happely think it inconvenient to send any company along with him. 3. That it is most likely that Jacob did steal away secretly, purposely that his brother Esau might not lie in wait for him by the way to do him a mischief. Vers. 12. And he dreamed, and behold a ladder, &c.] The end of this vision was doubtlesse that God might testifie unto Jacob that he would take care of him, and so might thereby comfort him in this his desolate condition, and strengthen his faith against all those discouragements he should meet with in this journey. There can be therefore no question made but that by this Ladder was signified the Pro∣vidence of God in governing the world, and particularly his provident care over Jacob, and that, as it is Psal. 113. 5, 6. Though God dwelleth on high, yet he humbleth himself to behold the things that are in the heaven, and in the earth, and disposeth all things according to his will, and that especially by the ministry of his Angels, according to that of David, Psal. 91. 11, 12. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy wayes; they shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. But yet because Christ is the onely foundation of that reconciliation that is wrought betwixt God and Man, and of that speciall care which God takes for the welfare of his Church and people, in and through whom they are made the sonnes of God, and heirs of heaven, and en∣joy the ministry of the Angels, Heb. 1. 13. Are they not all ministring spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation? therefore also que∣stionlesse by this Ladder Christ was represented, the promised seed, in whom all the promises are yea and amen, 2. Cor. 1. 20. as methinks our Saviour himself did in∣timate in those words of his concerning himself, John. 1. 52. Verily, verily I say unto you, hereafter ye shall see heaven open and the Angels of God ascending and descending upon the sonne of man. In his two natures personally united, heaven and earth are as it were joyned together: By him our onely Mediatour is man recon∣ciled to God, and both the things in heaven and the things on earth are reconciled through the bloud of his crosse, Col. 1. 20. By his onely merit and intercession both the ministry of the Angels, the gifts of the holy Ghost, and all other heavenly bles∣sings do descend upon us: and by him likewise we have accesse unto God and en∣trance into heaven. And thus by this vision Jacob was assured that through the promised seed, Christ, he should enjoy the guard of the holy Angels, and that he should be by them defended both in his going out and returning home. Vers. 16. Surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not.] Being awaked he perceived that God had appeared to him, and therefore admires, and extolls this goodnesse of God towards him: as if he had said, I thought God had onely in this manner revealed himself in my fathers house, I looked not for such an Apparition in this place; but now I find that God who is every where doth also in this place by these speciall testimonies of his presence manifest himself.
Vers. 17. And he was afraid, &c.] Stricken with a reverent fear of the maje∣stie of God. This is none other but the house of God.] This is spoken because God had ma∣nifested himself there unto him in his glory. Vers. 18. And set it up for a pillar, and poured oyl upon the top of it.] The stone which Jacob had laid under his head all night, he set up for a pillar, as a memori∣all of that vision, and then poured oyl upon the top of it, eiher to consecrate there∣by that place and stone to a holy and religious use, as afterward for the same cause Moses was commanded to anoynt with oyl the Tabernacle, and all that vvas there∣in; or else rather as an offering to God: Having no other sacrifice at hand, of the oyl, which he had about him either for food, or to anoynt his body in his travell, he poures forth an offering of thanksgiving unto God, as David, 2. Sam. 23. 16. poured out the water to God, which his three worthies had fetched for him from the well of Bethlehem not without extreme perill to their lives. Vers. 20. And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, &c.] Jacob being much affected with Gods gratious goodnesse to him in the glorious vision he had seen, and the many precious promises therein made to him, doth here, by way of thankfulnesse, vow a vow unto God, not onely in generall, vers. 21. that then the Lord should be his God, that is, he would then for ever acknowledge the Lord God of his Fathers to be the Authour of his welfare and salvation, love, worship, and serve him, yea and him onely; but also particularly vers. 22. 1. that the stone which he had now set up for a pillar should be Gods house, that is, he would account that stone or pillar, or that place where that stone was erected (for both are included figuratively) a holy place, consecrated to Gods worship and service, and would there perform the duties of his worship (which part of his vow he made good, Gen. 35. 6, 7. when at his return out of Mesopotamia he built there an altar and offered thereon sacrifices to the Lord) and 2. that of all that God should give him, he would give the tenth unto God, that is, that he would set it apart for Gods speciall service, as by imploying it in building altars, and sacrifices, and relieving the poore upon any occasion. Indeed concerning the first of these some doubt may arise in our minds, How Jacob could vow that upon such & such condi∣tions, then the Lord should be his God, which may imply a resolution on the con∣trary that in case such conditions were not performed, or did not come to passe, then the Lord should not be his God. But to this I answer, 1. That men that wait in expectation of receiving some speciall blessing from God, may vow upon the ob∣taining hereof to perform their duty to God, which otherwise by covenant they are bound to perform, and yet not intend that in case they fail of this they desire, then they will not; onely thereby they professe that this shall be a new ingagement to bind them to perform their duty herein, and to make them the more solicitously carefull to carry themselves herein as they ought to do: and 2. That with a condi∣tionall vow something may be, and is usually added, which shall not depend upon the premised conditions, but is onely annexed as a necessary concomitant of the vow; as if a man should vow, if God should blesse him according to his hopes in a voyage he is to undertake, that then he would for ever honour his poore parents,
and give them such a yearly maintenance; the paying of this yearly maintenance is the thing conditionally vowed, and that claue of honouring his parents is onely an∣nexed as that which must necessarily go along with his vowed maintenance: and so it is here, that which is vowed by Jacob conditionally is that the stone which he had now set p for a pillar should be Gods house, and that of all that God should give him, he would give the tenth unto God, and this clause, Then shall the Lord b my God, is onely annexd as a necessary adjunct, and the ground of his yielding this honour unto God. CHAP. XXIX. Vers. 1. THen Jacob went on his journey and came into the land of the people of the East.] That is, Mesopotamia, which lay Eastward from Ca∣naan, Job 1. 3. He was the greatest of all the men of the East. Isaiah 41. 2. Who raised up the righteous man from the East. Vers. 5. Know ye Laban the sonne of Nahor.] That is, the grandchild: for he was the sonne of Bethuell, who was the sonne of Nahor. Vers. 7. It is yet high day, neither is it time that the cattel should be gathered together.] That is, into the fold, there to rest all night. Vers. 8. And they said, We cannot untill all the flocks, &c.] Their meaning is, ei∣ther that they might not by right do it, they might not water their sheep till all the flocks came together; so the like phrase is used Gen. 34. 14. We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to one that is uncircumcised, that is, we may not do it; or else rather that they were not able to do it: which I rather approve▪ because vers. 2. there is expresse mention of the greatnsse of the stone; and upon Rachels coming it was rolled away before all came together: or why may not both be included? we cannot, that is, we neither may do it, nor are we able to do it. Vers. 10. And rolled the stone from the wells month.] To wit, either by his own strength, or with the help of the shepherds. Vers. 12. And Jacob told Rachel that he was her fathers brother.] That is, his kinsman, his sisters sonne; for near kinsmen in the Scripture are usually called bre∣thren: Gen. 13. 18. Though Abraham were Lots uncl, yet saith he, Let there be no strife between me and thee, for we be brethren. Vers. 13. And he told Laban all these things.] That is, what had been formerly related concerning Jacob, who were his parents, what had passed betwixt him and his brother, how he was sent away thither by his father, and what had befallen him in his journey: else Laban might have wondred to see him come so unfurnished, whereas he had seen Abrahams servant come so richly provided when he fetched thence Rebekah. Vers. 14. And Laban said to him, Surely thou art my bone and my fle.] This is either an acknowledgement that he was satisfied concerning his person, to wit, that he was inded his siters sonne; or else, a courteous reply to his relation, vers. 13. as if he had said, However, be the occasion of thy journey what it will, thou art my near kingsma, and must expect loving entertainment here.
Vers. 15. Because tho art my brother, shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought.] Laban perceiving in this moneths time of Jacobs abode with him, menti∣oned in the former vers, that he was wondrous able and active for his businesse (for it seems Jacob not vvilling to be burdensome to his uncle, nor to eat the bread of idlenesse, did presently buckle himself to do him what service he might) he begins now to tamper with him about giving him some recompense for his la∣bour, under a pretence that it was not fit that he should do him service for nothing, though he were his near kinsman, but aiming indeed to bind him thereby to some farther stay there, because he saw his service would be very profitable to him. Vers. 18. I will serve thee seven years for Rachel thy younger daughter.] It was it seems the custome in these Eastern countreys, that at making up of any match of marriage, both the husband and wife did mutually give dowries the one unto the other, as is evident chap. 34. 11, 12. And Shechem said unto her father, and unto her brethren, what ye shall ask I will give; ask me never so much dowry and gift, and I will give according as ye shall say unto me: but give me the damsell to wife. 1. Sam. 18. 25. And Saul said, Thus shall ye say to Davd, The King desireth not any dowry, but an hundred foreskins of the Philistines, &c. and 2. Sam. . 14. And David sent Messengers to Ishbosheth, Sauls sonne, saying, Deliver me my wife Michal, which I espoused to me for an hundred foreskins of the Philistines. Jacob therefore being in a strange place, and having nothing else to give, and being withall carried away with the strength of his affection to Rachel, that he might prevail with his uncle, vvhose base covetousnesse by this time he had discovered, tenders him seven years service for his daughter Rachel. Vers. 19. It is better that I give her to thee, then I should give her to another man.] Laban, regarding more his own profit then to deal fairly and ingenuously with so near a kinsman, makes advantage of the affection of Jacob to his daughter, and accepts of his proffer; yet because his words are so ambiguous, and not an ex∣presse promise, It is better that I give her to thee, then that I should give her to another: abide with me; it may be probably supposed that h did purposely equivo∣cate, and had already some thought of dealing doubly and deceitfully vvith Jacob. Vers. 20. And Jacob served seven years for Rachel.] Junius conceives that immediately after Jacob had agreed with Laban to serve with him seven years for his daughter, the marriage was solemnized, and having then Leah given him in stead of Rachel, he then made a new agreement for Rachel, and so married them both in the very beginning of his foureteen years service: But that cannot agree with his relation; for first, it might then as well have been said here, that he served fourteen years for Rachel; again secondly, it is said, vers. 27. Fulfill her week, and we will give thee this also, for the service which thou shalt serve with me yet other seven years; and thirdly when Jacob expostulates the wrong which Laban had done him, ver. 25. he saith, Did not I serve with thee for Rachel? which shows that seven of his years service were spent ere Leah was imposed upon him. And they seemed unto him but a few dayes for the love he had to her.] Love makes men think every day a year till they enjoy the party loved; and therefore this must be understood with reference to his labour and service, that the service of
seven years seemed as nothing to him, because of the great love he bare to Rachel. Vers. 25. And it came to passe, that in the morning, behold it was Leah.] He perceiveth it not before, both because it was the custome for brides to be veiled, and also because by her fathers direction she might be silent, vvhich he might impute to her modesty. Vers. 27. Fulfill her week, and we will give thee this also.] The marriage feast or solemnitie used to be kept a vveek, Judg. 14. 12. I will now put forth a riddle unto you: If you can certainly declare it me within the seven dayes of the feas, &c. this Laban desires him to fulfill vvith Leah, that so by this his voluntary consent the marriage might be confirmed, and then he promises to give him Rachel; so then vve see that he married Rachel vvithin a vveek after Leah, and served seven years for her after the marriage. Vers. 31. And whn the Lord saw that Leah was hated.] That is, not simply, but in comparison of Rachel, ver. 30. He loved Rachel more then Leah. Vers. 35. And left bearing.] That is, for a while: for afterwards she conceived again, Gen. 30. 17. And God hearkned unto Leah, and she conceived and bare Jacob the fifth sonne. See the Note in the following chapter upon ver. 9. CHAP. XXX. Vers. 1. GIve me children or else I die.] That is, either let me have children by thee, as well as my sister, or I am but a dead woman, I shall ne∣ver be able to endure it, & it will be my death, and indeed, I had rather die then live in this condition; and this Rachel saith to Jacob, not as seriously thinking that Jacob was able to give her this blessing, which God had hitherto denyed her; but as those that are in a passion do many times speak they scarce know what, so she in a womanish heat and passion crieth out to her husband to give her children, ne∣ver considering to whom she spake, or why she should crave this of him, or by what means he should be able to satisfie her desire. Vers. 3. She shall bear upon my knees.] That is, children, that might be brought up and nursed on her knees as her own. Gen. 50. 23. The children also of Machir the sonne of Manasseh were brought up upon Josephs knees: and it seems most probable that this was done about the third year after her marriage. Vers. 4. And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife.] A secondary wife or concubine; for so also she is called, Gen. 35. 22. And it came to passe when Isra∣el dwelt in that land, that Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his fathers concu∣bine. Vers. 5. And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a fonne.] Happely the same year wherein Levi was born of Leah. Vers. 9. When Leah saw she had left bearing, &c.] Considering that Leah had her six sonnes and one daughter (besides these two by her handmaid) within the compasse of the last seven years service of Jacob with Laban, it must needs be that it was not above half a year that she stayed ere she conceived again; yet so inor∣dinate was their desire of children, and emulation one against another, that she al∣so
gives her maid to her husband, and so her maid bringing her a sonne, and her self being also at that time with child, that might be one inducement to name the child Gd, that is, a Troop, &c. Vers. 14. And Reuben went in the dayes of wheat-harvest, and found man∣drakes.] A kind of flovver or fruit very pleasant to the eye (which may seem the ground of their name, for the Hebrew word signifieth lovely, or amiable) and ve∣ry odoriferous, Cant. 7. 13. the mandrakes give a smell: whether they were the same we now call mandrakes, or no, it is uncertain; these Reuben, being a child then about foure or five years of age, gathers in the field, as children are wont to do, and brings them home to his mother. Give me I pray thee of thy sonnes mandrakes.] It seems that mandrakes were in great esteem amongst them, though the child onely casually lighted on them, and plucked them because of their glorious show; and hence so great ado was made about these mandrakes which Reuben found. Vers. 15. Is it a small matter that thou hast taken my husband, &c.] For the full understanding of this pasage, we must know, 1. that these contentions were not merely carnall, but partly also for desire of Gods ordinary blessing in propaga∣tion, and chiefly for the encrease of the Church, and obtaining the promised seed for salvation; 2. that Jacob did most frequently converse with Rachel, whom he did most affect, and did comparatively neglect Leah, for which being highly of∣fended with Rachel, she thus snaps her up, and denies this small request she makes to her. Vers. 16. And Leah went out to meet him.] This she doth, to make sure he should not go in to Rachel (as for the most part he was wont to do) and tells him what had passed betwixt Rachel and her, and so prevails with him to go in to her. Vers. 17. And she conceived.] The same year that Gad was born of Zilpah, ver. 10. Vers. 25. Jacob said unto Laban, Send me away, that I may go unto mine own place.] That is, the land promised to him, Gen. 28. 13. The land whereon thou li∣st, to thee wll I give it, and to thy seed; and the land where his father lived, and where himself was born. No doubt the respect he had to the promise made him earnest that he might return thither. Vers. 26. Give me my wives and my children for whom I have served thee, &c.] That is, let me by thy good leave depart now home with my wives and children; for thou knowest that the years of my service are expired, and that I have therein done thee faithfull and good service. Vers. 29. Thou knowest how I have served thee, &c.] Though Jacob did before really intend to return home, yet now considering with himself that it would be better to get somewhat for him and his before he went, then to go away with a great family having nothing to sustain them, and being vvithall so earnestly pres∣sed by the importunitie of Laban, and not knovving hovv to get from him vvhe∣ther he vvould or no, in this reply he labours to make it appear vvhat good reason there vvas that if he did stay it should not be altogether vvithout respect of som benefit to himself.
Vers. 31. Thu shalt not give me any thing, &c.] He did not intend to serve him without some just recompense and reward; but the meaning is this, that he would not require any thing out of Labans present estate, and that which he had gotten already, but that he would receive his hire out of the future increase of his flocks, and that in a way, as afterward he tells him, which was likely to be most advantagious to Laban, and wherein he for his part was content to rest upon the providence of God, to wit, that having under his charge onely those sheep and goats that were all of one colour, whether black or white, none spotted, he would have for his hire onely such kids and lambes as were speckled and spotted, bred of the old ones under his charge, that had neither speck nor spot in them. A condition which Laban, vers. 34. imbraceth very greedily, I would it might be according to thy word; both because such covetous churls do more hardly part with that which they have in their present possession, then that which may come in hereafter, and because according to the ordinary course of nature cattel are wont to bring forth such as themselves are, and therefore in this way Jacob was like to have a poore bargain of it. But in all this doubtlesse the Lord directed Jacob what he should do, who by this means adjudged a good reward to Jacob, which otherwise Laban would have kept from him, chap. 31. 9, 10, 11, 12. Vers. 38. And he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in the gut∣ters, &c.] His end in this was, that the ews being in the heat or strength of a double desire, whilest they vvere both drinking greedily, and vvithall coupled with the males (for he did this onely in ramming time) they might conceive such young ones as they saw shadows of in the vvater; for the colour of the roddes made also the shadows of the rammes, that vvere leaped upon them, to appear particoloured. Vers. 40. And Jacob did separate the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks toward the ring-straked, &c.] This vvas another course he takes to encrease his flock, be∣cause all the flock vvould not conceive just at vvatering time, having gotten some spotted lambes by his first devise of the pilled rods, these he sets before the faces of Labans flock, that by the sight of the speckled cattel they might bring forth lambes like them that vvere in their eye. And he put his own flocks by themselves.] This vvas a third device he used for his greater advantage: his own flocks that vvere ring-straked, speckled, and spotted, vvhen they vvere likely to conceive, he vvould not let them be amongst Labans flocks, lest they looking upon them that vvere all of one colour, should bring forth young ones that were all of one colour, vvhich then it seems should have been Labans. CHAP. XXXI. Vers. 1. OF that which was our fathers hath he gotten all this glory.] That is, all this wealth, vvhich they call his glory, because commonly a man vvealth procures him honour, and makes him glorious in the eyes of vvorldly men; vvhence is that, Psal. 49. 16, 17. Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is increased: For when he dieth he shall carry nothing away, his glory shall not descend after him.
Vers. 3. And the Lord said unto Jacob, Return unto the land of thy fa∣thers, &c.] By the foregoing vvords it appears, that the envy of his brethren, and the frowns of his father in law Laban, made Jacob entertain some thoughts of re∣turning home; but being vvithall it seems perplexed vvith some fears how he should be able to get away, hovv his vvives friends might deal vvith him, and vvhether his brother Esaus vvrath vvere appeased or no, to remove all these scruples from his mind, the Lord novv appeared to Jacob, and vvilled him to return, and promised to be vvith him and blesse him in his journey. Vers. 7. Your father hath dceived me, and changed my wages ten times.] If sheep in that countrey bring forth young ones tvvice a year, as it seems they did, in the space of six years, so oft his vvages might vvell be changed; yet ten times may here be put for many times, as it is usually elsevvhere, Job 19. 3. These ten times you have reproched me. Num. 14. 22. And have tempted me now these ten times; and in many other places. Vers. 11. And the Angel of God spake unto me, &c.] Who is called, vers. 13. the God of Bethel; and therefore it vvas undoubtedly Christ. Vers. 13. I am the God of Bethel.] This vvas to put Jacob in mind of his pro∣mise and vovv, vvhich then and there he made to God. Vers. 15. For he hath sold us, &c.] To wit, for 14. years service, and our money, that is, the money and profit which he hath gotten by this sale of us, he hath quite devoured, that is, he hath woly converted it to his own use, whereas of right he should have given it us  portion. Vers. 21. And passed over the river.] That is, Euphrates, which was between Chaldea and Canaan: Josh. 24. 2, 3. Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the floud, in old time, &c. And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the floud, and led him throughout all the land of Canaan, &c. Vers. 22. And it was told Laban on the third day, &c.] For so many dayes journey were Labans flocks, which his sonnes kept (whether Laban was now gone to the sheep-shearing) off from Jacob. chap. 30. 36. And he set three dayes journey btwixt himself and Jacob and Jacob fed the rest of Labans flocks. Vrs. 23. And pursued after him sven dayes journey.] That is, being returned home (wherein three dayes were again spent) he gathers his company together, and in seven dayes pursuit overtakes him; so that Laban went as farre in seven dayes as Jacob had gone in thirteen, to wit, the three dayes of the messengers going to Laban, the three dayes of Labans return home, and the seven dayes of Labans pursuit after Jacob. Vers. 24. Take heed that thou speak no to Jacob either good or bad.] That i, respectively to that end for which thou hast pursued him; thou shalt not seek to de∣tain him, neither by flattering speeches, nor by evil language. Vers. 35. For the custome of women is upon me.] Not that women whilest they are in that condition are not able to rise, but because they are oft at those times sto∣mach-sick, troubled with headach, and many severall wayes not fit to be disquieted; and besides in those hot countreys perhaps that diseas of women was stronger up∣on them then it is in these parts.
Vers. 42. Except the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac, &c.] Jacob cal∣leth God the fear of Isaac, that is, the God whom his father Isaac feared and wor∣shipped, as the onely true God who alone is to be feared; as God is elsewhere cal∣led the hope of Israel, that is, the God on whom all his people do put their whole trust and confidence. Vers. 46. Jacob said unto his brethren, Gather stones.] That is, he exhorted the sonnes of Laban and other his kindred and allyes that were come thither with La∣ban, that they would put to their helping hand to raise up a heap of stones that might be a witnesse of the covenant that should be now made betwixt them: for in the 51. verse, it is evident that not Jacob onely and his family, but Laban also and those that were with him, did gather and make this heap of stones. Vers. 47. But Jacob called it Galeed.] That is, a heap, a witnesse: they both give it the same name; onely Laban called it so in his tongue, the Syriack; and Jacob in his, the Hebrew. Vers. 53. And Jacob sware by the fear of his father Isaac.] That is, whereas Laban sware by the God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, and Terah, the fa∣ther both of Abraham and Nahor (of whom it is said that he served strange gods, Josh. 24. 2. Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the floud in old times, even Te∣rah the father of Abraham, and the father of Nahor; and they served other gods) Jacob onely sware by the fear of his father Isaac, that is, the God whom his father feared and worshipped. CHAP. XXXII. Vers. 2. ANd he called the name of that place, Mahanaim.] That is, two camps, because the Angel appeared in two camps or troops, happely on each side of him, as it were to guard and defend him. Vers. 3. And Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother unto the land of Seir.] Here the Horites dwelt, Gen. 14. 6. And the Horites in their mount Seir; but Esau and his children destroyed them afterward, and dwelt in their stead. Deut. 2. 22. As he did to the children of Esau which dwelt in Seir, when he destroyed the Horims from before them, and they succeeded them, &c. Now Esau being removed thither at this time from his fathers house, Jacob that was necessari∣ly to passe that way, sends thither to him to get his favour. Vers. 4. Thy servant Jacob saith thus.] Jacob doth not by this submissive speech renounce his blessing, but yielding temporall subjection for a time (as David to Saul, though he were even then the anointed king) he thereby labours to appease his bro∣thers wrath, still waiting by faith for the promise which was to be accomplished in future times. I have sojourned with Laban, &c.] This he saith, that the consideration of what he had already suffered might cause Esaus anger to case; and also, that this his readinesse to render an account (as it were) of his time spent might seem a kind of submission unto him. Vers. 5. And I have oxen, &c.] This is added to prevent suspicion, that he
might not think he was come as one that gaped after his fathers riches, or to suck any thing from him, or that he now sought his favour for his own profit sake. Vers. 6. We came to thy brother Esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and foure hundred men with him.] Whether Esau came with this troop against Jacob with a purpose to destroy him, and so to be revenged on him, as long since he in∣tended, it is not evident in the text: the most Expositours are of that mind, and that God did miraculously change his heart by that time they met together. Yet others judge it more probable, that Esau meant not to cut off Jacob; & indeed they alledge a very probable reason for it: for if, say they, out of reverence to his father, Esau restrained himself vvhen he was in the freshest and hottest of his passion, it is not likely that now after twenty years absence he would have no respect to the grief of his aged father (who was still living) but by slaying his brother bring his gray hairs with sorrow to the grave. However, evident it is that the messengers feared he came in his displeasure, and to that end brought such a band of men along with him, which no marvell it is though Jacob were very ready to believe. Vers. 16. And put a space betwixt drove and drove.] This he did that his presents might make the fairer show, and by these distant spaces the heat of Esaus rage might be abated; and also that if he fell in hostile manner upon the first, the other might seek the better to escape. Vers. 20. And say ye moreover, Behold thy servant Jacob is behind us.] This he urgeth to be especially remembred by his servants, that Esau might not think that he sent these in this manner before to delude him, that he in the mean season might escape some other way. Vers. 21. And himself lodged that night in the company.] That is, the night after he had sent avvay these droves by his servants, as is before related: it vvas not therefore that night, mentioned vers. 13. the night after he heard that his brother Esau vvas coming tovvards him vvith foure hundred men, but the night follovving, the day betvveen being spent in sending avvay the presents to Esau. Vers. 22. And passed over the ford Jabbok.] Jabbok was a river whereof men∣tion is again made, Deut. 2. 37. Thou camest not unto any place of the river Jab∣bok: and that Jacob passed over this river, is expresly set down, because this testi∣fied that after he had prayed to the Lord he was well confirmed and settled in his mind concerning the Lords protection, because otherwise he would not have pas∣sed the river but have made a stand on the other side, where with lesse difficul∣ti he might have escaped away, had his brother in an hostile manner set upon them. Vers. 24. And there wrestled a man with him.] That is, Christ appearing in the form of a man, therefore called after, and by the prophet Hosea, God and an An∣gel, Hose. 12. 3, 4. And by his strength he had power with God: Yea he had power over the Angel, yea, the Angel that redeemed him from all evil, Gen. 48. 16. The Angel that redeemed me from all evill blesse the lads. Jacob having wrestled with God by prayer (as no doubt to that very end he stayed behind alone) and that not without bitter tears, as Hose. 12. 4. he wept and made supplication unto him, at the last the Lord appeared, set upon him, and wrestled with him, and that
to this very end, that he might be assured that though he wrestled with many affli∣ctions, yet he should be victour in them all. Vers. 25. When he saw that he prevailed not against him, &c.] This is spoken with respect to that assistance & measure of strength wherewith God was pleased, in that assumed body wherein he wrestled with Jacob, to struggle with him, and over which Jacob with his might and power prevailed. And the hollow of Jacobs thigh was out of joynt.] This was for the present to humble him, that he might not be exalted above measure, being a discovery of his weaknesse and of the Lords indulgence, whereby onely he prevailed; and it was withall for the future a memoriall and remembrance unto him of this most com∣fortable Apparition. Vers. 26. And he said, Let me go, for the day breaketh.] The Angel speaks thu 1. after the manner of men, whose shape he had taken, as if he had haste to be gone; 2. to put Jacob in mind of his affairs, that it was fit he should make haste to his wives, &c. and 3. to intimate unto him that he would not have his glory by the rising light be revealed to him, and much lesse to any of his family that might now come to him. And he said, I will not let thee go except thou blesse me.] His desiring to be blessed by him argues that he acknowledged himself to be inferiour to him, with whom he wrestled, and that though he did what he could to hold him, yet if he pro∣cured not the blessing by begging it at his hands, he might happely misse of it: and so some understand that place of the prophet, Hos. 12. 4. to wit, that it was at this time that he wept and made supplication to the Angel, with whom he had wrestled. Vers. 28. Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel.] That is, not so much Jacob as Israel, which signifieth one that hath princely power with God. Vers. 29. Tell me I pray thee thy name.] Though he knevv at length vvith vvhom he vvrestled, at least that he wrestled vvith an Angel sent from God, ver. 30. For I have seen God face to face, &c. yet he desires a surer and clearer knovvledge. Vers. 30. I have seen God face to face.] To vvit, in the Apparition before men∣tioned, for othervvise to see the face of God, that is, to see the glory of God as he is in and of himself, it is altogether impossible for men▪ Exod. 33. 20. Thou canst not see my face; for there shall no man see me and live. Vers. 32. Therefore the children of Israel eat not of the sinew which shrank &c.] To perpetuate hereby the memory of this honour vvhich God afforded Jacob in this conflict vvhich he had vvith him. CHAP. XXXIII. Vers. 3. ANd he passed over before them.] This proceeded not onely from his fatherlike affection, but also from his faith, exposing himself to danger rather then his children, in whom he expected the promises should be accom∣plished. And bowed himself to the ground seven times.] That is, many times: 1. Sam▪  5▪ so that the barren hath born seven, &c.
Vers. 8. What meanest thou by all this drove which I met?] The servants had told Esau the reason of this before; but yet he asks now the reason of Jacob, that he may take an occasion courteously to refuse them. Vers. 10. For therefore I have seen thy face, &c.] That is, for because I have seen thy face; and a like speech we have Gen. 18. 5. For therefore are you come to your servant, &c. for as there Lot gives that as a reason why he desired them to eat something, to wit, because they were come to him, & being there he would not have them go away till they refreshed themselves; so here Jacob gives this as a reason why he desired that Esau would accept his presents, to wit, because he had seen his face as the face of God, &c. implying that since Esau had been so kind and loving to him, it was fit he should shevv his thankfulnesse in those presents he had sent. As for that expression vvhich Jacob here useth, I have seen thy face as though I had seen the face of God, either it is spoken hyperbolically, to expresse hovv vvonder∣fully comfortable that kind meeting of Esau had been to him; or else in this phrase he acknovvledgeth that this reconciliation of his brother vvas Gods vvork, and so saies, that the light of Gods countenance vvas evident in the cheerfull countenance of his brother. Vers. 11. Take I pray thee my blessing.] That is, the gift vvhich by the blessing of God I am enabled to give, and do give vvith a vvilling heart: 1. Sam. 25. 27. And now this blessing which thy handmaid hath brought unto my Lord, let it even be given unto the young men, &c. Vers. 17. And Jacob journyed to Succoth, and built him an house, &c.] To vvit, after he had according to his promise, vers. 14. visited his brother in Seir, and stayed there avvhile. Some conceive that hovvever he intended at first to have follovved his brother to Seir, yet aftervvards through fear of the vvorst, or by spe∣ciall direction from God, he changed his mind, and vvent another vvay, and so came to Succoth: But indeed it is no vvay probable that being nevvly reconciled to his brother, he vvould again provoke him anevv to displeasure, by such a manifest contempt and disregard of him, and by such a palpable breach of his promise to him, but that he did indeed go to Seir, as he had told Esau he vvould. Besides, though by his building a house and making booths in this place (which vvas thence after∣vvard called Succoth▪ that is, Booths) it is clear that Jacob resolved to dvvell there; yet questionlesse, hovvever he might leave his carriages there, he vvent presently to his fathers house (and perhaps his brother Esau vvith him) and then aftervvard returned to Succoth again. There is indeed no mention made of his coming to his father till chap. 35. 27. And Jacob came unto Mamre unto his father, &c. But the story of the slaughter of the Shechemites, related in the 34. chap. vvas so long after Jacobs coming into the Land of Canaan, to vvit, vvhen his sonnes vvere grovvn lusty and strong men, vvho vvere very young at their coming into Canaan, that it cannot be thought that Jacob in all that time vvent not home to his fathers house. Vers. 19. And he bought a parcell of a field, &c.] This vvas that portion of land vvhich Jacob vvhen he lay upon his deathbed in Egypt gave unto his sonne Joseph, Gen. 48. 22. Moreover I have given thee one portion above thy brethren:
for that was near unto Shechem, Josh. 24. 32. And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought up out of Egypt, buried they in Shechem, in a par∣cel of ground which Jacob bought of the sonnes of Hamor the father of Shechem, &c. and consequently it was here that Christ had a conference with the woman of Samaria, and converted her and her neighbours: for Shechem it is that is there cal∣led Sychar, a city of Samaria, John 4. 5. CHAP. XXXIV. Vers. 1. ANd Dinah the daughter of Leah, &c.] This must needs be ten years at least since their coming from Laban, else Dinah could not be six∣teen years old. Vers. 5. And Jacob held his peace untill they were come.] Not having any into whose bosome he might so fitly poure out his complaint for the ravishing of his daughter, or whose counsel he might seek. Vers. 7. And the sonnes of Jacob came out of the field, &c.] By the computa∣tion of most Expositours, Reuben was now about two and twenty years old, Sime∣on one and twenty, Levi twenty, and Judah nineteen. And they were wroth, because he had wrought folly in Israel.] The disgrace of the Church was the chief ground of their anger. Vers. 13. And the sonnes of Jacob answered Shechem, &c.] Though there be mention made of Jacob, the father of Dinah, in Hamors treaty with Jacobs sonnes, concerning Shechems marriage with Dinah, vers. 11. And Shechem said unto her father, &c. yet it is altogether improbable that Jacob knew any thing of this pro∣position which his sonnes made, that if the Shechemites would be all circumcised then they would consent to this match: for is it likely that he would consent to such an horrible profanation of the Sacrament of Circumcision, the seal of Gods cove∣nant? this they propounded apart by themselves, not intending what they said, but plotting their destruction, which to do they thought they had good reason: and therefore it is said that they answered them deceitfully, because he had defiled Dinah their sister. Vers. 19. And he was more honourable then all the house of his father.] The great esteem he had amongst the people is here mentioned as one ground of his pre∣vailing so farre with them in so strange a request. Vers. 23. Shall not their cattell, &c. be ours.] That is, by having commerce with them, by making marriages with them, by receiving them in to be as one people with us. Vers. 25. And it came to passe on the third day, when they were sore.] The third day is counted the criticall day by Physicians, when wounds are oft at the worst, most painfull, &c. and therefore then they chose to make this massacre in the city, as it is here said, that then two of the sonnes of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinahs brthrn took each man his sword, &c. whether any of their servants joyned with them, as some think, we need not enquire; since it is probable enough that Simeon and Levi might do it alone, there not being a man able to stirre in the city. But
that the other sonnes of Jacob joyned not with them in this fact, is plain, 1. by these expresse words, two of the sonnes of Jacob; 2. because the boldnesse of the fact is noted as observable, they came upon the city boldly; 3. because the other are said to come in to the spoil, which implies that in the former act they had no hand; 4. because they onely are mentioned, Gen. 49. 5. Simon and Levi are brethren, instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. Being the brethren of Dinah not onely by the father, but by the mother, they were the more sensible of her disho∣nour, and ready to revenge it; yea and perhaps they might be stirred up and en∣couraged to do it by their mother Leah. Vers. 30. And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, &c.] Though Jacobs charging his sonnes with the offense they had given to the inhabitants of the land, and the danger which thereby they hd brought both upon him and all his family, be onely here expressed, Ye have troubled me, to make me to stink amongst the inhabitants of the land, (and that to make way to the story of his removing to Bethel, which follows in the next chapter) yet there is no question to be made but that he did also charge upon them the grievousnesse of the sin they had committed against God, as he did again at his death, Gen. 49. 5, 6, 7. Simeon and Levi are brethren, instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. O my soul come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honour, be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man, and in their self-will they digged down a wall. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel, &c. What shall we then think of the book of Judeth, but that it is Apocryphall, wherein by Judeth this fact of Simeons is so highly extolled, Judeth 9. 2. O Lord God of my father Simeon, to whom thou gavest a sword to take vengeance of the strangers, who loosened the girdle of a maid to defile her, &c. CHAP. XXXV. Vers. 1. ANd God said, Arise, go up to Bethel.] Bethel was distant from She∣chem Southward about thirty English miles. Now Jacob being at this time perplexed with fear because of that which his sonnes had done to the She∣chemites, and perhaps advising with himself about removing to some other place, the Lord appeared to him, and appointed him to go up to Bethel, and to build there an Altar unto God that appeared to him when he fled from the face of his brother Esau, thereby calling to his remembrance the gracious promises which God had there made to him, and the vow which he there had made to God, chap. 28. 22. And this stone which I have set for a pillar shall be Gods house; and of all that thou shalt give me, I will surely give the tenth unto thee. Vers. 2. Then Jacob said unto his houshold.] That is, not onely to them of his own proper house or family, but also to all that were of his retinue, that pitched their tents with him, and as appertaining to him, still removed whither he removed; of which there might be a great number, servants born in the house and bought with money, Gen. 14. 14. And when Abraham heard that his brother was ta∣ken captive, he armed his trained servants, born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen persons. Put away the strange gods that are amongst you.] Being quickened by the dan∣ger he had apprehended, as likewise by the Lords late appearing to him, and en∣joyning
him to go to that place which he had formerly found so dreadfull, even as the house of God, and as the gate of heaven, Gen. 28. 17. and where he was to perform the vow which he had made, he deemed it requisite that they should in a speciall manner prepare and sanctifie themselves; and of this he informs them of his family, & wills them in the first place to put away the strange or the strangers gods that were amongst them, that is, idoles which other nations worshipped, but might not be endured amongst those that worshipped the true God. And hereby I con∣ceive that he intended not Labans gods, which Rachel had stolen (for it is not like∣ly that this good Patriarch did all this while suffer his wives and children either to worship, or with his knowledge to keep, strange Gods amongst them) but rather the idoles of the Shechemites, which by his children or servants might be taken for the worth of them, when they spoiled the city, and such idolatrous and superstitious monuments as were brought forth of Mesopotamia by those of his retinue, whom he suspected to be still too much addicted to the superstitions of that countrey: and yet perhaps both those which Rachel had stolen, and any other secretly kept a∣mongst them, were now brought in upon these words of Jacob. And be clean, and change your garments.] It is clear by this place, that as the Lord did enjoyn the Patriarchs many rites of sacrificing which were afterward more fully enjoyned the Israelites by the written Law, so also he taught them many of those externall rites of purifying themselves by washing in water, and changing of their garments, of which we reade expressely in the Law, Levit. 15. 13. And when he that hath an issue is cleansed of his issue, then he shall number to himself seven dayes for his cleansing, and wash his clothes, &c. and Numb. 31. 23. Every thing that may abide the fire, you shall make it to go through the fire, and it shall be clean: Neverthelesse it shall be purified▪ with the water of separation; and all that abideth not the fire ye shall make to go through the water; which were even in these times as so many shadows of the spirituall cleansing of men from all filthi∣nesse of the flesh and spirit, that renewing by faith and repentance, which God requires especially of all those that draw near to him in the duties of his worship. Vers. 4. And all their ear-rings that were in their ears.] To wit, which were Idolatrous jewells and superstitious monuments. Hos. 2. 13. I will visit upon her the dayes of Baalim, &c. wherein e decked her self with her ear-rings and her jewells. Deut. 7. 25. The graven Images of their Gods shall ye burn with fire; thou shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on them. And Jacob hid them under the oaks, &c.] He hid them from the knowledge of his family, buried them in the ground as unclean things, under an oak, where they might not be easily found again. Vers. 7. And he built there an Altar, &c.] And so performed the vow which he had there formerly made unto the Lord, chap. 28. 20, 21, 22. And he called the name of that place Bethel, &c. And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my fathers house in peace; then shall the Lord be my God, & this stone which I have set for a pillar shall be Gods house; and of all that thou shalt give me I will surely give the tenth unto thee. Vers. 8. Bt Deborah Rebekahs nurse died.] This place makes me without any
scruple to conclude, that though the coming of Jacob to his father Isaac be not yet mentioned, he had been there long before this (for who can think that Jacob would be ten or twelve years in Canaan after he was come from Laban, with whom he had served twenty years, and never go in all that time to see his aged fa∣ther) undoubtedly there was continuall intercourse betwixt them; and so Deborah being come at this time to Jacob (it may be upon Rebekahs death, or some other occasion) there died, and with great mourning was buried. Vers. 10. But Israel shall be thy name.] God had given him this name before, Gen. 32. 28. And he said, Thy name shall be no more called Jacob but Israel: but now the Lord confirmed this name to him the second time; as Jacob also, ver. 15. confirms the name of the place, Bethel. And Jacob called the name of the place where God spoke with him, Bethel. Vers. 14. And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him.] Whether the pillar set up here before, Gen. 28. 18. And Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put for his pillow, and set it up for a pil∣lar, was defaced or overthrown it is uncertain; but this was questionlesse another pillar, as appears, because it is said to have been set up just in the place where God had this second time appeared to him. And he poured a drink-offering thereon.] See Gen. 28. 18. Ver. 18. But his father called him Benjamin.] That is, the sonne of my right hand, to wit, because he should be his beloved, tendered, and especially regarded, he should be ever at his right hand, according to that expression, Psal. 80. 17. Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand; and thus doth Jacob as it were correct the immoderate sorrow of his wife shown in the name she had given him Benoni, the sonne of my sorrow, & also prevents the frequent renewing of his sorrow by that name which might often have brought to remembrance the losse of his dear wife. Vers. 19. And Rachel died.] To wit, immediately after she was delivered of her child; and thus she that ere while in a passion quarrelled with her husband, Give me children or I die, now died by her bearing of children. And was buried in the way to Ephrath, which is Beth-lehem.] It hath both names, Micah 5. 2. But thou Beth-lehem Ephratah, &c. Vers. 29. And Isaac gave up the ghost and died.] This is here set down by way of anticipation: for that which is related in the two follovving chapters fell out be∣fore Isaac died. CHAP. XXXVI. Vers. 1. NOw these are th generations of Esau, &c.] This is related to shevv the accomplishment of that temporall blessing, vvherevvith his father blessed him, Gen. 27. 39. And Isaac his father answered and said unto him, Be∣hold, thy dwelling shall be the fatnesse of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from above, and by thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve thy brother; and it shall come to passe when thou shalt have the dominion, that thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck; as likevvise of the promise to Abraham, Gen. 22. 17. In multi∣plying I will multiply thy seed as the starres of the heaven, and as the sand upon the sea shore; and the oracle given to Rebekah, Gen. 25. 23. And the Lord said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels.
Vers. 2. Adah the daughter of Elon, &c.] The vvives of Esau are here set dovvn by other names then formerly. The first is Adah, vvho Gen. 26. 34. is called Ba∣shemath, and the daughter of Elon the Hittite, as here also she is said to be. And indeed it vvas usuall in those times to have tvvo names: for thus Esau vvas called Edom, and Jacob Israel; Maachah daughter of Abishalom 1. King. 15. 2. is cal∣led Michaiah daughter of Uriel, 2. Chron. 13. 2. His second vvife here named is Aholibamah the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon, the Hivite: novv this doubtlesse is the same who is called Judith, Gen. 26. 34. onely because her fa∣ther was called both Anah and Beeri, here she is said to be the daughter of Anah, and there, the daughter of Beeri; and because this Anah, who was also called Beeri, was the sonne of Zibeon, therefore Aholibamah is said to be not onely the daughter of Anah, but also the daughter of Zibeon (because she was his grandchild, name∣ly Zibeons) and that to distinguish this Anah the father of Aholibamah, Esaus wife, from another Anah, mentioned ver. 20. who was the brother of Zibeon, and so the uncle of this Anah. Indeed Anah or Beeri the father of Aholibamah or Ju∣dith, though here termed the Hivite, yet is said to be a Hittite, chap. 26. 34. but this is because the Hivites comprehended also the Hittites, as the Brittains the En∣glish and Welch. Vers. 3. And Bashemath.] This was Esaus third wife, called Machalath Gen. 28. 9. Vers. 6. And Esau took his wives and his sonnes, &c.] Esau dwelt in Seir whilest Jacob was in Mesopotamia, chap. 32. being removed thither, as may well be thought, either upon some displeasure, or for that he was allyed by marriage to the Hivites, vers. 2. Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan, Aholibamah the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite: but this cannot be meant of that removall; for now he goes from the face of his brother Jacob, and that vers. 7. because their riches were more then that they might dwell together: Questi∣onlesse therefore after Jacobs return from Mesopotamia, Esau, not yet having re∣moved his goods, &c. from Canaan, nor fully accomplished his designes in Seir, returned also to his father; but after Isaac was dead and buried, partly because (as it fared once with Abraham and Lot) the place where they dwelt was too strait for him and his brother, both being now grown exceeding rich; and partly be∣cause, no doubt, he had already hope to get the possession of the land of Seir, he re∣moves thither again with all that he had, God in his providence thus disposing it, that he should thus leave Jacob as it were in the possession of Canaan, which was appointed for his posterity. Vers. 12. And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Esaus sonne.] She was sister to Lotan, the sonne of Seir, vers. 22. And Lotans sister was Timma. Thus not onely Esau, but Eliphaz his sonne, matching into the stock of the Chorites, by this occasion they thrust in themselves into the government of Mount Seir (Deut 2. 12. As he did to the children of Esau which dwelt in Seir, when he destroyed the Horims from before them, and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead, &c.) and so he got his living by his sword, Gen. 27. 40. By thy sword shalt thou live, &c. Vers. 18. Duke Korah.] This is not the same Korah mentioned before, vers. 16. Vers. 20. Seir the Horite.] The Horite and Hivite seem to have been all one: for Anah elsewhere called a Hivite cometh of this race.
Vers. 24. This was that Anah that found the mules in the wildernesse, as he fed the asses of Zibeon his father.] Interpreters are of very different judgements con∣cerning the word in the originall here translated the Mules; but taking it as it is in our translation, that which is noted here concerning this Anah must needs be this, That as he kept the asses of his father Zibeon in the wildernesse, by putting he-asses amongst certain mares that they might cover them, these mares brought forth those creatures which we call Mules, a kind of beasts that never breed themselves, but are onely begotten of mares and he-asses, and so he is said here to have been the first, at least in those parts, that found out Mules. And this I conceive is noted concerning Anah, because he was Esaus father in law, vers. 2. the father of Aholibamah, and perhaps also did advance his estate by finding out these mules, which became by degrees to be much esteemed by the inhabitants of those countreys. Vers. 31. And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom &c.] This is added to shew the accomplishment of Gods promise to Abraham. Gen. 17. 16. Yea I will blesse her, and she shall be a mother of nations: Kings of people shall be of her. CHAP. XXXVII. Vers. 2. JOseph being seventeen years old, &c.] Hereby it appears that these things were done before Isaacs death. Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh, chap. 41. 46. and then was Jacob 121 years old (for nine years after, when the seven years of plenty were spent, and two of the famine, he was but 130) therefore Jacob was but 108 now when Joseph was 17, and Isaac but 168 (for he was but 60 years older then Jacob. Gen. 25. 26. And after that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on Esaus heel, and his name was called Jacob: and Isaac was 60 years old when she bare them) whereas he lived 180 years, chap. 35. 28. a little after the time that Joseph stood before Pharaoh. And the lad was with the sonnes of Bilhah and Zilpah:] As there was alwayes great emulation between Rachel and Leah, so it was likely enough to be continued amongst their children: and therefore it is very probable that Jacob did purposely place Joseph amongst the sonnes of the handmaids, rather then amongst the sonnes of Leah, that he might be trained up in the knowledge and skill of ordering his cattle, amongst those that were not so likely to maligne him, and that the rather also because he might well hope that Bilhah (who was Rachels handmaid) and her sonnes would even for Rachels sake be the more tender over Joseph. And Joseph brought unto his father their evil report.] That is, Joseph returned to his father their evil words and deeds; and principally I conceive it is meant of their evil dealing with him, though other their evil carriage be not excluded, be∣cause that which follows in the next verses seems to be added, to shew the reason of this evil, whereof Joseph accused them, to wit, that because of Jacobs singular love to Joseph, his brethren hated him, and would not speak peaceably unto him. Vers. 5. And Joseph dreamed a dream, and told it his brethren.] To wit, not out of a vain-glorious boasting, but out of youthfull simplicitie, and because himself wondred at it: yet withall doubtlesse there was a speciall providence of God in causing him thus to reveal his dreams, that by this prediction of his future exalta∣tion,
his father and brethren might the more plainly see vvhen it came to passe that it vvas of God. Vers. 6. Behold we were binding sheaves in the field, &c.] This dream, con∣cerning their sheaves of corn, was the fitter to represent their bowing down before Joseph; because it was for corn that they afterwards went down into Egypt and sued to Joseph, when they did (as was now foretold) in so submissive a manner yield obeisance unto him. Vers. 10. And his father rebuked him.] Not knowing that these dreams were of God, to foreshow what should befall Joseph; and being carried away at first with a sudden fear lest they proceeded from his own ambitious thoughts, and should stirre up the envy of his brethren against him, he gives him a gentle re∣proof, both to prevent the exalting of Josephs mind, and that his brethren might not imagine, to the increase of their envy, that he had any thought of preferring Joseph before them: though afterward when he came to consider with himself that he had two dreams tending both to signifie the same thing, and withall bethought himself what excellent gifts of mind God had bestowed on him, he began to think that there might be somewhat in it more then yet they perceived, and so laid it the more to heart, as it is said vers. 12. His father observed the saying. Shall I and thy mother, &c.] The mother of the family, and so his stepmother, whether Leah, or Bilhah; for Rachel was now dead. Vers. 13. Do not thy brethren feed the flock in Shechem, &c.] Shechem was, as is generally held, above 16 miles from Hebron, where Jacob now dwelt, the very place where that massacre was by his sonnes committed, Gen. 34. However his sonnes were gone thither to feed their flock, because happely the place was ever since uninhabited, at least they having been gone from thence so many years since were not likely to be there known; yet this might make him the more carefull to inquire of their welfare, and though happely he had of late kept his Joseph at home, to prevent all discord betwixt him and his brethren, yet now he sends him to see how they did, because this might also procure him favour amongst them. All which doth aggravate the following wickednesse of Jacobs sonnes, that did so ill requite the love of their carefll father. Vers. 15. And a certain man found him, &c.] All this is thus particularly rela∣ted, that his pains in seeking them might aggravate their crueltie to him. Vers. 21. And Ruben heard it, and he delivered him out of their hands, &c.] That Reuben did at first disswade them earnestly from offering any violence, is evi∣dent by his own vvords to his brethren when they vvere in Egypt, chap. 42. 22. Spake I not unto you, saying, Do not sinne against the child, and ye would not hear? But novv he delivered him by perswading them not to kill him, but to cast him in∣to a pit, and there to let him lye, intending withall to draw him out secretly after∣ward, and so to restore him to his father. Observable indeed it is that Reuben should do this, who (being Jacobs eldest sonne, and that by Leah) had most cause to be jealous of, and inraged against, the suspected superioritie of this sonne of Ra∣chel: But herein was the power of God magnified, vvho made him the instrument of delivering Joseph that vvas most unlikely to have done it: and yet there may be
some reasons withall conceived, why Reuben above all the rest should seek to rescue Joseph out of their hands; for having lately repented him of that his foul incest, with Bilhah his fathers concubine (for vve cannot think that the Patriarchs vvhen they fell so grievously did also runne on in a state of impenitency) he vvas doubt∣lesse the more tender of having any hand again in such a high degree of vvicked∣nesse, and vvas happely glad to have so fair an occasion to assvvage his fathers dis∣pleasure, conceiving evil against him for his former sinne, and fearing lest this in∣tended vvickednesse, should it come to his fathers knovvledge, vvould be chiefly charged upon him, even because of his former offense. Vers. 28. Then there passed by Midianites.] The Merchants to vvhom Joseph vvas sold are in severall places called sometimes Ishmaelites sometimes Midianites, vvho yet vvere tvvo distinct nations, the one of Ishmael Hagars sonne, the other of Midian Keturahs sonne, Gen 25. 2. but because they dvvelt both in Arabia, it is most likely that there vvas in this company of Merchants both Ishmaelites and Midianites, vvho did traffick together, and to that purpose vvere going together into Egypt, and are therefore called sometimes Ishmaelites, sometimes Midianites. And they drew & lift up Joseph out of the pit.] Reuben being formerly upon some pretence slipped avvay from them, that he might go about some other vvay, & take Joseph out of the pit without their knowledge, in his absence they sold him to these Arabian Merchants, and chuckerd themselves no doubt with thinking how farre they should be now from crouching to him, that was himself made a bondslave. Doubtlesse Joseph did both before when they cast him into the pit, and now again, earnestly beg of them with many tears that they would not do it, as is evident by their own confession, Gen. 42. 21. And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he be∣sought us, and we would not hear; but malice had for the present hardened their hearts. Vers. 29. And he rent his clothes.] As the custome was in those times, when any grievous calamitie or sorrow befell men, either thereby to expresse how their hearts were broken and torn with grief and anguish of spirit, or else how little comfort they took in any thing, and how little they cared what became of them, not mind∣ing those things which were most usefull for them. Vers. 30. And he returned unto his brethren, and said, The child is not.] Here∣by meaning not onely that he was not in the pit, but also that they had slain him in his absence, as at first they intended; for in Scripture those that are dead are said not to be, Jer. 31. 15. Rachel weeping for her children refused to be comfor∣ted, because they were not. Questionlesse Reuben (for the reasons before noted up∣on ver. 21.) was seriously and heartily distressed for that they had done; yet evi∣dent it is on the other side, that when they had told him, that they had onely sold him to the Ishmaelites, and had not slain him, he consented to conceal this their fact from their father, and to deceive him with a forget tale, because he should otherwise have stirred up the hatred of all his brethren against him, wherein though he cannot be excused from sinning greatly, yet he was farre lesse guilty then the rest of his brethren.
Vers. 35. And all his daughters rose up to comfort him.] He might have other daughters besides Dinah, though they be not mentioned: but however, hereby may be meant his sonnes wives or their daughters. But he refused to be comforted.] That is, so farre did his passions prevail over him that he minded not what they said to him, but even gave way to the extremi∣tie of his sorrow; which is noted as an infirmitie in this good Patriarch, but chiefly to aggravate the wickednesse of his sonnes, who had brought this sorrow upon their father, yea upon Isaac their aged grandfather too, for he lived thirteen years after this, as is before noted ver. 1. and had therefore his share doubtless in this sorrow. CHAP. XXXVIII. Vers. 1. ANd it came to passe at that time, &c.] It is very hard to determine of what time this is meant, when Judah went to his friend Hirah the Adullamit, that is, that dwelt in Adullam, a city mentioned Josh. 19. 35. and so by his means married the daughter of Shuah the Canaanite; and that because it is evi∣dent that from the time of Josephs being sold into Egypt unto the time of Jacobs go∣ing down thither to him, there were but three and twenty years at the most (for he was sold at seventeen years old, chap. 37. 1. Joseph being seventeen years old was feeding the flock, &c. from which time till he was exalted in Pharaohs Court, there were but thirteen years, chap. 41. 46. And Joseph was thirtie years old when he stood before Pharaoh King of Egypt, &c. to which if we adde the seven plenteous years that were in Egypt after his exaltation, and the two years and upwards, that were spent of the famine, ere Joseph sent for his father and his family, chap. 45. 6. For these two years hath the famine been in the land, &c. this will make up, at the time of his coming into Egypt, about three and twenty years: and yet it must needs be yielded, that all these things, related in this chapter, were done before Jacob removed out of Canaan into Egypt, and how they could be done within the compasse of so few years, it may seem very questionable. Some Expositours hold, that these words, And it came to passe at that time, must be strictly taken, with reference to that which went before, in the former chap, o wi, that Judah did this in that very year or thereabout when Joseph was sold into Egypt, and that 1. because the words are so expresse that, at that time, Judah thus married; neither can there be any probable reason given why the relation of those things that con∣cern Joseph should be broken off to insert these things concerning Judah, but onely this, because presently upon the selling of Joseph Judah made this marriage with the daughter of Shuah; 2. Because till Joseph was sold into Egypt, Judah dwelt amongst his brethren, and therefore, as is likely, it was after this that he went aside and matched himself with the daughter of Shuah the Canaanite: And that all these things here related, concerning Judah and his children, might well be within the compasse of three and twenty years, they shew thus, to wit, 1. That Judah might marry and have his three sonnes, Er, Onan, and Shelah by his wife, the daughter of Shuah, in the first three years after Joseph vvas sold into Egypt; 2. That Er might be marriedto Tamar when he vvas sixteen years old, & Onan also the follow∣ing
year, vvhich was towards the latter end of the seven plenteous years in Egypt, about eighteen years after Joseph was sold thither; and 3. That in the five follow∣ing years Tamar might by Judah, as is here related, conceive with child, and bring forth Pharez and Zarah, a little before their going into Egypt. And whereas it may be objected that Pharez had two sonnes, Hezron, and Hamul, vvhen Jacob vvent dovvn into Egypt, Gen. 46. 12. The sonnes of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul: to this they answer, That Hezron and Hamul are there reckoned amongst those that vvent dovvn vvith Jacob into Egypt, not because they were then born, but because they vvere of Jacobs family in Egypt, vvhilest Jacob vvas yet living: Thus, I say, some Expositours understand this place, that Judah married this Cana∣anites daughter (contrary no doubt to his father Jacobs mind, who vvas himself strictly forbidden to marry amongst them by Isaac) that very year that Joseph was sold into Egypt. But 2. because Hezron and Hamul are so expresly reckoned amongst those that vvent dovvn vvith Jacob into Egypt, Gen 46. 12. therefore many Expo∣sitours, yea the most, conceive that these vvords, And it came to passe at that time, must not be taken strictly, that Judah married thus at that time, vvhen Joseph was sold into Egypt; but that it vvas done about that time, that is, say they, at Jacobs first coming into the land of Canaan, vvhen he left his uncle Laban: and the ground of this their opinion is this, because Jacobs coming from Laban (vvhich vvas when Joseph vvas six years old, as is evident if vve compare Gen. 30. 25. And it came to passe when Rachel had born Joseph, that Jacob said unto Laban, Send me away, &c. give me my wives and my children for whom I have served thee, and let me go, &c. vvith Gen. 31. 40. Thus have I been twenty years in thy house: I served thee fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy cattel, &c.) vvas but eleven years before Joseph vvas sold into Egypt, & consequently not above foure & thirty years at the most ere Jacob vvent dovvn thither to Joseph; all vvhich time vvill be strait enough, if not too little, for all these things to be done in that are here related, and for the birth of Ezron and Hamul, the sonnes of Pharez, vvho are reckoned amongst those that vvent dovvn vvith Jacob into Egypt: for though Judah married the daughter of Shuah about tvvo years after their coming into Canaan (and yet vvas he then but thirteen years old, as being at the utmost but five yars older then Joseph) and had by her Er, Onan, and Shelah, in the three next years after his marriage; and though he then married Er, his eldest sonne, to Tamar, vvhen he vvas also but thirteen years old, vvhich vvas sixteen years after their coming into Canaan, three years at least after Joseph vvas sold into Egypt, to this if you adde but three years for the death of Er, the marriage and death of Onan, the going home of Tamar to her fathers house, Judahs incest with her▪ and the con∣ception and birth of her tvvo twinnes Pharez and Zarah, the fruit of that incest, and then fifteen years more ere Pharez could be marriageable, and have those his two sonnes Hezron and Hamul, who are numbred amongst those that went dovvn vvith Jacob into Egypt, this vvill make the vvhole number of foure and thirty years from Jacobs coming into Canaan till his removing into Egypt. And so they conclude, that doubtlesse the time here spoken of, vvhen Judah married this Cana∣anites daughter, vvas vvithin a vvhile after their coming into Canaan: And indeed
neither of these Expositours do suppose any thing impossible; yet the first may seem most probable, because it were very strange if Judah and his sonnes Er and Pharez should all marry at twelve or thirteen years of ag. Vers. 7. And the Lord slew him.] The like also is said of Onan his younger brother, vers. 10. and the meaning in both places is, that they died not an ordinary, naturall death, but that they were taken away in an extraordinary manner, by some remarkable judgement, whereby it was manifest unto others that they were cut off by the revenging hand of God for their notorious wickednesse. And this was the fruit of Judahs marriage with a daughter of that accursed nation of the Ca∣naanites, that were in time to come to be rooted out, that the Israelites might dwell in their room; his children that he had by her proved sonnes of Belial, and were destroyed by the just judgement of God upon them. Vers. 8. Go in unto thy brothers wife, &c.] By this it appears that God had gi∣ven this in charge to the Patriarchs (as many other things) which was afterward established by the written Law, Deut. 25. 5. If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have no child, the wife of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger; her husbands brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him for wife, and perform the duty of an husbands brother unto her. Vers. 11. Remain a widow in thy fathers house till Shelah my sonne be grown.] It is evident that in these words Judah thought to assure Tamar, that assoon as his sonne Shelah was marriageable, he also should take her to wife, and raise up feed to his deceased brethren: but withall it is most probable, that he meant nothing lesse, but onely intended to put her off, and that as suspecting that she had some way been the occasion of the death of his other two sonnes, as the words following do import, For he said, (to wit, within himself) Lest peradventure he die also, as his brethren did. And indeed, why lse did he send her home to her father? she might have stayed awhile unmarried with him; and when Shelah was grown, we see Ju∣dah minded not the performance of his promise, as is noted vers. 14. yea his own confession makes it manifest, vers. 26. where he accuseth himself of doing her wrong, She hath been more righteous then I, because that I gave her not to Shelah my sonne. Vers. 12. Judah was comforted and went up to his sheep-shearers to Timnath.] A city in the Philistines countrey, which also befell Judahs children for a possession, Josh. 15. 20▪ 57. This is the inheritance of the tribe of Judah, &c. Cain, Gibea, and Timnath. Vers. 14. And sate in an open place.] Such open places harlots used, Ezech. 16. 25. Thou hast built thy high places at every head of the way. Jer. 3. 2. Lift up thine eyes unto the high places, and see where thou hast not been lien with. Prov. 9. 12. For she sitteth at the doore of her house, on a seat in the high places of the street. Vers. 15. When Judah saw her, he thought her to be an harlot, because she had covered her face.] The meaning is not, that he judged her to be an harlot because she had covered her face (for this was a signe of modestie, rather then of whorish impudency, Gen. 24. 65. Rebekah took a veil and covered her self, when she saw
Isaac coming towards her) but that seeing her set in such a manner, in an open place, as harlots used to do, and doubtlesse in the dresse and attire of such light wo∣men, he imagined she was an harlot; and these words, because she had covered her face, are added to intimate what it was that made him thus to mistake, being she was his daughter in law, to wit, because she was veiled, and so her face being hid∣den he could not know her. Vers. 16. And she said, What wilt thou give me?] This she said, both as fol∣lowing the custome of harlots, Ezek. 16. 33. They give gifts to all whores; and also especially that she might have somewhat to witnesse by whom she had con∣ceived, if she proved to be with child. It may seem somewhat strange, that when she began to speak to him he should not know her by her voice: but for this we must consider, 1. that if she spake with a low and soft voice, under a pretence of secrecy, in that case a knovvn voice may be easily mistaken; 2. that much art may be used by a subtile woman in changing the ordinary tone of her voice and speech; 3. that Judah having now his lust inflamed, and being carried away with a violent passion, might easily be so farre blinded and transported as not to discern a fraud of this nature, which he had no cause in the world to imagine or suspect. Vers. 24. And Judah said, Bring her forth, and let her be burnt.] By the law of God afterwards given, to defile a betrothed woman (which was here Tamars case, in regard she was promised to Shelah, and by the law he was to marry her) was adultery, and as adultery to be punished with death. Deut 22. 23, 24. If a Damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto her husband, and a man find her in the citie, and lie with her; then ye shall bring them both out unto the gate of that citie, and ye shall stone them with stones that they die: And it seems such was the law and custome of these times, yea though they were widows; onely, as by that law, they were to be stoned, so by the law in these times and places they were to be burned: which Judah was very forward to presse against Tamar, out of a desire to b rid of her, that he might be no longer in danger of her being married to his sonne Shelah: yea, so farre was he transported with his passion herein, that he would have burnt (which was against the light of nature) both her and the fruit that was conceived in her womb. Concerning Judahs power of pronouncing such a sentence against her, the judgement of Expositours differs much. 1. Some con∣ceive, that at this time in those countreys there was not that exact form of a Com∣monweal established amongst them, as was afterwards in processe of time, nor such a strict legall way in judiciall proceedings, but that every one that vvas the head of a family had in his own family power of life and death; and so Judah did indeed pronounce sentence of death against Tamar, who belonged to his family: which indeed may seem the more probable, because vvhen, being brought forth, she had discovered by whom she was with child, there was no further proceeding against her, which shovvs the judgement was much in his power. Nor is that ar∣gument of any great strength that is brought against this, to wit, that she dwelt now with her own father, over whom Judah could have no such power to fetch her thence, and punish her as he pleased; since she might be fetched to Judah under some other pretence, and then he might proceed against her. But 2. others conceive
that Judah had no such power to pronounce sentence against her, but onely made known his will to have a strict course taken against her; Bring her forth, saith he, and let her be burnt, that is, let her be carried before the magistrate, and be pu∣nished with burning according to the law of the countrey. And this indeed is the common opinion of the most Expositours. Vers. 25. When she was brought forth she sent to her father in law, &c.] This she did being apprehended, or brought forth to tryall, either to stay his proceedings against her, if Judah were to be her judge; or at least some vvay to smother it, before it came to a publick hearing. Vers. 26. She hath been more righteous then I.] That is, my fault vvas greater then hers, I did it of mere lust, she as provoked by my injustice, because I gave her not to Shelah my sonne, and so I vvas also the occasion of her sinne. Vers. 28. When she travelled, the one put out his hand.] This shovvs that her labour vvas most hard and dangerous, the child coming not according to the ordi∣nary course of nature, the Lord therein correcting both Tamar and Judah for their sinne. And the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet threed.] As persvva∣ding her self that she vvould have tvvins, and that this vvould be the first born, she ties a scarlet thred upon his vvrest, that might be a mark to knovv him from the other, a mark that to him belonged the primogeniture honour: but herein she vvas deceived, for this child, vvho vvas aftervvards called Zarah, drevv back his hand, vers. 29. and then the other came forth and vvas born first, called thereupon Pharez, vvho vvas to be the stock out of vvhom should come the promised seed; and there∣fore (as an obscure testimonie thereof) contrary to the ordinary course of nature he brake out first. Vers. 29. This breach be upon thee.] That is, the breach is thine thou hast made it, and shalt carry the name of it upon thee: for Pharez in the originall sig∣nifies a breach. And indeed principally to shevv the birth of Pharez, vvho vvas one of Christs progenitours, vvere all these things here related concerning Judah, there being nothing spoken of the marriage of the other sonnes of Jacob, except Joseph; and that because hereby vve may learn, that it vvas of mere grace, that this family, the fruit of incest, vvas chosen to be the stock from vvhence the Messiah should spring, and that he vvill not reject great sinners, that vvould be the sonne of those that vvere guilty of such infamous sinnes. CHAP. XXXIX. Vers. 2. ANd he was in the house of his Master the Egyptian.] This is added to shew, that though Gods blessing vvent along with him, yet still he suffered him to be in servitude; or else to expresse Josephs patient bearing of his af∣fliction, that he remained there, and ran not avvay to his father again; or else that vvhereas some servants are imployed in more servile businesses abroad, Joseph in regard of his ingenuitie was imployed at home in the house. Vers. 4. And Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him, &c. This is
his first advancement, that he is taken to attend upon his masters person; the next is that he was made his steward, and had all committed to his hands. Vers. 6. And he knew not ought he had.] That is, he suffered all things to be at Josephs disposing, and so was without all care himself, onely eating and drinking such things as were provided for him. Vers. 14. See, he hath brought in an Hebrew to mock us.] The more to xaspe∣rate her husband against Joseph, both here to the servants, and afterward to him∣self, ver. 17. she layeth the blame of her being so used upon his folly, in bringing such a one into the house: See, saith she, showing his garment unto the servants, he hath brought in an Hebrew unto us (so she nameth him in contempt, for the Hebrews were an abomination to the Egyptians, chap. 43. 32) to mock us, that is, by a dishonest attempt to dishonour and disgrace us. To make the more shew of modestie, she useth the most modest terms she can devise, in speaking of his pretend∣ed attempt to ravish her. Vers. 20. And Josephs master took him, and put him into the prison.] Though Joseph questionlesse pleaded his innocency, and made known to his master the truth of the businesse, yet, having never formerly suspected his wife of incontinen∣cie, no marvel it is though he believed his wife and not him, and so in his rage cast him into prison: rather we have cause to admire the providence of God in re∣straining him so farre, that he did not presently in his rage fall upon him and kill him, especially if we consider how violent the rage of jealousie is, and that he was a heathen not awed with the fear of God, and might have done what he pleased to his servant. Vers. 21. But the Lord was with Joseph, and gave him favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison.] At first he was more hardly used, Psal. 105. 18. whose feet they hurt with fetters, he was laid in iron; but was by degrees (perhaps not altogether at last without Potiphars consent) allowed more libertie and kind∣nesse. CHAP. XL. Vers. 4. ANd the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them.] That is, Potiphar Josephs master; whereby is evident, that either by finding just cause at least to suspect that his Mistris had accused him falsly, or by some o∣ther means, his wrath was asswaged, so that now himself appoints Joseph to this imployment. Vers. 5. And they dreamed a dream both of them, each man according to the interpretation of his dream.] That is, no vain dreams, but significant, containing predictions of things which did accordingly come to passe. Vers. 6. And behold they were sad.] So dreams and visions sent of God use much to affect men, Gen. 41. 8. Pharaoh slept and dreamed, &c. and it came to passe in the morning that his spirit was troubled. Dan. 2. 1. Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams, wherewith his spirit was troubled. Mat. 27. 19. For I have suf∣fered many things this day in a dream, &c.
Vers. 8. And there is no interpreter of it.] That is, being prisoners they could not go to the southsayers, and wise men of Egypt, as that people was wont to do, Gen. 41. 8. And it came to passe in the morning, that his spirit was troubled: and he sent and called for all the Magicians of Egypt, and all the wise men thereof. Are not interpretations of God? tell me them, &c.] Joseph finding by the in∣stinct of Gods spirit that he should be able to interpret their dreams, and having happely had experience formerly that God had given him this extraordinary gift, he bid them tell him what their dreams were. Vers. 15. For indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews.] That is, out of the land of Canaan, wherein the children of Abraham the Hebrew dwelt, and to whom it was to come for an inheritance: thus he speaks by faith in Gods promises. And observable it is, that though he made known that he was stolen a∣vvay, yet he mentions not by vvhom it vvas done, as having respect to the credit of his brethren and fathers family. CHAP. XLI. Vers. 1. ANd it came to passe at the end of two full years, that Pharaoh dream∣ed, &c.] That is, after he had expounded the Butlers & Bakers dreams; & thus was the faith and patience of this dear servant of God the better tryed, that he might be an example unto others to wait patiently upon God in long-continu∣ing afflictions; and withall he was taught not to ascribe his deliverance to the fa∣vour of this Courtier, who never minded him so long a time together, but to the watchfull care and providence of God over him. Vers. 2. And behold there came up out of the River seven well favoured kine, &c.] The ordinary means of the fruitfulnesse or barrennesse of Egypt was from the overflowing (as it was much or little) of the river Nilus; therefore are both the fat and lean kine said to come out of the river: Neither could any thing be fitter to represent the plenty or scarcity of a land then were these visions of kine and ears of corn; because indeed corn and cattle are the two principall things which a land yields for the use of man, and where these abound the scarcitie of other things is but little felt. Vers. 5. And behold seven ears of corn upon one stalk, &c.] A clear signe of incredible plenty. Vers. 8. Pharaoh told them his dream, but there was none that could interpret them unto Pharaoh.] Thus God maketh the wisdome of the wise to perish, Isaiah 29. 14. For the wisdome of their wise men shall perish. Vers. 9. I do remember my faults this day.] It was not doubtlesse without a speciall providence, that the chief Butler spake not to Pharaoh concerning Joseph till he had made triall of the Magicians and Wise men of Egypt, and could receive no satisfaction from them; for this must needs make Pharaoh to prize Joseph the more, and so it made way to his advancement. As for the complement, wherewith the chief Butler begins his speech to Pharaoh, it was doubtlesse to curry favour with
his great Lord and Master, lest the mention of his imprisonment, should seem to be spoken out of discontent for that which he then suffered (as Kings are full of jealousies in this kind) by this humbling of himself Courtier-like, I do remember my faults, &c. he seeks to prevent all suspicion that might arise in the Kings mind in this regard. Vers. 16. God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace.] An expression of his hope or desire, namely, that his dream should be a prediction of nothing but peace; yea happely he might by the spirit of God be assured that the dream vvas such as did portend nothing but peace and prosperitie to Pharaoh and his kingdome. Vers. 34. And take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the seven plenteous years.] That this fifth part was taken up for the King, is evident; because he after∣wards sold it to the people, chap. 47. 14. And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the corn which they bought: but vvhether he took it up by vvay of tribute or purchase, buying it of the people, it is not expressed; most probable it is that both means vvere used, and that this store vvas gathered into the Kings granaries and storehouses, partly upon the Kings payments and ingagements for it, and partly by advancing of his yearly tributes, vvhich might be the more easily born by the people, both because of the exceeding plenty of those years, vvherein the remaining foure parts vvere more then the vvhole encrease of other years, and abundantly enough and to spare for their ovvn supply, and because they might knovv that this provision vvas made for the supply of the countrey against a time of scarcitie vvhich vvas feared, or knovvn to be coming upon them. Vers. 38. A man in whom the spirit of God is.] This he grounds upon that propheticall gift of interpreting dreams, and foretelling things to come, vvhich by a divine povver vvas conferred upon him. And observable it is, that as dreams vvere before the occasion of his bondage, so dreams vvere novv again the occasion of his exaltation. Vers. 41. See, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt.] This word see, he useth, as having respect therein to thse outward ornaments and signets wherewith this honour was to be conferred and confirmed unto him. Vers. 42. And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, &c.] That is, his si∣gnet, which he was to use, as his Vice-roy in his name, and by his authority to pu∣blish under his seal, whatever he should be pleased to decree. Vers. 43. And he made him to ride in the second chariot he had.] Kings had two chariots, for more honour and use, 2. Chron. 35. 24. His servants therefore took him out of the chariot, and put him in the second chariot that he had. By setting Joseph hereon the king honoured him (as Mordecai was by riding on the kings horse) and sought to make it known tht he had taken him to be the next man under himself in the kingdome. Vers. 44. I am Pharaoh, &c.] That is, I am king, that authority which I have given thee I am able and will make good unto thee; or else it may be a kind of oath, so true as I am Pharaoh, without thee shall no man lift up his hand, or foot in all the land of Egypt, which is a proverbiall speech, and the meaning is, that the
least thing should not be done, to wit, in matters concerning the ordering and go∣vernment of the kingdome, but by authority from Joseph. Vers. 45. And he gave him to wife Asenath the daughter of Poti-pherah, &c.] It is expressely noted that Poti-pherah, the father in law of Joseph, was Priest or Prince of On, a chief citie in Egypt, not onely to shew into what an honourable family Joseph was matched, by the care and favour of Pharaoh, but also to distin∣guish him from Potiphar, the captain of the guard, to whom Joseph was sold when he was first brought into Egypt (because their names are much alike) neither is it likely that he would marry the daughter of Potiphars wife, whom he knew to be dishonest, and by whose false accusation he had suffered so much reproch and mise∣ry. As for his marrying with the daughter of an idolatrous Priest or Prince, vve must consider that it vvas an extraordinary case, there being no other in the land of Egypt, neither could he go elsevvhere to seek a vvife vvithout deserting that great office, vvhereto, for the benefit of the Church, God had advanced him; and besides he might by some speciall instinct or revelation from God be moved to accept of Pharaohs favour herein. Vers. 51. For God, said he, hath made me forget all my fathers house.] By for∣getting his fathers house, is not meant, that novv he did not at all think upon his father or brethren, or mind the family from vvhich he vvas taken (for this had been sinfull in Joseph, and a dishonour to him, and not a matter to be rejoyced in) but that God had comforted him in regard of his former sad thoughts for his being sold avvay from his father and all his friends, by advancing him to a condition vvherein it vvas better vvith him for all outvvard things, then in his fathers house it could have been; and besides he might in these vvords have especiall respect to his marriage, concerning vvhich it is said that A man must then leave his father and his mother, and cleave unto his wife. It is true indeed (and very strange it may seem) that Joseph neither in his bondage, nor in the eight years after his exaltation, did ever send vvord to his father vvhere and in vvhat condition he vvas, vvhich vvas doubtlesse of God in some extraordinary vvay; and most probably vve may con∣ceive, that having that extraordinary gift of interpreting dreams, even the meaning and event of his own dreams might be revealed to him, to wit, how his brethren should in the famine come down into Egypt for corn, and so bow down before him, and that therefore he sent not to his father, but waited for the accomplishment of that which God had beforehand revealed to him. Vers. 57. And all countreys came into Egypt, &c.] That is, all the neighbour-countreys round about Egypt. CHAP. XLII. Vers. 1. NOw when Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt.] To wit, by the relation of the Canaanites, who in his sight did daily bring it home. Vers. 6. And Josephs brethren came, and bowed down themselves before him, &c.] It seems that however there was corn sold unto the natives, throughout all the land of Egypt, by subordinate officers deputed by Joseph to that service, yet the
strangers that came from other countreys for corn, came immediately to Joseph, and bought it of him; by which he had opportunity of sifting them, and informing himself concerning any thing that might be for the advantage of Egypt, and God withall did accomplish what in his dreams was long since foreshown, that his bre∣thren should in an humble and submissive manner bow down before him. Vers. 7. He knew them, but made himself strange unto them, &c.] Had Jo∣seph at first made known himself to his brethren, he might fear lest they would assay to hide from their father what had befallen him in Egypt, lest their wicked∣nesse in selling him, &c. should thereby come to knowledge: neither would they happely have dealt sincerely with him, in telling him how it fared with his father, and with his brother Benjamin (concerning whom he had cause enough to suspect them, because of that they had done to him, and because he was not now with them.) To prevent therefore these inconveniences, and that he might first bring them to make a full relation of the present state of their family; secondly, humble them the better with the remembrance of their former sinnes; thirdly, make their joy the greater when the truth of things should be discovered to them; fourthly, clear the more fully the accomplishment of his dreams, when being under his juris∣diction and power they should in such an humble manner prostrate themselves be∣fore him, and make supplication to him for their peace and libertie, he made shew of his displeasure, accused them to be spyes, and prosecuted the accusation, as is rela∣ted in this, and the following chapters. Vers. 9. And Joseph remembred the dreams which he dreamed of them.] That is, he called to mind how now in their bowing down before him his dreams were accomplished: for we must not understand these words, as if he had never thought upon his dreams before. Vers. 11. Wee are all one mans sonnes.] They apprehend the ground of Josephs charge to be, because they came in that company like conspiratours, and therefore in this answer they imply, that they came thus together because brethren, and the more unlike spies who use to disperse themselves; as also because one man would hardly expose almost all his sonnes at once in so dangerous an imployment. Vers. 14. That is it that I spake unto you.] That is, this discovers that to be true that I charged you vvith: Is it possible that one man should have twelve such sonnes? or why should not one have served to fetch corn? or if you vvould come together, vvhy should one onely stay at home? Vers. 20. But bring your youngest brother unto me.] Though Joseph could not but fear that his father vvould be very loth to send his Benjamin vvith them into Egypt, yet not knovving hovv to trust his brethren concerning his life and safety except he might see him, and hoping vvithall that his father vvould by his present bountifull dealing vvith them conceive that no vvrong should be done him, he commands this straitly that they must be sure to bring their youngest brother vvith them. Vers. 21. We are verily guilty concerning our brother, &c.] That is, it is our sinne long since committed against our brother Joseph that hath brought this misery up∣on us: vvhereof they are the more assured by comparing together their former sin
and present misery: they had sold their brother into bondage, and they were now deprived of their libertie; Joseph in the anguish of his soul besought them, and they would not hear him, they therefore had now done what they could to perswade the Governour concerning their fidelitie, and he would not be perswaded by them; they had deluded their father with a lie, and now when they spake the truth they could not be believed. Vers. 24. And he turned himself about from them, and wept.] Moved with their acknowledgement of their fault, and especially with Reubens sharp upbraiding them. And took from them Simeon, and bound him before their eyes.] Though Reu∣ben, that had no hand in selling Joseph, was for three dayes imprisoned with the rest of his brethren, because Joseph had no colour to shew him more favour then the rest, yet now when Joseph was to take one of them to stay behind in bonds, till the rest went home and fetched Benjamin, he passeth by Reuben the eldest (remem∣bring how he had pleaded for him) and took Simeon Jacobs second sonne, the ra∣ther perhaps because he was the forwardest in Josephs troubles, which may be the more probably conceived, because he was by nature bold and fierce, as is evident by that fact of his upon the Shechemites, Gen. 34. 25. Two of the sonnes of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinahs brethren, took each man his sword, and came upon the citie boldly, &c. and to humble them the more, and to make them the more care∣full speedily to return with Benjamin, he bound him before their eyes, though hap∣pely when they were gone he might ease him of his bonds, and onely keep him in prison till their return. Vers. 25. Then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to restore every mans money into his sack.] To wit, lest his father should be in want; and yet this he doth secretly, because as yet he would not be known. Vers. 28. And their hearts failed them.] Finding their money in one of their sacks, as men perplexed in conscience are wont to fear every thing, they suspect some plot laid for their ruine; or at least that some danger hereby would befall Simeon: and therefore this their fear was encreased when at their coming home they found it so in all their sacks, vers. 36. And when both they, and their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid. And Jacob their father said unto them, Me have you bereaved of my children: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not. Vers. 36. All these things are against me.] As if he should have said, Though they be not very grievous to you, they are like to fall heavily upon me. CHAP. XLIII. Vers. 3. THe man did solemnly protest unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my face, &c.] Both these words of Joseph here repeated by Judah, and other passages mentioned vers. 7. were no where before expressed; whereby is ma∣nifest that many things passed particularly betwixt Joseph and his brethren which are not so expresly related in the story. Vers. 8. Send the lad with me, &c.] That is, Benjamin: it is manifest that Ben∣jamin
was not above seven years younger then Joseph: for Joseph was born in the end of Jacobs foureteen years service with his uncle Laban, Gen. 30. 25. 26. And it came to passe when Rachel had born Joseph, that Jacob said unto Laban, Send me away, &c. and when Jacob had served six years longer for his cattle, the next year as they were returning into Canaan Benjamin was born, Gen. 35. 16, 17, 18. So that Joseph being now nine and thirty years old (the seven plenteous years, and two years of famine being passed since his exaltation, when it is expressed that he was thirty years old, Gen. 41. 46. Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh) it must needs follow that Benjamin was now above thirty years old; yet Judah here calles him the lad, according to the phrase of the Scripture, to vvit▪ comparatively, because he was the youngest of all his brethren. See also the former note upon Gen. 21. 15. Vers. 12. And take double money in your hand, &c.] Not treble money, as some hold, that is, thrice as much as they carried before (namely, the money which was brought back in their sacks, and twice as much to buy new provision, for fear the price was raised) but double money, that is, that which they should have paid for their former corn, and the same quantity again for new provision; for that clause which followeth, And the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks carry that again in your hand, is added to explain what he meant by double money, to wit not onely money for a present supply of corn, but also that which they found in their sacks. Vers. 14. If I be bereaved of my children, I am bereaved.] As if he had said, Send him I must, and therefore I shall resigne him into Gods hands; if it be his will to bereave me of my children, I must and will be content, Though he kill me, yet will I put my trust in him. Vers. 21. Every mans money was in the mouth of his sack.] In the former chapter we find that in the inne one of them onely is said to open his sack, and find his money, chap. 42. 27. As one of them opened his sack, &c. he espied his money; and the rest at home in presence of their father, chap. 42. 35. And it came to passe as they mptied their sacks, that behold every mans bundle of money was in his sack, where also it is said that seeing it they were afraid. Here they re∣port it otherwise, that they all opened their sacks in the inne: Some therefore con∣ceive that they all opened their sacks, & found their money in the inne (as here they say) but that also they knit up their sacks again, that so their father when they came home might see how it was. But rather we may think, that here they speak as men in haste, and so joyn together both what was done in the inne, and what was discovered at home; every mans money indeed was in the mouth of their sacks when they were in the Inne, but they saw it onely in one of their sacks, till they came home, and poured out their corn before their father, and then they found that it was so in all their sacks; and therefore it is added there, that when both they and their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid. Vers. 26. They brought him the present which was in their hand into the house, and bowed themselves.] This bowing of themselves before Joseph, when they came with their presents, was not onely in their own name, but also in the name of their
father, who had sent those presents to him, whom therefore also they term his ser∣vant, vers. 28. Thy servant our father is in good health. And thus was Josephs dream accomplished concerning the sunne, and the moon, and the eleaven starres, making obeisance, chap. 37. 9. Vers. 32. Because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews.] Be∣cause the Hebrews were known to be keepers of sheep, and so to kill, eat, and sa∣crifice such cattel as the Egyptians worshipped: Gen. 46. 34. For every shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians. Exod. 8. 26. And Moses said, It is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians unto the Lord our God. Vers. 33. And the men marvelled one at another.] That is, they looked upon one another, as men use to do when any thing that is strange befalls them, with wonder and astonishment, to wit, marvelling why the Governour of Egypt should shew them that were strangers so great favour, and should feast them so royally, especially having a while before entertained them so roughly: others referre their wondring to that which is before mentioned in the foregoing words, concerning their sitting at the table, conceiving that Joseph had placed them in that manner, every man according to his age, and that they wondred how he could place them in that order that were strangers unto him. But because it is not expressed that Joseph did so order them, but that themselves rather sat down in that manner, the former exposition is farre more probable. Vers. 34. And he took and sent messes unto them, from before him, &c.] It was it seems, the custome of those times, that great men would send some choice thing' from their table to those whom they meant to grace and honour. Again they used not in those times to set provision on the table for all the guests in common, as we nowadayes are wont to do, but to set a portion for every guest by himself, as many ancien riters do witnesse, and may be gathered from other places of Scripture, as 1. Sam. 1. 4, 5. He gave to Peninnah his wife, and to all her sonnes and her daugh∣ters portions: but unto Hannah he gave a worthy portion. 1. Sam. 9. 23, 24. And Samuel said unto the cook, Bring the portion which I gave thee, of which I said unto thee▪ Set it by thee. And the cook took up the shoulder, and set it before Saul, &c. 2. Sam. 6. 19. And he dealt unto all the people, &c. to every one a cake of bread, and a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine, &c. and thence it was that Josephs brethren had every one their messe apart and by themselves, and so Benjamins messe was five times so much as any of theirs; which was purposely so ordered by Joseph, both to testifie thereby his singular affection to him, and to make tryall whther his brethren would envy him for it. CHAP. XLIV. Vers. 2. ANd put my cup, &c. in the sacks mouth of the youngest.] This he doth to humble them yet more, and withall especially to make tryall how they stood affected to his father and brother Benjamin, as conceiving that if they envied Benjamin▪ as they had formerly envied him, they would be glad to see him apprehended for theft and cast into prison.
Vers. 5. Is not this it in which my Lord drinketh, and whereby indeed he divi∣neth?] Because he was so famous for his propheticall interpretation of dreams, the common opinion of the Egyptians was that he used divination, as their Magicians and Wisemen did: Joseph therefore appoints his steward to say thus according to the opinion the Egyptians had of him, 1. That he might the better conceal himself from his brethren; 2. That he might make their fault seem more hainous, little lesse then sacriledge, to steal so sacred a thing; 3. To intimate that it was not strange that their theft was discovered so soon after they were gone. Neither is it any wonder that the best of Gods servants should discover (as Joseph did in this) some mixture of hu∣mane infirmitie in all their actions. Vers. 15. Wote ye not that such a man as I can certainly divine?] See vers. 5. Vers. 16. God hath found out the iniquitie of thy servants.] Because Judah had particularly ingaged himself to his father for the bringing home of Benjamin, chap. 43. 8, 9. Send the lad with me, &c. I will be suretie for him, of my hand shalt thou require him, &c. therefore he amongst all the rest undertakes to speak in this cause: and though doubtlesse he was at first resolved to plead for Benjamin, and to discover to Joseph the great straits they were in, yet first he wisely beginnes with an ingenuous acknowledgement of that which was plainly discovered, and a yielding up of themselves to the punishment of bondage, to which, when search was made for the cup, they had formerly consented: for though it is not likely that he was convinced that Benjamin had stolen the cup (not onely his brothers known fidelity and honesty, but also their former finding of their money in their sacks, which was put there they knew not how, might well perswade him it was not so) and therefore afterwards he speaks so warily in this regard, We are all my Lords servants, both we and he also with whom the cup is found, not, he that hath stolen the cup; yet because they had no way to clear themselves before men, nor could object any suspicion of wrong secretly done them, without danger of provoking him who had power to do with them what he pleased, he deemed it best to yield and submit, which is the surest means to procure favour from a generous spirit. God, saith he, hath found out the iniquitie of thy servants: in which words though Judah might have respect to Gods just bringing this upon them for their former iniquitie, yet doubtlesse withall he spake them by way of acknowledging that ini∣quitie which was now charged upon them; as if he should have said, Not onely he in whose sack it was found, but generally all of us deny the stealing of it: but alas though each man knows his own innocency, nor have we any cause to suspect one another, yet plain it is that the cup was found with us, and God hath thereby taken away all excuse from us, we must therefore yield our selves as guilty to the punishment deserved. Vers. 28. And I said, Surely he is torn in pieces.] Hereby might Joseph now perceive by what means his brethren had kept his father from knowing what they had done to him, to wit, by pretending that some wild beasts had devoured him. Vers. 30. Seeing that his life is bound up in the lads life.] That is, his life de∣pends upon Benjamins life, and unlesse therefore he knows it be well with Benja∣min he will not be able to endure it, it will be his death. So in regard of the like
strong affection it is said, 1. Sam. 18, 1. that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and that he loved him as his own soul. CHAP. XLV. Vers. 1. CAuse every man to go out from me.] This he did, both because he thought it not seemly for a man in his place to discover his passion be∣fore any but his brethren, as also lest any mention of his brethrens crueltie to him should make that fact known to their discredit, which might also have caused Pharaoh not to think so well of them as Joseph desired he should. Vers. 3. And his brethre could not answer him, &c.] To wit, being asto∣nished at that which they heard, partly because it was a thing so wonderfull that their brother Joeph, whom they had sold for a slave, should be the governour of Egypt; and partly by reason of terrour of conscience which now struck them for the wrong they had done him, and the fear of his power who might now revenge himself as he pleased upon them. Vers. 4. I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt.] He mentions that they sold him into Egypt, not to upbraid them with the injury they had done him, but to assure them thereby that he was indeed their brother Joseph, by telling them that which no body knew but themselves onely. Vers. 5. Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with your selves.] Be not so farre dejected as not to your comfort to look up to the providence of God, which hath turned your very sinne to good. Vers. 6. Yet there are five years in the which there shall neither be earing nor harvest.] That is, there are five years of famine behind, wherein there shall be nei∣ther ploughing, sowing nor reaping, neither tillage nor harvest: vvhereby must needs be intended, either that throughout the land of Egypt there should be no til∣lage nor sowing, to wit, for lack of corn, which Joseph supplyed them with in the last year, chap. 47. 23. Lo, here is seed for you, and ye shall sow the land; or that it should be little or nothing that should be done in this regard, there being few that vvould attempt to sovv their land in those years of famine, vvhich Joseph had fore∣told, and little or nothing there vvould grovv up of that vvhich vvas sovvn. Vers. 8. And he hath made me a father to Pharaoh.] That is, a counseller or a guide. The like is said of Mihah's Levite, Judg. 17. 10, 11. And Michah said unto him, Dwell with me, and be unto me a father and a priest, &c. and the young man was unto him as one of his sonnes: & the drift therefore of these vvords here is to shevv that by his advice and counsel Pharaoh had yielded himself to be directed, as a sonne follovvs the direction of his father. Vers. 15. And after that his brethren talked with him.] Having novv over∣come their former astonishment and fear, they talk vvith him about all things vvherein either he or they might desire to be satisfied. Vers. 22. He gave each man changes of rayment.] That is, robes or upper gar∣ments vvhich they used in those countreys often to change, as vve our cloaks and govvns; or else by change of rayments is meant, choice garments, called so, to
distinguish them from such as are vvorn every day. And these vvith other gifts he conferres upon them, not onely to shevv his love, but also that they might confirm the truth of their message, and make both vvives and others the more vvilling to come dovvn into Egypt. Vers. 28. It is enough.] That is, Here is proof enough that Joseph is alive: or else he speaks it to expresse his joy that he was alive; be he in so happy a condition or not, this is enough for me that he is alive. CHAP. XLVI. Vers. 3. FEar not to go down into Egypt.] There might be many causes of Jacobs fear: 1. because in the like necessitie Isaac was forbidden to go thither, Gen. 26. 2. And the Lord appeared unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt. Again, because this removall was a kind of forsaking the land of promise, which must needs be the more bitter, because the land of Canaan was also a sacramentall pledge of the heavenly Canaan. 3. Because he might remember that which God had said to Abraham, Gen 15. 13. That his seed should be afflicted in Egypt many years. 4. Because he might fear lest his seed should be infected with the idolatry or other sinnes of Egypt; all these the Lord removes in this comfortable vision. Vers. 4. And I will also surely bring thee up again.] Though the dead body of Jacob wore brought back out of Egypt into Canaan, Gen. 50. 7. And Joseph went up to bury his father, &c. yet the return of the Israelites his seed is principally meant. And Joseph shall put his hand upon tine eyes.] Herein is couched a promise that he should die in peace, in the presence of Joseph and the rest of his chil∣dren. Vers. 6. And came into Egypt, Jacob and all his seed with him.] To wit, be∣sides his servants, who also no doubt went with him, though they be not named. And now was that accomplished which God had said unto Abraham, Gen. 15. 13. Thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs. Vers. 10. And Shaul, the sonne of a Canaanitish woman.] That cursed stock with whom the Israelites might not ordinarily marry, Gen. 28. 1. Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan. Vers. 12. And the sonnes of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul.] These grand∣children of Judah are here numbred with the rest, because of Hezron Christ came, though it be most probable that they were born in Egypt, as is before noted upon the first verse of the thirtie eighth chapter. Vers. 15. All the souls of his sonnes and his daughters were thirtie and three.] Counting Jacob for one, and leaving out Er and Onan, who died in Canaan. Vers. 26. All the souls were threescore and six.] The severall numbers before particularly mentioned arise to a greater summe: for three and thirtie, vers. 15. and sixteen, vers. 18. and fourteen, vers. 22. and seven, vers. 25. being put together make up seventie, which is indeed the full number mentioned in the following verse. But therefore we must know that in this summe of threescore and six, 1. Jacob is left
out, because here he summes up onely his posterity that came out of his loins; and 2. Joseph and his two sonnes are here left out, because they were in Egypt be∣fore Jacob came thither, and his purpose is here to summe up onely the number of those of his posteritie that went down with him into Egypt. Indeed it cannot be well conceived that Hezron and Hamul, the sonnes of Pharez, and grandchildren of Judah, went down with Jacob into Egypt, but that they were born in Egypt, as is before noted, chap. 38. 1. But first they were the posteritie of those that did go down into Egypt with Jacob, and were numbred amongst Jacobs family whilest Jacob was yet living; and then there was not the same reason for men∣tioning all the rest that were born of Jacobs family, because of Hezron Christ the Messiah descended; and therefore the sonnes of Pharez are added to the rest. Vers. 27. All the souls of the house of Jacob which came into Egypt were threescore and ten.] Here the whole family before particularly set down are summed up together, and even Jacob and Joseph and his two sonnes are here included, that were left out in the totall summe in the former verse. The whole family of Jacob were seventie souls, which is purposely noted, that we might take notice what a mi∣raculous work of God it was, that this family of Jacob should within the com∣passe of two hundred and fifteen years multiply so exceedingly, that at their de∣parture there should be of them six hundred thousand that bore arms, besides the Levites, old men, women and children. It was indeed a strange and miraculous increase, and therefore we see Moses reckons it as one of the most wonderfull works which God had done for that people, Deut. 10. 22. Thy fathers went down into Egypt with threescore and ten persons, and now the Lord thy God hath made thee as the starres of heaven for multitude. The greatest difficultie concerning this place, is, how it may be reconciled with that relation which Stephen makes of this, Acts 7. 14. that when Jacob went down into Egypt, he and his kindred, there were of them threescore and fifteen souls. But to this there are two answers given by Ex∣positours, either of which may give satisfaction, to wit, 1. That Stephen, or S. Luke relating the words of S. Stephen, did purposely follow the translation of the Septu∣agint in this place, who have here indeed seventie five, and not seventie souls; and that because the Greek translation of the Septuagint was most frequently used in those times, and though it were corrupt in this place, and not according to the He∣brew originall, yet he would not therefore in a matter of so small consequence set down the number of Jacobs family otherwise then it was there, especially consider∣ing that in some sense also it was a truth, that there went down of Jacobs family at least seventie five souls, to wit, if their wives also should be added to the number: or 2. That S. Stephen speaks of the whole family of Jacob that are here mention∣ed by Moses; and indeed leaving out Jacob, and numbring all of his family that are named here by Moses, to wit, Er and Onan, the sonnes of Judah that died in Canaan, and the foure wives which are mentioned here by Moses, though not cast up in the totall summe, it is clearly true that there are here named of his family or kindred seventie and five souls. Vers. 28. And he sent Iudah before him unto Ioseph, to direct his face unto Goshen.] That is, to give him notice of his coming, that he might come to Go∣shen,
and meet him there; which doubtlesse he did both out of an earnest desire to see Joseph so soon as possibly he could, and likewise that by Josephs authoritie both he and his family might be there disposed of, to prevent any grudge or discontent amongst the native inhabitants. Vers. 29. And he fell on his neck, &c.] That is, Jacob fell on Josephs neck, and wept on his neck a good while; Josephs carriage of himself at their meeting is expressed in the former words, to wit, that he presented himself before his father, falling down before him in a lowly manner, and that the rather to manifest there∣by that his honour and advancement in Egypt did not make him forget the duty which, as a sonne, he did owe to his father; and now in these words is expressed what Jacob did, to vvit, that he fell on the neck of Ioseph, thus bovving before him, and wept on his neck a good while, and then brake into those vvords recited in the following verse. Vers. 30. Now let me die, since I have seen thy face, &c.] As before, vvhen he heard of Joseph, he said, I vvil go and see him before I die, chap. 45. 28. so novv having seen him, he breaks out into this expression of joy, Now let me die, since I have seen thy face; for though ordinarily men are most desirous to live vvhen things go vvell vvith them, and most desirous to die vvhen they live in affliction and sorrovv; yet it vvas not thus vvith Jacob, he vvas alvvayes desirous to be vvith God in heaven, and therefore though since the time that he heard of Josephs safetie and advancement in Egypt (vvhereto these vvords have chiefly reference) he de∣sired earnestly no doubt that he might live to see his face, yet novv having to his great comfort received satisfaction, herein he professeth his vvillingnesse to die vvhensoever God should be pleased to call for him, even as old Simeon did vvhen he had seen Christ, vvhich he had long vvaited for, Lord, now lettest thou thy ser∣vant depart in peace according to thy word, Luke 2. 29. Vers. 32. And the men are shepherds.] There vvere many reasons vvhy Jo∣seph might desire to have his father and brethren dvvell together in the land of Goshen: 1. Because it vvas a fruitfull pasture-countrey, fit for breeding cattel; 2. That they might not be corrupted vvith the idolatrie and superstition of the E∣gyptians; 3. That they might not be an offense to the Egyptian vvho abhorred all keepers of sheep; 4. Because Goshen, being the nearest part of Egypt tovvards Canaan, stood most commodiously for the Israelites return out of Egypt vvhensoe∣ver God should be pleased to call them back again into the land of Canaan. Novv though Joseph had promised his brethren before that they should dvvell in Goshen, yet he vvould not settle them there vvithout the Kings expresse consent; and though he doubted not of procuring his consent, yet the more easily to effect it, h re∣solves to acquaint Pharaoh that they vvere shepherds, that so he might think it most convenient to dispose of them by themselves in the land of Goshen, the out∣most parts of Egypt, that they might not be an eyesore to the Egyptians that could not endure men of their occupation. Vers. 34. For every shepherd is an abomination to the Egyptians.] To wit, be∣cause such people did usually eat and sacrifice those cattel which the Egyptians wor∣shipped as their gods, as is befoe noted, Gen. 43. 32. It is evident indeed that the
Egyptians had flocks of sheep, both the king and people: for, chap. 47. 6. Pharaoh profers Joseph to make his brethren rulers over his cattel: and Exod. 9. 3. we reade of a grievous murrain that God sent among the Egyptians cattel, and amongst the rest upon their sheep; but it seems they kept them rather for their wool and milk then any thing else, and happely those that kept them were strangers rather then E∣gyptians. CHAP. XLVII. Vers. 4. FOr to sojourn in the land are we come.] That is, not to settle our selves here, but onely to stay here for a time for our succour and relief in this time of famine; whereby it is evident that the purpose of Jacob and his sonnes was not to leave Canaan, though afterward for Josephs sake they continued in Egypt even after the famine was ended: which is the rather to be noted, to discover the injustice of the following kings of Egypt, who, against all laws of hospitality, did afterward detain them there by force, and made very bondslaves of those that onely came at first to sojourn in their land. Vers. 9. The dayes of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years.] Jacob called his life a pilgrimage, not onely with respect to his travelling up and down, and living as a stranger first in Mesopotamia, afterwards in Canaan, now in Egypt; but also especially with respect unto that heavenly inheritance which is the rest of Gods people, to which they are still travelling, esteeming them∣selves but pilgrimes here in this world: for so it is expressely said of the patriarchs, Heb. 11. 13. that they confessed themselves strangers and pilgrimes on the earth, and sought a better, even an heavenly countrey. As for the age of Jacob here ex∣pressely made known to Pharaoh, it helps much to the understanding of the time of other passages of this history: for Joseph being now nine and thirty years old when Jacob was an hundred and thirty (for he was thirty years old when he was first exalted in Egypt, chap. 41. 46. and since that there had been seven years of plenty and two years of famine, chap. 45. 6.) it must needs follow that Jacob was ninety one when Joseph was born in the fourteenth year of his service with Laban, and consequently that he was about seventy seven when he first went down into Meso∣potamia, flying from the rage of his brother Esau. And have not attained unto the dayes of the years of the life of my fathers, &c.] For Abraham lived an hundred seventy and five years, Gen. 25. 7. And these are the dayes of the years of Abrahams life which he lived, an hundred threescore and fifteen years, and Isaac an hundred and fourescore years, Gen. 35. 28. And the dayes of Isaac were an hundred and fourescore years. Vers. 15. And when money failed in the land of Egypt, &c.] This is generally spoken, not with relation to each particular man; the Egyptians had for the most part spent all their money, and so were forced to sell their cattel. Vers. 18. They came unto him the second year.] That is, after their cattel were sold, which seems to have been the sixth year of the famine. Vers. 21. He removed them to cities from one end of the borders of Egypt, &c.]
This may be taken in a double sense: 1. That he removed them from one end of Egypt to the other (that is all the land over) out of their countrey-dwellings into the cities, and so by this means, 1. They give up the possession of their land to Pha∣raoh; 2. They are the more commodiously nourished out of the kings granaries; 3. The desolate places of the cities are filled up, and so many onely as are necessary are sent out to till the ground, the famine being ceased; or else (which I rather think) the meaning is onely this, that he transplanted them from one town unto another, not leaving them in that which was their own, that so it might appear the land was his, and they onely his servants. Vers. 29. And the time drew nigh that Israel must die.] Which he knevv, hap∣pely not onely as other men may, by the great decay of his naturall strength, but also by speciall revelation from God. Put I pray thee thy hand under my thigh, &c.] Concerning this custome of putting the hand under the thigh when an oath vvas taken, see the note on Gen. 24. 2. Jacob being near his end made Joseph svvear that he vvould not bury him in Egypt, but carry him into Canaan, not out of a suspicion that Joseph vvould not do this vvhich he required of him, but 1. that Joseph might alledge this to Pha∣raoh, and so decline the envie of the Egyptians, vvho might else have taken it ill, as if Joseph had scorned and despied the land vvherein he had been so highly esteemed and advanced; and 2. especially to shevv of vvhat great importance it vvas vvhich he novv rquired of him, not proceeding from any carnall or ambitious con∣ceits, but from the assurance of faith, and to strengthen the faith of his children herein, that God vvould undoubtedly bring them back to Canaan, and give them that land for a possession as he had promised, and a signe of his expectation and de∣sire of that heavenly inheritance, vvhereof the land of Canaan vvas a type and pledge. Vers. 31. And Israel bowed himself upon the beds head.] Namely to God, by vvay of thankfulnesse, both for those promises (in the faithfull expectation vvhere∣of he had desired to be buried in the land of Canaan) and for this present mercy that novv by Joseph he vvas assured that he should be buried in the promised land. Novv because he vvas bed-rid through vveaknesse or age, or at least lying upon his couch, Moses shevveth hovv he bovved himself, to vvit, that turning his face to the bed, and so rearing himself upon the bolster at his beds head, he then bovved him∣self and vvorshipped the Lord. And indeed such vvas the zeal of the good servants of God in those times, that vvhen they vvere bed-rid, it seems they endeavoured in the best manner they could vvith some devotion and bovving of their bodies to vvorship the Lord: for so it is said also of David vvhen he kept his bed by reason of vveaknesse in his old age, 1. King. 1. 47. that the king bovved himself upon his bed. Indeed the Apostle renders this place othervvise, Heb. 11. 21. to vvit, That Jacob when he was a dying worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff; and the ground of this difference all Writers conceive to have been this, that the Hebrevv vvord in this place (vvhen the vovvel points are not added) signifieth both a bed and a staff, and that the septuagint Greek Translatours making use of a copie that had not the vovvel points did mistake the vvord, and translated this place, And
Israel bowed himself upon the top of his staff, vvhich translation of the Septuagint the Apostle follovved in that place of his epistle to the Hebrevvs. But vvhereas it may seem improbable that the Apostle, vvho vvrote by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, should follovv a corrupt translation; to this it is ansvvered, 1. That it is no impeachment to the Apostles divine illumination that he should cite a place as it vvas in the Greek translation vvhich the Hebrevvs did most commonly use in those times, considering that even according to that translation it served fitly to the pur∣pose for vvhich he alledged it; and 2. That it is true that Jacob, vvhen he raised up himself upon his pillovv tovvards his beds head that he might bovv nto the Lord (as is here expressed) vvithall the better to help himself in his great vveaknesse, he leaned upon the top of his staff, and the Apostle knovving this also to be true, did not therefore stick to alledge the place according to the Greek translation. CHAP. XLVIII. Vers. 4. I Will make of thee a multitude of people.] That is, thirteen populous tribes. Vers. 5. And now thy two sonnes, Ephraim and Manasseh, &c. are mine, as Reuben and Simeon are mine.] That is, being by birth my grandchildren they shall by adoption be my sonnes, and therefore accordingly in the division of the promised land, they shall have the priviledge of my sonnes, each of them a tvvelfth share, no lesse then Reuben and Simeon: thus hath Joseph a double portion, the priviledge of the first-born, 1. Chron. 5. 1. Now the sonnes of Reuben, the first-born of Israel; for he was the first-born, but forasmuch as he defiled his fathers bed, his birth∣right was given unto the sonnes of Joseph the sonne of Israel, Deut. 21. 17. But he shall acknowledge the sonne of the hated for the first-born, by giving him a dou∣ble portion. Vers. 6. And thy issue which thou begettest after them shall be thine, and shall be called after the name of their brethren.] That is, shall be counted of the stock and tribe of Ephraim or Manasseh, as if they were their sonnes, not their brethren; there∣fore though there be no other sonnes of Joseph mentioned, yet that is no proof that he had none: for it is here appointed that they should be called after the name of their brethren. Vers. 7. And as for me, when I came from Padan Rachel dyed, &c.] That is, though the Lord promised at Luz (as I have said) that he would so exceedingly multiply my seed, yet as for me, my hope of having more children by your mother, my beloved Rachel, was soon taken from me by her death, (for even a while after she dyed a little short of Ephrath, and was there buried by me) so that my hope for the accomplishment of Gods promise must be in my childrens children; and since I had by her but thee and thy brother, therefore thy two sonnes shall be mine, &c. it may be thou maist have more; but as for me, Rachel dyed, and left me but onely you two. Vers. 8. And Israel beheld Josephs sonnes, and said, Who are these?] His eyes
being dimme by reason of age, he could not perfectly discern whether they were Josephs sonnes or no, and therefore he asked them who they were. Vers. 12. And Joseph brought them out from between his knees.] Jacob had hitherto onely testified his love by imbracing and kissing them; Joseph therefore doth remove them as it were from the bosome of the old man, first the one and then the other, that the next work might be done which was of most moment, namely the Patriarchall blessing of them, which it seems was usually done with imposition of hands. And he bowed himself with his face to the earth.] To wit, in reverence to his aged father, and by way of thankfulnesse for the work in hand, the adoption of his sonnes. Vers. 14. Guiding his hands wittingly.] That is, though Jacobs eyes were dimme, as is before noted, vers. 10. yet that was not the reason why he laid his right hand upon Ephraim that was the youngest, and his left hand upon Manasseh that was the eldest, but he did it wittingly: why else should he crosse his armes, that he might lay his right hand upon the youngest that stood at his left hand, and his left hand upon the eldest that stood at his right hand, but that he did it purposely as a signe of that which afterwards he foretold, to wit, that Ephraim which was the youngest should have the preheminence; yea, this was one of the chief evidences that he did all he did in this businesse by the speciall revelation of the spirit of God, because being so ill sighted that he could not discern which was the eldest, and which the youngest, yet he did purposely crosse his arms that he might lay his right hand upon the youngest, and his left hand upon the eldest. Vers. 15. And he blessed Joseph.] That is, in his children. Vers. 16. The Angel which redeemed me from all evil blesse the lads.] That is, Christ the eternall sonne of God, who is called the Angel, or, Messenger of the covenant, Mal. 3. 1. and of whom it is said, Exod. 23. 21. that Gods name is in him. And indeed to say that a created angel redeemed Jacob from all evil, or might be prayed to by Jacob, that he would blesse the sonnes of Joseph, and make them grow to a multitude in the midst of the earth, is to ascribe to the creature Gods peculiar Prerogatives. Doubtlesse no other angel is here meant, but he that is one God with the Father, and therefore here joyned with God: to the clearing whereof also observable it is, that this word, blesse, is here in the originall of the singular number, though it have relation both to God and the Angel mentioned in the foregoing words, The God which fed me all my life long unto this day, the Angel which redeemed me from all evil, blesse the lads; which should not have been, if in both clauses Jacob had not spoken of one and the same almightie God. And let my name be named on them.] That is, though they were born in Egypt out of my family, yet let them be numbred amongst my sonnes, and so let them in∣herit the blessings promised to Abraham and his seed for ever. Vers. 17. And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, &c.] Though Joseph knew that his father was in this action guided by a propheticall spirit, to wit, in blessing his children, yet supposing that he might be mistaken in this circumstance of the imposition of his hands, by reason of
the dimnesse of his sight, he seeks to reform this errour as he deemed it, by infor∣ming his father that he had laid his right hand upon the younger. Neither is it questionable but that this was done so soon as ever he saw his father lay his hands in that manner upon them, even before he had added the blessing set down in the former verses, though here it be related by Moses after the blessing. Vers. 19. But truly his younger brother shall be greater then he.] This was most evidently fulfilled in the dayes of Jeroboam, in whom the dignitie of that kingdome was settled upon the tribe of Ephraim: whence all those ten tribes are usually called Ephraim, Esai. 7. 2. And it was told the house of David, saying, Syria is confederate with Ephraim. Vers. 22. Moreover I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren, &c.] Because there was one portion of land in Canaan, which was Jacobs not onely by Gods donation, as vvas all the land of Canaan; but also by a speciall civill right, this he now bequeaths to Joseph, to whom he intended to transferre the dignitie of the firstborn, 1. Chron. 5. 1. His birthright was given unto the sonnes of Joseph, the sonne of Israel, &c. for though it vvas now as well as the rest of the land in the hand of the Canaanites, yet he did assuredly believe that God would cast out the in∣habitants, and plant his posteritie in their room, and therefore as a pledge hereof, to confirm Josephs faith herein, and the better to take off his affections from the de∣lights of Egypt, and to pitch them upon the expectation of Gods promise herein, he novv bequeaths to him this parcell of land, which should be his childrens over and above that lot which in the common division of the land should befall them. That this portion of land vvhich Jacob gave to his sonne Joseph vvas nigh unto Shechem (vvhich in processe of time vvas corruptly called Sychar) is evident by the words of the evangelist, John 4. 5. Which is called Sychar, near to the parcell of ground that Jacob gave his sonne Joseph: And there though many Expositours understand it of the citie Shechem with all the field or territories adjoyning, which, say they, according to this prophecie of Jacobs, fell to the sonnes of Joseph when the land vvas divided amongst the tribes, Josh. 17. 7. The coast of Manasseh was from Asher to Michmethah, that lyeth before Shechem; yet I conceive it is onely meant of that parcell of land which there he bought of Hamor Shechems fa∣ther for an hundred pieces of money, as is related Gen. 33. 19. which hereupon be∣came his own proper inheritance, and there afterwards therefore Jacobs sonnes fed their fathers flocks, Gen. 37. 12. and there Josephs bones were buried by the Israelites when they came into Canaan, as in the inheritance peculiarly bequeathed him by his father Jacob, Josh. 24. 32. The bones of Joseph buried they in Shechem in a parcell of ground which Jaob bought of the sonnes of Hamor the father of Shechem for an hundred pieces of silver, and it became the inheritance of the chil∣dren of Joseph. Nor is it of any great moment that is objected, that so small a parcell of ground was not worth the bequeathing to so great a man as Joseph was now: for vve cannot think it vvas so small a tract of ground that Jacob bought for the feeding of his cattel that vvere very many. But besides not so much the quantity as the qualitie of the gift is to be regarded: for this being all he had in Canaan by vvay of purchase, Jacob, by bequeathing this in speciall to Joseph, did as it vvere
designe him his heir, and conferre upon him the dignitie of the firstborn, vvhich vvas no small Prerogative. The greatest difficultie in these vvords is, vvhy Jacob saith that he took this portion of the land of Canaan novv bequeathed to Joseph, out of the hand of the Amorites with his sword and with his bow? And for satisfi∣ing this doubt, there are severall ansvvers given by Expositours: for first some say that it is usuall in the Scripture to speak prophetically of things to come, as if they were done already: so the birth of Christ is foretold by the Prophet Esai. 9. 6. under these terms, Ʋnto us a child is born; and so, say they, here Jacob, out of the assu∣rance of his faith, speaks of the Israelites taking this land out of the hands of the inhabitants by force of arms as if it vvere done already: 2. Others hold that he speaks this vvith reference to the slaughter of the Shechemites by the svvord of his sonnes and servants, vvhich fact hovvever he detested and abhorred, yet because they armed themselves as it vvere under his name, and in revenge of vvrong done to him and his, and because through ods just vengeance upon the Shechemites and his singular favour to Jacob, the land, the inhabitants vvhereof they had utterly destroyed, fell to him, the neighbouring inhabitants not daring to oppose him by reason of a divine terrour vvherevvith they vvere stricken, and so he through Gods providence reaped the benefit of that desolation vvhich his sonnes had vvickedly made in those parts; therefore he affirms here, that he took it out of the hand of the Amorite with his sword and with his bow: 3. Some again conceive that when Jacob removed to Hebron, after the slaughter of the Shechemites, the bordering in∣habitants entered upon the territories of Shechem, and together with the rest also took into their hands that parcell of ground which Jacob had there purchased; which when they would not restore, Jacob did by force of arms drive them out, and so recovered his own rightfull possession; which however it were not before related, sufficient it is, that it is here by Moses occasionally mentioned: And lastly, some conclude that these words, Which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow, are figuratively spoken, and meant onely of the purchase that he made of it (accordingly as we use to say that a man gets a thing suo Marte, or suis copis, when he gets it with his own proper charge and labour) and that of purpose thereby covertly to protest against the crueltie of his sonnes in sacking that place and destroying the inhabitants, and against any title that he laid to it upon that ground, and to make known that he challenged it not by virtue of that cruell fact of theirs, but by virtue of a just price paid for it, which he calls his sword and his bow, as in opposition to their arms; because those were the weapons where∣vvith he got it out of the hands of the Amorites, that is the Hivites, the inhabitants of Shechem, for Amorites was the common name of all the inhabitants of Canaan, as we may see Gen. 15. 19. Josh. 24. 8. And I brought you into the land of the Amorites, which dwelt on the other side Jordan, &c. and indeed these tvvo last ansvvers I conceive to be the most satisfactory, because it is evident that he challengeth this portion of land to be his by a speciall right vvhich he novv gives unto Joseph; and he might as vvell have said that he had taken the vvhole land of Canaan by his svvord and by his bovv, as this particular portion, if he had spoken prophetically concerning the conquest of the land in time to come by his posteritie;
and partly because it is not probable that Jacob would alledge the cruell massacre of the Shechemites as the ground of his rightfull interest in this parcell of land which he did alwayes so abhorre and detest, or that he would call their weapons his sword and his bow, which immediately afterwards he calls instruments of crueltie, or, weapons of violence, chap. 49. 5. CHAP. XLIX. Vers. 1. GAther your selves together that I may tell you that which shall befall in the last dayes.] That is, in time to come, yea long time hereafter: for these words are frequently used in Scripture, not onely for the last dayes of the world, nor, as some will have it, onely for the time of the new Testament, but ge∣nerally for the time to come. See 1. Tim. 4. 1. The Spirit speaketh expresly (saith the Apostle) that in the latter times, , some shall depart from the faith, which yet came to passe not long after the Apostles time. Vers. 3. Reuben thou art my firstborn, my might, &c.] The firstborn are usu∣ally in the Scriptures called the beginning and chief of their parents strength, Deut. 21. 17. But he shall acknowledge the sonne of the hated for the firstborn, &c. for he is the beginning of his strength. Psal. 105. 36. He smote all the first∣born in their land, the chief of all their strength; and that both because they are be∣gotten in the prime of their parents strength; and because children being accounted the strength of their parents, Psal. 127. 4, 5. As arrows are in the hand of a migh∣ty man, so are the children of the youth: Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them, they shall not be ashamed; but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate, consequently the firstborn are the beginning and chief of their strength, the principall pillar and stay of their family. But now Jacob saith this of Reuben, one∣ly by way of yielding what he should have been, had it not been for his sinne, and that to make him the more sensible of the losse which his sinne had brought upon him: Reuben thou art my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignitie, and the excellency of power; by the ordinary course of nature the greatest honour and authoritie should have come to thee and thy chil∣dren; but now hear a contrary doom, Ʋnstable as water, &c. Vers. 4. Ʋnstable as water, thou shalt not excell.] This expresseth his sudden downfall from the dignitie of his birthright, even as waters do naturally roll down from high places, and will not continue there, or else it is meant of his weak∣nesse and of the weaknesse of his posteritie, in comparison of what they should have been had he not lost his birthright. And indeed frequently in the Scripture the dis∣solving and weakening of mens strength is compared to the pouring forth of wa∣ters, I am poured forth like water, saith David, Psal. 22. 14. and all my bones are out of joynt; and John 7. 5. The hearts of the people melted and became as wa∣ter; as we also use to say of feeble men, that they are as weak as water: which well agreeth with the condition of Reubens posteritie, of which tribe we reade not that ever it came to any excellencie among the other tribes. He went up to my couch.] Jacob, as out of an indignation of the fact, turneth
his speech from Reuben to his brethren, and shews how just cause there was to pro∣nounce this sntnce against him. Vers. 5. Simeon and Levi are brethren, &c.] That is, as brethren by birth of the same father and mother, so also true brethren in iniquitie: for so this word Brother is sometimes taken, as Prov. 18. 9. He that is slothfull in his work, is bro∣ther to him that is a great waster. And observable it is how unpartially Moses her relates that brand of infamy that was set upon Levi, the stock of that tribe whereof himslf was; which makes it evident that in writing this story he was not guided by his own private spirit, but by the spirit of God. Vers. 6. O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine onour, be not thou uited.] This is spoken to shew his detestation of that execrable fact of theirs, in massacring the Shechemites, and to protest against the least consent that he should give thereto. No, saith he, when they consulted together, and con∣trived that cursed plot, they did it secretly without my knowledge; and when they assembled together to put in execution their barbarous designe, I knew not of it: yea, God forbid that my soul should ever joyn in the plotting of such a villanie. By his honour, in the second clause, he means, as in the first clause, his soul, because the soul is the chief excellency of man, and the glory of the body, without which the body is nothing better then a livelesse lump of earth: yet sometimes by a mans ho∣nour or glory in the Scriptures is meant his tongue: so my glory, Psal. 16. 9. My heart is glad, and my glory rejoyceth, is by the Apostle rendred my tongue, Acts 2. 26. My heart did rejyce, and my tongue was glad; and that because the speech of man is also his glory, as being that gift of God wherein he excels all other creatures; and so therefore it may be here also taken, unto their assembly, mine honour, be thou not united, implying that he would not give the least consent or approbation to a fact so foul. Now this severe censure of that treacherous and bloudy crueltie of Si∣meon and Levi in the slaughter of the Shechemites, is a notable evidence that th Authour of that Apocryphall book of Judeth, where this fact of Simeons is highly extolled, wrote not by the inspiration of that spirit of God, by which the Patriarch Jacob was guided when he uttered this prophecy, and consequently that that Book is no part of the Canonicall Scripture. Vers. 7. I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.] Jacob speaks here as in the person of God; as usuall it is in the Scriptures to ascribe the work of God to the Prophets who are onely his messengers to foreshew what he will do. How this prophecy was fulfilled in the tribe of Levi, every one knows; who were here and there dispersed abroad, and placed in severall cities all the land over, that so they might teach and instruct the people in the law of God: wherein also the goodnesse of God is observable, that turned, as it were, this curse into a blessing; for though the dividing and scattering of them was in it self a punishment, yet that they wre dispersed for that end, to be as the mouth of God unto the people, to feed them with knowledge and understanding, herein they were exceedingly honoured. As for the tribe of Simeon, how this prophecy was accomplished in them we may see also, Josh. 19. 1, &c. who were not planted apart by themselves in the land of Ca∣naan, as the other tribes were, but had their inheritance intermingled with that of
Judah, out of vvhose lot in severall places here and there those of Simeon had cer∣tain cities and villages assigned them: and therefore vve see that vvhen Moses blessed the severall tribes before his death, Deut. 33. he made no mention at all of this scat∣tered tribe of Simeon; and that aftervvards they vvere forced, many of them at least, to seek a nevv habitation, partly in Mount Seir, and partly in Mount Gedor, 1. Chron. 4. 39, 43. by force of arms driving out the Amalekites, and other inha∣bitants, and so planting themselves in their room. Novv herein also vvas the pu∣nishment denounced against Simeon svveetned also, in that though they vvere thus divided and scattered, yet it vvas an honour to them that they vvere at first joyned vvith the royall tribe of Judah, and that aftervvards God made them victorious over those uncircumcised nations in vvhose countrey they planted themselves, vvhen their first habitation, by reason they multiplied so greatly, vvas too little for them. Vers. 8. Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise.] Alluding to his name, vvhich signifieth confession, or, praise, Gen. 29. 35. And she conceived again, and bare a sonne, and she said, Now will I praise the Lord. And the meaning is, that the name of this tribe should be famous and eminent amongst the rest, not onely in regard of the temporall government, but much more in regard that out of him Christ should come, Heb. 7. 14. For it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah. Thy hand shall be in the neck of thy enemies.] That is, thou shalt put them to flight and subdue them. This prophecy of the valour and prevailing power of Judah was fulfilled when that tribe became the leader, Num. 10. 14. In the first place went the standard of the camp of the children of Judah. Judg. 1. 1, 2. The children of Israel asked the Lord, saying, Who shall go up for us against the Cana∣anites first to fight against them? And the Lord said, Judah shall go up; as also in those Worthies of this tribe, Othniel, Judg. 3. 9, 10. David, 2. Sam. 8. 1. So∣lomon, 1. Chron. 22. 9. but especially in Christ, who hath vanquished all the powers of darknesse. Thy fathers children shall bow down before thee.] This is spoken in relation to that regall power that should be established in the tribe of Judah, to which all the Israelites should submit themselves; and purposely that he might comprehend all the posteritie of Jacob, even all the tribes of Israel, he saith not, thy mothers children, but, thy fathers children shall bow down, &c. Yet it is most exactly accomplished in the spirituall kingdome of Christ, Phil. 2. 10. That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow. Vers. 9. Judah is a lions whelp, &c.] The tribe of Judah is here compared to a lion, thereby the better yet to expresse their mighty strength and courage, how ter∣rible they should be unto their enemies, and how great and glorious their conquests should be; that look as a lion, the king of beasts, flies upon any beast he meets with, and tears them in pieces, and returning from his prey, coucheth down, and feedeth upon his prey, or lieth at rest, and none dare disquiet him, or offer to take his prey from him; so should Judahs kings conquer and subdue their enemies, and then returning with victorie should quietly and peaceably enjoy their spoils and
conquests without disturbance. But especially is this spoken in relation to Christs unresistable power, and glorious conquests, who is therefore called▪ the lion of the tribe of Judah, Rev. 5. 5. Vers. 10. The sceptre shall not depart, &c. till Shiloh come.] Shiloh, is by in∣terpretation, the Prosperer, the Safemaker, the Prince of peace: or, as others think, his sonne, or, her sonne, & is doubtlesse meant of the Messiah, the Lord Christ, who is indeed the onely Saviour of mankind, the onely Peace-maker betwixt God and us; and the sonne of Judah, and that as being the sonne of the Virgin Mary, who was of Judahs tribe: so that the drift of these words was to foretell of what tribe the Messiah should be, to wit, of the tribe of Judah; and at what time he should come, to wit, that after once the regall dignitie should be settled in that tribe, which was done when David was anoynted king, the government should never be taken from him, at least so farre but that there should be a Lawgiver from between his feet, nor his kingdome and commonwealth be utterly ruined and abolished untill the Messiahs coming. The chief difficultie of this place is, in making good the truth of this prophecy, concerning the continuance of Judahs principalitie and kingdome untill the Messiahs coming, and that because it is evident, 1. That after Jechoniah and Zedekiah, the two last kings of Judah, they had no more any king of that roy∣all house of David, nor of the tribe of Judah: for so Jeremiah prophecied concern∣ing Jechoniah, Jer. 22. 0. Thus saith the Lord, Write ye this man childlesse, a man that shall not proper in his dayes: for no man of his seed shall prosper, sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah; yea so Ezekiel prophe∣cied concerning the utter overthrow of that crown and regall dignitie, Ezek. 21. 27. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more untill he come whose right it is, and I will give it him; 2. That after their return from their captivity in Babylon, though in the principalitie of Zorobabel, and perhaps of some of his posterity, there was a little reviving of the dignitie of Judahs tribe, yet within few years, the supreme, yea the regall, power came into the hands of the Macchabees, who were of the tribe of Levi, and yet ruled many of them as kings over the Jews, untill Herod did wholly take away their principality from them. Now to this ob∣jection some answer, That though in the time of the Macchabees, who were indeed of the tribe of Levi, the chief power was removed from the tribe of Judah, yet there was then a Lawgiver from between his feet, to wit, the Sanhedrin, that great Councell of seventy Elders, to whom the cognizance of the weightiest causes apper∣tained, and the establishing of laws, and who were still elected out of the tribe of Judah, and continued constantly in the exercise of this power untill a little before the birth of Christ, Herod who was a mere stranger became king of Judea, and rooted them quite out; yet because the chief thing alledged in this answer to satisfie the objection, to wit, that the Sanhedrin were all chosen out of the tribe of Judah, is taken for granted, but cannot be well proved, a more full answer I conceive is given by others in these following particulars: 1. That by Judah here is meant the whole nation and kingdome of the Jews, after the ten tribes of Israel were separated from them, and became a kingdome apart by it self, and that because although there were of the tribes of Levi and Benjamin amongst them, yet they were as it were
incorporated into the tribe of Judah, and the whole commonwealth had their name from Judah, and was called the kingdome of Judah; insomuch that in the eleaventh chapter of the first book of the kings, three severall times, to wit, vers. 13, 32, 36. it is said that there should be onely one tribe reserved to the kings that were of the posteritie of David; and 1. King. 12. 20. it is said, There was none that followed the house of David but the tribe of Judah onely; yea and after their return from the captivitie out of Babylon, they were all chiefly planted in the lot and territory that appertained to the tribe of Judah: whence it is, that though after Nehemiahs time, the chief government was in the hands of the priests, yet because the whole people were called by the name of Judah, the kingdome and commonwealth of Ju∣dah, therefore still the government may be said to be in Judah; yea and this there∣fore may well be thought to be the main thing intended in this prophecie, that whereas those of the kingdome of the ten tribes of Israel, after they were carried away captive into Assyria, did never return thence again to become a kingdome and commonwealth as before, yet those of Judah, after seventy years captivity in Babylon, returned again into their own land, and became a kingdome and com∣monwealth as before, though not so glorious, living under the government of their own lavvs, and the command of their own rulers, and so continued, untill a little before Christs coming the government vvas vvholly taken from them, and not long after the death of Christ, their kingdome and commonvvealth vvs by the Ro∣manes utterly destroyed. 2. That even at that time vvhen the supreme povver vvas in the priests, they had it by the choice and appointment of the people of Judah, vvho conferred this honour upon the Macchabees because of their zeal and valour in fighting against their enemies. 3. Though all the Sanhedrim vvere not of the tribe of Judah, yet doubtlesse the greatest part of them vvere of that tribe, as it is evident, because the greatest part by farre of those that returned from Babylon vvere of that tribe, vvhich is sufficient to make good this prophecy, That there should not cease to be a Lawgiver from between Judahs feet, that is, of his seed and progeny, untill the Messias came. And unto him shall the gathering of the people be.] That is, vvhereas a little before the coming of Christ Judah shall seem to have lost his authority, in Christ it shall be recovered again, to vvhom not onely the Jevvs but all other nations shall come in as to their king, and submit themselves to his sceptre. Vers. 11. Binding his fole unto the vine, &c.] This last passage of Judahs bles∣sing is vvholly a prophecy concerning the vvondrous fruitfulnesse of that part of Canaan, vvhich should fall to Judahs lot and portion, to vvit, that it should abound vvith vines and fat pastures, insomuch that vvine and milk should be as plentifull and common in a manner as vvater amongst them. Vers. 13. Zebuln shall dwell at the haven of the sa.] Though Issachar vvere older then Zebulun, yet Jacob blesseth him first, because his lot vvas next in the di∣vision of the land, Josh. 19. 10. And the third lot came up for the children of Zebulun, &c. and prophesieth of his dvvelling by the sea, alluding to his name which importeth dwelling, Gen. 30. 20. Now will my husband dwell with me, &c. and she called his name Zebln: and indeed his borders were both to the main sea
Westward, and to the sea of Galilee Eastward, Josh. 19. 10. And their border went up toward the sea, &c. Isa. 9. 1. When at the first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun, and the land of Naphtali, and afterward did more grievously afflict her by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, in Galilee of the nations. Vers. 14. Issachar is a strong asse, &c.] Jacob here foresheweth how different the disposition of this tribe of Issachar should be from that of Zebulun, whereof he had before spoken, as Moses also doth, Deut. 33. 18. Rejoyce Zebulun in thy going out, and Issachar in thy tents; to wit, that whereas those of Zebulun should be altogether for tradin gand trafficking abroad at sea, these of Issachar should be wholly for a quiet life, and countrey imployments at home. Issachar is a strong asse, &c. The meaning is, that this tribe should be of great strength, but of a more servile disposition; that his portion should fall in a fertile and fat soil, and that ac∣cordingly his strength should be imployed in tilling the ground and other countrey labours; and last of all, that he should rather undergo any tributes and taxes that should be laid upon him, then be drawn from that quiet which at home he did en∣joy. But then withall we must know that this is spoken onely concerning the con∣dition of this tribe for the generall; for even in this tribe there were sometimes some that were of a more noble and a more heroicall spirit. Judg. 5. 15. it is said, That the princes of Issachar were with Deborah, even Issachar and also Barak; and 1. Chron. 12. 32. it is said that many of the children of Issachar resorted to David to Hebron, who were men of eminent understanding, and ready armed to the warre, as it is vers. 23. and came purposely to settle the kingdome upon him, according to the word of the Lord. Vers. 16. Dan shall judge his people as one of the tribes of Israel.] Dan was the eldest sonne of Bilhah, Rachels handmaid, and his name was given him as a memo∣riall that God had judged Rachel in giving her a sonne by her handmaid (for Dan signifieth judging) Gen. 30. 6. saith Rachel, God hath judged me, and hath also heard my voice, and hath given me a sonne; therefore alled she his name Dan; al∣luding therefore to his name he pronounceth this blessing upon him, Dan shall udge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel; and the meaning doubtlesse is that however he was the sonne of a handmaid, yet his posteritle should be one of the tribes of Isra∣el, and enjoy all the priviledges of a tribe, as well as the posterity of his freeborn sonnes, of whom before he had spoken; to wit, they hould have an equall share in the land of Canaan, and as other tribes had their heads and elders to judge and de∣cide causes amongst them, so should they. Some conceive the raising up of Sampson to be one of the judges, who was of the tribe of Dan, to be the accomplishment of this prophecy; but questionlesse the blessing here promised is more generall, and meant of the common priviledges which as a tribe Dan should enjoy in the common government of the people together with the rest. And Dan being the eldest of the sonnes of the handmaid, by expressing that he should enjoy this priviledge, the like is implyed concerning the rest. Vers. 16. Dan shall be a serpent by the way.] A prophecy that this tribe should rather by cunning then open force get the better of their enemies. Some footsteps whereof we have in Sampsons acts, and also in that exploit of this tribe against
Laish, which they suddenly surprised, Judg. 18. 27. And they came unto Laish, un∣to a people that were at quiet, and secure; and they smote them with the edge of the sword, &c. Vers. 18. I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord.] This ejaculation thus inter∣posed, is not strange in a dying man; yet the ground might be, his foreseeing the troubles of his posterity, and that tribe of Dan in speciall. Vers. 19. Gad, a troop shall overcome him, but he shall overcome at last.] Here∣in Jacob foretells that Gads posterity, being placed in the utmost skirts of the land of Canaan, should be often sorely annoyed with the incursions of the bordering na∣tions that should be enemies to Israel, to wit, the Ammonites, Moabites, and others, who should often by troops make inroads upon the Gadites that lay next to them, but at length they should gather their forces together, overcome them, and drive them out of their countrey again, and so afterward peaceably enjoy their possessions. Now because Gad signifieth a troop; A troop cometh, saith Leah concerning this first-born sonne of her handmaid Zilpah, and therefore she called his name Gad, Gen. 30. 11. in allusion to his name, Jacob thus expresseth his blessing, Gad, a troop shall overcome him, but he shall overcome at the last. Vers. 21. Naphtali is a hind let loose, he giveth goodly words.] Herein is chief∣ly prophesied (as I conceive) that this tribe should also have a fruitfull and pleasant portion in the land of Canaan, wherein they should be as a hind let loose, that hath scope and liberty, and so in choice of pastures find plenty of feeding; 2. That they should live as in plenty, so in peace, as a hind let loose, that is, a hind that must not be hunted, but is preserved and cherished as the delight of the owner; but 3. It may also be meant of their cunning and active nimblenesse in dealing with their enemies, that they should be light-footed both to pursue enemies, and to escape danger, Psal. 18. 34. He maketh my feet like hinds feet; whereof one instance we have in the story of Barak, Judg. 4. 10, 15, 16. And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh, &c. And the Lord discomfited Sisera, and all his chariots, and all his host with the edge of the sword before Barak, so that Sisera lighted down off his chariot, and fled away on his feet; but Barak pursued after the chari∣ots, &c. and all the host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the sword, and there was not a man left. As for the second clause, he giveth goodly words, thereby is meant in generall, that this tribe should be fair-spoken▪ courteous, and of friendly behavi∣our, and therefore beloved; or it may be more particularly intended, 1. of their elo∣quence, and fair speeches, whereby they should rather keep themselves safe, then by force of arms; 2. of the songs of thanksgiving, the praises and blessings which they should return unto God, both for their fruitfull land, their peace, and conquest of their enemies; of which last we have an instance in that song of Deborah and Barak, Judg. 5. Vers. 20. Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royall dainties.] That is, the portion which in the division of the land of Canaan shall fall to this tribe, shall be fat, and fertile, abounding with wine and oyl, but especially with the choicest and finest wheat; and so indeed it was one of the richest and fruitfullest parts of all that countrey.
Vers. 22. Joseph is a fruitfull bough.] Because of him came two tribes. Vers. 23. The archers have sorely grieved him, &c.] His brethren that sold him, his mistris that accused, and mster that imprisoned, did what they could to rine him; but through Gods assistance he proved too strong for them all. Vers. 24. From thence is the shepherd, stone of Israel.] That is, from the mightie God of Jacob it was, that Joseph became the shepherd, the stone of Israel▪ a shepherd, in that he fed both his father and brethren in the time of famine; the stone of Israel, in that he was a rock of refuge to them, providing a hiding place for them in Egypt when they were in so great distresse, and in that he was the one∣ly stay and support of his father and all his family. And herein was Joseph a fi∣gure of Christ, who is the shepherd of his Israel, the foundation and corner stone of his Church and people, Acts 4. 11. This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner. Vers. 26. The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitours, &c.] This place is diversly rendred by Interpreters, and accordingly they differ much in giving the sense and meaning of the words. But according to our translation the meaning of the first clause is evident, to wit, that Jacob therein affirms that the blessings wherewith he had blessed his children, and Joseph especial∣ly, were of farre greater efficacie and excellencie then those wherewith his progeni∣tours had blessed their children. If we understand it to be spoken concerning all his children, and that it is afterward particularly applyed to Joseph in the following words, They shall be on the head of Joseph, &c. and thus we must know that he pre∣ferres the blessings wherewith he had blessed his children before those of the Patri∣archs that were before them, 1. because they were more particularly explained and applyed; 2. because they were and should be more suddenly, clearly, fully and effectually accomplished in them: for till their increase in Egypt, where was that seed to be seen that should equall, as it were, the number of the starres? yea what likelyhood was there of such an increase? 3. because whereas the promised seed made to Abraham was ratified onely unto Isaac, and so Ishmael and the rest of his sonnes were excluded, and afterwards it was confirmed onely to Jacob, and so Esau was cut off, now it was ratified unto all his children, and upon the condition of faith to all their posteritie. But if we understand it particularly of Joseph, the bles∣sing wherewith Jacob had blessed him is said to surpasse the blessings wherewith his progenitours were blessed, 1. because it should not now be long ere the promi∣ses made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob concerning the multiplying of their seed. &c. should be performed: hitherto there was no appearance of that which God had promised, but now as in the other sonnes of Jacob, so in Joseph also, the pro∣mise of God should be accomplished; 2. because he should have this priviledge above the rest, that his two sonnes should be the heads of two severall tribes; 3. be∣cause Joseph was in regard of temporall blessings farre happier then ever Jacob, or any of his progenitours had been, being advanced in Egypt to the highest pitch of honour next under the King, and so living and dying in great prosperitie. The greatest difficultie is in the next words, Ʋnto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills, and the most probable expositions that are given thereof are these▪ 1. That
they are a comparative expression of the surpassing excellency of those blessings wherewith he had blessed his children, and Joseph especially, and how farre they exceeded those of his progenitours, to wit, as farre, as the utmost tops of the hills and mountains are above the ordinary levell of the earth; 2. That they are an am∣plification of that which went before concerning the blessings wherewith he had blessed them, shewing that they were blessings not onely temporall, but also spiritu∣all and eternall, such as should reach beyond the continuance of the mountains and hills, which yet should continue till time should be no more, and are therefore called, everlasting hills: whence is that of the prophet,  54. 10. The moun∣tains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindnesse shall not depart from thee, &c. that is, my kindnesse to thee shall be more stable then the mountains that cannot be removed, but shall continue to the end of the world. And indeed herein was the chief and surpassing excellency of Jacobs blessing above those of his proge∣nitours, that all his sonnes were appointed heirs of the promise, and of the covenant of grace, not one of them being excluded, as Ishmael and Esau were; and 3. they are added to set forth the riches of the portion of land which should befall the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh in the division of Canaan, which as it should abound with all other desirable blessings, so also with the chief things of the ancient moun∣tains, and the precious things of the lasting hills, as Moses calls them in his bles∣sing of Joseph, Deut. 33. 15. And indeed if we observe how evident it is that Mo∣ses doth there, as it were, explain and unfold this blessing of Jacob, we may the more readily encline to think that what is there expressed concerning the ancient mountains and lasting hills in Josephs portion is also covertly intended here. Vers. 26. They shall be on the head of Joseph, &c.] Comparing the blessings wherewith God had blessed him to the oyl wherewith Princes are wont to be an∣oynted, he saith, They should be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren, that is, whom the Lord hath separated and set apart from the rest of his brethren, advancing him to a high and singular degree of honour: and in this sense he was a Nazarite, as the word is in the ori∣ginall. Vers. 27. Benjamin shall ravine as a wolf, in the morning he shall devour the prey, &c.] Because the wolf is a strong and fierce beast, and goeth forth usually both mornings and evenings to seek his prey, Jacob here compares this tribe to a ravening wolf, and that to signifie, they should be a very strong couragious and warlike people, and that they should with admirable violence vanquish and destroy their enemies, and return from the battel laden with the spoils. And indeed that this tribe of Benjamin was in future times of a warlike disposition, we find in many places of the sacred history, and especially in those bloudy battels which they fought with their brethren of the other tribes, where though there were of the other tribes foure hundred thousand armed men, & themselves were but five and twenty thou∣sand and seven hundred, yet they twice overcame them, and slew of them eight and thirtie thousand; and it is there particularly noted of these Benjamites (which shows what active men they werefor the warre) that there were amongst them seven hun∣dred chosen men left-handed, thatcould every one sling stones at a hairs breadth
and not misse, Judg. 20. 16. and in the conquests of Saul, the first king of Israel, who was of this tribe. Vers. 28. All these are the twelve tribes of Israel.] That is, these are the heads from whom descended the twelve tribes of Israel; indeed there were thirteen tribes: but Ephraim and Manasseh are comprehended in one, under the name of Joseph their father; and besides when the land of Canaan was divided amongst the tribes, the Levites had no share amongst them, because the Lord was their portion, and so they were still called the twelve tribes of Israel. And by this mentioning of the tribes, the holy Ghost doth, as it were, direct us to look for the accomplish∣ment of these prophecies, not so much in the persons of Jacobs sonnes, as in their posterity. Every one according to his blessing, he blessed them.] That is, he fore∣told the severall blessings which God had allotted to them. But did he not rather pronounce three of them accursed, namely, Reuben, Simeon, and Levi? I answer, 1. That the temporall chastisement threatned was but a fatherly correction for their amendment, and so a blessing and not a curse: but 2. They are blessed also in that he concludes them within the number of the tribes, and so comprehendeth them within the Covenant: for by this means they have an equall right with the rest to the land of promise, and by faith to the heavenly Canaan, whereof the other was a type. CHAP. L. Vers. 3. ANd fourty dayes were fulfilled for him.] That is, fourty dayes were spent in embalming him, according to the custome of the countrey. And the Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten dayes.] That is, thirty dayes after they had done embalming him did the Court, and the Egyptians mourn for him, ere he was carried to be buried. Vers. 4. Joseph spake unto the house of Pharaoh, saying.] Though Joseph was still in as high esteem with Pharaoh as ever before, yet he made use of the mediati∣on of the Egyptian courtiers, to procure the kings consent that he might go into Canaan, to bury his father, partly thereby to endear himself the better to them, and to testifie his own modestie, who in a businesse that concerned himself would do nothing, but what should be approved of all; partly to prevent all suspicion of any purpose that he should have to get quite away out of Egypt upon this occasion; and partly also perhaps, because mourners used not to come into the presence of Princes. Esther. 4. 2. For none might enter into the kings gate clothed with sackcloth. Vers. 5. In my grave which I have digged for me, &c.] Thereby implying, that it was not in any contempt of Egypt, to decline the envy of the Egyptians, who might be ready enough to surmise that he despised their land, as not worthy to be the grave of his father, he makes known that he desired this onely because his fa∣ther had long since, before he came into Egypt, digged a grave for himself there where his ancestours and wife were buried, and made him swear that he would bu∣ry him there. Vers. 10. And they came into the threshing floore of Atad, &c.] This threshing floore of Atad I conceive to have been not farre from Hebron, the place intended
for the sepulchre of Jacob, chosen happely by Joseph and the rest, as the most con∣venient place to perform the solemnities of his funerall rites by so great a multi∣tude. And it is said to be beyond Jordan, with respect unto Moses, who was on the outside of Jordan in the wildernesse where he wrote these things, Deut. 1. 1. These be the words which Moses spake unto all Israel, on this side Jordan, in the wilder∣nesse, &c. Deut. 3. 25. I pray thee let me go over, and see the good land that is beyond Jordan. Vers. 18. And they said, Behold we be thy servants.] This is spoken by way of submitting themselves to Joseph, because of the wrong that they had formerly done him; as if they should have said, We sold thee for a servant into Egypt, and behold we now yield up our selves to be thy servants. Vers. 19. For am I in the place of God?] Can I, or dare I (think you) be of∣fended with that which I know was Gods work, or seek to revenge my self on you whom God hath forgiven? or turn that to your destruction, which God did for your preservation? this were to make my self equall with God, yea to challenge to my self a power to crosse and overturn the will and purpose of God.
ANNOTATIONS On the second book of MOSES called EXODUS. CHAP. I. NOw these are the names of the children of Israel, &c.] When the Israelites went out of Egypt (which was but two hun∣dred and fifteen years after Jacob went thither with his fami∣ly) there were of them, Numb. 1. 46. six hundred thousand, three thousand five hundred and fifty, fit for warre, besides the Levites, old men, women, and all under the age of twenty years, which might well be three times so many. Here there∣fore in the beginning of this story the names of those that went down into Egypt are thus particularly set down, that by considering how few there went down thither, we might the more plainly in the multitude that went out from thence see the accomplishment of those promises made to Abraham, concern∣ing the wonderfull multiplying of his seed. Vers. 5. And all the souls that came out of the loyns of Jacob were seventy souls.] Reckoning with the rest Jacob, Joseph, and his two sonnes. See the note on Gen. 46. 27. Vers. 7. And the children of Israel were fruitfull, &c.] Moses expresseth their multiplying with many severall words, to shew, that it was indeed a most incredible and miraculous increase. Vers. 8. Now there arose up a new king over Egypt, which knew not Joseph.] That is, there arose up another king (for so Stephen expresseth it, Act. 7. 18.) who because he knew not the person of Joseph, nor lived in his dayes to see the good that he did for the kingdome of Egypt, never minded the good service that he had formerly done for his predecessour, nor in the least manner regarded either his poste∣rity, or fathers family for his ake. And so indeed it is usually with many men, they onely mind present things, and are onely affected with such things as happen in their own dayes, the memory of that good which hath been done for their an∣cestours, they never regard. Some indeed hold, that this king that dealt thus hardly with the Israelites was not of the posterity of that Pharaoh that exalted Joseph, but was chosen of another stock to rule over Egypt; and that therefore it is said, There arose up a new king over Egypt. But this cannot be grounded on those words: for the sonne that succeeds his father in the throne is usually called a new king; and So∣lomon saith concerning his succeeding of his father in the kingdome of Israel, 1. King. 8. 20, I am risen up in the room of David my father. However it seems that Joseph sought not to advance his children in Egypt, but was content they
should live in a mean condition amongst his brethren, waiting in hope for the promised inheritance; by reason whereof the memory of Joseph was the more like∣ly not to be continued amongst the Egyptians. Vers. 9. Behold the children of Israel are more and mightier then we.] It can∣not be questioned but that the Egyptians were more in number, and of greater ri∣ches and strength then the Israelites were: either therefore this must be understood by way of proportion, to wit, that those parts of the land that were inhabited by the Israelites were farre more populous then other parts of the land, the Israelites multiplying farre more then the Egyptians did, and that they flourished more in wealth and plenty of all things (the might, here chiefly intended) which indeed is no wonder, considering that besides their industry, and the fertilitie of the land of Goshen wherein they were placed, an extraordinary blessing from God was upon them in all their endeavours; or else it was spoken by Pharaoh, onely to incense his Lords and Counsellours of State to whom he propounds this motion, and so he lash∣th out, as men that speak out of envy and disdain are wont to do, beyond measure, and intimates withall that this it would come to, if it were not prevented. Vers. 11. Therefore they did set over them taskmasters, &c.] To wit, that they might hereby both impoverish them, and waste their estates, and withall keep them from multiplying so exceedingly, as they had formerly done: for whilest they took them off from their own imployments, and as bondslaves, forced them to work in the Kings service, without allowing them any equall recompence for their labours, this must needs soon bring them very low in their estates; and then withall by overbur∣dening them with extreme labour, toyl, and drudgery, they hoped to waste their strength, and to consume them by degrees through weaknesse and sicknesse, and so much to abate their number, and to prevent their encrease. All which misery the Lord suffered the Egyptians to bring upon this his peculiar people, 1. Because in this time of their ojourning in Egypt, the Israelites began many of them to be corrupt in their religion, and to commit whoredome with the Idoles of Egypt, and so the Lord cast them into this fiery furnace of the Egyptian bondage, that he might purge them from these pollutions: hence is that of Joshua to the Israelites, Josh. 24. 14. Put away the Gods which your fathers served in Egypt, and that complaint of the Lord concerning his people, Ezek. 23. 3. That they committed whoredomes in their youth in Egypt, and chap. 20. 7, 8, 9. that when they rebelled against him, and did not eve∣ry man cast away the abominations of their eyes, nor did forsake the Idoles of Egypt, yet he wrought for his names sake in bringing them forth of the land of Egypt▪ 2. Because hereby the Lord intended to keep them from setting their hearts upon Egypt, and to make them long after Canaan the promised land, to cause them to leave Egypt willingly, to remove to Canaan when God should call them thither, and that they might have no desire to return thither again when they were once gone: which if they did when Egypt had been to them a land of bondage, and of such bitter service, Num. 11. 5. and 14. 4. And they said one unto another, Let us make a cap∣tain, and let us return into Egypt, what would they have done if they had lived in ease and plenty there? and 3. Because the Lord would have the juster occasion given for the Israelites casting off the yoke of Egypt, and for his punishing that tyrant Pha∣raoh
and his bloody people with so many great and wonderfull plagues for the better manifestation of his justice and almightie power, ya his faithfulnesse also and tender compassion towards his people. Vers. 14. And in all manner of service in the field.] That is, in the most sordid and toylsome labours of their countrey-imployments, as digging and cleansing of their ditches, carrying out their dung, plowing and tilling their grounds, &c. Vers. 15. And the king of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives, of which the name of one was Shiprah, &c.] Pharaoh perceiving himself crossed in his first de∣vice, and that because the more they afflicted the Israelites the more they multiplied and grew, he now seeks to bring his purpose to passe another way, andthat is by perswading the Hebrew midwives to smother or strangle all their male-children, a sure way to prevent their multiplying, even in the very birth, that so there might be no suspicion that it was purposely done, but that it might be ascribed to chance, or to the womans hard labour, and difficultie of birth. Indeed so strange it is that he should hope to perswade the midwives, if they were Israelites, to lend thus a helping hand to the utter destruction of their own people, that thereupon some Writers have con∣cluded, that questionlesse the midwives were Egyptians, and the Hebrew women were forced to make use of them. But methinks it is farre more unlike that the He∣brew women should ever admit to imploy Egyptian midwives in that service, then that Pharaoh should hope partly by great promises, and partly by severe threatnings to winne the Hebrew midwives to do this that he enjoyned them. And besides it would have been in vain for the king to hope to have the businesse carried so secretly, and that the people should think that their male-children dyed in the birth, and were not at his command made away, if he had violently imposed on them Egyptian mid∣wives, who upon such an occasion must needs be presently suspected. And to this we may adde also, that the commendation that is here given the midwives, that they feared God, doth alwayes in the Scripture signifie the fear of the true God, and a higher degree of true pieti then could be in the Egyptians by the mere light of nature. And therefore I conceive that the midwives were not Egyptians but Israelites; to which our Tranlatours seem to enline in translating the Hebrew word here used not the midwives of the Hebrews, but the Hebrew midwives. As for these two that are here named, we must not thence conclude that there were no more (for it is not possible that two midwives should be sufficient for this imployment amongst so many thousand women of the Israelites) but these two are onely named, because they were the chief, and perhaps the rest were under their direction and command; or rather, because he called these first, and having made tryall of them, meant afterwards to give the same command to the rest, till finding that these hd deceived him, he gave over this course, and then his rage brake openly forth, and he enjoyned by publick command that all their male-children should be drowned. Vers. 21. And it came to passe because the midwives feared God, that e made them houses.] Though the midwives inned in lying to Pharaoh, yet the Lord accor∣ding to his wonted goodnesse passed by this infiritie of his poore servants, and re∣warded their piti and ear of him, in saving their men-children alive, and made them houses, that is, did greatly increase their posteritie (for so the like phrase is used
Ruth. 4. 11. The Lord make the woman that is to come into thine house like Rachel, and like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel, and withall did prosper them exceedingly in their outward estate, according to that of the Psalmist, Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it, Psal. 127. 1. Vers. 22. And Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, &c.] Failing of bringing about his purpose secretly by the help of the midwives, he now openly at last disco∣verd his rage, and by publick proclaation e njoyns the Egyptians to take the Israe∣lites male-children so soon as they were born by force from them, and to drown them in the river: That the Egyptians did accordingly with much strictnesse put in execu∣tion this bloudy command of their King, is evident, because Moses parents could not long hide him from those that were imployed in searching after them; but yet, that by degrees they gave over the prosecuting of this crueltie, and that it continued not all the time of the Israelites bondage in Egypt, is also clear, because there were so many under twenty years old when they went out of Egypt. Perhaps this Pharaoh within a few years died, and then this cruell decree, which the very light of nature must needs abhorre, was not, at least so violently, pursued as it was at first. CHAP. II. Vers. 1. ANd there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a daugh∣ter of Levi.] To wit, as we reade, Exod. 6. 19. Amram the sonne of Kohath, and grandchild of Levi, married Jochebed his Aunt, the daughter of Le∣vi, as she is here called, whom her mother bare unto Levi in Egypt, as is expressed Num. 26. 59. and so the sister of his father Kohath. And though such marriages between the aunt and nephew were afterward expresly forbidden by the law, as incestuous and against the law and light of nature, Levit. 18. 12. Thou shalt not uncover the nakednesse of thy fathers sister; yet considering the confusion of those times, no wonder it is though even the faithfull servants of God did not see and consider the evil thereof, but did what was customarily done though not warran∣table, till God gave them an expresse law against it. However observable herein again is the faithfulnesse of Moses, who would not conceal the truth herein, though it were no little blemish to him, that he was born of such an incestuous marriage. Vers. 2. And the woman conceaved, and bare a sonne.] To wit, Moses; but yet this was not their first child: for Mary or Miriam a daughter, and Aaron a sonne, were both born before him, as it is evident Exod. 7. 7. and Moses was fourescore years old, and Aaron fourescore and three years old, &c. and in the fourth verse of this chapter, And his sister stood afarre off, to wit what would be done; where we see that Miriam was set to watch what became of her brother, because she as a child would be least in danger of being suspected. And hereby it is manifest that Amram and Jochebed, the parents of Moses, were married, and had their two el∣der children Miriam and Aaron, before that cruell edict came forth, for the drown∣ing of all the male-children of the Israelites, about the time when Pharaoh sought by the help of the midwives to make them away in the birth, and that Moses was born immediately after he had commanded them to be drowned.
She hid him three moneths.] That is, his mother; for though it is evident that his father did also yield his consent and help hereto, Heb. 11. 23. By faith Moses when he was born was hid three moneths of his parents, yet Moses here ascribes it particularly to his mother, because she had the chief hand in the managing of it, and perhaps did first motion it to her husband. And herein their faith was obser∣vable, as the Apostle hath noted, because out of their naturall affection to their child, quickned by the rare beauty they beheld in his countenance, they resolved to do what they could to save him, being not afraid of the Kings commandment, but trusting that God would be with them, and so hid him three moneths; and then when they could hide him no longer, because happely some notice was taken of it, or some stricter search was to be made, they laid him out in an ark of bulrushes, setting his sister withall to watch what became of him. Vers. 10. She brought him unto Pharaohs daughter, and he became her sonne.] That is, she made him her adopted sonne, and accordingly afforded him such princely education as was seemly for her sonne, training him up in all the learning and wisdome of the Egyptians, Acts 7. 22. And thus the Lord by his se∣cret providence fitted him for the service for which he intended him, his known wisdome and singular learning being afterwards no doubt a speciall means to make him the more feared and honoured both amongst the Egyptians and his own peo∣ple, and every way the fitter for the government of the Commonwealth of Israel. Vers. 11. And it came to passe in those dayes, when Moses was grown, that he went out unto his brethren, &c.] To wit, when he was full fourtie years old, Acts 7. 23. from the time of his weaning (when by his mother-nurse he was brought home, and delivered up to Pharaohs daughter) unto that age he continued in the court of Egypt as her adopted sonne, and became famous amongst them, mightie both in words and deeds, as S. Stephen saith, Acts 7. 22. that is, of great abilities both for discoursing, and giving counsel concerning any businesse propounded, and for the wise and successefull managing of any affairs that he undertook. Du∣ring this time it cannot well be thought, that he never went out to visit his bre∣thren, as compassionating their miseries, since most probable it is, that his mother having recourse unto him, as his nurse, would instruct him, and put him in mind of all things that concerned him as one of Gods Israel▪ But this going forth unto his brethren, which Moses here speaks of, was when at fourty years age he went forth with a full purpose to abandon his honours in Pharaohs Court, and to joyn himself to the poore oppressed people of God, and to lend them what help he pos∣sibly could for their deliverance, and that as finding himself inwardly, as by a spe∣ciall instinct of Gods spirit, called thereto; whence it is that Stephen said, Acts 7. 25. that when he slew the Egyptian that wronged the Israelite, he supposed that his brethren would have understood, how that God by his hand would deliver them; of which the Apostle also speaks, Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26. By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the sonne of Pharaohs daughter, choo∣sing rather to suffer affliction with the children of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sinne for a season, esteeming the reproch of Christ greater riches then the trea∣sures in Egypt.
Vers. 12. And he looked this way, and that way, and when he saw there was no man he slew the Egyptian, &c.] Moses had doubtlesse the warrant of an extraor∣dinary calling from God to slay the Egyptian, as it is evident by those words of Stephen before mentioned, Acts 7. 25. He supposed is brethren would have u∣derstood how that God by his hand would deliver them: for though the time which God had ordained for their deliverance was not yet come, yet God intended that hereby he should give even at present some intimation to the people, both of Gods purpose to deliver them by him▪ & ofhis willingnesse to undertake the work. But why then did he thus look about, as afraid to have it known? I answer it is no wonder though at his first calling his faith was mixed with doubtings and fears; but besides, he might do this out of a prudent circumspection and care not to have it known, and not out of fear, because he knew that things were not yet in a rea∣dinesse for the publick deliverance of the people, even as Magistrates will some∣times execute offenders the more privately, when they fear any tumult amongst the people. Vers. 14. And Moses feared, and said, &c.] What the Apostle therefore said of Moses, Heb. 11. 27. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King, must be understood of his second leaving Egypt, when he carried away the Israelites with him. Now he left Egypt for a time onely, and that to save him∣self from the wrath of a King who sought to slay him: but then he quite forsook Egypt, and boldly carried away his brethren, though he might well suspect that Pharaoh would pursue them, not fearing his wrath and malice in this regard, but looking to that invisible God who was able to defend him. Vers. 15. Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to slay Moses.] Not onely to punish that fact of his in slaying the Egyptian, but also doubtlesse especi∣ally out of a jealousie which hereupon he had conceived concerning Moses, know∣ing him to be an Hebrew, and having by experience found that he was a man of rare abilities, and singularly wise and learned, when he saw that he had left the Court, and joyned himself to his own people, and had now in revenge of an Israe∣lites wrong slain an Egyptian, no marvell though he suspected what Moses might hereafter attempt, on the behalf of that people, and so resolved presently to cut him off. Vers. 16. Now the Priest of Midian had seven daughters.] The word in the originall signifieth either a Priest, or, a Prince, but because this imployment of at∣tending and watering their fathers flocks was more likely to be the imployment of a Priest then a Princes daughters; and secondly, it is no way probable that the shepherds durst daily offer such violence to their Princes daughters, as we reade here they did to these, it is more probable that in this place the word in the origi∣nall is to be understood of a Priest then a Prince. A Priest of the true God, we may well think he was, because Moses married his daughter, yet withall perhaps he was corrupt in his religion, and had gone aside to many heathenish superstiti∣ons, till by Moses in the time of his abode there he was more perfectly instructed. The most difficult question concerning these words is, Who this Priest of Midian was, that had seven daughters, whether the father or the grandfather of Zipporah,
who was doubtlesse one of these seven daughters, and afterward became the wise of Moses. It is manifest that in the next verse but one this Priest of Midian is clled Reuell, When they came to Reuell their father, he said, How is it that ye are come so soon to day? and vers. 21. that he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter to wife. But because the father of this Zipporah, and father in law of Moses, is elsewhere cal∣led Jethro, yea immediately in the first verse of the next chapter, Moses kept the flock of Jethro his father in law, the Priest of Midian, and also Hobab, Judg. 4. 11. Heber the Kenite was of the children of Hobab, the father in law of Moses; and this Jethro or Hobab the father in law of Moses is said to have been the sonne of Raguel the Midianite, Num. 10. 29. Moses said unto Hobab the sonne of Raguel the Midianite, the father in law of Moses, &c. it may seem very questionable, why this Reuell, the Priest of Midian, is here spoken of as the father of these seven daughters, of whom Zipporah the wife of Moses was one. The most of Expositours do hold that Reuell this Priest of Midian was the grandfather of Zipporah, and the same that is called also Raguel the Midianite Num. 10. 29. Jethro, who was also called Hobab, was (they say) the father of Zipporah, and the sonne of Reuell or Raguel, and so they hold that Zipporah is called the daughter of this Reuell, because she was his sonne Jethro's daughter: and indeed usually in the Scriptures grand∣fathers are called fathers, and grandchildren sonnes and daughters; so Laban saith of his daughters children, Gen. 31. 43. These children are my children; and Maachah is called the mother of Asa, who yet was his grandmother, 1. King. 15. 13. But yet because there can be no probable reason given, why in this place there should be no mention made of the father, but of the grandfather onely, and though the grandfather be sometimes in the Scriptures called a father, yet no instance can be given where in setting down the number of a mans daughters, it is yet meant of his grandchildren, I rather conceive that this Priest of Midian, here spoken of, that had seven daughters, was the father of Zipporah, and father in law of Moses, and so con∣sequently that he had three names, Reuell as in the 18. verse of this chapter, Jethro chap. 3. 1. and Hobab Judg. 4. 11. and that Raguel the Midianite, mentioned onely Num. 10. 29. was the father of this Reuell. Vers. 17. And the shepherds came, and drove them away. &c.] That is, though these daughters of the Priest of Midian had with all diligence hastened to the well, that they might water their flocks first (which happely in those dry countreys they did the more earnestly strive for, because those that came last were sometimes scan∣ted of water) yet when the shepherds came, they barbarously drove them, and their flocks away, and with the water, which these Virgins had drawn, sought to water their own cattle, and so to make them wait till they had done: the injustice where∣of when Moses perceived, he stood up in their defence, withstood the shepherds (though a stranger) and helped them to water their flock. Probable enough it is, considering in how great esteem Moses had lived in Egypt, that he had some servants attending him, that might aid him herein; if he were alone, there was doubtlesse a speciall hand of God in it, that one man should by force prevail against all the shepherds. Vers. 20. Why is it that ye have left the man?] That is, being a stranger, and
now thus late towards evening, unprovided happely of a place to lodge in, why did you not bring him home with you? Vers. 21. And he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter.] That is, Reuell, the Priest of Midian, gave Moses Zipporah his daughter to wife. How long after Moses his coming this match was made, it is not expressed; most likely it is that it was not till by living a while together they had learnt by experience that which might induce them on both sides to desire it: which we may the rather incline to think also, because fourty years after his coming into Midian, when God command∣ed him to return into Egypt, one of his two sonnes by his wife Zipporah was but a very little one, and as yet uncircumcised: chap. 4. 25. Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her sonne, &c. Vers. 22. And he called his name Gershom: for he said, I have been a stranger in a strange land.] Gershom is by interpretation a desolate stranger: Now so he named his eldest sonne, both to testifie his faith concerning the land of promise, which he looked upon, because of Gods promise, as his true countrey, and the in∣heritance of his children; and professed therefore that his children were but strangers in the land of their nativitie: and likewise to expresse his thankfulnesse to God for affording him this comfort to support him in the time of his affliction, when he lived after the manner of a banished man in a strange countrey. Another sonne Moses had by his wife Zipporah, whom he called Eliezer, as we may see, chap. 18. 4. but the first-born onely is mentioned here. Vers. 23. And it came to passe in processe of time, that the king of Egypt died, and the children of Israel sighed, &c.] The death of the king of Egypt is here men∣tioned, to shew the misery of the poore Israelites, who were no way eased of their burdens upon the death of the former oppressing tyrant, but had as much cause of sighing under their burdens as ever they had before. CHAP. III. Vers. 1. NOw Moses kept the flock of Jethro, &c. the Priest of Mdian.]. Ei∣ther this Jethro was the same that is before called Reuell chap. 2. 18. or else if Jethro were the sonne of Reuell, he also was Priest of Midian, as his father had been, the sonne succeeding in his fathers office; and that happely because Reuell was now dead, this being fourtie years after Moses coming thither, as we see Acts 7. 30. And when fourtie years were expired there appeared unto him in the wilder∣nesse of Mount Sinai. And came to the mountain of God, even to Horeb.] Horeb is called here by anticipation, the mountain of God, both because of this following vision, wherein God appeared to Moses in so miraculous a manner; and also especially because there afterwards the Lord came down to Moses, and delivered him the law, and made a covenant with his people, Exod. 19. for it is said expressely, that this apparition was at mount Sinai, Acts 7. 30. And when fourtie years were expired there appeared unto him in the wildernesse of mount Sinai an angel of the Lord in a flaming fire in bush: and there we know the Law was given, Exod. 19. 1. It seems therefore that
the whole mountanous track or circuit where mount Sinai stood was called Horeb; or else (as some of the Jewish Rabbins hold) this mountain was formerly called Horeb, but after this apparition of God in the bush it was called Sinai, from the He∣brew word, Sneh, which signifieth a bramble bush. Vers. 2. And the angel of the Lord appeared unt him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush, &c.] It is vident that it was the Lord God himself that now ap∣peared unto Moses: for vers. 7. it is said, that the Lord Jehovah spake unto him, and verse the fixth he saith, I am the God of thy father, &c. and (which is most to be observed) vers. 5. he that appeared to Moses required that worship and honour which is due onely to God, namely, that he should present himself before him bare∣footed, as a poore caytiffe, not worthy to stand in the presence of so great a Maje∣stie. Nor is there any just cause why we should question this, because it is said here, The angel of the Lord appeared unto him; since it is evident that Christ the eternall sonne of God is called the Messenger, or, Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. Now as concerning the burning bush, wherein the Lord appeared to Moses, it was doubtlesse intended not onely to cause Moses with the more reverence and humilitie to attend to what should be said unto him, but also to be a signe representing to him the state and condition of his people, concerning whom the Lord now gave him a charge, to wit, that though his Israel had been long in the fire of affliction, the ene∣mie seeking with all possible fury to destroy them, yet hitherto they had been mira∣culously preserved, and so still should be; and that because the Lord was amongst them to preserve and defend them, and would now rescue them from the power of their oppressours. Vers. 3. And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, &c.] It is hard to say, which some affirme, that Moses concluded that this was some secret of nature that the bush burned and was not consumed, and so out of curiosity did rashly resolve to approch nearer that he might search out the cause of it. No such thing can be concluded from these words; rather his calling it a great sight may seem to imply that he thought it some vision. But indeed the most probable opinion is, that he neither concluded the one nor the other, but being suddenly stricken with admiration at the sight, and not knowing what to think of it, he determined at last to approach nearer, hoping thereby to be the better informed, and waiting with re∣verence to see what the issue would be. Vers. 4. God called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said▪ Moses Moses, &c.] This calling of Moses by his name, and the redoubling of his name in such a familiar and loving manner, was both to make him know that the vision he saw was of God, thereby to stirre him up the more carefully to intend what was done and said; and also to intimate the great love and favour of God to him: and indeed considering how strange and terrible the apparition was, and that Moses though all alone and in a desert place was not yet so astonished, but that when he heard himself called by name from the midst of the burning bush, he could answer so readily here am I, we may well think that it was this gracious manner of Gods call∣ing upon him that did thus farre encourage him. Vers. 5. Put off thy shooes from off thy feet.] The putting off of shooes was used
as a signe of mourning and humiliation, Ezech. 24. 17. 23. Forbear to crie, make no mourning for the dead, &c. and put on thy shooes upon thy feet &c. 2. Sam. 15. 30. And David went up by the ascent of mount Olivet, and wept as he went up, and had his head covered; and he went barefoot, &c. Esai. 20. 2. 4. Go and loose the sackcloth from off thy loyns, and put off thy shooe from thy foot, &c. So shall the King of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners, and the Ethiopians captives, young and old, naked and barefoot, &c. And upon this ground no doubt is Moses here enjoyned it, both that this outward ceremonie might strike him with the greater aw and reverence of Gods Majestie, into whose presence he might not be suffered to approch but in so lowly and submissive a manner; and also that it might be an outward expression of the inward religious affection of his mind, that he did indeed acknowledge the disproportion betwixt God and him, &c. And in this may also be included the putting off all earthly and carnall affections and thoughts, and such a spirituall preparation of the mind as beseems him that knows he must come into the presence of so great a God. Vers. 5. For the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.] To wit, because of the present vision; for it is all one as if he had said, because thou comest into Gods presence. Vers. 6. I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, &c.] Because the Israelites were Gods peculiar people by virtue of the covenant which God had made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to whom he had promised, that he would be their God, and the God of their seed after them, and that he would give them the land of Canaan for an inheritance; therefore doth the Lord style himself here the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. As for the Lords expressing this as in the present tense, I am the God of Abraham, &c. speaking of men long since dead, it was doubtlesse not onely in the regard of the immortalitie of their souls, but also in regard of the certain resurrection of their bodies too; and therefore did our Saviour alledge this place to prove the resurrection, Mat. 22. 31, 32. As touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken to you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; God is not the God of the dead, but of the living; and it is noted verse 34, that therewith he put the Sadduces to silence. Look as Adam af∣ter he had sinned was dead whilst he lived in regard of the sure decree, and sentence of God, Gen. 2. 17. In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die; so the Patriarchs, when dead, were yet living, not onely because their souls died not, but returned unto God that gave them; but also in regard of the sure promise of God concerning their resurrection. And Moses hid his face, &c.] To wit, out of an awfull reverence of the Ma∣jesty of God: as Eliah for the same reason in this very mountain did the like, when God spake to him in a still small voice; 1. Kings 19. 13. He wrapped his face in his mantle: and of the angels it is said, Esa. 6. 3. that with their wings they cover their faces. No doubt so soon as he heard himself named out of the burning bush, he was convinced of the presence of God, and was accordingly affected with reverence and fear: But yet after that God had called upon him to pull off his shooes and
to present himself in such an humble manner before him, because the place where∣on he trod was holy ground; this assured him that the Lord meant in some extra∣ordinary manner to him; and so being stricken with the deeper apprehension of Gods glorious majesty and his own basenesse and weaknesse, he hid his face. Vers. 8. Unto a land that floweth with milk and hony.] That is, a land abound∣ing with all the blessings of a fruitsull land, not onely for necessitie, but also for de∣light; a land that should yield them plenty even of the choicest dainties: for under these two, milk and honey, all other blessings of the like nature are comprehended. Vers. 10. Come now therefore, &c.] The secret inspiration which Moses had before from God, when he killed the Egyptian, whereof Chap. 2. 11. is now be∣come an open calling and a full commission. Vers. 11. And Moses said unto God, Who am I, &c.] This he sayes, not so much out of diffidence or disobedience (though there might be in it some mixture of humane infirmitie) as out of modestie and humilitie, acknowledging that God might have chosen many more able instruments. At his first calling he was very forward, and killed the Egyptian; but his following flight out of Egypt made him now better think of the businesse. Vers. 12. This shall be a token unto thee that I have sent thee, &c.] Some un∣derstand the vision of the burning bush to be the token whereof God here speaks to Moses; and then the following words, When thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this Mountain, they conceive are added as a promise of that which should follow upon the deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt, to wit, that upon that mountain, where the Lord had now appeared to him, they should be taught how to worship God, and so should there offer up sacrifices to him. But others again (and that more probably, as may appear by the connexi∣on of the words together) hold, that the signe whereof the Lord here speaks is that which is added immediately in the following words, to wit, That when he brought forth the people out of Egypt, they should worship God upon that mountain. Nor is it any wonder that a thing, that should so long after come to passe, is propounded to him as a signe or token for the present strengthening of his faith concerning his calling: for though this token served principally for the confirmation of his faith in time to come, when he should see this token come to passe; yet even for the pre∣sent, the prediction of such a particular passage that should certainly befall them up∣on their deliverance out of Egypt might well be a great help to the perswading of his heart, that God would indeed deliver the Israelites by him; for just such a to∣ken was given to Hezekiah, to strengthen his faith concerning Gods promise of de∣stroying the Assyrians that had besieged Jerusalem, 2. Reg. 19. 29. This shall be a signe unto thee; ye shall eat this year such things as grow of themselves; in the se∣cond year, that which springeth of the same; and in the third year, sow yee, reap, and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof, which was not fully accomplished till after the Assyrians were destroyed. Vers. 13. They shall say unt me, What is his name? &c.] He conceives that because he was in a manner unknown to them (for from his infancy to his grown years he lived in Pharaohs Court, and now had lived for fourtie years as a banished man
in the land of Midian) therefore they might question whether he were indeed sent of God, and to try that, might demand of him under what name or title God had made known himself unto him: if this should prove so he desires to know what an answer he should mak them; not that he was ignorant of Gods name, or had hi∣therto worshipped an unknown God, but onely desires by carrying them Gods own answer, to have that as an effectuall pledge of his calling: under what name or title God is pleased to send unto them, that he will use; as in a businesse of great mo∣ment, he desires as particular instructions as may be. Vers. 14. And God said unto Moses, I am that I am.] This is the name where∣by God expresseth his essence to us, so farre as we are able to conceive him. And it implyes, 1. his incomprehensiblenesse: as we use to say of any thing we would not have others to prie into, It is what it is; so God saith here to Moses, I am what I am; 2. his immensitie, that his being is without any limits: a man is a man, an angel is an angel, that is, every creature hath a being, but bounded and defined within such a compasse, but God is an immense being, that cannot be included within any bounds; 3. that he is of himself, and hath not a being depending up∣on any other; I am, that is, by and from, and of my self; 4. his everlastingnesse, I am before any thing was, and shall for ever be; there never was, nor shall be time, wherein God could not say of himself, I am; 5. that there is no succession of time with him: for the understanding whereof see John. 8. 58. Before Abraham was I am; and then, 6. that he giveth being to all things. Vers. 16. Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, &c.] That is, the heads of their Tribes, who doubtlesse had some place of authority and power amongst them: for though in Egypt they lived in much disorder and confusion, yet it can∣not be thought but that they had some kind of government amongst them, as is yet more evident chap. 5. 14. where we reade of officers of the children of Israel. Now these the Lord commanded Moses to assemble, and to deliver this message to them, both that they might afterwards acquaint their brethren of the severall tribes with this message which God had sent; and also that they might joyn with Moses in the name of all the people to desire of Pharaoh what God enjoyned them to de∣sire. Vers. 18. And now let s go (we beseech thee) three dayes journey into the wildernesse, &c.] God appoints them to petition onely for so much libertie, that the denyall of this might render Pharaoh inexcusable, and make the justice of God the more manifest, both in destroying Pharaoh and delivering Israel: neither was it necessarie that either God or they (having other direction from God) should re∣veal their whole counsel. See Deut. 2. 28. and 1. Sam. 16. 2. And the Lord said, Take an heifer with thee, and say, I am come to sacrifice unto the Lord. Vers. 19. And I am sure that the king of Egypt will not let you go, no not by a mighty hand.] If we reade this place as it is in the margin of our Bibles, I am sure that the King of Egypt will not let you go but by a mighty hand, the meaning then is plain, to wit, that Pharaoh would not let the Israelites go till God by a strong hand forced him to let them go. But reading it as it is in our Bibles, which agrees best with the originall, it may happely be questioned how it can be said, that the
King of Egypt would not let them go, no not by a mighty hand, since it is evident that he did give them leave to go, chap. 12. 31. and so the Lord tells Moses here in the following words, I will stretch out my hand and smite Egypt, &c. and after that he will let ye go. To which I answer, that though upon the slaying of all the first-born in Egypt Pharaoh gave them liberty to go; yet it might be well said that he would not let them go, no not with a mighty hand, because after that God had with a strong and mighty hand, that is, by many grievous plagues, endeavoured to make him yield, yet a long time he persisted in his obstinacy, and would not let them go, till at last he was even constrained to bid them be gone: and indeed even then he said that more out of displeasure then a yielding spirit; and therefore he soon repented of what he had said, and when they were gone pursued after them with an army to fetch them back again. CHAP. IV. Vers. 1. ANd Moses answered and said, But behold, they will not believe me, &c.] That is, at first perhaps they will not believe me this; being sup∣posed, what shall I do then? Considering that the Lord had now immediately be∣fore told Moses that the Israelites would hearken to him, chap. 3. 18. they shall hearkn to thy voyce, we cannot well think that Moses did now absolutely question the truth of what God had said, but that only he objected that it may be at first, till they saw something to move thereto, they would be shy of giving credit to his words; and so intimated his desire to know what in that case he should do. And this indeed he had cause enough to suspect, because by reason of Pharaohs great power they were like enough to doubt much at first, especially whether Moses would be able to rescue them from their bondage, the rather, because they regarded him so little at first, when upon his slaying of an Egyptian in the defence of an Israelit, he supposed his brethren would have understood, how that God by his hand would deliver them, as Stephen said, Act. 7. 25. Vers. 3. And he said, cast it on the ground, &c.] The generall end of this, and the other following signes, was to confirm the faith of the Israelites concerning the calling of Moses; the more speciall end of this first miracle of turning his rod into a serpent, and then into a rod again, was to assure both Moses and the Israelites that God could and would make his shepherds crook, so base and contemptible in it self, terrible as a serpent to Pharaoh, but comfortable to the Israelites, that is, that the rod of his government should affright the one, but be the means of much good and happinesse unto the other. Vers. 6. Put now thine hand into thy bosome, &c.] The end of this signe was also to put them in mind of Gods almightie power, who was able thus suddenly to change things, whereby both the Israelites might be comforted, remembring that however they had been despised and abominable in the sight of the Egyptians, yet God was able to give them favour in their sight, and however to restore them to their former libertie by an outstretched arm; and withall Moses might be encou∣raged, as considering, that however his estate might now seem base and contem∣ptible,
even as a thing leprous and vile, yet God was able to make him a glorious instrument of Israels deliverance. Vers. 10. O my Lord, I am not eloquent, &c.] That is, I am not a man of a free and ready speech, as it is fit they should be that are implyed in such a service, but of a slow speech, and a slow tongue. Nor doth this contradict, if thus understood, that which S. Stephen said of Moses, Acts 7. 22. that he was mightie in words and in deeds: for a man that is of greatest abilitie to speak wisely, learnedly, and perswasively, may yet have some great imperfection in regard of his utterance and pronunciation: and so it seems it was with Moses, though he were an excellent speaker for the substance of that which he spake, yet some defect he had in regard of his utterance, which some conceive to have been that he was of a stammering tongue, and thereto apply that which he afterwards said, How shall Pharaoh heare me, who am of uncircumcised lippes, chap. 6. 12. Vers. 12. I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say.] It is evident that the imperfection of Moses speech and utterance continued after this; for still we see he complained of his uncircumcised lippes, chap. 6. 30. and because of this Aaron was his spokesman, in delivering Gods message unto Pharaoh▪ This therefore which the Lord here sayes to Moses, I will be with thy mouth, is not meant of helping him of that naturall imperfection in his speech, but that God would direct him what he should say, and so prosper him in his message, that his slownesse of speech should be no hinderance to him, but that he should with com∣fort to his people, and terrour to their enemies, dispatch the businesse which God had imposed upon him. Vers. 14. And he said, Is not Aaron the Levite, thy brother? I know that he can speak well, &c.] Thus was Moses comforted, hearing that his brother Aaron, from whom he had been absent now fourty years, was still living and well; and withall encouraged by knowing that he should have him joyned with him in com∣mission, of whose fidelity he could make no question, and whom he knew of good abilities for the delivering of their message to Pharaoh. Vers. 16. And thou shalt be to him in stead of God.] That is, thou shalt as from God, and in Gods stead, make known to him what he shall say unto Pharaoh. Vers. 18. And Moses went and returned to Jethr his father in law, and said unto him, Let me go, &c.] Moses did not ask his father in law leave to go into Egypt, as questioning whether he should obey Gods command in going, unlesse he would give him leave; but onely as judging it fit that he should acquaint his father in law with his purpose, and crave his approbation, and not go rudely away with his daughter and her children without giving him any notice beforehand of it, e∣speially considering that he had no cause at all to suspect either the wisdome or courtesie of his father in giving him liberty. Moses therefore was not herein to be blamed; rather his modesty and humilitie herein discovered was worthy admirati∣on, who after so glorious a Vision was no way puffed up with it, but carried him∣self in such an humble and lowly manner towards his father in law. As for his alledging no other reason to Jethro for his returning into Egypt, but onely his de∣sire to visit and see his brethren, Let me go I pray thee, and return unto my bre∣thren
which are in Egypt, and see whether they be yet alive, therein also his mo∣desty was discovered, in that he could forbear to tell his father in law of the glori∣ous vision he had seen, and the honourable imployment which God had put upon him; and likewise his wisdome in managing this businesse: for doubtelesse he did purposely conceal this, that hewas sent to fetch the Israelites out of Egypt, both be∣cause he judged it not fit to impart this secret to Jethro, who was not of the stock of Israel though a godly man, before he acquainted the Israelites themselves with it; and likewise especially lest the difficultie and danger of the work should make his father in law unwilling to let him go. Vers. 19. And the Lord said unto Moses in Midian, &c.] To wit, either be∣fore he had asked his fathers leave, or after that. The other appearing of God to Moses was in Horeb, this in Midian; but whether this his appearing to Moses in Midian were before he asked leave to go or after, we cannot certainly conclude: if it were after that, then either Moses, even after leave obtained from Jethro, yet hastened not his journey as was fitting, and therefore by this second apparition God quickned him again; or else he took it that in the first vision in the burning bush, God had onely called him to the work of going into Egypt for the deliverance of the Israelites, but had not expressely told him the time when he should go, and so he waited till now that in this second vision in the land of Midian God again appeared to him, and commanded him immediately to go thither, adding this en∣couragement to what he had said before, that all the men were dead which sought his life. And doubtlesse all the time of his sojourning with his father in law in Midian, he thought of what God had formerly revealed to him in Egypt, concern∣ing the Lords imploying him in that service; onely he waited to see when God would call him thereto: and that happely might be the reason why in so many years he did not send to know in what condition his brethren were in Egypt, be∣cause he was resolved wholly to cast himself herein upon the providence of God, and to do nothing without direction from him. Vers. 20. And Moses took his wife and his sonnes, &c.] Hereby it appears that Moses either carryed his wife and his children into Egypt, or at least that he was upon his journey intending to carry them with him thither: Indeed, as evident it is, when Moses went with the Israelites out of Egypt, his wife and children were with his father in law in Midian: for Exod. 18. 5. it is said▪ that Jethro his father in law met him in the wildernesse when he encamped at the mount of God, and brought his wife and his sonnes thither to him. It seems therefore that either when he was up∣on the way going thither, he sent them back again to Jethro (perhaps upon the oc∣casion of the following story of the circumcising of his sonne) or at least that when he was in Egypt, finding some inconvenience in their being there, he took order to return them to the safe custodie of his father in law, that himself might the more freely and wholly intend the businesse he had undertaken. And Moses took the rod of God in his hand.] It was doubtlesse the same rod or shepherds crook which Moses used at other times to carry in his hand, and which he had in his hand when God spake to him out of the burning bush; onely it is here called the rod of God, because it was that wherewith God had appointed that Moses
should work so many glorious miracles, and so to intimate that it was meerely of God and not of any power in Moses or in the rod that so many strange things were done by it. Vers. 21. But I will harden his heart, that he shall not let the people go.] See chp. 7. 13. Vers. 22. Thus saith the Lord, Israel is my sonne, even my first-born, &c.] Ma∣ny severall reasons may be given why the Israelites might be called Gods first-born sonne, to wit, 1. to intimate how dear they were to God, even as mens first-born children are usually to them; 2. in regard of their preheminence and dignity above all other Nations that were at that time upon the face of the earth; 3. with respect to the Gentiles, that were afterwards to become the people of God, and to be recei∣ved into the covenant of being Gods sonnes and daughters, the Israelites being first admitted to this peculiar priviledge of being Gods people; so that those of the Gen∣tiles that were afterwards received to this dignity were but as Israels younger bro∣thers; 4. because the root of primogeniture rested in them, in that he was to be born of this people who was to be the first-born among many brethren, Rom. 8. 29. But the chief reason, and that which I conceive was principally intended in this place is, because God had chosen the Israelites to be his peculiar people, and heirs, as his first-born, of the land of Canaan, the type of the heavenly inheritance, wherein they were to live under the laws and governmeut of God unto the coming of the promised Messias: for if we mark it, this is alledged as the ground why Pharaoh was bound to let the Israelites go. Now their being received into a covenant of adoption did not inferre any necessity of being freed from Pharaohs service; but Gods chusing them to be his first-born people that were to inherit Canaan, and there to live under his government, could not stand with their continuance under the tyranny of Pha∣raoh: and therefore upon this ground Pharaoh is required to dismisse the Israelites, Israel is my sonne even my first-born; and I say unto thee, Let my sonne go that he may serve me, &c. Vers. 24. The Lord met him, and sought to kill him, &c.] How the Lord en∣dangered the life of Moses, whether by sicknesse, or rather by appearing with a sword drawn in his hand, it is not expressed: it is therefore sufficient for us to know, that Moses was in danger to be killed by the hand of the Lord, and that the cause was at the same time by the Lord himself revealed to him; for though this be not expressed yet it is clearly enough implyed: for why else should his wife so readily circumcise her sonne, had it not been told them that their neglecting hitherto to circumcise that their sonne was the cause of Moses danger. And this the Lord did not till now that he was upon his way going into Egypt, partly for the tryall of his faith, to see whe∣ther upon this occasion he would turn his back upon that great service to which God had called him; and partly because there was now a necessity of doing it, there being a manifest incongruity in it, that he should undertake to be as a judge and governour of Gods circumcised people, himself neglecting this badge of the covenant in his own child. Vers. 25. Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her sonne. &c.] To wit, Eliezer, her youngest sonne: whence it seems probable (espe∣cially
if we observe how his wife at this time carries her self) that Moses had hi∣therto neglected the circumcising of this his youngest sonne, because she was so high∣ly displeafed at the circumcising of the first. CHAP. V. Vers. 1. ANd afterward Moses and Aaron went in, and told Pharaoh, &c.] They went to Pharaoh, and with them some good number of the Israelites: vers. 4. Wherefore do you Moses and Aaron let the people from their works? gt you unto your burdens. Vers. 3. Lest he fall upon us with pstilence, &c.] Herein Moses and Aaron do not onely discover to Pharaoh, that it stood them upon to do what in them lay that they might obey God in this which he required of them, even to prevent the judge∣ment which otherwise they might well fear he would bring upon them; but withall likewise they covertly intimate to him how justly he might fear lest the Lord should bring the same or some greater judgements upon him, and his people, if he should refuse to let them go, as God had commanded him. Vers. 6. And Pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the peo∣ple, &c.] The taskmasters were doubtlesse Egyptians, appointed to require and re∣ceive from the Israelites the work, which for the kings service they were enjoyned to do; but their officers, here mentioned with them, were Israelites, appointed to have the oversight of their brethren in their labour, and to see that every one did the task that was set them as is evident, vers. 14. And the officers of the children of Israel, which Pharaohs taskmasters had set over them were beaten, &c. because the people had not done their task. Vers. 7. Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick, &c.] For in ma∣king brick they used straw, both for covering their new-made bricks, that they might not be parched and chapped with the sunne before they came to be dryed by the fire; and also for firing in their kilnes where they burnt their bricks. Vers. 8. And the tale of the bricks which they did make heretofore, &c.] That is, though some of them be sent about the countrey to gather straw where they can get it, yet those that are left to make the bricks shall make the full number of bricks which they did all make before: and thus did Pharaoh seek to make the Israelites hate and abhorre Moses and Aaron, as the cause of this misery that was fallen upon them. CHAP. VI. Vers. 3. BƲt by my name Jehovah was I not known to them.] This is not meant of the syllables and letters of these two names, as if the Patriarchs had nver heard of this name Jehovah, but onely that of God Almightie (for the con∣trary is manifest, Gen. 22. 14. And Abraham called the name of that place, Jeho∣vah-jireth, &c.) but it is meant of that which is signified by these names. This name Jehovah denoteth, both Gods eternall being in himself, and also his giving of
being unto others, that is, the performance of his promises▪ and in regard of this he saith, that he was not known to their fathers by this name: They being sustained by faith in Gods almightie power, rested upon the promise, not enjoying the thing promised; but now to their children the promise should be performed, and so they should have full knowledge and experience of the efficacie of that name Jeho∣vah. But withall we must know that this is onely spoken comparatively: As the glorious ministration of the law is said to have had no glory, in respect of the ex∣cellent glory of the Gospel, 2. Cor. 3. 10. so the fathers are said not to have known God by his name Jehovah in comparison of that which their posteritie knew. Vers. 9. But they hearkened not unto Moses for anguish of spirit and for cruel bondage.] That is, so grievous was the bondage and miserie they lay under, and so oppressed they were with sorrow by reason thereof, that they could not mind what Moses said to them, nor believe any thing that was spoken concerning their deliverance, as deeming their condition desperate, and past hope of recoverie. Vers. 12. How then shall Pharaoh heare me who am of uncircumcised lips?] That is, if the Israelites would not regard what I said to them, what hope can I have that Pharaoh should mind my words, especially considering that I am a man that have an imperfection in my speech? for doubtlesse it was with respect to his bad utterance that Moses called himself a man of uncircumcised lips. Because cir∣cumcision was with them the first badge of Gods people, and therefore those that were not circumcised were counted profane, and their uncircumcision was counted a grievous blemish; hence it was that in a figurative kind of speech they called those things that had any naturall or morall blemish uncircumcised, as a heart a mind or tongue uncircumcised. Vers. 14. These be the heads of their fathers houses.] Moses his chief intention is no doubt to shew the naturall stock of himself and Aaron, that he was a true Israelite, of the tribe of Levi, though he was brought up in Pharaohs court, and afterward led into the land of Midian; yet for order sake he begins first with the children of Reuben and Simeon, Levies elder brethren. Vers. 16. And the years of the life of Levi were an hundred thirtie and seven years.] This expresse mention of their age is of great use in Chronologie, especi∣ally for the opening of that speech concerning Israels peregrination. Exod. 12. 40. The sojourning of the Children of Israel who dwelt in Egypt was foure hundred ad thirtie years. It is evident in the 30. chapter of Genesis that Joseph was not above foure years younger then Levi. If therefore Joseph was 39 years old when Jacob went down into Egypt (as may be clearly gathered from Gen. 41. 46. because Jo∣seph was thirtie years old when he stood before Pharaoh, and when the seven yeas of plentie were gone, and two years of the famine, then Jacob came down into Egypt) consequently Levi was then three and fourtie years old; and since he lived, as it is here said, an hundred thirtie and seven years, it must needs follow that he lived in Egypt ninetie and foure years, or thereabouts.
CHAP. VII. Vers. 1. I Have made thee a God to Pharaoh.] Not onely because by Aaron (as God is wont to do by his prophets) he should in Gods name declae his will unto him for the delivering of his people; but also because of the divine authoritie given unto him in bringing those great plagues upon Egypt, which made Pharaoh to fear him as God, &c. Vers. 7. And Moses was fourescore years old, &c.] The age of Moses and Aaron is here inserted, 1. for the further evidence of the truth of the story, and the computation of the Chronologie of those times; 2. to set forth Gods glorie the more by this intimation of the weaknesse of his instruments; 3. to shew how long God in his wise providence had suffered the Egyptians to oppresse the Israelites with such cruel bondage, even from before the birth of Moses till he came to be fourescore years old; and 4. the more to commend the obedience of Moses and Aaron, that did not because of their great years shrink from this weighty employment which God had imposed upon them. Vers. 10 And they did so as the Lord had commanded, &c.] that is, 1. They again required Pharaoh in the name of the Lord to let the children of Israel go out of his land; for this God had commanded Moses and Aaron, chap. 6. 11. and it was a notable evidence of their faith and courage, that they durst again desire this of that proud king notwithstanding they had so enraged him formerly by the first delive∣rie of this their message, that in a furie he oppressed the people more then he had done before; and 2. when Pharaoh hereupon either by way of derision, or out of a captious device to trie what they could do, or because he had heard of the mi∣racles wrought, and the Israelites did will them to shew him some signe, if they would have him know that their God had sent them, Moses thereupon spake unto Aaron to cast his rod upon the ground, and said it should become a serpent; which Aaron accordingly did. For though it be not here expressed that Pharaoh asked a signe, yet may we justly conclude it from the foregoing verse, where the charge gi∣ven to Moses was, When Pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, Shew a miracle for you; then thou shalt say unto Aaron, Take thy Rod, and cast it before Pharaoh, and it shall become a serpent; and then it follows in this verse, And they did so, as the Lord had commanded, &c. Vers. 12. They also did in like manner with their inchantments.] That is, they caused their rods in outward shew and appearance to become serpents. These, or the chief of these, were Jannes and Jambres, whereof S. Paul speaks, 2. Tim. 3. 8. But Aarons rod swallowed up their rods.] And thus the Lord discovered that the power whereby Moses and Aaron had wrought their miracle, was infinitely fare above that of Satan, whereby the Magicians had endeavoured to equall the work which Moses had done. Vers. 13. And he hardned Pharaohs heart that he hearkned not to them.] Though hardnesse of heart be a grievous sinne, yet the hardening of the heart is not alwayes sin: and therefore is it here said of God, who cannot be the authour of sin, that he hardned Pharaohs heart, to wit, not by making his heart hard that was
soft before, nor by infusing any evil into him whereby his heart should be hardned; but in a way of judgement and punishment for his former sinnes: 1. by withdraw∣ing and withholding that grace whereby he should be wonne to repent, and yield unto the Lord, as the sunne causeth darknesse by withdrawing his light; 2. by deli∣vering him up to the power of Satan, and leaving him to his own corrupt lusts and affections; 3. by doing those things to him, which the Lord knew well would prove occasions actuating and exciting the evil that was in him, and cause him more and more to harden his heart against God. Vers. 17. I will smite with the rod that is in mine hand upon the waters &c. and they shall be turned into bloud.] They had shed the bloud of the Israelites children, and drowned them in the river, and now God in his just judgement makes the ri∣ver to yield them nothing but bloud. Vers. 18. And the fish in the river shall die, and the river shall stink.] This is added to shew the greivousnesse of the plague: for first it deprived them of that which was in Egypt their chief food, fish, as may easily be discerned by compa∣ring these places together, Num. 11. 5. We remember the fish that we did eat in Egypt freely. Esai. 19. 8. where the Lord threatens this as a great judgement to Egypt, The fishers also shall mourn, and all they that cast angles into the brooks shall lament, and they that spread nets upon the waters shall languish: and Exod. 8. 26. where it seems that the Egyptians did abhorre to eat of such cattel as the Israe∣lites used to sacrifice, It is not meet for us so to do, saith Moses, for we shall sacri∣fice the abomination of the Egyptians, &c. Secondly it deprived them of drink: for they used to drink the waters of Nilus in Egypt, Jer. 2. 18. What hast thou to do in the way of Egypt, to drink the waters of Sihor, &c? there being very seldome any rain in that countrey. Deut. 11. 10, 11. The land whither thou goest in to possesse it, is not as the land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy seed, and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs: But the land whither ye go to possesse it, is a land of hills and valleys, and drinketh water of the rain from heaven. And the Egyptians shall loath to drink of the water of the river.] The Israelites were therefore free from this plague also, as from others after, Exod. 8. 22. And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there, &c. Vers. 22. And the Magicians of Egypt did so with their inchantments.] But whence had they waters, since already they were all turned into bloud? surely ei∣ther from the land of Goshen, where it was likely the waters were not turned; or rather from the pits which the Egyptians digged, ver. 24. And all the Egyptians digged round about the river for water to drink: for it is unlikely they stayed for the doing of this till water could be fetched from the land of Goshen. CHAP. VIII. Vers. 3. ANd the river shall bring forth frogs abundantly, which shall go up in∣to the house of thy servants, and upon thy people, &c.] By expres∣sing
these persons that should be plagued with these frogs, the exempting of Israel seems to be implyed, as after it is plainly expressed, ver. 22. And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen in which my people dwell, &c. Vers. 4. And the frogs shall come up both on thee, &c.] The despicablenesse of the creature wherewith they were annoyed did no doubt aggravate the plague. Vers. 8. Intreat the Lord that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people.] Though the turning of their water into bloud all the land over was doubtlesse a very grievous plague, yet this of the frogs was more grievous then that: against the first they found some help, though not without great trouble, by digging for fresh water round about the river, chap. 7. 24. and per∣haps Pharaoh and the richer sort of his people had other sorts of drink in store for their own use; but now against this plague of the frogs, they could find no way to help or ease themselves, no not the greatest of them all▪ and therefore this forced Pharaoh to stoop a little, and to desire Moses and Aaron to pray unto the Lord that he would take away their frogs from them. Vers. 9. And Moses said unto Pharaoh, Glory over me.] The most conceive this to be spoken of the honour which should be done unto Pharaoh, that he should prescribe the time himself when the frogs should be taken away. But I rather think that it is such a kind of yielding to his desire, wherein Moses doth also imply his fear concerning the event, that Pharaoh would brag and boast when he had got the frogs removed, and not keep promise with him in letting Israel go. When shall I intreat for thee, &c.] That is, that you may know that it is the mightie work of God, and that it is not by chance or by any naturall means that the frogs are destroyed, prescribe the time your self when they shall be destroyed, and at that very time it shall be done. Vers. 10. And he said, To morrow.] He was so loth to be beholding to God, or Moses, that he rather chooses to endure th plague till next day, that he might make tryall whether they might not go away of themselves, hoping that they came by some naturall cause, and so would again go away. Vers. 14. And they gathered them together upon heaps.] God could have dri∣ven them into the river again, or have caused them to vanish away; but thus it pleased him to let them remain as a spectacle, unto the Egyptians, both to shew that it was a true miracle, and by their ill favour to put them in mind of their sinne, that made them stink before God. Vers. 16. And the Lord said unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, &c.] Because Pha∣raoh had mocked God, promising and then not performing, the Lord, to manifest his indignation, commands his servant to strike now without giving him warning beforehand (as at other times) what he meant to do. Stretch out thy rod, saith he, and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice, &c. and thus again too he trampleth on the pride of the Egyptians, punishing them by such base and con∣temptible creatures. Vers. 17. All the dust of the land became lice, &c.] That is, the dust in every part of the land▪ for it is an hyperbolicall speech. Vers. 18. And the Magicians did so with their inchantments to bring forth
lice, and they could not.] The Lord disables them in making this smallest and basest creature, for their greater confusion; and so the folly of these their Wisemen was made manifest to all men, 2. Tim. 3. 9. Vers. 20. ▪Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to the water, &c.] It seems to have been usuall with Pharaoh in the morn∣ing to go forth unto the waters, either for his health and pleasure, or rather of a su∣perstitious mind, as attributing divine honour to the river Nilus. There therefore Moses is appointed to meet him; both because he had no accesse into Pharaohs pre∣sence in his palace, and also that withall his threatning him with the ensuing plague might be the more publick. Vers. 21. Behold I will send swarms of flies upon thee, &c.] That is, mixt swarms of wasps, hornets, and all kind of flies Psal. 78. 45. He sent divers sorts of flies amongst them. The houses of the Egyptians shall be full of swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon they are.] That is, the ground whereon the Egyptians are: the meaning is, that they should be on all the land whereon the Egyptians dwelt, but not in Goshen where the Israelites dwelt, as in the following verse is expressed: and this exempti∣on of Israel is here first mentioned, to put Pharaoh in mind of it, as a most remark∣able thing, which if he would well think on must needs work upon his conscience. Vers. 24. And the Lord did so; and there came a grievous swarm of flies, &c.] Here is no mention of Aarons rod, and happely there was no use made of it, that Pharaoh might see the work was Gods and not mans. Vers. 25. Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the land.] That is, in the land of Egypt: being terrified with this fourth plague of the swarms of flies, that were sent amongst them, Pharaoh yields at first thus farre, that they should go and sacri∣fice unto the Lord, so that they went not out of Egypt. And hereby it is evident that during the time of their bondage in Egypt the Israelites were not suffered open∣ly to offer sacrifice to the Lord, but what they did this way they did in private se∣cretly; as indeed it is not likely that all the time of their being in Egypt they did wholly neglect this duty of Gods worship and service. Vers. 26. For we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the Lord our God, &c.] That is, that which the Egyptians abhorre to have sacrificed: the beasts which they worshipped, they could not endure to kill, or see them killed for sacrifice; and these were such as the Israelites were to offer up in sacrifice, namely bullocks (and the Egyptians worshipped a certain pyed bull or calf, called Apis) and also sheep and rammes, as we may see, Gen. 46. 34. For every shepherd is an abomination to the Egyptians. CHAP. IX. Vers. 1. THen the Lord said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh.] This phrase that is here used, go in unto Pharaoh, makes it most probable that when Moses was sent to denounce this following plague, he was not appointed to meet him at the river as formerly, but to go into his palace to him.
Vers. 2. If thou refuse to let them go, and wilt hold them still.] This word still is to put Pharaoh in mind ofhis intolerable impudencie if he should still refuse, God having so many wayes testified his displeasure against him. Vers. 3. Behold the hand of the Lord, &c.] Here is no mention neither of Moses rod. See chap. 8. vers. 24. There shall be a very greivous murrain.] Or Pestilence: for so is the word, here used in the originall, translated, chap. 5. vers. 3. Lest he fall upon us with pesti∣lence. Vers. 6. And all the cattel of Egypt died.] That is, the greatest part of all sorts: for that all died not, is evident vers. 19. where before the inflicting of another plague, it is said, Send therefore now and gather thy cattel, &c. Vers. 7. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, &c.] Here is no mention made of Pharaohs desiring Moses prayers: Now therefore it seems he did not so farre yield as formerly, and we may well conceive that the reasons were these, 1. Because the cattel died presently that were slain by this plague, and so the plague could not be removed by his prayers; and 2. Because his envious heart swelled more then ever against the Israelites, and thereupon it is likely he resolved to make up the losse they had sustained in their cattel, by taking away the cattel of the Israelites from them, and therefore he resolved that he would not let them go. Vers. 8. Take to you handfulls of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it, &c.] And so Aaron also, though Moses as the chief be here onely mentioned: for why else were they both appointed to take handfulls of ashes of the furnace: As for this sprinkling of ashes towards the heaven, it was but onely an outward signe to let Pharaoh know that the ensuing plague came from the God of heaven: and the signe was the fitter, because as they oppressed the Israelites with furnace-work in burning brick, so they are now punished with burning sores which came of ashes taken out of the furnace. Vers. 9. And it shall become small dust in all the land of Egypt.] That is, upon the casting up of these handfulls of ashes into the aire, there shall be a small dust, that shall fall both upon man and beast throughout all the land of Egypt. It is not ne∣cessarie, I conceive, to hold that those very handfulls of ashes were turned into such a cloud of dust, but onely that they should be a signe of that which should follow, to wit, that immediately there should be small dust showred down both upon man and beast: yet others do hold that those very handfulls of ashes, which Moses and Aaron threw up into the aire, did miraculously by the mighty power of God become a cloud of sall dust overspreading the whole land of Egypt, and so fell down both upon man and beast. And there shall be a boyl breaking forth with blains.] That is, this dust where it falls shall cause a boyl breaking out▪ that is, not yet ripe (for then are such boyls most painfull) yea a boyl breaking forth with blains; The word in the originall signifies scalding blains, or boyling blisters, and the hot ashes out of the furnace were intended as a signe that such they should be. The word is not used but in this place: it was an extraordinary and incurable boyl: for so it is called, Deut. 28. 27. The boyl of Egypt whereof thou cant not be healed.
Vers. 11. And the Magicians could not stand before Moses, because of the boyls, &c.] Because the Magicians could not by their enchantments bring forth lice, and were thereupon forced to acknowledge concerning that plague that it was the finger of God, chap. 8. 19. it is most probable that they did no more after that attempt to do the like to that which Moses had done; and therefore in the fourth & fifth plagues there hath been no mention at all made of them. But yet on the other side because here in this sixth plague it is plainly implyed that the Magicians were standing before Moses, it seems most probable, that even after they were so farre convinced by the failing of their Art in bringing forth lice, they still continued to embolden Pharaoh not to be moved with those things which were done, and were still ready at hand to resist Moses and Aaron as farre as they could: and therefore now by the shame and pain of these boyls that rose upon them they were driven away, and forced to give over their fighting against God. Vers. 14. For I will at this time send all my plagues, &c.] This word includes all the following plagues: for the Lord would have him know that though his hand had been already heavy upon him, yet there were many farre worse plagues still be∣hind, plagues that should sting him to the heart, which now he would poure forth thick and threefold upon him. Vers. 15. That I may smite thy people with pestilence, and thou shalt be cut off from the earth.] This must needs be meant of the killing of the first-born, chap. 12. as likewise that which followeth, thou shalt be cut off, &c. must needs be meant of his perishing in the red sea. Vers. 18. I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as hath not been in Egypt since the foundation thereof.] That is, since it became a land inhabited: for so this is explained vers. 24, there wa hail, &c. such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a Nation. And hereby also it is manifest, that there was sometimes rain and hail too in Egypt, though very rarely, and not so ordinarily as in other lands. Vers. 19. Send therefore now and gather thy cattle, &c.] This he saith, chiefly to set forth the terrour of this plague: if you provide not, saith Moses, all will be lost; and withall it aggravates the sinne of the Egyptians, that having had experi∣ence of Gods displeasure yet would not be forewarned, that would not be wonne by judgements nor mercie. Vers. 23. The Lord sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground, &c.] The description here given us of this strom of hail is to shew that i came not by the ordinary course of nature, but was a supernaturall and extraordi∣nary work of God, as appeared, 1. in that it fell upon all the land of Egypt, vers. 25. whereas storms of hail seldome extend so farre; 2. that it came at the very houre almost prefixed beforehand by Moses, vers. 18; 3. that onely in the land of Goshen, where the Israelites dwelt, there was no hail, vers. 26. 4. that the hail that fell was of such a bignesse, and that in Egypt where there seldome was any hail at all, that it did not onely destroy their corn and herbs, but also brake their trees and killed both man and beast that were in the storm, vers. 25. and so also the Psalmist saith, Psal. 78. 47, 48. He destroyed their vines with hail, and their sicamore trees
with great hailstones: He gave up their cattle also to the hail, and their flocks to hot thunderbolts: and so again, Psal. 105. 32. 33. and 5. that notwithstanding there was not lightning but fire mingled with the hail, even fire that ran along up∣on the ground, yet were not the hailstones melted with the heat of the fire, nor the flaming fire quenched with the hail. Vers. 27. I have sinned this time.] That is, now I cannot but acknowledge my sinne: he intended not, doubtlesse, to intimate that he was formerly innocent, and had been punished unjustly, though now indeed at this time he had sinned against God; but his purpose was to make known that now he did plainly see, and therefore did willingly at this time acknowledge it, that he had sinned against God, and therefore that God was righteous, and he and his people wicked. Vers. 29. As soon as I am gone out of the citie, I will spread abroad my hands unto the Lord.] This time was set by Moses, that as soon as he was gone, &c. he would spread abroad his hands, to wit, in prayer, unto the Lord, either with respect to that privacy of retiring by himself, which he intended when he undertook to per∣form this duty; or else to testifie his own confidence in God, that was not afraid to go out into the open field, notwithstanding this fearfull storm of hail which God had sent upon the land. Vers. 30. I know that ye will not yet fear the Lord God.] That is, though ye have seen and felt so much of Gods power and wrath, and now seem to yield and to begge for mercie; yet I am sure that as yet ye will not truly repent, and fear the Lord. This Moses might well say he knew, because of their carriage of themselves at present, in that they sought not after the way of worship of the true God, but onely cryed out to have the plague stayed: But besides, God had told Moses that Pharaoh should harden his heart, untill he were destroyed; and this he tells Pha∣raoh before he prayed for him, that so Pharaoh might not boast, when the plague was gone, that he had deceived Moses; and to let him know that he saw cause suffi∣cient why he should at this time make tryall of him yet once more by praying that this plague might be removed as he desired, though he knew beforehand that he would be never a whit the better for it. Vers. 31. And the flax and the barley were smitten.] It seems that in Egypt they sowed their barley at the same time with their wheat (which we do not) and there the barley would be by farre the forwardest. CHAP. X. Vers. 5. ANd they shall eat the residue of that which is escaped, which re∣maineth unto you from the hail, &c.] Hereby it appeareth that it was some good time after the plague of hail ere these locusts were sent, to wit, when the wheat and the rie might be destroyed, which when the hail fell were not yet grown up, chap. 9. 32. and the like we must hold concerning the other plagues. Vers. 6. Which neither thy fathers nor thy fathers fathers have seen, &c.] The meaning of this is not that they had never before seen locusts in Egypt (for all Hi∣stories witnesse that Egypt is often troubled with locusts) but that they had never
seen such multitudes of them, nor any that did so much mischief as these should do. Vers. 7. How long shall this man be a snare unto us?] This word, Snare, usually signifieth the means of destruction. See chap. 23. 33. They shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sinne against me: for if thou serve their gods, it will surely be a snare unto thee. Josh. 23. 13. They shall be snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, untill you perish, &c. and so the word is taken here. Vers. 10. Let the Lord be so with you, as I will let you go, &c.] This is spoken scoffingly, expressing his firm resolution that they should not all go, as they desired, and that by way of scorn and derision, Let the Lord be so with you, as I will let you go: as if he should have said, May your great God you boast of be with you, and prosper you, if I consent to this which you desire of me; you have a high opi∣nion of your mighty God, and what great things he will do for you; if I let you go upon those terms that you propound, let it be thought that your God was with you, and that he delivered you. Look to it, for evil is before you.] That is, ready to fall upon you. Some ex∣pound this to have been spoken by way of reproof, as understanding by evil, the evil purpose of the Israelites; evil is before you, that is, though you pretend onely a desire to go a little way to offer sacrifice, yet you have a wicked fraudulent inten∣tion herin, even to carrie away this whole people from being under my govern∣ment: but doubtlesse it is rather spoken by way of threatning, and by evil is meant the evil he would do to them, if they would not accept the favour now prof∣fered them, but persevere to require of him: Look to it, (saith he) for evil is before you; if you trouble me further I shall make you smart for it. Vers. 13. The east-wind brought the locusts.] Or grashoppers, and with them caterpillars, Psal. 78. 46. He gave also their increase unto the caterpillar, and labour to the locust: Psal. 105. 34, 35. He spake, and the locusts came, and cater∣pillars, and that without number, and did eat up all the herbs in their land, and devoured the fruit of their ground. Vers. 16. I have sinned against the Lord your God, and against you.] To wit, against Moses and Aaron, by using them so scornfully and reprochfully, by threat∣ning them for the faithfull discharge of their dutie, and driving them away out of his presence, as in the 10. and 11. verses; or else the Israelites in generall, by the cruel bondage under which he had held them, and by refusing to dismisse them, and to grant them that libertie of going forth to serve the Lord, which by Moses and Aaron they had so often desired of him. Vers. 17. Now therefore I pray thee forgive me my sinne onely this once.] That is, pardon the wrong I have done you, and procure that the Lord may not further be offended with me; and if this be done this once, I require no more; for if I fail you any more, and not do what I promise, I desire not that you should ever any more afford me the least favour. Yet withall we must know, that the main thing which Pharaoh intended in desiring that his sinne might be forgiven, was that the plague might be taken away, which now lay upon them: for he was farre from a sincere desire of reconciliation with od▪
Vers. 17. Intreat the Lord your God that he may take away from me this death onely.] That is, this deadly plague or destruction. And so he calls this plague of the locusts, not onely because it killed and destroyed all the fruit of the ground, but also especially because by this means it deprived them of that which was to be food both for man and beast; it was likely if it continued to bring a grievous fa∣mine, and so death and mortalitie amongst them. As for that opinion of some Ex∣positours, that these locusts with their biting killed even men themselves, it is alto∣gether uncertain, and cannot be concluded from these words. Yet probable it is, that there were sometimes in those countreys some kind of locusts that killed men with their biting, and that therefore Rev. 9. 5. it is said of those cruel enemies of the Church, that are compared to locusts ascending out of the bottomlesse pit, that, their torment was as the torment of a scorpion when he striketh a man. Vers. 21. Even darknesse which may be felt.] The darknesse threatned is here called darknesse that may be felt, either by way of an hyperbole to signifie what an exceeding great darknesse it should be, or else because the aire should be so thick∣ned with grosse mists and vapours, that it might be felt; which in such an extraor∣dinary horrid darknesse as that was might indeed well be. Vers. 23. They saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for three dayes.] They saw not one another, because neither it seems had they any light by sunne moon or starres from above, nor yet from fire or candle beneath, the thick clouds wherewith the aire was darkned being such, that either they did put out the fire; or at least wholly hide and cover it from the sight of men. And being thus de∣prived of all light whatsoever, and that by a divine hand of judgement, no marvell though with the terrour thereof, they durst not so much as move from the places where they were, as is here expressed. How easily the Israelites, that had light in their dwellings, might have gone away with all that they had, whilest the Egyptians lay thus for three dayes together imprisoned in darknesse, we may easily conceive; but they had learnt to depend and wait upon God, and would not stirre but by his appointment. Vers. 24. And Pharaoh called unto Moses, and said, &c.] Pharaohs sending for Moses, and charging him not to see his face any more, ver. 28. argue plainly that this was done after the three dayes darknesse was over. But is it likely that when the plague was removed he would relent? To which I answer, And is it like∣ly that lying bound in the chains of darknesse he would not have yielded to let the cattel go, or at least have desired the help of Moses prayers as at other times? Onely let your flocks, and your heards be stayed.] And this he desired chiefly that they might be as pledges of their return again. Vers. 28. I will see thy face again no more.] That therefore which follows in the next chapter, concerning the death of their first-born, was spoken immediately by Moses at this time before he went from Pharaoh, and therefore it is said, chap. 11. 8. that he went out in a great anger.
CHAP. XI. Vers. 1. ANd the Lord said unto Moes yet ill I bring on plage more up∣on Pharaoh.] That is, the Lord had said unto Moses, yet will I bring &c. for this message Moses rceived from the Lord immediately, before Pharaoh sent last for him chap 10. 24. when he charged him not to see his face any more; and it is here added as the gound of Moses confidence in answering so readily as we have it in the last verse of the former chapter, that he would come to him no more; the reason was, because God had before that last coming to Pharaoh told him this which is here recorded. It is true, God had told Moses at first somewhat of the Israelites borrowing of the Egyptians jewels of silver and gold, Exod. 3. 21, 22. And it shall come to pass that when y go, ye shall not go empty, but every wo∣man shall borrow of hr nighbour, and of her that soouneth in her house jewels of siver, and jewels of gold, &c. as also of this plague of slaying their first-born, Exod. 4. 23. Let my sonn go that he may serve me; and if thou refuse to let him go, behold I will slay thy sonne, even hy first-born. But this message which is here related, he received from the Lord immediately before that his last going to Pha∣raoh, whereof mention is made in the 24. verse of the former chapter: and there∣fore he saith, Yet will I bring one plague more upon Pharaoh, &c. Vers. 3. The man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaohs servants, &c.] Implying thathe reverend esteem the Egyptians had of Moses was a furtherance to the enclining of their hearts thus to lend their jewels to the Hebrews. Vers. 4. And Moses said, Thus saith the Lord, &c.] That is, immediately af∣ter he had told him that he would see his face no more, chap. 10. ver. 29. Vers. 5. Even unto the first-born of the maid-servant that is behind the mill.] That is, grinding at the mill: se chap. 12. 29. Now those that did thus work at the mill were said to be behind it, because they used to thrust the mill before them as they wrought. Vers. 7. But against any of the children of Israel shall not a dog move his tongue.] Which yet are wont to bark in the night at the least noise: The speech is proverbiall, and signifies that they should not have the leas disturbance among them, but should all quiely take their rest in their beds. This is spoken as it were in opposition that which Moss had immediately▪ before said concerning the Egyptians; when as there should be a great cry amongst them because of the death of their first-born, amongst the Israelites all should be still and quiet, not so much as a dog should amongst them move his tongue▪ either against man or beast. CHAP. XII. Vers. 1. ANd the Lord spake unto Moses and Aron in the land of Egypt, &c.] It is not precisely expressed when the Lord spake this which here followeth to Moses and Aaron concerning the institution of the Passeover; yet most probably it may be gathered hat it was before the three dayes darknesse,
wherewith the Lord punished the Egyptians: for the Passeover was kept on the foureteenth day, the day after the first-born of the Egyptians were slain; and it seems it was but the day before the thirteenth day, when Moses being sent for to Pharaoh, immediately after that darknesse was over, and finding he would not dismisse the Israelites, denounced that last plague, the death of the first-born, and that it should befall them the night following, chap. 11. 4, 5. Thus saith the Lord, About midnight will I go out into the midst of Egypt, and all the first-born in the land of Egypt shall die. Now these directions concerning the Passeover were given before the tenth day of this seventh moneth; for upon the tenth day they were enjoyned (as we see her ver. 3.) to set apart the lambe which was to be eat∣en at the Passeover. Vers. 2. This moneth shall be unto you the beginning of moneths.] That is, the moneth Abib. See chap. 13. 4. This day came ye out in the moneth Abib, which in the Chaldee tongue was also called Nisan and contained for the most part some of our March, and some of our April; whereas formerly they began their year with the moneth Ethanim, or after the Chaldees Tisri, which agreeth with our Septem∣ber, as is evident Exod. 23. 16. where we may see that one year ended, and ano∣ther began at the feast of in gathering, which was after all their harvest. Now in remembrance of this their miraculous deliverance they were appointed to begin it with this moneth, which was formerly the seventh in number. And yet this ac∣count was aferward kept onely in Ecclesiasticall affairs: for the Jubilees and such other civil affairs, it began as it had done before, Lev. 25. 8, 9, 10. Vers. 3. In the tenth day of this moneth they shall take to them every man a lambe, &c.] To wit, the very day whereon afterwards the Israelites entre d the land of Canaan, Josh. 4. 19. The people came up out of Jordan on the tenth day of the first moneth. Now a lambe, or a kid (for that is added ver. 5. Ye shall take it out from the sheep, or from the goats) was appointed to be set apart on this day for the Passeover; and that no doubt as a significant type and figure of Christ, who is therefore called our Passeover sacrificed for us, 1. Cor. 5. 7. and by the Baptist, John 1. 29. the lambe of God which taketh away the sinnes of he world. For as these lambes were taken away from the rest of the flock, so was Chrit taken from among men, Hebr. 5. 1. and was indeed a man as other men are, and sent into the world by his bloud to save us from death: and the lambe being of all creatures the most harmlesse, meek, and profitable, it was the fitter to be a shadow of him in whom the truth of these things was transcendently eminent. Vers. 6. And ye shall keep it up untill the foureteenth day of the same moneth.] There is no mention made of this separating the Paschall lambe from the flock foure dayes before the feast, in other places where the Passeover is commanded. At this time it was thus ordered, both that it might be in a readinesse, and not be to seek when they were encumbred with businesse about their going away; especially that in this, as in other things, it might be a type of Christ, who was holy, harmlesse▪ undefiled, and separate from sinners; and that there was such a degree of perfection required in him who was to be offered up as a sacrifice of propitiation for us, as was no where amongst men to be found.
And the whole assembly of the congregation of Isral shall kill it in the even∣ing.] In the Hebrew it is between the two evenings. The meaning of this may thus be understood: The naturall day from sunne to sunne the Jews used to divide into foure parts, the first was from sunnerising to nine in the forenoon; the second con∣tained the three following houres, from nine to twelve, and was called the sixth hore; the third contained the three next, from twelve to three in the afternoone, and was called the ninth houre; the fourth reached from thence unto sunsetting: so that between three a clock in the afternoon (which was the first evening) and sunsetting (which is here reckoned the other evening) was the time appointed for the killing of the Passeover, at which time also Christ the true Paschall lambe dyed for us, as is evident Matth. 27. 46. 50. And about the ninth houre Jesus cryed with a loud voyce, Eli, Eli, &c. vers. 50. Jesus, when he had cryed again with a loud voice, yielded up the Ghost. And so, Once in the end of the world appeared to put away sinne by the sacrifice of himsef, Heb. 9. 27. Vers. 7. And they shall take of the bloud, and strike it on the two sideposts, &c.] In the 13. verse the reason is expressed why the Lord enjoyned the Israelites thus to strike the bloud of the Paschall lambe, on the two sideposts, and on the upper dore∣post of the houses wherein they did eat it, The bloud (saith the Lord) shall be to you for a token upon the houses where you are, and when I see the bloud I will passe over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you. And hence we may probably gather, that this also was ordained onely for this Passeover in Egypt, when the de∣stroying angel was to passe over the Israelites houses that had their doores sprinkled with the bloud of the lambe, and not for future times; 2. That hereby also was sig∣nified the applying of Christs bloud by faith, to the hearts of believers, which is cal∣led the sprinkling of the bloud of Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 12. 3. That where two smaller households joyned together for the eating of the Paschall lambe, either they all conti∣nued together that following night in the house wherein they eat, or else that the doores of both their houses had the blod of the lambe sprinkled upon them. Vers. 8. And they shall eat the flesh in that night; rost with fire, and unleavened bread, and with bitter herbs, &c.] This rosting of the lambe was chiefly enjoyned, with respect unto the great haste and speed they were to make, because, it might be sooner made ready by rosting then by seething; and withall it signifyed the bitter∣nesse of Christs passion. So likewise the unleavened bread did betoken haste also, for unleavened cakes are sooner made. But withall it signified, if they will be Gods pe∣culiar people they must be purged from all those old superstitions and corruptions wherein they live that have not this interest in God▪ 1. Cor. 5. 8. Therefore let us keep the Feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wicked∣nesse; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. And as for the bitter herbs that were eaten with it, they were a memoriall of their bitter bondage in Egypt, and withall a type of our mortification, and readnesse to undergo afflictions with Christ. Vers. 9. Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but rost with fire, his head with his legges, &c.] Meaning that the lambe must be rosted all and whole: not so much but the inward parts (after they had been taken out and washed) must
be put in again and rosted with the rest: whereby may well be signified our com∣munion with Christ whole and undivided, 1. Cor. 1. 13. Is Christ divided? &c. Gal. 2. 20. I am crucified with Christ: Neverthelesse I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the sonne of God, &c. Vers. 10. And ye shall let nothing of it remain untill the morning, &c.] Because he would not have them imployed to any other use then what he had appointed. And besides it might signifie that when the morning of the Gospel came, there should be no more use of those Legall shadows. Vers. 11. And thus shall ye eat it; with your loyns girded, your shoes on your feet, &c.] These ceremonies were also peculiar to that Passeover in Egypt, and therefore not observed by Christ. They were principally intended as an expression of their faith concerning their sudden going out of Egypt, which God had pro∣misd. Vers. 12. And against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgement, &c.] It may well be meant, of Gods confounding their Idole-Gods by punishing the peo∣ple that worshipped them, and delivering the Israelites whom they had kept in bondage: for hereby God discovered the vanity of those Idoles, and as it were laid their honour in the dust. But because, Numb. 33. 4. Moses speaks of this execu∣ting judgements upon their gods, as a severall act from that of killing their first-born, I rather conceive, that hereby is meant either the killing of the first-born of those beasts which they worshipped as gods; or else, that some such notable accident befell the Egyptian Idoles as did the Philistines Dagon before the Ark. Vers. 14. And this day shall be unto you for a memoriall, &c.] Here begins the direction for the observation of the Passeover in succeeding generations. You shall keepit a feast by an ordinance for ever.] That is, untill the coming of Christ who is our Passeover for ever; since whose passion there is a like sacrament used also in the Church of the new Testament, in remembrance of his death untill he come. Vers. 15. Seven dayes shall ye eat unleavened bread, &c.] This number of dayes was appointed, both because seven (being a full and perfect number) figured the whole time of their life, wherein they were still to remember with thankfulnesse this deliverance; and also because the destruction of the Egyptians in the red sea follow∣ed seven dayes after the Israelites went out of Egypt. Now the first of these seven dayes was the fifteenth day of this moneth, and began at the evening, immediately after the eating of the Passeover, which they did at the very latter end of the fourteenth day. Whosoever eateth leavened bread from the first day untill the seventh day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.] This phrase in this place signifieth not onely the cutting of them off from the communion and society of the Saints both in this life and in the next; as in Gen. 17. 14. The uncircumcised manchild, whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; but also the cutting of them off by death, as in the like case, Exod. 31. 14. Ye shall keep the Sabbath therefore, &c. every one that defileth it shall surely be put to death: for
whosoever doth any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his people. Vers. 16. No manner of work shall be done in them, save that which every man must eat, that onely may be done of you.] And yet this might not be done on the Sabbath, as is clear Exod. 16. 5. 23. 29. On the sixth day they shall prepare that which they bring in, and it shall be twice as much as they gather dayly. To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath▪ bake that which you will bake to day, &c. and Exod. 35. 23. Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the Sab∣bath day. Vers. 22. And none of you shall go out at the doore of his house untill the mor∣ning.] This also was onely for the Passeover in Egypt (for Christ with his disciples went out that night. Matth. 26. 30. And when they had sung an hymne, they went out into the mount of Olives) and it was commanded, by this signe to teach thee that it was the bloud of Christ, the true Paschal lambe, whereby they must be defen∣ded from the destroying angel. Vers. 24. And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance for thee and for thy sonnes for ever.] That is, the commandment of the Passeover, and the feast of un∣leavened bread (but not those ceremonies, vers. 7, 11, 12. which were appointed for this Passeover in Egypt onely) you and your children shall observe them for ever, to wit, during the time of the Sanctuary and the Legall service: for thus this word for ever is often used in the Scripture▪ with respect to the thing spoken of, as Psal. 89. 1. I will sing the mercies of God for ever, that is, as long as I live. Vers. 25. When ye be come to the land which the Lord will give you, &c. ye shall keep this service.] The command for keeping the Passeover was therefore chiefly intended for the land of Canaan, howbeit they kept it once in the wildernesse, Numb. 9. Vers. 29. Unto the first-born of the captive that was in the dungeon, &c.] Where they ground at the mill, Exod. 11. 5. Even unto the first-born of the maid servant that is behind the mill. Vers. 30. And there was a great cry in Egypt: for there was not a house where there was not one dead.] Either therefore the eldest and chief of the family was slain in those houses where there were no children; or else the words must be taken figu∣ratively, there was not a house where there was not one dead, that is, there was not a house that had a first-born where there was not one dead; or there was scarce any house without one dead in it generally, the first-born were slain in every house, as elsewhere the Scripture useth the like expression; Jer. 5. 1. Runne ye to and fr through the sreets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that executeth judgement, that seeketh the truth, and I will pardon it. John 12. 19. Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? behold▪ the world is gone after him. Vers. 31. And he called for Moses and Aaron by night, &c.] That is, Pharaoh sent messengers to Moses and Aaron, to call them up, and bid them presently to go away with the Israelites as they had desired. For that Moses and Aaron went not now to Pharaoh, may be probably gathered from that which Moses had said to Pharaoh a while before, chap. 10. 29. Thou hast spoken well, I will see thy fac
again no more. Yea indeed so violent were the people in hastening them away, that it is not likely they would allow the delay of their going to Pharaoh. Vers. 33. And the Egyptians were urgent with the people, &c.] With humble and earnest entreaties, Exod. 11. 8. And all these thy servants shall come down un∣to me, and bow down themselves unto me, saying, Get thee out, &c. Vers. 35. And they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, &c.] To wit, at that time when they were going away. I know that many Expositours hold tha this was done before, betwixt the plague of the three dayes darknesse and this last of the death of their first-born. But I see no reason why we should not think it was done in the order as here it is related, especially considering that when the Egyptians were now in such distraction of sorrow, and thereupon so importunate with the Israe∣lites to go, they were most likely to lend them whatever they would desire to bor∣row, that they might hasten them to be gone. Vers. 36. And they spoyled the Egyptians.] To wit, by carrying away their jewels and other ornaments which they had borrowed of them. It is evident (ac∣cording to our translation) that the Israelites, alledging that they wee to keep a solemn feast unto the Lord in the wildernesse, desired of their neighbours the Egypti∣ans their jewels of silver and gold for their use at that time, and that the Egyptians lent them those things, as not knowing nor believing any other but that they in∣tended onely a three dayes journey into the wildernesse, there to sacrifice unto the Lord; yet withall as evident it is that they never intended to restore them again, but to carry them quite away, and that not onely by Gods permission but by his exprsse command; for he had enjoyned them by Moses to do so, chap. 11. 2. and had told them that by this means they should spoyl the Egyptians, chap. 3. 22. So that the most that can be conceived in the behalf of the Israelltes herein▪ is this; that they did not say they would bring these things again, but onely desired them of the Egyp∣tians for their use in keeping a feast unto the Lord concealing and dissembling what farther they intended, to wit, to carry them quite away with them. Now in all thi, notwithstanding we cannot charge the Israelites with sinne, because they therein obeyed the commandment of God, whose word to obey can never be il: And much lesse can we charge God with unrighteousnesse, God forbid: His will is the supreme rule of all righteousnesse▪ and needs it must be good and just which he com∣mands. Besides all that is in the world is Gods; and is it not lawfull for him to do what he will with his own? Matth. 20. 15. The riches of the Egyptians were more Gods then theirs: and most just it was with God by this means to recompence the Israelites for the hard service and injuries they had suffered in Egypt, and as it were to pay them their wages, which the Egyptians had most unjustly detained from them. Vers. 37. The children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth.] Which signifieth boothes; so called, because there the Israelites made them boothes of the boughs of trees, in remembrance whereof was the feast of tabernacles, Levit. 23. About six hundred thousand foot, that were men, besides children.] This shews the virtue of that promise, Gen. 46. 3. I am God, the God of thy father; fear not to go down into Egypt, for I will there make of thee a great nation.
Vers. 38. And a mixed multitude went up also with them, &c.] That is, strangers, men of severall Nations, both such as were servants to the Israelites, and others sojourning there, who were moved by Gods mighty works to go out of Egypt with them; and that doubtlesse the rather, because Egypt must now needs be in a sad estate, by so many grievous plagues, as God had brought upon them. Vers. 40. The sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was foure hundred and thirty years.] The speech is figurative: for the meaning is, that from Abrahams calling out of Chaldea to sojourn in the land of Canaan, unto this de∣parture of the Israelites out of Egypt, was foure hundred and thirty years: as St Paul explains it, Gal. 3. 17. And this I say, that the Covenant that was con∣firmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was foure hundred and thirty years after cannot disanull, &c. See the notes upon Gen. 15. 13. Vers. 46. Neither shall ye break a bone thereof.] This was enjoyned the Israe∣lites, as most other of the ceremonies that were to be observed in eating the Paschall lambe, that it might put them in mind in what haste they were at their going out of Egypt, when they were first commanded to keep this ordinance; and that because they that eat in haste do not use to stand breaking of the bones that they may pick out the marrow from thence. But withall God intended hereby the more manifest∣ly to discover that the Paschall lambe was a type of Christ our Passeover, or Paschall lambe, as the Apostle calls him, 1. Cor. 5. 7. in whom there should be an exact accomplishment of the truth of this figure: for when the souldiers had broken the legges of the two thieves that were crucified with Christ (which they used to do to them that were crucified before they were yet dead, thereby to mak their sufferings the greater) coming to Christ and finding that he vvas dead already, they brake not his legges: And these things were done (saith St John chap. 19. 36.) that the Scrip∣ture should be fulfilled, A bone of him shall not be broken. CHAP. XIII. Vers. 2. SAnctifie unto me all the first-born, &c.] That is, make known unto my people that they are to be put apart to holy uses for me and my service. Now the first-born were thus consecrated as a kind of first-fruits, to signifie that all Gods people, which are a congregation of first-born, being redeemed from death by the bloud of Christ, were bound to consecrate themselves to the service of the Lord; Rom. 12. 1. I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your rea∣sonable service. Whatsoever openeth the wombe among the children of Israel both of man and of beast, it is mine.] To wit, by a peculiar right, because he preserved them in Egypt vvhen the Egyptians vvere killed: and therefore such might not be given as a vovv of freevvill offering, Levit. 27. 26. Onely the firstling of the beast, which should be the Lords firstling, no man shall sanctifie it, whether it be ox or sheep. Vers. 5. And it shall be, when the Lord shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, &c.] He mentions the goodnesse of the land vvhich he had promised,
h at it was a land flowing with milk and hony, as a spurre to quicken them in Gods service; and makes known that the celebrating of this solemnity should not begin till they were entred the land of Canaan, the better to assure them, that though there were now so many strong Nations dwelling in that countrey, yet they should drive them out and possesse their land. Vers. 9. And it shall be for a signe unto thee upon thine hand, and for a memo∣riall between thine eyes, &c.] That is, this feast of unleavened bread shall be as a continuall means to call to your remembrance your deliverance out of Egypt: as when men use to put a ring, or to tie a thread upon their fingers, or to hang jewels upon their foreheads, hanging between their eyes (a custome it seems in those times) to put them in mind of something which they are very carefull not to for∣get. Vers. 13. And every firstling of an asse thou shalt redeem with a lambe.] That is, the firstling of all unclean beasts: for this one kind is put for the rest, because there were great store of them in that countrey. See Numb. 8. 15. The first-born of man shalt thou surely redeem, and the firstling of unclean beasts shalt thou redeem. And all the first-born of man shalt thou redeem.] When and at what price, see Numb. 18. 16. And those that are to be redeemed, from a moneth old shalt thou redeem, according to thine estimation for the money of five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, which is twenty gerahs. Vers. 17. Left peradventure the people repent when they see warre, and they return to Egypt.] The Philistines were enemies to the land of Egypt; and hence we reade that whilest the Israelites lived in Egypt, in the dayes of Ephraim the son of Jacob, the men of Gath that were born in that land, slew some of the sonnes of Ephraim because they came down to take away their cattel, 1. Chron. 7. 21. much more therefore was it likely, that now they would deny them passage though their countrey. Now should they see warre where the easinesse and shortnesse of the way they had gone might invite hem to escape, and avoyd that trouble by a spee∣dy return back again into Egypt, it is likely the fear of the enemy would soon have made them turn their backs upon Canaan. To prevent this, God leads them a way where the red sea, and troublesome wildernesse, through which they had passed, might beat them off from attempting to return, though they should meet with enemies that should make warre against them. Vers. 18. And the children of Israel went up harnessed out of the land of Egypt.] Some by this word harnessed, understand onely that they went away girt up and prepared for their journey, as travellers used to do▪ But others, and I think more probably, understand it of their going up armed in a military order; whereto a∣grees also that Translation of this word which is set in the margin of our Bibles, that they went up five in a rank: for considering 1. that the same word in the origi∣nall is used both here and Josh. 1. 14. where it is translated ye shall passe before your brethren armed; and 2. that immediately after they were in the wildernesse they fought with the Amalekites, I see not why we may not think that they went up in a military manner armed: for though they were in bondage to the Egypti∣ans, yet being such a numerous people, living together in the land of Goshen, it is
not probable that they were left wholly unfurnished of armes, wherewith they were to defend that part of the countrey. However the drift doubtlesse of this place is to shew that they went not away in a confused manner, as men that fled, but that being all me together at Succoth (a place which before they had appointed for their Rendevouz) they marched away from thence in battel-array. Vers. 19. And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him.] Though the re∣moving of the bones of Joseph as chief be here onely mentioned, and that because of the oath that was made to him concerning this, Gen. 50. 25. Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence; yet doubtlesse either the bones of the other Patriarchs were now carryed away with Josephs; or else the Israelites had before when they died carry∣ed their dead bodies out of Egypt, and buried them in Canaan, as they did Jacobs. For of all the Patriarchs Stephen said. Act 7. 16. that they were carryed over into Sichem, and laid in the sepulchre that Abraham bought for a summe of money of the sonnes of Emor the father of Sichem. Vers. 21. And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, &c.] That is, the Lord to shew the Israelites which way they should go, caused a cloud, the signe of his presence, to go before their camp, not onely by day, but also by night too, when they had any occasion to travel in the night; and the fashion of it was alwayes like that of a pillar, ascending round and straight from the earth towards the being in all other respects by day like other clouds, onely by night it was red in appearance like fire, Numb. 9. 15. called therefore here, a pil∣lar of fire: and so it served not onely to direct them which way to go (for which way soever that went in the forefront of the camp, the Israelites still followed it, and when they were to stay in any place, then that removed backward into the middest of the Camp, and rested upon the tabernacle, Numb. 9. 18.) but besides it served in the night to give them light, and in the day to cover and shelter them from the extremity of the sunnes heat. He spread a cloud for a covering (saith the Psalmist, Psal. 105. 39.) and fire to give light in the night: for though it ascend∣ed up a great height in the aire straight like a pillar, yet there it dispersed it self abroad, it seems, at least when need was, like any other cloud, and so did shadow them from the sunne (as smoke useth to do) concerning the which the like phrase is used, Judg. 20. 40. The flame began to arise with a pillar of smok. And there∣fore it is said, Numb. 14. 14. that this cloud stood over them. Now in all these respects this figured Christs guidance and protection of his Church in their tra∣vels towards the heavenly Canaan; and hereto the Prophet seems to allude, Esay 4. 5, 6. The Lord will create upon every dwelling place in Mount Sion, and upon her assemblies a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence. CHAP. XIV. Vers. 1. ANd the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, &c.] That is, before their removall from Succoth, though it be here set down after it: for there
they began to turn aside towards these straights. That we may know that Moses did not ignorantly bring them into such a place of danger, where they had the sea before them, the mountains on one hand, and the tower or city Migdol, a garrison of the Egyptians, on the other, and so no place to passe out, but to return upon the face of the enemy; I say, that we might not misjudge of this action, Moses tells us that it was done by Gods speciall direction, and that to these ends: 1. To avoyd warre with the Philistines; 2. To harden Pharaohs heart, and to draw him forth upon a supposed advantage gotten; 3. To try the faith of the Israelites. Vers. 3. For Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel, They are entangled in the land, &c.] That is, when Pharaoh shall begin to think, that by reason of the difficulties of the wildernesse you know not how to scape away, this shall embolden him to pursue you to his own distruction. Vers. 5. And it was told the King of Egypt that the people fled.] That is, that they were making away as fast as they could, and went not onely to sacrifice un∣to the Lord. It is not meant of flying for fear (for it is afterward said, ver. 8. that they went out with a high hand, that is, boldly powerfully in good array of battel as in chap. 13. 18. The children of Israel went up harnessed, &c.) but it is meant of their marching away with a purpose to get out of his service. Vers. 8. The children of Israel went out with a high hand.] Not like fugitives, but like a free people rescued out of their bondage by the mighty power of God (so to sinne with a high hand, is to do it boldly and openly, Numb. 15. 30.) and as men that now thought themselves secure and out of danger of the Egyptians. Vers. 10. And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the children of Israel lift up their eyes, &c.] Implying that they were the more terrified because they never feared this danger, till unexpectedly looking forth they saw the Egyptians close at their heels. And the children of Israel cryed out unto the Lord.] That is, in the sudden∣nesse of the danger they cryed out for help, but without faith, as men that knew not what they did. Vers. 13. And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, &c.] Im∣plying that they should not need to stirre in the businesse: if they would onely be quiet, and with a settled mind wait upon the Lord for help, he would deliver them without their help. Vers. 14. The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.] That is, be still, not be put to any trouble in the least resistance of them: for this phrase, of holding the peace, is often applyed to actions, and then it signifieth being still, and not moving to do any thing, Psal. 50. 3. Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence. and Psal. 83. 1. Keep not thou silence, O God; hold not thy peace, and be not still. Esa. 42. 14. I have long time holden my peace, I have been still, and refrained my self. Vers. 15. And the Lord said unto Moses, Wherefore criest thou unto me?] This may be meant of the time before Moses had so encouraged the people, as is expressed in the former verses; and then it is here related as the ground of that his confident promise, ver. 13. As for those words of God to Moses, Wherefore criest
thou unto me? they imply that he did call upon God, though it were not before mentioned. Neither doth God mislike or reprove him for this, but onely hastens him to do what was to be done, and to strike the sea with his rod that it might be divided, and so give way to the Israelites to passe over. Vers. 19. And the Angel of the Lord which went before the camp, &c.] That is, Christ, called Jehovah, Exod. 13. 21. And the Lord went before them by day, &c. and he is said to remove, onely because the signes of his presence went to ano∣ther place. Vers. 22. And the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry ground.] That is, they went into the channel of the red sea upon the dry-ground, and so were in the midst of the sea, having the sea both on their right hand and on their left. So farre were the people now encouraged, that had ere while with much bitternesse murmured against Moses and Aaron, partly by the removing of the cloud betwixt them and the Egyptians, partly by the miraculous dividing of the sea upon Moses lifting up his hand over it, but chiefly by the working of Gods Spi∣rit in their hearts, that Moses leading the way, they were not afraid to follow him, notwithstanding the terrour of the waters standing up on each side as they went; whence it is that the Apostle saith, that by faith they passed through the sea, Heb. 11. 29. and therefore it is also that the Apostle saith, 1. Cor. 10. 2. that they were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea; to wit, because the condition wherein they were, as they were led by the ministry of Moses under the cloud and through the sea, was a notable figure or representation of our Baptisme, to wit, in that as they by the cloud were covered from the heat of the sunne, and were en∣lightned in the way they should go; so those that are baptized by the water and the Spirit of Christ, are covered from the burning wrath of God, and enlightned to the saving knowledge of the way of life: and as they in the red sea passed as it were through death to life, the red sea being the means of saving them, and of the destruction of the Egyptians; so Christ by the waters of Baptisme, as the outward signe, doth save us, our enemies, sinne and death, being utterly destroyed. And the waters were a wall unto them, &c.] That is standing up as a heap. Psal. 78. 13. He made the waters to stand as an heap; and so as a wall of defence to them, on their right hand and on their left. Vers. 24. The Lord looked unto the host of the Egyptians, through the pillar, &c.] That is, whereas hitherto the Lord had suffered them to go on, and seemed not to regard them▪ now he began to shew himself in his displeasure against them. And troubled the host of the Egyptians.] That is, the Lord caused grievous tem∣pests and storms to fall upon them, thunder and lightnings, and hail and rain: See Psal. 77. 17, 18. The clouds poured out water, the skies sent out a sound: thine arrows also went abroad. The voyce of thy thunder was in the heaven, the light∣nings lightned the world, the earth trembled and shook. Hereby he struck them with an apprehension of Gods wrath, overthrew their tents, put them all into disor∣der, and made such a tumult in their host, that flying in this disorder they runne one against another, and were troubled in their flight. Vers. 25. And took off their chariot-wheels, that they drave them heavily, &c.]
That is, the Lord by his rain and tempests had so softned the ground that their wheels were clogged, and sunk into the ground, whereby some might be broken and taken off; all drove heavily, and had much adoe to get forward. Vers. 30. And Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the seashore.] The Israelites, being gotten over to the other side, saw, no doubt, how upon Moses stretching forth his hand again over the read sea the waters, that stood before up on heaps, came rowling in upon the Egyptians, who had followed the Israelites close behind them, and so drowned them; and so it is said in the following verse, that Israel saw that great work which the Lord did upon the Egyptians. But afterwards they saw also the dead bodies of the Egyptians upon the shore; and if they waited not some time for this, it was doubtlesse an extraordinary work of Gods power, since dead bodies that sink under water do not usually flote upon the water, that so they may be dri∣ven upon the shore, till they have been some few dayes under water. But happe∣ly indeed the Israelites might wait so long by the sea side, expecting to furnish them∣selves with the spoyl both of the dead bodies and their carriages. Nor did the sight of the Egyptians, being now but dead carcases, crosse the truth of that which Moses had said, ver. 13. The Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for ever. CHAP. XV. Vers. 2. THe Lord is my strength and song.] That is, the Lord it is that hath subdued and destroyed our enemies; being weak in our selves we are strong in him, who hath fought for us, and the Lord it is therefore of whom I mean to sing, and whose praise I desire in my song to set forth: and this is the first song which we meet with in the Scriptures. He is my God, and I will prepare him an habitation.] Moses here by the spirit of prophecy foresheweth that the people should build a peculiar tabernacle for the Lords service. Vers. 7. And in the greatnesse of thine excellency thou hast overthrown them that rose up against the.] That is, by many glorious and miraculous works, declaring the transcendent greatnesse of thine excellency, hast thou overthrown the Egyptians, who in rising up against thy people did rise up against thee. Thou sentest forth thy wrath which consumed them as stubble.] That is, which did suddenly and utterly consume them: for stubble is consumed when the fire takes it, and is gone on a sudden; and whereas when wood is burnt there will be coals left, when the stubble is burnt, it scarce leaves any ashes behind it. Whence is that also of the Prophet, Isa. 47. 14. Behold, they shall be as stubble, the fire shall burn them, there shall not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to sit before it. Vers. 8. And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered together.] In this phrase, the blast of thy nostrils, it may well be conceived that Moses had respect both to the wind wherewith God divided the red sea, chap. 14. 21. (for so he seems to explain himself in the 10. verse of this chapter, Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them; as also to the anger and wrath of God which
caused him thus to divide the sea; for so usually the wrath of God is expressed in Scripture, and that by a metaphoricall speech taken from men, who in their anger use to snuff and blow with their nostrils thicker and stronger then at other times, as Job 4. 9. By the blast of God they perish, and by the breath of his nostrils are they consumed; and so in many other places. And though the dividing of the red sea was a work of mercy in regard of the Israelites, yet was it an effect of his high displeasure against the Egyptians. Yea therefore did the Lord lead the Israelites that way, that the Egyptians following them might be taken as in a trap, and over∣whelmed with the waters. Vers. 11. Who is like thee, glorious in holinesse, fearfull in praises, doing won∣ders?] That is, there is none either amongst the false Gods of the heathen, or amongst their great ones, Gods upon the earth, that is in any degree worthy to be compared to thee, O Lord, who art glorious in holinesse, &c. where by the holi∣nesse of God is meant that transcendent purity and singular perfection in every re∣gard which is in God alone, which is that indeed which makes God incomprehen∣sibly glorious, and fearfull in praises; because we cannot think of those praises which are due unto the Lord, but we must needs be stricken with an awfull fear of his Majesty: and he is said to do wonders, because he is of infinite power to do what∣soever may seem most wonderfull in the eye of man. Vers. 12. Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.] The Egyptians, that were drowned in the red sea, are here said to have been swallowed up of the earth, not onely, because they did at first sink down into the earth, in the bot∣tome of the sea, but also because being cast up by the waves upon the shore, many of them at least were there no doubt thrown into pits by the Israelites, and buryed, to avoid the corruption of the aire; and so did all of them return to the earth from whence they were taken. Vers. 13. Thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation.] That is, towards the land of Canaan: for by the Lords holy habitation, here is doubtlesse meant that land of promise where God had long since promised to seat his people, and there to dwell amongst them by the gracious signes of his presence, not in the tabernacle onely, but especially also in the temple, which God chose to be his resting place, Psal. 132. 14. and where the promised Messiah did afterwards dwell amongst them, and accomplish the work of mans redemption: and though they were yet but newly gotten out of Egypt, yet Moses saith, Thou hast guided them unto thy holy habitation, both because this was the place whither the Lord was now leading them (for this purpose had he brought them out of Egypt, that he might carry them to Canaan, and plant them there) as also because it was most cer∣tain that God would at length carry them thither: and usuall it is with the pro∣phets to expresse the certainty of that which shall afterwards be, by speaking of it as if it were done already. Vers. 15. The mighty men of Moab trembling shall take hold of them.] See Numb. 22. 3. And Moab was sore afraid of the people, because they were many; and Moab was distressed because of the children of Israel. Vers. 17. Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine in∣heritance,
&c.] That is, in mount Sion, which the Lord had chosen to be the place of his habitation, where his temple and sanctuary should be built, wherein he would dwell amongst his people: yet figuratively under this one, the most eminent part of the land, the whole countrey of Canaan is comprehended; and it is called the Lords inheritance, because he had prepared it for the habitation of his first-born Israel. Vers. 20. And Mriam the prophetesse, the sister of Aaro, &c.] Though Moses and Aaron were brothers, and so Miriam was the sister of Moses as well as the sister of Aaron; yet she is peculiarly called the sister of Aaron, because through Moses ab∣sence, when he fled out of Egypt, her reference to Aaron was best known. Vers. 21. And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the Lord, &c.] When the men had sung a verse or staff of the former song, then she with her women took her course, and sung it over again; or at least she still repeated this one clause here ex∣pressed, Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea, which was happely the burden of the song, as in Psal. 136. For his mercy endureth for ever. Vers. 22. And went out into the wildernessof Shur.] Called also the wilder∣nesse of Etham, Numb. 33. 8. One might be the generall name of the whole desert, the other of some part of it, where the Israelites pitched their tents: It is said indeed chap. 13. 20. that they were in the wildernesse of Etham before they passed over the red sea; but it seems the wildernesse on both sides the red sea was called the wil∣dernesse of Etham. Vers. 25. And the Lord shewed him a tree, &c.] This may seem to imply that there was in this tree a naturall virtue of sweetning the waters it was cast into, be∣cause it is said that God shewed it him; yet I see no reason why we should thus con∣clude: for why may it not be as well that God shewed him a tree, that was likely in its own nature to make the waters bitterer, that so the miracle might be the more manifest? The changing of the waters taste was rather by the mighty power of God then any virtue in that wood. There he made a statute, and an ordinance, and there he proved them.] Some Expositours conceive that hereby is meant, that in this place God gave the Israelites certain generall laws and statutes necessary for the well ordering and governing of the people, untill at Sinai they should be more perfectly afterwards taught concerning the whole law and will of God; which happely may be true. But yet doubtlesse the statute and ordinance chiefly, if not solely, here intended, is that which followeth in the next verse, where the Lord enjoyned the people to obey him, and moves them thereto with a promise, that if they would so do, he would then protect them from the plagues of Egypt. So that this clause, There he made a statute, and an ordinance, and there he proved them, hath reference to that which immediately after is expressed in the 26 verse, And said if thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, &c. and the meaning is, that after God had thus tryed them with want of water, and upon their murmuring had so miraculously healed the bitter waters of Marah, he then admonished them by Moses hereafter to take heed of this sinne they had fallen into, and to carry themselves more obediently towards him; and so made this as a statute and ordinance, that if they would thus
do that which is right in his sight, then he would be a gracious God unto them: and thus there he proved them, to wit, not onely by their former want, but also byhis pre∣sent favourable dealing with them, not punishing them for their murmuring, butonely admonishing them, & so making proof whether they would thereby be wonne or no. Vers. 26. I will put none of these diseases upon thee, which I have brought upon the Egyptians.] That is, none of the plagues: see Deut. 28. 60. Moreover he will bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt which thou wast afraid of, and they shall cleave unto thee. The meaning is, that he would not deal with them as with the Egyptians, but as at present he had done; for the present mercy in healing the bitter waters, which is the ground of this speech, sheweth plainly that all externall plages are implyed: and thus likewise all externall blessings are comprised under health. See Prov. 4. 22. For they are life to them that find them, and health to all their lesh. Psal. 103. 3. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who healeth all thy diseases. Vers. 27. And they encamped there by the waters.] Staying there at Elim, as it seems, many dayes, because the place was so pleasant, and convenient for them by reason of the waters. CHAP. XVI. Vers. 1. ANd all the congregation of the children of Israel came unto the wil∣dernesse of Sin, &c.] From Elim they turned back to the red sea, Numb. 33. 10. And they removed from Elim, and encamped by the red sea (which no doubt the Lord did, that he might try them again) but this remove is not here mentioned, because no memorable matter happened in that place; and so he passes over it, and onely mentions the next station: for from the red sea they turned back again to the wildernesse of Sin. Vers. 3. Would to God we had dyed by the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh-pots, &c.] That is, when we had dayly plenty of flesh, and might peaceably and freely tae our fill of it. Doubtlesse considering their hard bondage, we may well think that though they had flesh in Egypt, yet they had no such plenty, at least that they had no such liberty to it by it, having such tasks day∣ly imposed upon them, that the day scarce afforded them time to dispatch their dayes work. But thus those that are discontented at their present condition are wont beyond the bounds of truth to extoll what they formerly enjoyed. For ye have brought us forth into this wildernesse, to kill this whole assembly with unger.] Their provision being so farre spent which they brought out of Egypt, that they saw no means to sustain themselves in this wildernesse, where no food could be gotten. Vers. 4. And the people shall go out, and gather a certain rate every day, &c.] That is, as verse 16. an omer for every man: and thus God fed them from hand to mouth, giving them still no more but provision for one day, that they might be still kept in dependance upon God; to which also agreeth that petition which our Saviour taught us, Matth. 6. 11. Give us this day our dayly bread. Vers. 6. At even, then ye shall know that the Lord hath brought you out from the land of Egypt.] When God should give them quails in such abundance, then they should know that the Lord had brought them out from the land of Egypt, and
not Moses and Aaron of their own heads, as was objected by the Israelites, verse 3. For ye have brought us forth, &c. Vers. 7. And in the morning then y shall see the glory of the Lord.] That is, the Manna, that glorious work of his (for so Moses expounds himself in the next verse) and glory is oft used for glorious works. See Numb. 14. 21. All the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord. John 11. 40. Said I not unto thee, that if thou wouldst believe thou shouldst see the glory of God? For that he heareth your murmurings against the Lord.] Thatis by reason of your murmurings this the Lord will do, to justifie us his servants. Thus he puts them in mind of their sinne, and wisheth them to observe that this message which God had sent them concerning the Quails and Manna did shew that God had heard their murmurings; and therefore they had need take heed, it may be he would not alway deal with them as he had now. And what are we that ye murmure against us?] That is, we durst never of our¦selves have undertaken this great work of bringing you out of Egypt, from the bondage of Pharaoh; nor can you think that we by our own power have done those miraculous works which you have seen done in this bsinesse, and which now you shall yet further see; since therefore it is the almighty God that hath done these great things for you, and we onely his instruments, your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord. Vers. 10. They looked toward the wildernesse, and behold the glory of the Lord appeared in the cloud.] Aaron having given charge to the Israelites (as is expressed in the former verse) to come near before the Lord, and there being at that time, be∣fore the tabernacle was built, no other visible signe of Gods presence amongst them but onely the pillar of the cloud; toward that therefore they turned their faces, and perceived that God did in a more glorious manner then ordinarily therein manifest the brightnesse of his presence. Now because the cloud was in the forefront of their armies, leading them still farther into the wildernesse, therefore it is said that they looked toward the wildernesse. Vers. 11. And the Lord spake unto Moses, &c.] This the Lord had said to Moses before: onely here it is repeated, to shew that he did nothing without a war∣rant, and that as God had spoken, it came to passe. Vers. 13. At even the quails came up and covered the camp.] Being happely brought in by a wind, as those afterwards vvere at Kibroth-hattaavah, Numb. 11. 31. where God again gave them quails to eat, and that for a vvhole moneh together; vvhereas novv they came in onely this one evening before the Manna vvas given them. Vers. 15. And when the children of Israel saw it, they said one to another, It is Manna.] Which is all one as if they had said, vvhat is this? (for so the Hebrevv vvord may signifie) or this is a meat vvhich God hath prepared for us vvithout our labour (for Manna in the Hebrevv signifieth prepared) and therefore it is added in the next vvords, For they wist not what it was, that is, they knevv not vvhat more particular name to give it. Vers. 16. Gather of it every man according to his eating.] Proportionably as he hath more or lesse in his family.
Vers. 18. And when they did mete with an omer, he that gathered much, &c.] All were imployed in gathering, and some (as more able) gathered more, some (as lesse able) gathered lesse; but when all was laid together in the common heap (whether of the family, or of the tribe, &c.) and then afterward it was measured to every man an omer, ccording to the Lords direction, there was nothing want∣ing for which they should pinch him that had gathered lesse, nor nothing over for him that had gathered much; but every one had his just omer. And hence it is that S. Paul by this example of the Israelites, one helping another, and conferring what they had gathered in common, exhorts the Christian Corinthians in like manner to supply the necessities of their brethren, 2. Cor. 8. 13, 14, 15. For I mean not that other men be eased, and you burdened: But by an equality, that now at this time your abundance may be a supply for their want, that their abundance also may be a supply for your want, that there may be equality. As it is written, He that had gathered much, &c. Vers. 19. Let no man leave of it till the morning.] Though every one in each family had an omer allowed him, whether great or little, men or women, old or young, and none might reserve any of their portion till the next day, yet it cannot be thought that every man was enjoyned to eat, or did eat the same quantity; but what they left, they either burnt it, or cast it forth, or some other way consumed it, and might not keep any of it to be eaten the next day. See above, ver. 4. Vers. 22. On the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for one man: and all the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses.] To wit, that the people had gathered, as they were appointed, twice as much on that sixth day as they had on other dayes: and of this they informed Moses, both as desiring thereby to glorifie God, in the confession of this wonderfull work, that he had sent Manna so abundantly that day as before he had promised ver. 5. And it shall be twice as much as they gather daily; and also chiefly that they might receive dire∣ctions from Moses how to order this their double portion. Vers. 23. Bake that which ye will bake to day, and seethe that ye will seethe, &c.] It may seem questionable, whether in these words the Israelites were enjoyn∣ed to bake and seethe so much of the Manna as they dsired to eat so dressed on the sixth day, and then to reserve the rest unto the morning; or to bake and seethe both for that day and the next day which was the Sabbath. But yet this last seems the most probable; and that because it was not likely they onely eat of it undres∣sed, as it was gathered, on the Sabbath day▪ and expressely afterwards it was en∣joyned in the law, that they should kindle no fire throughout their habitations on the Sabbath day, Exod. 35. 3. Yet I make no question but that some part of it was reserved for the Sabbath, not onely because they did so eat some part of it on the o∣ther dayes; but especially also that the hand of God herein might be the more evi∣dent, seeing they could no way keep it, whether baked or sodden, on other dayes, untill the next morning, but they found it putrified; and which way soever they reserved it, whether dressed or undressed, for the Sabbath day, it did not corrupt but continued good and sound. Vers. 31. And it was like coriander-seed, white, and the taste of it was like wa∣fers
made with hony.] We must not so understand these words, as if the Manna were said, to be like coriander-seed, because it was white (for the coriander-seed is blackish) but that it is compared to coriander-seed in regard onely of its quan∣tity and proportion, and then besides that it was of a whitish colour. So that we must reade these words as expressing three qualities of the Manna: 1. That it was little and round like the coriander-seed, ver. 4. There lay a small round thing, as small as the hoar frost; 2. That it was for the colour of it white, like Bdellium, as it is expressed, Numb. 11. 7; 3. That it was sweet like hony-wafers, namely, un∣baked: for being baked the taste of it was as the taste of fresh oyl, Numb. 11. 8. In that Apocryphall book, called the Wisdome of Solomon, chap. 16. 20, 21, it is said of this Manna, that it was able to content every mans delight, and agreeing to every taste, and that serving to the appetite of the eater, it tempered it self to every mans liking; whence it hath been by some conceived and maintained that the Manna rellished according to every mans desire, and had the savour of any kind of meat which they had a desire to eat of. But this is a weak conceit: for first there is no evident ground for it, in these words; and then besides though it had been entended by that Author, yet it is directly contrary to this description of the Man∣na which Moses gives us; and again, if God had given this miraculous bread such an extraordinary gift to satisfie every wanton appetite, that it should taste like any meat they desired to tast of, why did the Israelites murmure afterwards against Moses, lusting for flesh and fish, and repining because they had not the cucum∣bers, and melons, and leeks, and onyons, and garlick, which they had in Egypt Numb. 11. 4, 5. Vers. 33. And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a pot, &c.] It was a golden pot: See Hebr. 9. 4. Wherein was the golden pot that had the Manna. Moses rehear∣seth these things here to make a full end of the history of Manna, but they were not done till afterwards, when the Tabernacle was built wherein it was laid up be∣fore the Lord. Vers. 35. And the children of Israel did eat Manna fourty years, untill they came to a land inhabited.] To wit, till they were gone over Jordan into the land of Canaan, and then it ceased. This Manna (called by the Psalmist Angels food, Psal. 78. 25. Man did eat Angels food, &c.) was a notable type of Christ, and is therefore called Spirituall meat, 1. Cor. 10. 3. And did all eat the same spiritu∣all meat: for Christ indeed is the true bread that came down from heaven, Joh. 6. 33. upon whom feeding by faith, our souls are nourished unto life everlasting: White, in regard of his purity and innocency; and sweeter then the hony to the souls of believers: bruised for our transgressions, and conveyed to us, in the dew of the word, as the Manna lay in the dew upon the ground, and so is our spirituall nourishment all the time of our travelling towards the heavenly Canaan, when there shall be no more use of this food, but God shall be all in all to us. Vers. 36. Now an omer is the tenth part of an phah.] And ephah, by the judgement of the best Writers, was much like to our English bushel: Whereby we may conceive how bountifull the allowance of Manna was which God allot∣ted them for their daily food.
CHAP. XVII. Vers. 1. ANd all the congregation of the children of Israel journeyed from the wildernesse of Sin, after their journeyes, &c.] This clause, after their journeyes, is added, to imply that Rephidim was not the next station after they went from the wildernesse of Sin; no, they went from Sin to Dophkah, from thence to Alush, and from thence to Rephidim, Numb. 33. 12, 13. 14. Vers. 2. Wherefore do ye tempt the Lord?] To wit, by their mutinous requi∣ring of water, as a signe of Gods presence among them, saying, Is the Lord among us, or not? as it is afterward expressed verse 7. when men, not believing the pro∣mises of God, will boldly prescribe God the time when, and the manner how, he shall perform his promises, this is called a tempting of the Lord, because thereby they do, as it were, try whether he be able and faithfull to do what he hath said. And thus are the Israelites here said, to tempt the Lord. Having Gods promise for their safe convoy through the wildernesse to the land of Canaan, and having had already evidence enough of Gods almighty power and fatherly care over them; yet being now in some distresse for want of water, they came in a bold manner, and expostulated with Moses and Aaron, and cried upon them to give them water, that they and theirs might not perish with thirst: and herein they did tempt the Lord, because as the Psalmist saith, Psal. 78. 41. They limited the holy one of Is∣rael; they said, Is the Lord among us or not? that is, the want they were in made them question Gods presence, and they resolved now to put it upon this tryall. Let Moses give them water, and they would acknowledge it; but if that were not done, they would not believe it. And hence was this place afterward called Massah, that is, temptation. Vers. 4. What shall I do to this people? they be almost ready to stone me.] Though there be no mention made in the foregoing expostulation of the people with Moses, that they threatned to stone him; yet perhaps some intimation hereof might fall from some of the rudest and most tumultuous amongst them: and here∣upon Moses might ground these words of his. But howsoever their behaviour being so full of fury as it was, he might well from hence complain to the Lord that he had just cause to fear lest their rage should at last break forth into this extremity. Vers. 5. And the Lord said unto Moses, Go on before the people, &c.] That is, toward the rock Horeb: and mention is made of going before the people, for the encouragement of Moses; as if he had said, Fear them not, though they are thus en∣raged, they shall do thee no harm. And take with thee of the elders of Israel.] That is, all the people shall not go up with thee to the rock to see the miracle, onely some of the elders thou shalt take along with thee, that they may be eye-witnesses of that which is to be done, and afterwards affirm the truth of what they had seen amongst the people. When ma∣ny years after this the Lord did again, after the same miraculous manner, give them water out of the rock, it was done openly before all the people. Numb. 20. 8. Take the rod (saith the Lord) and gather thou the assembly together, thou and Aaron thy brther, and speak ye unto the rock before their eyes, and it shall give forth his
water: and this makes some question, why God would not have it so now, but one∣ly that some few of the elders go up with Moses to see the miracle wrought. But see∣ing there is no reason given for it in the text, it is sufficient for us to say, that God in his wisdome saw it fit to have it so: yet the most probable reason that can be given is this, That God ordered it so the better to try the faith of his people, and therefore having determined that the rock should give forth water in some hollow place, where the entrance and passage into the rock was not wide enough that the whole multitude of the people might come in to see the miracle wrought, he onely enjoyned that some of the elders should go up with Moses to be eye-witnesses of what was done, the rest of the people waiting below till the streams of the water came rushing down amongst them, as it is expressed Psal. 78. 1. 5, 16. He clave the rocks in the wildernesse, and gave them water as out of the great depths: he brought streams also out of the rock, and caused waters to runne down like rivers. And thy rod wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thine hand and go, &c.] That is, the rod wherevvith thou smotest the river Nilus in Egypt, when the waters thereof vvere turned into bloud. See Exod. 7. 20. Vers. 6. Behold, I will stand before thee there, upon the rock in Horeb.] Hereby it is evident that vvhen Moses came to the rock, there vvas there some visible signe of Gods glorious presence to be seen there upon the rock (though vvhat it vvas the Scriptures being silent vve cannot affirm) vvhich doubtlesse did vvondrously strengthen the faith of Moses and the elders that vvere vvith him. And Moses did so in the sight of the elders of Israel.] That is, he struck the rock, and immediately the waters gushed forth. And thus the Israelites had not one∣ly water for the quenching of their thirst, and that not for the present onely, but for some good time after, the stream of water that brake out of the rock becoming a river that ranne along in this desert unto severall places, where after this they had their stations (whence it is that the Apostle saith, that this rock followed them, meaning the water that gushed out of this rock) but withall in the rock, and the waters issuing from thence they had an extraordinary sacramentall signe or type of Christ, and the benefits that redound to poore sinners by him. For so the Apostle saith, 1. Cor. 10. 4. They did all drink the same spirituall drink (for they drank of the spirituall rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ) For as that rock in the wildernesse, being struck by the rod of Moses, gave forth waters for the quench∣ing of the Israelites thirst; so Christ upon the crosse, being smitten with the rod of Moses, the curse of the law, yields forth, both in his righteousnesse and the spirit of grace derived to believers from him, that living water, wherewith their dry and thirsty souls are refreshed so that they shall never thirst again, as our Saviour saith, John 4. 16. Vers. 8. Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel, &c.] That is, the poste∣rity of Amalek, a Duke of the posterity of Eliphaz, the sonne of Esau, Gen. 36. 15. For fear lest the huge army of the Israelites should have passed through their coun∣trey, they came out to resist them, and lying in ambush, smote the hindermost of them, even all that were feeble behind thee, Deut. 25. 18. Vers. 9. And Moses said unto Joshua, Chuse us out men, &c.] Thus early (it
seems) was Joshua chosen by Moses as his lieutenant, or at least one that should have a speciall stroke in matters of warre. I will stand on the top of the hill, with the rod of God in mine hand.] There Moses might be seen holding his rod in his hand, as an ensigne to strengthen the faith of the people. Vers. 10. Moses, Aaron and Hur went up to the top of the hill.] This could not be that Hur the sonne of Caleb, who was but fourtie years old when he searched the land of Canaan. If we may credit Josephus, he was the husband of Miriam, Moses and Aarons ister. Vers. 11. And it came to passe when Moses held up his hand, that Israel pre∣vailed, &c.] And this lifting up of his hands was chiefly to hold forth the rod as an ensigne to strengthen the faith of the souldiers; but yet withall it served to expresse the lifting up of his heart in prayer to God, the lifting up of the hands being the usuall gesture of one that prayes: so that this different successe of the Israelites, ac∣companying the different gesture of Moses body, was purposely by the providence of God appointed to be a reall expression both how forcible Moses prayers were, and also how weak the Israelites were in themselves, if God (of whose assistance the rod was a signe) should not stand on their sides. Vers. 12. But Moses hands were heavy, and they took a stone and put it under him, &c.] Which shows that he was weary with standing so long, as well as with lifting up his hands. And Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, &c.] The common opinion is, that Moses held up the rod of God in both his hands, and that his hands were weary at length, and so sometimes sinking down not so much through his weaknesse by reason of age (for fourty years after this his naturall force was not abated, Deut. 34. 7.) as by the continuall labour of reaching up his hands so long together, and that too when his spirits were happely spent much with the vehemency of his spirit in pray∣ing to the Lord: Aaron and Hur perceiving ths, and that withall the Amalekites prevailed against the Israelites, when he let down his hands, they standing on each side of him stayed up his hands, the one the right hand, and the other the left. But because we cannot well conceive but that they would have been all wearied if it had been thus; I conceive it more probable, that Moses held up the rod in one hand, shifting it as occasion was from one hand to another; And so Aaron, and Hur in their turns helped to bear up that hand which was next to them, and had by their turns a time to rest and ease themselves. Vers. 14. Write this for a memoriall in a book, and reherse it in the ears of Joshua, &c.] Who was to succeed Moses, and therefore was to take speciall notice of this decree of God concerning the utter extirpation of Amalek: whether this were written in any other book, we cannot say; sufficient for us it is that here we find it recorded by Moses, and that no doubt the rather, because of this expresse command which was now here given him. Vers. 15. And Moses built an altar, &c.] To wit, thereon to offer acrifices of thankfulnesse, and that it might tand as a memoriall in future times of this first victory which God had given his people against their enemies the Amalekites: and
therefore also he called the altar, Jehovah Nissi, that is the Lord my banner, that it might be a memoriall to posterity that in that place the Jehovah had as with a banner displayed gone forth and fought against the enemies of his people, and had there as it were proclaimed that he would have perpetuall warre with that Nation from one generation to another. Vers. 16. For he said, Because the Lord hath sworn that he will have warre with Amalek, &c.] Some reade this place thus, Because the hand of Amalek is against the throne of the Lord, therefore the Lord will have warre with Ama∣lek, &c. and then the words intimate the reason why the Lord had determined that he would have warre with Amalek from generation to generation, to wit, because Amalek had lifted up his hand against the throne of the Lord, in that he had fought against them that were his peculiar people, whose Sovereigne Lord he had under∣taken to be. But if we reade the words, as they are in our Translation, Because the Lord hath sworn that he will have warre, &c. whereas in the Hebrew it is word for word thus, the hand upon the throne of the Lord, then we must know that the hand upon the throne, intimates the form of Gods swearing, to wit, that laying his hand upon his throne, as swearing by his Majesty and Regal power, and as he was the great King of the whole world, he had sworn that he would have warre for ever with Amalek. And this Moses alledgeth as the reason why he called this altar, Jehovah Nissi. CHAP. XVIII. Vers. 1. WHen Jethro the priest of Midian, &c.] See Exod. 2. 16, 18. also the 3. 1. Vers. 2. Then Jethro Moses father in law took Zipporah Moses wife, after he had sent her back.] See Exod. 4. 20. Vers. 5. And Jethro, Moses father in law, came with his sonnes and his wife, &c.] These words make known the coming of Jethro to Moses with his daughter the wife of Moses, and her two sonnes; and particularly where Moses was when they came to him, to wit, that he was encamped at the mount of God, that is at Horeb (which why it is called the mount of God, is noted before upon Exod. 3. 1.) Evident therefore it is that though the removing of the Israelites from Rephidim (where they vanquished the Amalekites) to the desert of Sinai, where this mount of God was, be not mentioned till the beginning of the following chapter, yet thi∣ther they were removed before Jethro came to them. Vers. 6. And he said unto Moses, I thy father in law Jethro am come unto thee, &c.] That is, Jethro sent this message to Moses; and therefore it is said in the next verse, that hereupon Moses went out to meet him. Considering that the armies of the Israelites were still watchfull doubtlesse of enemies that might set upon them, and the rather because the Amalekites had so lately assaulted them, no wonder it is though Jethro did, before he came upon them with his train, first send to inform Moses of his coming, that they might know who they were, and why they were come. But besides it was requisite in point of civility, that Jethro should before∣hand
send Moses word of his coming, that he might do what to him seemed good for the receiving of them. Vers. 11. I know that the Lord is greater then all Gods; for in the thing where∣in they dealt proudly he was above them.] That is, in redeeming the Israelites out of their cruell bondage, concerning which Pharaoh and his Egyptians carryed them∣selves with such pride and insolencie, as if they thought it impossible that God should deliver them out of their hands, and resolved that they would in despight of God hold them still in Egypt. And indeed if Moses had now told Jethro, as it is likely he did, how arrogantly Pharaoh at first disdained the message which Moses deliver∣ed to him from the Lord, saying, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go, chap. 5. 2. and there∣upon laid heavier tasks upon them then he did before; and howthe Magicians of Egypt strove with Moses, & sought to work the same miracles that Moses, but were still confounded, and forced at last to acknowledge the mighty power of God; and yet their Magick, and the feats they wrought thereby, was the chief pride of Egypt, and that wherein they most gloried; and lastly with what a high hand they pursued the Israelites to fetch them back when they were come away, assuring themselves that they should not scape; chap. 15. 9. The enemie said, I will pursue, I will over∣take, I will divide the spoyl, my lust shall be satisfied upon them; no marvel though Jethro thereupon now answered, that in the thing wherein they dealt proudly, God was above them. Vers. 12. And Aaron came, and all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with Moses father in law before God.] This clause, before God, is added, because it was a reli∣gious banquet, eaten before the Majestie of God, and accompanying their sacrifices, as was usuall. See Deut. 12. 5, 7. Unto the place which the Lord your God shall chuse out of all your tribes to put his name there, there ye shall eat before the Lord your God, and ye shall rejoyce, &c. 1. Chron. 29. 21. And they sacrificed sacrifices unto the Lord, &c. and did eat and drink before the Lord on that day with great gladnesse, &c. Vers. 15. Because the people come unto me to enquire of God.] That is, to en∣quire both concerning religious and civill affairs, wherein they are doubtfull what the will of God is. Vers. 16. And I do make them know the statutes of God, and his laws.] That is, I make known to them what the will of God is, and what he hath determined shall be done: for though they had not yet the law of God in writing, as after∣wards they had when they came to mount Sinai; yet the Church was never with∣out a law, both concerning the duties of Gods worship, and their conversing with one another, wherein Moses informed them when they made any question what the will of God was, either by the direction and instinct of Gods spirit, or by enqui∣ring of God in cases that were more difficult, and there shewing what answer the Lord had given him. Vers. 17. And Moses father in law said unto him, The thing that thou doest is not good, &c.] Thus was the Lord pleased to teach his servant Moses humility, imploying one that was a Midianite to advise him better for the well ordering of the civill government then he himself could think of.
Vers. 19. I will give thee counsell, and God shall be with thee.] That is, I make no question but that the blessing of God will testifie Gods approving this course which I shall now prescribe thee. Be thou for the people to Godward, that thou mayest bring the causes unto God.] That is, matters of lesse moment, easie to be decided, referre to some inferiour officers; but in matters of more importance, and greater difficulty, where there is need of one to enquire of God, there do thou still imploy thy self, that is, both in consulting with God, and then in returning an answer to the people. Vers. 21. Rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and ru∣lers of tennes.] That is, of so many families: The meaning is, that there should be a ruler or judge appointed over every tenne families in each tribe; and so another over every fifty families, &c. and so by this means a goodly order was to be esta∣blished amongst them, to wit, that every tribune appointed to be judge over a thou∣sand families had under him ten centurions, that is judges over hundreds; and eve∣ry centurion had under him two rulers over fifties; and every ruler over fifty had under him five which were set over ten families. Vers. 23. Then thou shalt be able to endure, and all this people shall also go to their place in peace.] That is, whereas formerly, when Moses did all alone, they oft re∣turned their controversies being undecided, or else were constrained to attend a long time; now they should be soon dispatched, and so go to their place, that is, their se∣verall dwellings or tents, in peace, that is, their controversies ended, and their minds quieted, &c. Vers. 25. And Moses chose able men out of all Israel, &c.] To wit, by the peo∣ples consent, who brought fit men unto him. Deut. 1. 13▪ 14. Take ye wise men, and understanding, and known among your tribes, and I will make them rulers over you. And ye answered me and said, The thing which thou hast spoken is good for us to do. Vers. 27. And Moses let his father in law depart, &c.] Though this be here added to conclude the story, yet it doth not follow that he went presently away: But of this see more, Numb. 10. 29. CHAP. XIX. Vers. 1. IN the third moneth, when the children of Israel were gone forth out of the land of Egypt, the same day came they into the wildernesse of Sinai.] That is, the very day of the newmoon, which was the first day of every moneth among the Hebrews; so that they came into the wildernesse of Sinai, about five and fourty or six and fourty dayes after they came out of Egypt: for they came out of Egypt on the fifteenth day of the first moneth; from whence if w count fourteen dayes remaining of the first moneth (for their moneths were according to the course of the moon) and the whole nine and twenty dayes of the second moneth, the first day of the third moneth when they came before mount Sinai, was the foure and fourtieth day after they came out of Egypt; six dayes after which the Law was given, whreon afterward was kept the feast of Pentecost, that was fifty dayes after the Passeover.
Vers. 4. And I bare you on eagles wings, &c.] This is meant of the whole course of Gods providence over them, from their deliverance out of Egypt unto this time, and implyes how speedily, safely, and with what tender affections and care he had brought them thither, carrying them over all difficulties out of the reach of danger, in a manner, as if they had been carryed through the aire. Vers. 6. And ye shall be unto me a kingdome of priests, and an holy nation.] That is, a nation whom God hath by a speciall priviledge separated from others, and consecrated to himself. Vers. 9. Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud.] That is, I will now out of hand meet with thee upon the mount Sinai, in a thick cloud: for this is not meant of that cloud which went before the Israelites, to shevv them their vvay in their travails through the vvildernesse, and out of vvhich God did usually speak to Moses vvhen it rested upon the Tabernacle; but of that cloud mentioned aftervvard, vers. 16. vvherein God spake o Moses upon the mount; And it came to passe on the third day in the morning, that there were thunders, and lightnings, and a thick clud up∣on the mount. Vers. 10. Let them wash their clothes.] Hereby vvas signified hovv carefull Gods people should be to clense themselves from all filthinesse of the flesh and spirit, especially vvhen they come into Gods presence. Vers. 11. And be ready against the third day, &c.] Which vvas fifty dayes after the passeover, at vvhich time the feast was aftervvard kept, usually called Pente∣cost, the day vvhereon the fiery lavv vvas given, and the day vvhereon the fiery tongues vvere aftervvards given for preaching the Gospel. This therefore vvas not the third day of the moneth (for then it could not have been the fiftieth day after the passeover that the Lavv vvas given; and some dayes after their coming to Sina on the first day of the moneth, vers. 1. had been spent in that which hath been hitherto related concerning Moses his going betwixt God and the people) but the third day after God gave Moses this charge concerning his preparing and sanctifying the people. Vers. 12. And thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about, &c.] This was commanded, first, to strike their hearts with the greater reverence of God; secondly, to bridle the curiosity of man in searching into Gods secrets, and to teach them to be content with the bounds which he hath set them; thirdly, to provide for their weaknesse, who would else have been slain with the glory of his presenc. See chap. 20. 19. Let not God speak with us lest we dye. Vers. 13. There shall not a hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot through, whether it be beast or man, &c.] Or touch him, that is, the man or beast that shall touch the mountain: for that concerning the beast was enjoyned, to teach men the more carefully to avoid it: And the reason of this command was, first, lest apprehending the offenders they transgresse themselves in touching the mountain, whence those two sorts of death were appointed, of stoning, if they were near hand, of striking them through with darts, if further off; secondly, to teach them how execrable the offender should be unto them: as a thing that would defile them, they must not touch it, but stone it, or strike it through.
When the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount.] By the ministry of Angels there was a trumpet sounded: when this trumpet sounded long, that is, with a long protracted sound (as trumpeters use to do when they are about to make an end) then they were appointed to come up to the mount, that is, to the bottome of the mount, so farre as their limits and marks extended, but not beyond. See ver. 16, 17. It came to passe on the third day in the morning, that there were thunders, &c. and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud, so that all the people that was in the camp trembled. And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with God, and they stood at the nether part of the mount. Vers. 15. Be ready against the third day, Come not at your wives.] Implying that they were to lay by all worldly cares and carnall affections, that they might be wholly intent to the hearing of the Law. See 1. Cor. 7. 5. Defraud you not one the other, except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give your selves to fasting and prayer. Vers. 16. There were thunders, and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, &c.] Yea, together with thunder and lightnings, the earthquake, and sound of the trumpet, there fell also great showers of rain, as David hath expressed it, Psal. 68. 8. The earth shook, the heavens also dropped at the presence of God. Now all this terrour was to signifie and set forth the nature of the Law, whose work it is to shew the judgement prepared for sinners, and so to terrifie and amaze. Vers. 19. And when the voyce of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed lowder and lowder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voyce.] That is, they talk∣ed together. What it was that Moses said, it is a weaknesse to enquire, since it is not expressed: We are onely hereby taught how that promise was accomplished, ver. 9. that the people should heare the Lord speaking to Moses in a distinct and audible voyce: yet withall probable it is that now that was done whereof the Apo∣stle speaks, Hebr. 12. 21. So terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceed∣ingly fear and quake, and that the Lord hereupon cheared him up, and spake com∣fortably to him. Vers. 22. And let the priests also which come near unto the Lord sanctifie themselves, &c.] By the Priests here doubtlesse were meant the first-born of eve∣ry family, to whom the prerogative of the priesthood belonged, and who hitherto were imployed in offering sacrifices, till by Gods appointment the priesthood was afterwards settled in the tribe of Levi. Now the charge that is here given Moses particularly concerning them, is not meant of that which before was enjoyed all the people, ver. 10. that they might be prepared in a holy manner to present them∣selves before the Lord, which doubtlesse the priests did then observe no lesse then the rest of the people; but of a peculiar watching over themselves, to keep them∣selves clean from all pollutions, and particularly from being defiled with sinne by touching the mount, which happely they might have been the bolder to do in re∣gard of their priesthood, if there had not been a speciall charge given to them. Vers. 23. And Moses said unto the Lord, The people cannot come up to mount Sinai, &c.] Thus Moses replyed, not by way of contradicting what God had said, and to make known that this charge which God now gave him was needlesse;
but by way of further enquiry concerning Gods will: for hearing that charge a∣gain repeated, Moses began to bethink himself whether he had not omitted some∣thing of that which was before given him in charge, & so in an humble manner pro∣fesseth how carefully, to his best knowledge, he had done what God had command∣ed for the restraining of the people from touching the mount, covertly intimating hereby his desire to be further informed, if he had hitherto omitted any thing which ought to have been done. Vers. 24. And the Lord said unto him, Away, get thee down, &c.] Notwith∣standing Moses former answer, the Lord again bids him haste away down, adding the reasons, to wit, 1. that he might fetch Aaron thither to him; 2. that he might again renew his charge to the people, that they should not come near the mount, and especially to the priests, lest they should presume too farre in regard of their priviledge. CHAP. XX. Vers. 1. ANd God spake all these words, saying, &c,] Namely after Moses was gone down to the people, and had the second time, as God com∣manded, given them straight charge not to passe the bounds that were set them, lest they provoked the Lord to break forth upon them to slay them. Vers. 18. And all the people saw the thundrings, &c.] This word is general∣ly used for seeing, hearing, or perceiving: Thus that which is said, Gen. 42. 1. When Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt, &c. is expressed Act. 7. 12. But when Jacob heard that there was corn, &c. Vers. 20. Fear not: for God is come to prove you.] God is not said to prove men, by any thing he doth, because thereby he comes to find out that concerning those men which he knew not before; but because thereby he doth that which those do that prove men, that is, he discovers that either to the men themselves whom he proves, or to others, which was not manifest before: And so Moses here tells the Israelites that the Lord had spoken to them with so much terrour to prove them, that is, to discover how weak they were and unable to endure Gods glorious ma∣jestie, and much lesse his wrath and indignation; and also to make it manifest whe∣ther the apprehension of this majesty of God would make them fear to offend him or no. Vers. 21. And the people stood afarre off▪ and Moses drew near unto the thick darknesse where God was.] That is, the people stood aloof from the mount, as Moses had enjoyned▪ but Moses went up into the mount, to wit, together with Aaron▪ for so God had before commanded, chap. 19. 24. Thou shalt come up, thou and Aaron with thee. Yea and after this, because the people were so terrified at the manner of the giving of the Law, when the Elders had desired of Moses that he would recieve from God his statutes and judgements, that they then afterwards might recieve them from him, the Lord consented hereto, and so the people were sent away to their tents, and Moses went up to the top of the mount, Deut. 5. 30, 31. Go (saith the Lord to Moses) say to them, Get you into your tents again, but a for thee, stand thou here by me, &c.
Vers. 22. Say unto the children of Israel, Ye have seen that I have talked with you from heaven.] This is premised as a reason of the following precept; because ye onely heard me speak out of heaven, ye saw no image, therefore ye shall make no image: Now it is said here that God spake unto them from heaven, though he spake to them from the midst of the fire on the top of Mount Sinai, either be∣cause it was the voyce of God, who dwelleth in the heavens; or because the aire is also usually called the heaven, as Gen. 1. 20. and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven. Vers. 24. An altar of earth shalt thou make unto me, &c.] This is meant of such altars as they should be appointed to rear as they were upon the way, untill they came to the place which the Lord should choose to settle his worship there; and hap∣pely of altars reared afterwards upon extraordinary occasions: And these they must make either of earth or of rough stone, as ver. 25. both that the worth∣lessenesse of the matter and form might shew that God would not have them places of his worship for perpetuity; and likewise that they might be types of Christs humane nature (for Christ is our altar, Hebr. 13. 10. We have an alar, whereof they have no right to eat, which serve the tabernacle) and of the mean and contemptible condition wherein Christ lived upon the earth, of which the Pro∣phet speaks Isa. 53. 2. He hath no form nor comlinesse; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. See the note also upon Exod. 27. 1. In all places where I record my name, I will come unto thee, and I will blesse thee.] Together with that foregoing precept for the service of God, he addes a pro∣mise of his presence, his gracious acceptance of their sacrifices and service, as also his blessing that should attend them thereupon; onely this is limited to the places that he should choose to put his name there, as he speaks elsewhere: Deut. 12. 5. But unto the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes to put his name there, even unto his habitation shall ye seek, &c. And the reason of adding this here seems to be, 1. to restrain them from rearing altars wherever themselves pleased, they must do it onely in places which he should choose to record his name there; and 2. to restrain them from having any superstitios conceits in time to come of these places where altars had been raised for the worship of God: for, saith the Lord, into whatever places you come, if I there appoint you to build an altar, I will accept of your service, and will blesse you in one place as well as in another. And for this very cause it was (as I before observed) that the Lord commanded such slightnesse in making their altars, to prevent superstition, that the people might see they were not intended for succeeding times. Vers. 25. Thou shalt not build it of hewen stone.] See the notes upon the fore∣going verses. If thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou hast polluted it.] Namely by transgressing the commandment of God. Thus that which in mans judgement, and art, should polish it, Gods Law maketh to be a pollution: so is it with humane wisdome in preaching the Gospel, 1. Cor. 2. 4. And my preaching was not with enticeing words of mans wisdome, but in demonstration of the spirit, and of power. Vers. 26. Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, &c.] This was al∣so
so given in charge concerning altars to be raised upon extraordinary occasions, and which were not to continue for constant use: for it is evident by the height of So∣lomons altar, which was ten cubits high, 2. Chron. 4. 1. that the Priests went up offer sacrifices thereon, though doubtlesse they were not such steps as are in ladders, whereon whilest they went up there might be danger of discovering their nakednesse to those that were beneath them; and though the altar which Moses made for the Tabernacle was but three cubits high, yet it is said that the sacrificers did ascend up to it, and descend down from it, Lev. 9. 22. Aaron came down from offering of the sinne-offering, and therefore there was some kind of ascending to this altar also. Either therefore it is meant of altars suddenly to be raised of earth or unpolished stones upon extra∣ordinary occasions, or else the steps forbidden are not all kind of stairs, but such as are on ladders, whereon there might be danger of discovering the Priests naked∣nesse, which God would have prevented, 1. for comelinesse, and honesty sake; and 2. lest any uncomely thing in the Priests should impair the honour of those sacred rites. CHAP. XXI. Vers. 1. NOw these are the judgements which thou shalt set before them.] That is, the judiciall laws. Vers. 2. If thou buy an Hebrew-servant, &c.] Divers wayes the Hebrews came to be sold for servants to their brethren: for 1. sometimes being condemned for theft, they were sold by the judges, that so satisfaction might be made to the owner for the goods they had stollen, if otherwise they were not able to make satis∣faction, chap. 22. 3. If he have nothing, he shall be sold for his theft; 2. by rea∣son of poverty they might sell their children for servants, as is vident in the 12. verse of this chapter; or themselves, Lev. 25. 39. And if thy brother that dwelleth by thee be waxen poore, and be sold unto thee, &c. 3. in case of debt which they were not able to pay, they and their children might be sold as servants, for satisfaction of the debt; whence is that complaint of the poore widow, 2. King. 4. 1. The cre∣ditour is come to take unto him my two sonnes to be bondmen; and that in the pa∣rable, Mat. 18. 25. For as much as he had not to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife, and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. Now in all these cases, here is a law given concerning the time of their service, namely that they should serve those that had bought them onely six years, and that in the seventh year they should set them free. Elsewhere it is evident, that if the year of Jubile fell within the compasse of those six years, their servants were then also to be set free, though it were but a year after they had bought them, Lev. 25. 40, 41. but otherwise, they were to serve them six years, as here is expressed. Ma∣ny learned Expositours, indeed the most, conceive that the seventh year, wherein the Hebrew servants were to be set free, was the Sabbaticall year, or the year of release, which was every seventh year, at which time they were to set free their ser∣vants, how lately soever they had bought them: And if we thus understand this
place, then the meaning of these words is this, If thou buy an Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve, that is, six years is the utmost he shall at any time serve thee, and in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing, that is, when the seventh year, the Sabbaticall year, comes, then however he shall go out free for nothing. But 1. because where the Scripture speaks of this Sabbaticall year, or year of release, as in the 25. chapter of Leviticus, and in the fifteenth chapter of Deuteronomie, we find no expresse Law given for the setting free of servants; and 2. because accord∣ing to this exposition of this Law their servants could never serve them six years, unlesse they were sold to be servants immediately after the end of the Sabbaticall year, and it seems manifest that this clause, six years he shall serve, is more generall then so, therefore I rather think that the setting free servants before they had served six years was the peculiar priviledge of the year of Jubile, which was every fiftieth year; and that the seventh year in this Law intended, when they were to be set free, was alwayes counted from the year when they were first sold to be servants. Now the reason why the Lord would not have the Israelites serve any longer, is expressed elsewhere, Lev. 25. 55. to wit, because they were Gods servants, and so the Lord would teach them to put a difference betwixt his people, and others that were not his people. And though there is mention made here onely of servants bought with money, yet if they became any other way servants to their brethren, as by being taken in the warre, when there came to be any civill warre amongst them, it is probable that by the rule of Analogy this law was extended even to them also. Vers. 3. If he were married, then his wife shall go out with him.] And so also by the rules of Analogy we may gather, that if he brought children with him, those children should also go out with him. Vers. 4. If his Master have given him a wife, &c.] Here is an exception added to the former law, concerning the setting free of the wife together with the husband, to wit, that if his Master have given him a wife, in the time of his ser∣vice (namely one of his maidservants, either an Hebrew woman, or stranger, both the manservant and maidservant consenting thereto) and she have born him sonnes or daughters, in this case the man was to be set free alone by himself, and his wife and children were to continue still servants to his Master. Nor yet can we hence inferre, That God approved any mans forsaking his wife: for doubtlesse that Law stood firm which God had established from the beginning, that a man must leave all and cleave to his wife, Gen. 2. 24. and that the bond of marriage should be kept alwayes inviolable, What God hath joyned together let no man put asunder. But for the resolving of this doubt, we must consider, first, that in some cases this might be onely a parting with mutuall consent for a time, because if his wife were a daughter of Israel, bought with money, she also was to be set free at the end of her six years service, if the year of Jubile did not happen before (Deut. 15. 12. If thy brother, an Hebrew man, or an Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, and serve thee six years, then in the seventh year thou shalt let them go free from thee) and then might she return unto her husband: Secondly, that no man was by this law forced to leave his wife; by continuing in his former service, he might still enjoy her:
onely God takes order that when himself is set free, he must not think under that pretence to deprive his Master of her that was his lawfull servant, but should rather endure the inlarging of his own bondage, that he might enjoy her. Thirdly, that this liberty given to a servant set free to go away, and leave his wife behind him, was not an approbation of his forsaking the wife he had taken: at the most, it was but a part or branch of that scope wherein this people were left to themselves, for the hardnesse of their hearts, as Christ saith in another case, Matth. 19. 8. and fourthly, That if the wife, given him in the time of his service, was a stranger of another na∣tion, and happely of another religion, these marriages were never pleasing to God; and it was his fault that he would yield to marry such a one. Vers. 6. Then his Master shall bring him to the judges, he shall also bring him to the doore, &c.] To wit, that his Master might prove it fairly and openly, that it was his servants free and voluntary act to continue with him. His Master shall bore his eare through with an aul, and he shall serve him for ever.] That is, all his life time, to wit, unlesse the yeare of Jubile fall in the mean time: for then indeed all Hebrew servants were absolutely set free together with their children, Levit. 25. 40, 41. Now for the boring of his eare to the doore, or to the doore-post of his Masters house, it was happely partly to shadow forth how blame-worthy they are that preferre not the liberty of the Gospel before the bondage of the law; but doubtlesse the main reason was, that his bored eare might be an evi∣dence concerning such a servant, that he had voluntarily disclaimed the priviledge that God had granted him of being set free at the end of six years service: it was not so much a punishment inflicted, as a mark set upon him to witnesse his consent to perpetuall service, and the misery thereof. And indeed a fit signe it was to signifie this. The eare is the embleme of obedience; because they that are obedient, are willingly ready to hearken to the commands of their superiours, that so they may do what is enjoyned. The boring therefore of his eare was to signifie that he was now tyed to his Masters house, and that as a servant he would be ready alwayes to hearken to his voice in all he should give him in charge: whence is that phrase con∣cerning the obedience of Christ, Psal. 40. 6. Sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire: mine eares hast thou opened, or, bored through, as the word in the origi∣nall signifies. Vers. 7. If a man sell his daughter to be a maidservant, she shall not go out as the menservants do.] That is, she shall not alwayes be tyed to six years service as the menservants are, as is made evident by some particular exceptions which are added in the following verses: This course of parents selling their children is by many reckoned amongst those things which God did not approve but tolerate in this people, because of the hardnesse of their hearts. However Lord did here provide that in case parents, constrained perhaps by extreme necessity, should sell their children, if it were a daughter which they sold, she should not go out as the menservants do: and the meaning, I say, is onely this, that the Law concerning the setting free of such a maidservant should not be in all respects alike with that of menservants, as namely because though ordinarily maidservants were to be set free also at six years end, Deut. 15. 12, &c. yet sometimes they were to be freed before
their six years service was ended (which menservants never were) as appears by those cases propounded in the following verses. Vers. 8. If she please not her Master, who hath betrothed her to himself, &c.] That is, if her Master after he hath bought he betroth her to himself, and after∣wards dislike her, and so repenting of what he hath done will not take her to be his wife (which was likewise one of those things which God did tolerate in this people, but not approve) he must let her be redeemed, that is, he must not think to keep her still to be a servant, or sell her to be a servant to others; at least he must procure her to be redeemed, either by her self, or by her kindred, or by some other that would take her to be his wife. In which case doubtlesse order was taken by the Judges, that it should be done at a very reasonable price: for though the next clause may seem to imply, that he was onely restrained from selling her to one that was not an Israelite, To sell her unto a strange nation he shall have no power; yet since they might not do that to any Israelite servant whatsoever, therefore by a strange nation here is meant (as Calvin takes it) any of another family, though an Hebrew; or else his selling her to a strange nation is onely expressely forbidden, because the Hebrews would not buy her, knowing it to be contrary to Gods law. And indeed the like favour is granted to a servant whom her Master had marryed, though she were not an Israelite: for concerning such a one the law was, Deut. 21. 14. that her Master should let her go whither she would, but should not sell her and make merchandise of her, because he had humbled her. Vers. 9. And if he have betrothed her unto his sonne, he shall deal with her after the manner of daughters.] That is, both in the matter of dowry, and in all other things he shall deal with her as if she had been a freewoman. Vers. 10. If he take him another wife, her food, her rayment, and her duty of marriage shall he not diminish.] Now another case is propounded, What shall be done, if a man having betrothed his servant to himself, or to his sonne (for both may be here understood) do not in dislike cast her off, but take him another wife? This we must not think God approves of, onely he tolerates it for the hardnesse of their hearts; but in this case he provides that the true wife be not wronged, Her food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage shall he not diminish, which last clause may be meant of dowry, and all other things due by marriage covenant; but doubt∣lesse that which St Paul calls due benevolence, 1. Cor. 7. 3. is included, and in∣deed principally (if not onely) intended. Vers. 13. If a man lie not in wait, but God deliver him into his hand; then I will appoint thee a place whither he shall fly.] To wit, the altar, whilest they were in the desert; in Canaan, both the altar and the cities of refuge also. Vers. 16. And he that stealeth a man and selleth him, or if he be found in his hand, &c.] This law is again repeated by Moses, though in tearms somewhat dif∣ferent, Deut. 24. 7. If a man be found stealing any of his brethren the children of Israel, and maketh merchandise of him, or selleth him, then that thief shall de; so that by comparing them together we may see, first, That though this place speaks generally of stealing a man, yet it is meant onely of stealing those that were their brethren of Israel: There was doubtlesse some punishment inflicted on those that
stole servants that were strangers of another nation, to wit, according to the punish∣ment of other thefts (for their servants were their money) but it was onely the stealing of Israelites, whether men or women, that was punished with death: secondly, That whereas it is said here, He that stealeth a man and selleth him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death, the meaning is not, that though the manstealer had not yet sold his brother whom he had stollen, but had him still in his own possession, he should notwithstanding be put to death, no lesse then if he had sold him (for the law in Deuteronomi doth plainly enough intimate that the man∣stealer was onely to be put to death, in case that he had sold, and made merchandise of his brother whom he had stollen; and indeed when the party stollen might be re∣stored, and had not yet endured the misery of being sold for a slave, it is not probable that the thief was in this case to be put to death) but the meaning is this, that though it could not be proved against the manstealer that he had sold him, yet if it could be proved that he had been in his and, it should be taken for granted that he had sold him, and he should be put to death: and thirdly, That the reason why this theft alone was punished with death amongst the Isralites, we may well conceive to have been this, to wit, because it was such a debasing of man, made after Gods image, and much more of Gods people redeemed from bondage by his outstretched arm, to be sold as beasts; and because the miseries which such poore wretches endured in bondage were indeed worse then death, especially when they were sold to heathens (of which this law was meant; for they could not hope to conceal their theft if they sold them in the land of Israel) where no mercy could be expected, and where be∣sides their souls were exposed to manifest peril. By all which we may likewise ga∣ther what a grievous sinne it is to bring men into the worse bondage of sinne and Satan, or of subjecting the conscience of Gods people to be in thraldome to men, of which the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 7. 23. Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men. Vers. 17. And he that curseth his father or his mother shall surely be put to death.] By cursing here is not meant onely expresse imprecations, when a child should wish any mischief might befall his father or mother, nor yet any unreverent and undutifull language, but all kind of malitious reviling speeches, whether by way of imprecation or otherwise, as manifestly argued a contempt of their parents: and therefore we see that Solomon saith, with respect doubtlesse to this law, The eye that mocketh at his father, and despiseth to obey his mother, the ravents of the valley shall pick it out, &c. Prov. 30. 17. and Christ having joyned this law with the fifth Commandment, Matth. 15. 4. God commanded saying, Honour thy father and thy mother; and he that curseth father or mother let him die the death, he applyeth it to the condemning of that Tradition of the Pharises, who allowed men to withhold necessary sustenance from their parents, so that what they withheld from them they gave to the Temple, and concludes that hereby they made the commandment of God of none effect by their Tradition: whence it is manifest that by the judgement of Christ they transgresse this law, and deserve death before God, that shall either revile their parents, or under the pretence of any religious vow shall whithhold from them that relief which by the law and light of nature they are bound to afford them.
Vers. 18. If men strive together, and one smite another with a stone, &c.] That is, by throwing any thing at him, or by the stroke of any thing held in his hand. Vers. 19. If he rise again, and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall he that smote him be quit, &c.] That is, if he recover so farre as to go forth though weakly, he that struck him shall not be put to death, though he die afterward. Vers. 20. If a man smite his servant or his maid with a rod, &c.] Some Expo∣sitours understand this law thus, that if a man, with any thing fit to give correction with, do correct or beat his manservant or maidservant, yet if he do it so immode∣rately that the servant dies under his hands, he shall be punished, to wit, as a man∣slayer, with death: for the word in the originall signifeth, he shall be avenged, and the vengeance to be inlicted by the civill magistrate was the putting them to death that had wilfully been the death of others. Now this law was concerning servants that were not Israelites: for it is meant of servants that were absolutely their Mastes money, as is expressed in the following verse, which the Hebrew servants were not, but were onely bought for a time; and for Hebrew servants there is another law given, Levit. 25. 9. If thy brother that dwelleth by thee be waxen poore and be sold unto thee, thou shalt not compell him to serve as a bondservant, &c. But now others again hold that the Israelites were not to be put to death for this correcting their servants here spoken of, to wit, when their servants dyed under their hands. And indeed it may well be questioned why it should not be said here as in other laws of that nature, he shall surely die, but onely, he shall be surely punished, if it were not purposely done because in this case the guilty party was to be left to the wisdome of the Judges to be punished as they should see cause. Vers. 21. If he continue a day or two, he shall not be punished; for he is his money.] That is, it may be thought he intended not to bring that losse upon himself, by killing him whom he had purchased with his money: and since it may well be judged that he did not do it willingly, even the losse of his servant, bought with his money, shall be deemed sufficient punishment. Vers. 22. If men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart from her, and yet no mischief follow, &c.] That is, if a woman with child come in to help her husband, or friend, when men are fighting together, or to part them, or upon any other occasion be nigh them, and so do casually receive some hurt, and by that means miscarry, yet so as that no mischief follow thereupon, that is, neither the woman nor child die, or be maimed, in this case the party that was the cause of the womans miscarrying shall pay such a penalty as the womans husband will lay upon him; onely it is in the next clause provided that the womans husband shall not be his own judge, but shall onely require to have such or such a penalty imposed upon him, which shall there be accordingly awarded him by the judge, and he shall pay as the judges determine; whereby also is implyed, that the judges had power to moderate the penalty, if the womans husband demanded that which was unre∣sonable. Vers. 23. And if any mischief follow, then thou shalt give life for life.] Whe∣ther of the mother, or child having shape and life, as appears by that which follows.
Vers. 24. Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.] This was the law amongst the Hebrews, which we call the law of Retaliation, whereby the Magistrate was authorised to punish man that had done voluntarily any hurt to their neighbours, according to the hurt which they had done them: And it was doubtlesse most equall▪ as those times were, and frequently practised amongst them; yet withall very probable it is that it was in the Judges power in some cases to al∣low a change or commutation of this penalty, and in stead of this to award a pecu∣niary mulct or fine of money: first, Because in some cases the law of retaliation could not be equall; as for example, If a man that had but one eye should put out one of his neighbours eyes, the putting out of this mans onely eye in lew thereof would not be perfectly equall; or if the man that had cut off his neighbours arm were of such a weak constitution, that it was altogether unlikely that he should escape death if his arm should be cut off too, by way of punishing that harm he had done his neighbour: scondly, Because that law, Numb. 35. 31. Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer which is guilty of death, may seem to imply that except onely in that case of life and death they were allowed to take satisfaction in stead of corporall punishments: thirdly, Because it is evident in the thirtieth verse of this chapter, that when a mans ox had killed a man after warning had been given to the owner to keep him in, though the owner was by the law to be stoned, yet the Judges were allowed in some cases not to adjudge him to be stoned, but in stead thereof to impose a summe of money: whence by the rule of analogy we may con∣ceive, that in this case of taking eye for eye, and tooth for tooth, &c. the Judges had likewise the same liberty. In Matth. 5. 39. our Saviour having repeated this law, addeth, But I say unto you that ye resist not evil; whereby he never intended to abo∣lish this law, but onely to clear it from the false exposition of the Jews, who thence took unto themselves liberty for private revenge, which Christ condemnes, and ra∣ther enjoyns his discipiles to bear patiently any wrong done them then to be Judges and revengers in their own cause. Vers. 26. He shall let him go free for his eyes sake.] And so also for the losse of any other member, the chiefest the eye, and the meanest the tooth, being onely ex∣pressed. Vers. 28. If an ox gore a man or a woman that they die, then the ox shall be surely stoned, &c.] One kind of beast (most usuall amongst the Hebrews) is here put for all. Vers. 31. Whether he have gored a sonne, or have gored a daughter, &c.] The same punishment that was allotted in the former verses, for the punishment of him whose ox had killed any man or woman of grown years, is here also allotted, though it be onely a mans child, whether sonne or daughter, that is killed by such an ox. Vers. 32. If an ox shall push a manservant or a maidservant, he shall give unto their Master thirty shekls.] The price at which Christ was valued, who became a servant for our sakes, is here appointed to be paid in liew of a servant killed. Vers. 33. And if a man shall open a pit, &c.] Some conceive, that this must one∣ly▪ be meant of pits mad in open and publick wayes, not of those which men digged
in their own private grounds. And whereas there is no punishment appointed in case a child or any man or woman in the dark should fall into such a pit, it is pro∣bable that this was left to the judges to be determined proportionably to that which is determined in this and the former law, vers. 28. 29, 30. CHAP. XXII. Vers. 1. IF a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it, &c.] For the un∣derstanding of this law, we must know first, that what is here said con∣cerning the stealing of ox or sheep, must also by the rule of proportion be under∣stood concerning any other cattel, the ox and sheep being onely mentioned, because they were the chief, and therefore vers. 4. the asse is also mentioned; secondly, that upon the thief that stole cattel a greater fine was set, then upon him that stole other things: for those that stole other things were onely allotted to pay double. vers. 7. but those that stole cattel were to restore fourefold, or fivefold; and the reason was, because mens cattel being left abroad were most in danger; and therefore such theft was to be restrained with the greater severity; thirdly, that the reason why foure∣fold or fivefold restitution was enjoyned in case the cattel stollen were killed, or fold, whereas if they were found in the hands of him that stole them, he was onely to restore double, vers. 4. was, because in him that had the cattel still with him there might seem to be some remorse, or simplicity, but in him that killed or sold it there seemed to be more cunning and boldnesse; and besides, the owner was put to the greater charge or trouble in finding it out, and therefore his penalty was the greater; and fourthly, that the thief was to restore five oxen for an ox, and but foure sheep for a sheep, because the losse of an ox was the greater losse, and besides the owner lost the labour of his ox, and therefore was this theft to be restrained with somewhat the greater severity. Vers. 4. He shall restore double.] That is, in case he hath not made away the ox or sheep, &c. he shall restore that which was stollen, and another as good, or the full value of it. And indeed double restitution was the ordinary penalty of theft, un∣lesse in the case before mentioned, when they stole cattel, and afterwards killed or sold them: for so it is expressely said concerning those that stole other things, in the seventh verse of this chapter, If the thief be found, let him pay double. And though it be said Prov. 6. 30, 31. Men do not despise a thief if he steal to satisfie his soul when he is hungry; But if he be found, he shall restore sevenfold; yet I do not thence conclude, that in the dayes of Solomon theft was more severely punished then God by his law had appointed, but rather conceive that by those words, he shall re∣store sevenfold, is onely meant that he should abundantly satisfie him, as the phrase is elsewhere used, not for a set quantity, but for the abundant doing of any thing, as Psal. 79. 12. Render unto our neighbours sevenfold into their bosome their reproch wherewith they have reproched thee, O Lord. Vers. 5. If a man shall cause a field or a vineyard to be eaten, and shall put in his beast, &c.] Under this particular expressed, all kind of hurting another mans ground is here forbidden, as with trampling of cattel, &c. yet it is not punished as theft, because it might be doe unwillingly.
Vers. 7. If a man shall deliver unto his neighbour money, or stuff, and it be stollen, &c.] To wit, of trust, and for no reward but of friendship. Vers. 8. If the thief be not found, then the Master of the house shall be brought unto the Judges, &c.] To wit, to have it cleared either by witnesses, or the oath of the party, as ver. 11. (whose oath it was fit should be taken, since the owner had trust∣ed him with his goods) whether the goods left with him were indeed, as he pre∣tended, stollen from him, or whether he had himself made them away. Vers. 9. For all manner of trespasse, whether it be for ox, for asse, for sheep, for raiment, &c.] This is a generall law inserted concerning the power of the magi∣strate in deciding controversies of this kind, that so it might not be repeated in eve∣ry severall law: As he had before ordered concerning dead things, as money or stuff committed to the trust of any man, if any difference did grow betwixt the owner and the party entrusted, the magistrate must decide it; so here he shews that in the same manner in other trespasses, as if cattel were committed to a friends trust, and were lost, or if any thing lost by the owner were denyed by the party that found it, or in any other trespasse, the magistrate must still award how it shall be: So that this Law doth not as the former and following Laws shew how the Judge should determine, in what cases he should condemne men to pay double, and in what cases he should absolve them; but onely takes order that the Judge should determine such differences, and as he did absolve or condemne any man to pay double, so it should be, he shall pay double unto his neighbour, that is, the party accused, if found guilty; and happely the party falsely accusing, by virtue of that Law, Deut. 19. 16, 19. If a false witnesse rise up against any man, to testifie against him that which is wrong; Then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother. Vers. 10. If a man deliver unto his neighbour an asse, or an ox, or a sheep, or any beast to keep, and it die, &c.] As before concerning dead goods, so here con∣cerning cattel committed to the keeping of a friend, the Law appoints how the judges must determine, to wit, that in case such cattel die, or be hurt, or by force driven, not stollen away, no man seeing it, but the keepers; because those losses are not to be prevented by the keepers care, therefore the owner most bear them. Vers. 12. And if it be stollen from him, he shall make restitution unto the owner thereof.] Dead goods stollen from the keeper were not to be made good to the owner, ver. 8. yet cattel must be restored: the reason is, first, because there might be some neglect in keeping cattel abroad, which cannot be so likely of things laid up in a mans dwelling house: secondly, it is most likely they were paid for keep∣ing cattel (because it required watching and charge) and then it was just they should make it good, through whose neglect it was stollen away. Whence is that of Jacob, Gen. 31. 39. Of my hand didst thou require it, whether stollen by day, or stollen by night. Vers. 14. And if a man borrow ought of his neighbour and it be hurt or die, &c.] The Law here concerning things borrowed that are lost or hurt whilest they were with the borrower is this, That if the owner were by when the thing borrow∣ed did miscarry the borrower should not make it good, because the owners presence
made it manifest that the mischief could not be prevented; But if the owner were not by, then the borrower was to make it good. Nor was the severity of this branch of the Law unequall. For however it might miscarry without any neglect of the borrower though the owner was not by, yet it was fit that such a penalty should by Law be imposed to prevent all fraudulent dealing in the borrower, and to make him the more circumspectly carefull of the thing he borrows; and so likewise by this means men had the more encouragement to lend freely. Vers. 15. If it be an hired thing it came for his hire.] That is, if it were not borrowed gratis, but hired, then though it miscarry and the owner be not by, he that hired it shall not make it good. Vers. 16. If a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her, &c.] If a maid were betrothed, it was death to lie with her, Deut. 22. 23, 24. If a damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and a man find her in the city, and lie with her; ye shall stone them with stones that they die: but this Law is concerning the defiling of a maid that is not betrothed, in which case it is here provided that if a man entice a maid, either by promise of marriage, or otherwise, and lie with her, he was to endow her, and marry her; and in case her father re∣fused to let him marrie her, he was then to pay her a summe of money, according to the dowry of virgins, that is, according to her estate and condition, as dowries used to be given with maids of like parentage and estate. There is another Law much like this, Deut. 22. 28, 29. to wit, that if a man did find a damsel, a virgin not betrothed, and did lay hold on her and lie with her, and they were found, he was then to marry her, and might never asterwards put her away, and was withall to pay unto the maids father fifty shekels of silver. To shew the disference betwixt these two Laws, some say that this here is meant of such as by enticing maids did perswade them to consent and so lie with them; but that the Law in Deuteronomie is meant of such as did defile maids without their consent, & that therefore a greater penalty is allotted to those there, then to these here that had the consent of the maids they defiled. But because it is most probable that violent rapes, where the maid no way consented, were alwayes amongst this people punished with death, therefore I cannot think that that Law in Deuteronomie is meant of those that ra∣vished maids: Rather the difference betwixt these Laws consists in this, That in that place of Deuteronomie the Law speaks of defiling maids▪ that being occasio∣nally laid hold on, yielded presently to the lust of him that defiled them, not being beforehand allured and perswaded by degrees; and that this speaks of such as did entice maids with promise of marriage, and so defiled them; and in this case the Law is not so severe. Indeed here nor there is there any punishment at all appoint∣ed for the woman, though her sinne was great; and that because besides that the losse of her virginitie was a brand of ignominy to her, and the hope of marriage might chiefly deceive her, being under her fathers power, and having nothing of her own, she could not be chargeable with paying any mulct of money. Vers. 18. Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.] The word here used in the originall is in the feminine gender, a woman-witch, to intimate that women in this case were not to be pittied: But elsewhere the same is decreed both concerning
men and women, and withall it is expressed by what kind of death they were to die, to wit, that they were to be stoned: Lev. 20. 27. A man or a woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death, they shall stone them with stones. And some adde that this Law against witches is set next after those against fornication, because it was usuall in those times with men by witchcraft to winne the hearts of maids to them. Vers. 20. He that sacrificeth unto any God, save unto the Lord onely, he shall be utterly destroyed.] Or, Anathematized, that is, put to death without mercie, destroyed as an execrable and cursed thing. Vers. 25. If thou lend money to any of my people that is poore by thee, thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, &c.] To such as these we are bound to lend, not expecting so much as the principall, if they be not able to pay, much lesse the use: Luke 6. 34, 35. And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye? &c. But love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again, &c. Vers. 26. If thou at all take thy neighbours raiment to pledge thou shalt deliver it unto him by that the sunne goeth down.] That is, which he lieth in by night, as is evident in the next verse, for that is his covering onely; yet under this is com∣prehended all other garments and other things whereof he hath present use, as tools to work with, &c. which must be restored against the time he should need them; and therefore also such things as were of continuall use, they might not at all take for pawns, whereof an instance is given, Deut. 24. 6. No man shall take the nether or upper milstone to pledge. And indeed this which is here enjoyned, that they should at the going down of the sunne deliver back their neighbours bed∣clothes, which they had taken for a pledge, it was all one in effect as if they had been enjoyned not to take any such necessaries of them to pledge: for doubtlesse it is meant of an absolute restoring them without any expectation of receiving them again, there being nothing fonder then that which some would have to be the meaning of these words, that every night the lender was to restore them these pledges for their use, and then in the morning to take them back again, which would have been a continuall trouble to the lender without any the least advan∣tage to him; and if they must absolutely restore them at sunne-setting, it was to no purpose to take them at all. But however all this must be understood of the pawns of poore people, that had not variety, and so were forced to pawn those things which they could not be well without when the time came that they were to use them; and not of rich men that had variety, as is evident, Deut. 24. 12. If the man be poore thou shalt not sleep with his pledge; where also another Law is given con∣cerning pawns, ver. 10, 11. to wit, that the lender might not go into his brothers house, and take what pawn he pleased, but must stand abroad, and take that pledge which should be brought out to him. Vers. 28. Thou shalt not revile the Gods, &c.] That is, those that sit in the place of judgement, the judges, as it is in the margin of our Bibles; for so it is ex∣plained in the following clause, nor curse the ruler of thy people: for these in the Scripture are called Gods, as Psal. 82. I have said, Ye are Gods, &c. to wit, because
they are Gods Vicegerents upon earth, and they have as it were an impression of Gods majesty upon them, in whose stead they are, and whose name they bear. And hence I conceive it is evident that S. Paul spake that ironically, Act. 23. 5. I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest: for it is written, Thou shalt not speak evil of the Ruler of the people: for could we conceive that S. Paul knew not the high priest, which is altogether unlikely, yet he knew that he was one of the judges, for so much his own words discover, Sittest thou to judge me after the Law, and commandest me to be smitten contrary to the Law? So that it was no ex∣cuse for him to say he knew not that he was the high priest, because however being one of the judges it was against this Law to revile him: And therefore I say, though perhaps those that heard him speak those words understood that he spake them by way of excusing himself, yet he spake them ironically, by way of derision and scorn, as disdaining that he should be accounted Gods high priest, or should sit in the seat of justice, that would so unjustly command his officers to smite him on the mouth: which will yet seem the more probable, if we consider how farre that Ana∣nias was, of whom he spake, from having any true right to that place and power, to which he pretended, when Christ had abolished the Legall priesthood. Vers. 29. The first-born of thy sonnes shalt thou give unto me.] See the notes upon Exod. 13. 1, 2, and 13. Vers. 30. Seven dayes shall it be with his damme, on the eighth day thou shalt give it me.] To wit, because till the eighth day it was not fit for the priests use, for whom the first-born of their cattel were intended, yet doubtlesse when they saw cause they might keep them a while longer, so they did not delay the bringing of them, as being unwilling to give them to the Lord, nor were bound precisely to the eighth day, onely they might not bring them sooner: for so we find it was in the like case of bringing their sacrifices, Lev. 22. 27. It shall be seven dayes under the damme, and from the eighth day and thenceforth it shall be accepted for an offer∣ing made by fire unto the Lord. Vers. 38. Neither shall ye eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field, &c.] This restraint of the Israelites from eating that which was torn of beasts was, 1. because all flesh of beasts that was not rightly purified from the bloud was un∣clean by the Law; 2. because the bodies of clean cattel became legally unclean by being torn by wild beasts of prey which were all unclean; and 3. to teach the Israe∣lites by abhorring the flesh of beasts thus killed, to abhorre all rapine and cruelty, as sinnes most odious in the sight of God. CHAP. XXIII. Vers. 1. THou shalt not raise a false report.] Some reade this clause as it is in the margin, Thou shall not receive a false report: The word in the originall will bear both interpretations: and indeed if it be a sinne to raise, that is, to be the first authour of a false report; then must it needs be also a sinne to receive such a report, and so to carry it and spread it abroad amongst others. Put not thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witnesse.] That is, af∣ford
not thine help and aid to those that combine themselves together to accuse any man falsely before a magistrate; for he that lends a helping hand to the furtherance of any such wickednesse may in that sense be said to put his hand to it. Yet because it is manifest that the Lord here speaks of helping by bearing false witnesse, it may well be that this phrase, put not thine hand, may be used here with reference to that ancient rite of mens putting forth their hand to lay it upon something when they were to take an oath, as Abrahams servant put his hand upon his masters thigh, Gen. 24. 2. and as we use to lay our hands upon a Bible when we swear. Vers. 2. Neither shalt thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest judge∣ment.] That is, neither must the judge respect the multitude of the parties friends upon whom sentence is to passe; nor the multitude of the judges that consent to wrong judgement; nor must witnesses, or any other, either for fear or favour of the many oppose the truth. Vers. 4. If thou meet with thine enemies ox, or his asse agoing astray, thou shalt surely bring it back to him.] This is also meant of bringing home any other thing that is lost. Deut. 22. 3. In like manner thou shalt do with his asse, and so shalt thou do with his raiment, and with all things of thy brothers which he hath lost, &c. Vers. 5. If thou see the asse of him that hateth thee lying under his burden, &c.] This is also meant of relieving the cattel any way endangered. Vers. 7. Keep thee farre from a false matter, &c.] Though all lying be sinne∣full, and may be here implicitely forbidden; yet I conceive that which is here di∣rectly and principally forbidden, is lying in or at the seat of justice, as is manifest by the following clause, and the innocent and righteous slay thou not; which must needs be meant of innocent mens being put to death by means of unrighteous judgement: so that the principall thing intended in this Law is, that judges should be marvellous shy either to admit of a false testimony from others, or to give false judgement themselves especially when it is against the life of a man. For I will not justifie the wicked.] These words imply two reasons, why judges must take heed of false judgement, and of condemning the innocent and righ∣teous. 1. Because the judge is not to do in Gods name what the Lord will not do; and God will not justifie the wicked and so condemne the righteous: 2. Because the Lord will not justifie such wicked judges, as condemne the righteous, when they come before his Tribunal. Vers. 11. But the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and lie still.] That is, neither plow it, nor sow it, nor gather those fruits which should this year grow of themselves: for so we find this Law more fully expressed, Levit. 25. 20. And if ye shall say, What shall we eat the seventh year? Behold we shall not sow, &c. Where their distrust of want of food is answered with a promise that in the sixth year the Lord would cause the earth to yield enough for three years; Then will I command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth fruit for three years. Now God appointed this Sabbath year, first to give rest to the land (and it was a signe of a very fruitfull countrey if it lay fallow but once in seven years) secondly, to give rest to the servants, who had by this much ase
every seventh year; Thirdly to provide for the poore, who now gathered freely of the fruit of every mans ground for their present use, and this was given to the Lord who gave them the land; Fourthly, that they all might have the more liber∣ty to excecise themselves in holy things, as the learning of the Law, which was this year with more then ordinary solemnity to be read in the audience of all the people, Deut. 31. 10, 11, 12. And Moses commanded them, saying, At the end of every seven years thou shalt reade this Law before all Israel, &c. And fifthly, that it might be a memorall of the creation and Gods rest on the seventh day, and a shadow of our rest in Christ, and that the rest of the land might teach how exact God is in requiring his Sabbaths. That the poore of thy people may eat.] Namely such corn as grew this year of it own accord (as it used to do in some good store in those countreys) of the grains scattered in the former harvest, as also the fruit of their vineyards, and oliveyards, &c. and of this the owners might eat as well as the poore, Levit. 25. 6. And the Sabbath of the land shall be meat for you, for thee and for thy servant, &c. though they might not gather and store it up. Vers. 12. Six dayes thou shalt do thy work, and on the seventh day thou shalt rest, &c.] One reason of repeating this Law here may be well thought to be this, to let them know that they were not exempted from the peculiar sanctifying of the seventh day on this Sabbath yar, but were rather bound more religiously to keep it holy; and also besides by placing it amongst the judiciall Laws, the magistrate was enjoyned to see that it was kept. Vers. 13. And make no mention of the names of other gods, &c.] That is, let them be so abominable to you, that you may detest to make any mention of them, that it may be irksome to you to name them or hear them named. We must not think that it was to the Israelites or is to us a breach of this Law any way or upon any occasion to name the gods of the heathens, for we see they are often named in the Scripture. The meaning of this Law we may gather from that place of the Apostle, Eph. 5. 3. But fornication and all uncleannesse or covetousnesse let it not be once named amongst you. For as the Apostles meaning there is onely that those horrid sinnes should be an abomination to them; so here the Lords meaning is onely that they should abhorre all false gods so as to dtest their very names, and of this detestation of Idols is that spoken, Hos. 2. 17. I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall no more be remembred by their name. Vers. 15. And none shall appear before me empty.] To wit, at the feast of un∣leavened bread, and so also at neither of the three feasts, whereon they were all bound to appear before the Lord. See Deut. 16. 16, 17. Vers. 16. And the feast of harvest.] Called also the feast of weeks, or, of se∣vens, Exod. 34. 22. And thou shalt observe the feast of weeks, &c. To wit, be∣cause it was seven weeks after the former feast, upon the fiftieth day following, called thereupon Pentecost; and it was celebrated not onely in remembrance of the giving of the Law, which was given the fiftieth day after their going out of Egypt, but also by way of thanksgiving for their harvest: and therefore the first bread or loaves of the new fruit was then offered, Levit. 23. 16, 17. Even unto the
morrow after the seventh Sabbath shall ye number fifty dayes, &c. Ye shall bring out of your habitations two loaves, &c. as in the end of the Passeover, the first eares of corn. And the feast of in-gathering, which is in the end of the year, &c.] The feast of in-gathering, to wit of all the fruits, not onely corn which was before inned, but all other fruits, as wine, and olives, &c. It was also called the feast of boothes, or, of tabernacles, Levit. 23. 24. The fifteenth day of this seventh moneth shall be a feast of tabernacles, &c. and the time allotted for this feast is said here to be in the end of the year, because though Abib was appointed to be the first moneth for the computation of those things that concerned religion, as their holy feats, &c. yet the moneth Tisri, the seventh in this account, was yet the first moneth for their civill affairs; and so the feast of tabernacles being kept in this moneth, when one year was ended and another began, therefore it is said to be in the end of the year. Now this feast was kept, first in remembrance of Gods favour to them in the wil∣dernesse, when they dwelt in boothes, Levit. 23. 43. I made the children of Israel to dwell in boothes, when I brought them out of Egypt, &c. And secondly, to shew their thankfulnesse for the fruits which in this moneth they reaped, Deut. 16. 13, 14. Thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven dayes after thou hast gathered in thy corn, and thy wine: And thou shalt rejoyce in thy feast, &c. And thirdly, to figure out Christs coming into the world at this time of the year, to dwell in the tabernacle of our flesh, John 1. 14. And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, &c. and their being strangers and travellers here in this world. Vers. 17. Three times in the year all thy males shall appear before the Lord thy God.] That is, at the three great feasts before mentioned, the feast of unleavened bread, the feast of harvest or Pentecost, and the feast of in-gathering, called also the feast of tabernacles; then all the males were enjoyned to appear before the Lord, and that in the place which he should choose, Deut. 16. 16. namely, all that were able: for those that were sick, infants and aged men, were doubtlesse excused. And though onely the males were by this law tyed to this service, because women had many occasions to keep them at home; yet even the women might if they pleased go up unto these feasts, and often doubtlesse did: for so it is sad of Hannah, the mother of Samuel, 1. Sam. 2. 19. She came up with her husband to offer the yearly sacri∣fice; and of the virgin Mary, Luke 2. 41. Now his parents went to Jerusalem eve∣ry year at the feast of the Passeover. As for the place where they met together, it was doubtlesse first the tabernacle, and afterward the temple; because there God dwelt, as it were, amongst his people; and therefore there it is said they should ap∣pear before the Lord. And though it may seem somewhat questionable where they met to keep these feasts, all the time the ark was in one place and the tabernacle in another (as it was for many years after the ark was taken and carried away by the Philistines) yet upon good consideration I think we may well conclude that they were kept where the tabernacle was, because there was the altar of burnt-of∣ferings, and the offering of sacrifices was a main part of the holy service of these feasts. Vers. 18. Thou shalt not offer the bloud of thy sacrifice with leavened bread, &c.]
Because the very same words almost are repeated Exod. 34. 25. onely there the Passeover is expressely mentioned, Thou shalt not offer the bloud of my sacrifice with leaven, neither shall the sacrifice of the feast of the Passeover be left unto the morn∣ing; therefore the most and best Expositours do understand this place particularly of the Paschall Lambe, to wit, that they might not eat any leavened bread with the Passeover, and that they might not leave any part of the Paschall Lambe untill the morning; the fat being here by a Synecdoche put for all, and specially menti∣oned, because this in all sacrifices was offered to God. Yet I see not why this place may not be understood generally of all sacrifices; since it is evident, first, that leaven was forbidden in all meat-offerings, which were alwayes offered together with their sacrifices: Levit. 2. 11. No meat-offering which ye shall bring unto the Lord shall be made with leaven; for ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey in any offering of the Lord made by fire. And secondly, that though the flesh of some sacrifices might be eaten the next day, yet the fat thereof was to be presently burnt upon the altar. See Levit. 7. 2, 3. Vers. 19. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mothers milk.] Either this must be literally understood according to the very words, that they might not seethe a kid, or a lambe, &c. in the milk of the damme, because this had some appearance of cruel∣ty, which the Lord by this ceremony taught them to abhorre; and indeed upon the same ground other like laws were given this people, as Deut. 22. 6, 7. If a birds nest chance to be before thee in the way, &c. thou shalt not take the damme with the young. Or else rather it must be understood concerning the age of the kid, to wit, that they might not offer a kid to the Lord, or eat it themselves, whilest the flesh was onely erely a milky frothy substance, thereby to teach them to avoid all foolish intemperancie and delicacie in their feeding: and upon this ground they were forbidden to bring the first-born of their cattel, or any other sacrifice, till they were eight dayes old; because so long they were but as the dammes milk. Vers. 20. Behold I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, &c.] That is, the promised Messiah, the sonne of God, and Angel of the covenant, Mal. 3. 1. Who led them by day in the pillar of a cloud, and by night in a pillar of fire, and at last brought them into the land of Canaan; of whom it is said, 1. Cor. 10. 9. that the Israclites in the wildernesse tempted him, and so were justly destroyed by him, therein finding that verified which the Lord here saith, vers. 21. that he would not pardon their transgressions. Vers. 21. For my name is in him.] That is, he is the Lord Jehovah as I am, of the same Essence, Power, Majesty, and Authority: for so it is said of Christ, Heb. 1. 3. that he was the brightnesse of his Fathers glory, and the expresse image of his per∣son, and one God with him, The Father is in me, and I in him, saith Christ, John 10. 38. God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, saith the Apostle, 2. Cor. 5. 19. And so it was prophecied of him, Jer. 23. 6. This is his name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our righteousnesse. Vers. 28. And I will send hornets before thee, &c.] This may be meant of stinging terrours, wherewith God struck the hearts of the Canaanites; or it may be understood literally of true hornets sent before the Israelites, and the rather, be∣cause
first God had spoken of the fear wherewith the Canaanites should be stricken in the former verse; and it is not usuall in the Scripture to expresse any thing plainly first, and then afterwards figuratively and obscurely. And secondly he tells the Israelites that God had done this for them which he had promised. See Josh. 24. 12. Vers. 31. And I will set thy bounds from the red sea, &c.] The bounds of the promised land are here set down, to wit, first their Eastern bound, which was the red sea; and secondly the sea upon which the land of the Philistines lay, called the Me∣diterranean sea, which was their West border; and thirdly the desert, which lay on the South of Canaan, to with the desert of Shur or Paran, which was their South border, on which side ran the river of Sychar, Josh. 13. 3. called the river of Egypt, Gen. 15. 18. for it runs out of Nilus into the Mediterranean sea: and therefore this also is there made the Southern bound; and fourthly the river, which is the great river Euphrates, which was the North bound. CHAP. XXIV. Vers. 1. ANd he said unto Moses, Come up unto the Lord, &c.] God having given Moses those judiciall laws set down in the former chapters, and Moses being now to carry them to the people, upon their consent to make a cove∣nant betwixt God and them; the Lord before his departure gives him this command for his coming up again with Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and seventy of the Elders of Israel, appointing him to leave the people at the foot of the mount, but to bring up Aaron and his two eldest sonnes and the seaventy Elders into the mont, that is, a little way up into the mount, where they might be eyewitnesses of part of Gods glory, as is expressed afterwards, vers. 9, 10. being to approch nearer to the Lord then the people were; and then there to leave them also to worship afarre off, whilest Moses went up higher to the top of the mount, into the dark cloud, vers. 18. for so it followeth, vers. 2. Moses alone shall come near the Lord, but they shall not come nigh. It is questioned by Expositours who these seventy Elders were: W reade of seventy Elders that wre chosen to bear part of the government with Moses, and received therefore from the Lord an extraordinary measure of gifts of Gods spirit to enable them thereunto, as you may reade Numb. 11. 16, 17. but that was done after the camp was removed from Sinai, and pitched in Kibroth-Hattaavah, as it is Numb. 11. 34. which was the next station beyond Sinai: Numb. 33. 16. And they removed from the desert of Sinai, and pitched at Kibroth-Hattaavah. Nor can it be meant of those Judges chosen by Moses before this, by the counsel of Jethro, as you reade Exod. 18. 25. they were doubtlesse farre more then seventy, seeing there were amongst them Rulers over every ten families amongst all the tribes. I sufficeth us therefore to know, that whereas there were alwayes, even when they were in Egypt, certain Elders in every tribe that were principall men amongst them▪ God now appointed that of these seventy should come up with Aaron and his sonnes into the mount: and these happely were chosen both now for witnesses, and after∣wards at Kibroth-Hattaavah for helpers to Moses in his government: yea some adde,
that God appointed seventy rather then any other number, as a memoriall of the seventy souls that went down with Jcob into Egypt, and consequently of Gods blessing upon them in bringing them within a few years to so great a multitude. Vers. 2. Neither shall the people go up with him.] That is, they shall not at all go up into the mount, as Aaron and the Elders did. Vers. 4. And Moses wrote all the words of the Lord, &c.] To wit in a book. See Hebr. 9. 19. The ten commandments in the stone tables were written by the finger of God himself, but the judiciall laws Moses wrote in a book. And thus co∣venants agreed upon betwixt party and party are usually committed to writing. And builded an altar under the hill, and twelve pillars, &c.] Both the altar and the pillars were outward sacramentall signes of the covenant which was now to be established betwixt God and his people; the altar representing God in Christ, the first and chief party in the covenant; and the twelve pillars, the twelve tribes. Vers. 5. And he sent young men of the children of Israel which offered burnt∣offerings, &c.] The common opinion of most Expositours is, that the first-born were the priests and sacrificers amongst the people▪ untill the Levites were taken in their stead, Numb. 3. 41. And thou shalt take the Levites for me in stead of all the first-born, &c. and consequently that these were the young men here spoken of▪ And indeed the word here used, in the originall doth not alwayes signifie youths, in regard of years not yet grown up to mans estate, but young men, fit for service and ministery to their Elders; as Gen. 14. 23, 24. I will not, saith Abraham, take from a threed even to a shoe-latchet, &c. Save onely that which the young men have eaten; and Exod. 33. 11. His servant Joshua, a young man, departed not out of the tabernacle. And so in many other places. But because it is I think unquestionable that before the people of God came to be a body politick, the chief and governours of every family were the sacrificers; neither do we ever reade that the first-born were set apart for publick sacrifices, since the Lord challenged them for his, upo the coming forth of his people, Sanctifie unto me all the first-born, Exod. 13. 2. It is rather probable that Moses and Aaron, and their chief Governours, had as yet the chief hand in offering publick sacrifices, and that then young men, perhaps of the first-born, were onely chosen to minister to Moses and Aaron in fetching and kill∣ing the sacrifices, and other services belonging thereunto; and are therefore said here to have offered burnt-offerings, and sacrificed peace-offerings of oxen unto the Lord. Where by oxen other sacrifices are also implyed, these being named as the principall i stead of all: for Heb. 9. 19. the Apostle speaking of this place, addes also calves and goats. Vers. 6. And Moses took half of the bloud, and put it in basons, &c.] Which was so reserved to be sprinkled upon the people. This bloud was to signifie the bloud of Christ, by which we are reconciled to God, and by virtue whereof the co∣venant of grace is established betwixt God and us: and the dividing of this bloud (half being sprinkled upon the altar, which represented God, and half upon the people) signified that the performance of the covenant by both parties, Gods favour and grace to his people▪ and the peoples faith and obedience to God, was to be ascri∣bed to the bloud of Christ.
And half of the bloud he sprinkled on the altar.] And so also on the book, Heb. 9. 19. Which as it seems was laid on the altar; making use herein also of water, scarlet, wooll, and hyssope, Heb. 9. 19. though Moses here nameth them not▪ because so the legall sprinklings were usually done, for there was water intermin∣gled with the bloud, because the bloud otherwise growing cold would have been thick, and not fit to be sprinkled, nor perhaps enough for the use. Vers. 8. And sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold, &c.] That is, all the people that stood about him, some for all▪ or all as they came to him; or the Elders in stead of the people. See Levit. 4. 15. Vers. 10. And they saw the God of Israel.] That is, the signes of Gods glori∣us presence; for never man saw God, nor can see him, 1. Tim. 6. 16. Whom  man hath seen nor can see. And there was under his feet as it were a paved work of saphir stone, &c.] Not that the Lord shewed himself in any humane shape (See Deut. 4. 15.) but this is spoken because of the scituation of this saphir work, that it was beneath the signes of his glory, as a pavement under the feet. Vers. 11. And upon the Nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand.] That is, though these Elders and Nobles of Israel saw the glory of God in an ex∣traordinary manner upon the mount, yet God was pleased to spare them, that they received no hurt thereby; which is noted as a speciall mercy of God, in regard that men, yea the greatest and noblest of men, by reason of their frailty are not able to endure such a manifestation of glory, should not God withold it from being urtfull to them. Also they saw God and did eat and drink.] That is, Aaron and his sonnes. The Elders and Nobles of Israel, before spoken of, saw the signes of Gods presence, and yet were so farre from receiving any hurt thereby, that returning home again unto the people, where they had before their coming up into to the mount offered up di∣vers sacrifices to the Lord, they did there with their peace-offerings feast together, rejoycing in the goodnesse of God to them, and the honour he had done to them. Vers. 12. And the Lord said unto Moses, Come up to me into the mount, &c.] Hitherto Moses stood afarre off with the seventy Elders; now he is called nearer, as God had before said, ver. 2. And Moses shall come near unto the Lord, &c. And be there.] That is, continue there. Thus God makes known to him that his stay should be now longer then usuall; and thereupon it is that he takes order, ver. 14. that Aaron and Ur should in his room determine the affairs of the people. Vers. 13. And Moses rose up, and his minister Joshua.] Joshua was not be∣fore mentioned, ver. 1. because he was as Moses minister and continuall attendant; and therefore it was not necessary that he should be expressed by name. See chap. 32. ver. 17. Vers. 14. Tarry ye here for us, &c.] Either this must be meant of such a stay in that place of the Mount, as that withall they might go as oft as they pleased un∣to the people; or else rather, this word here must be taken in a larger extent, com∣prehending the place where the people were in their tents, and onely implying that they should not go up with him to the top of the mount.
Vers. 16. And the seventh dy he called unto Moses e of the idst of the cloud.] Moses having staid six dayes in the higher part of the mount, but without the cloud, that in that time his mind might by degrees be taken off from all world∣ly thoughts and cares, and raised up with a desire and longing expectation of be∣holding Gods glory, to which he was not yet admitted, upon the seventh day God called him, and he went into the midst of the cloud. Vers. 18. And Moses was in the cloud fourty dayes and fourty nights.] To wit, after he went into the midst of the cloud, and was there with God: for so it is expressed, chap. 34. 28. And he was there with the Lord fourty dayes, &c. All which time Joshua it seems stayed upon the mount without the cloud, wait∣ing for Moses, sustaining himself happely all the while with the Manna that fell from heaven, and the water of the brook, mentioned Deut. 9. 21. that descended out of the mount; for there Moses found him when he came down from God; nei∣ther did he know what the Israelites had done in the camp. See Exod. 32. 17. But for Moses, he was with God within the cloud all those fourty dayes and fourty nights; and therefore doubtlesse did neither eat nor drink (wherein his condition was a shadow of the life of the glorified Saints in Gods presence in heaven) but was continually imployed in beholding the glory of Gods presence, in receiving instructions from God about all things that concerned his people, and viewing that pattern of the tabernacle, and all things belonging thereto, which was shown him in the mount. CHAP. XXV. Vers. 5. ANd shittim wood.] This was doubtlesse some choice kind of wood, of great esteem in those times, as Box and Ebony, and such sorts of wood are now amongst us; which either they procured from the places adjoyning in the wildernesse, where it grew (it seems) in great abundance (and thence happely that place in the plains of Moab, where the Israelites pitched their tents, was called Abel-shittim, Num. 33 49.) or else it was brought out of Egypt, at least by the richer sort of them, for their own private use in their tents or household utensils: which seems the more probable, because of that passage, Exod. 35. 24. Every man with whom was found shittim-wood for ny work of the service, brought it: where∣by it seems that some of them had it lying by them as a choice treasure. Vers. 8. And let them make me a sanctuary.] That is, the tabernacle consecra∣ted to God for the duties of his publick service, the visible signe of Gods presence with, and protection of his people, Levit. 26. 11, 12. And I will set my tabernacle among you: and my soul shall not abhorre you, and I will walk among you, &c. It was a type, 1. of Christs person, whence he is said to be, Heb. 8. 2. A minister of the sanctuary▪ and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched and not man, by whom God doth manifest himself unto us, and in whom we have accesse unto God; and 2. of the Church, the habitation of God by the spirit, 2. Cor. 6. 16. Ye are the temple of the living God, &c. and every Christian, in whose heart God dwelleth, Heb. 3. 6. Whose ouse, are we, if w hold ft the confidence, nd the rejoycing of hope firm unto the end.
T I may wl ong th.] This i add   rong moie to make the give  towards the ing of the . Vers. 9. Aftr th  of e  and h  f  the  thf, &c.] God did not only in word  to Mo aft wht manner he would hve every thing made in the abernacle, but the was  in a vision represented to his sight the very form and propoion of th, ver. 40. Look that thou ake the fter their patern whih was  the in the ont: Evn as he did also aftrwards to David, for th mking of the ple, and all the frniture eof 1. Chron. 28. 19. All this, sid Dd,  Lord me me understand in writing, by his hnd upon  evn ll the works of this pttern. Now the reason why the Lord was so exct herein, that oes might be sure to make all things according to his appointment, was partly because the tabernacle and all things apperining therunto were to be types and shadows of spirituall and heavely things, ppertaining to Christ and his prihood; to which end the Lord also heed him the pttern of those things above in the mount. So that in∣dd the paern which was showed to Moses in the mount, was not onely a pt∣tern of the tabemacle and those things apprtaining thereunto, which Moses was  mae; but withall likewise a pattern or sigure of those spirituall and havenly things which concernd the rnall priosthood of Christ. And hence it is that the Apole pplyeth this direction givn to Moses, to make all things according to the pattern that was shewed him in the mount, to manifest that he did not unfitly call those legall utensils, which Moses made, an example and shadow of heavenly things, Heb. 8. 5. Namely, because if the pattern hed him in the mount was a shadow and type of heavenly things, then necessarili those things that Moses made after this pattern were also such too. Vers. 10. Ad they hall make an ark of siim-wood.] The use of this was principally to keep the two tables of the Law in it, ver. 16. And thou shalt pat in∣to the ark the testimony▪ &c. And so it was a signe of Gods preence amongt them, as he was their Lord and Lawgiver, ordaining and requiring the covenant of works, This do and live; and threatning death to them that ansgressed his com∣mandments. Two cubits and an half shall be the lngth thereof▪ &c.] It is generally held hat a cubit amongst the Hebrews contained a foot and an half of our measures: the ark therefore was a yard d nine inches long, and three quarters of a yard high and broad. Vers. 11. And thou shalt over-lay it with pure gold, &c.] As the gold spent in the whole work of the tabernacle, and the holy things thereof, was to set forth the majesti of that great God who had chosen that for his dwelling place; so was this also wherewith the ark was overlaid; but besides also, this of the ark was par∣tiularly to teach them what prious account they were to make of the Law of God, tha was laid up there in so costly a cabinet. And shalt mak upon it a crown of gold round about.] Or a border which ws for the closing of the cover of the ar, and withall for ornament. Vers. 14. And th shalt put tho stavs into th rings by the ides of the ark,
&c.] And so not being suffered to touch the  they were taught thereby the more reverently to esteem of it. Vers. 16. And thou shalt put into th ark the testimony, &c.] That is, the two tables whereon the Decalogue was written, which were a testimony of the co∣venant betwixt God and the people, and testified what it was that God required of them. See Exod. 31. 18. also ver. 22. of this chapter, and Exod. 38. 21. There∣fore also were they called the tables of the covenant, Deut. 9. 9. and the ark where∣in they were was called the ark of the covenant of the Lord, Numb. 10. 33. as upon the same reason the book of the Law is also called the testimony, 2. King▪ 11. 12. and the Gospel, 1. Cor. 2. 1. the testimony of God. Vers. 17. And thou shalt make a mercy-seat, &c.] Or, a propitiatory covering, a type of Christ, whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation, Rom. 3. 25. by whom we are covered from the wrath of God, and curse of the Law, so that the hand-writing that was against us, which was contrary to us, is taken out of the way, Col. 2. 14. and have Gods will revealed unto us. Vers. 18. And thou shalt make two Cherubims, &c.] These Cherubs were to represent the holy Angels, who continually attend God in heaven to do him ser∣vice, and were therefore signes in that place of Gods presence. Vers. 20. And the Cherebims shall stretch out their wings, &c.] The wings of these Cherubims being thus stretched forth did cover the top of the mercy-seat, and compasse in that place (their wings meeting together on each side of the mer∣cy-seat) from whence the Lord intended to speak unto Moses; by an audible voice▪ of all things which he would give him in charge for the children of Israel, ver. 22. And I will commune with thee from above the mercy-seat, &c. But withall by stretching forth of their wings was signified the readinesse of the Angels to do all willing service to God▪ to Christ, and to his Church and people: And by their hiding of that place from whence the voice of the Lord came to Moses, the Israelites were taught to content themselves with that which God was pleased by his word to reveal unto them, and not to search further. And their faces shall look one to another, toward the mercy-seat, &c.] Hereby was sgnified that the Angels with one joynt consent are alwayes attentive to exe∣cute Gods command, to wait upon Christ▪ his Church and people, into whose my∣steries now revealed in the Gospel they desire to look, 1. Pet. 1. 12. Vers. 22. And there I will meet with thee, &c.] And indeed there specially did God speak to them, though not there onely. See chap. 29. 42. and Numb. 12. 5. Vers. 23. Thou shalt also make a table of shittim-wood▪ &c.] Hitherto God had given Moses direction for the making of these things that were to be in the most holy place: here he proceeds to give direction for those things that were to be done in the Sanctuary or holy place within the vail, and so in the first place for making of the table of shew-bread. Now this table was 1. to be a memoriall of Gods mi∣raculous feeding the twelve tribes in the wildernesse with bread from heaven▪ 2▪ to teach them when they came into the land of Canaan, that all their provision there was from God▪ and that they were continually fed at Gods table (for so much was implyed, in that part of their food was still set before God, as by way of ac∣knowledgement
that all was  that so they might be thankfull to him and use his gifts soberly and moderately, as if they were at Gods table; ly, to be a type of Gods feeding his people and family with the true bread of life, Christ, and that both in the word and in the sacrament of the Lords supper (for indeed therein we may truly say with Solomon, Prov. 9. 2. The Wisdome hath mingled her wine, and hath furnished her table; and as, Psal. 36. 8. That we are abundantly satisfied with the fatnesse of Gods house) and likewise of that fulnesse of joy which God hath prepared for the faithfull in heaven, of which Christ speaking saith, Luke 22. 29. 30. I appoint unto you a kingdome▪ as my father hath appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdome. Two cubits shall be the length thereof, &c.] According therefore to our measures it was a yard long, half a yard broad, and three quarters of a yard high. Vers. 24. And make thereto a crown of gold round about.] This crown was upon the table by the very edge of it, to keep from falling such things as were set thereon, and withall for ornament. Vers. 25. And thou shalt make unto it a border of an hand-breadth round about.] This border was surely either the very frame wherewith the feet▪ of the table, above close under the board, were joyned together, and whereon the board of the table was by some means fastened; or else rather, it was a border for ornament round about the frame, as is usuall, to hide the joynts where the frame and feet were joynted together. And thou shalt make a golden crown to the border thereof round abut.] This was not the same crown mentioned vers. 24. but another, which went round about the frame of the table, upon or over the border, and that onely for ornament. Vers. 27. Over against the border shall the rings be, &c.] That is, close under the border in the upper part of the frame, that it might be carried the more conve∣niently. Vers. 29. And thou shalt make the dish therof, &c.] Foure kinds of vessels are here named belonging to the table: hard it is to say for what purpose they were severally used; yet according to our translation the most probable opinion is, that first the dishes were to hold the loaves of shew-bread, and some of them happely to hold franckincense which was put upon ach row of the shew-bread, Levit. 24. 7. secondly, that the spoons were to put in the franckincee into the dishes, and to take it out again when it was to be burned upon the altar of incense, Levit. 24. 7. and thirdly, that the two last kind of vessels were two severall sorts of covers (as is evident in the text, where they are called covers and bowls to cover withall) the one happely being plates for the covering of the loaves, the other bowls▪ for the co∣ving of the dishes of franckincense, and which might also serve for the burning of te franckincense. Vers. 30. And thou shal set upon the table shew-bread before me alwayes, &c.] To wit, twelve loaves or cakes, each containing two homers or tenth deals of fine flower which were set in wo rowes upon the table, and changed every Sabbath day, Levit▪ 24. 5. &c. And were therefore called shw-bread, because they were al∣wys set forth and shewed as inthe presence of God.
Vers. 31. Thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold.] This candlestik was a type of Christ, and that as he is and alwayes hath been both by his word and spirit the light of the Church, John 12. 46. I am come a light into the world, that who∣soever believeth in me should not abide in darknesse. Vers. 32. And six branches shall come out of the sides of it, &c.] The shaft went upright in the middest, and then from this shaft went out six branches, three on a side, one above another, and they went out by couples▪ one on the one side, and righ over against that another on the other side; ither were they all of one length, for the nethermost branches were the longer, and the uppemost the shorter▪ so that they were all of one height above. Now these did denote the Prophets and Priests before, and the Apostles, Evangelists and Pastours since the dayes of Christ; who did all in their severall times, places and degrees, receive their gifts and authority from Christ, and were as so many burning and shining lamps, as it is said of the Bptist▪ John 5. 35. Vers. 33. Three bowls made like unto almonds with a knop, &c.] These bowls, knops, and flowers, such as are usually in candlesticks, were onely for onament, yt might also signifie the severall gifts and ornaments wherewith Christ dot en∣due his ministers; and there was three of each in every branch. Vers. 34. And in the candlestick shall be foure bowls, &c.] That is, in the shaft of the candlestick: as in the branches there were bowls, and knops, and flowers for ornament, so also in the shaft or body of the candlestick which went up right in the midst of the branches; yet in this there were foure of each, whereas there wer but three in the branches. Vers. 35. And there shall be a knop under two branches of the same, &c.] That▪ i, just ove the fist and lowest knop in the shaft came out two branches, one on each side, and so over the second, and third; and then in the upper part of th shaft, above the place where the branches went forth, was there a bowl, a knop, and a lower. Vers. 37. And thou shal make the seve lamps thereof.] That is, the sockets where the oyl was put to feed the light, which may well signifie the manyold gifts of th spirit, as Rev. 4. 5. And there were even lamps of fire burning before the throne, which r the seven spirits of God. Now these seven lamps ere on the top of the shaft and the ix branches thereof. That they may giv light over against i.] That is, round about it. See Numb. 8▪ . Vers. 38. And the togs thereof and the snffdises thereof shalt be of pre gold.] The tongs or suffers were appointed to raise up the wick of the lamps, or to cleanse the droppigs of it, and the the  so takn away was put into the snff∣dishes. Vers. 39. Of a tlent of pure gld shall e make it.] That is, of a hundred an twenty pound weig.
CHAP. XXVI. Vers. 1. MOreover thou shalt make the tbernacl with ten curtains, &c.] This word tabernacl is sometimes taken in a larger sense, inclu∣ding the court also; but hre it is onely taken for the inclosure of the ten curains which did compass the Sanctuary of the most holy place. With Cherubi of cnig rk, &c.] Thse Chubims wr a visibl g of Gods presence, ad of  Angles ministry in th Church, whereof th brnacle was a type. Vers. 2. The length of one curtain, &c.] According to our masures every cur∣tain was fourtn yards long, and two yard broad; and so the breadth of all the ten curtains togethr was twnty yrds: and thu they wr ordered, they were laid in the length of them crosse athwart the tabernacle, in the breadth ofit, from th North to th South. Now th tabrnacle bing fifteen yards compasse from th ground on th Southsid to the ground on the Northsid (for it was on both sids five yards high and on th top five yrd brod▪) the curtain of fourt yards length would cov i fr one sid to the oth within halfa yard of th groud on ach side: and again, the tbernacle bng▪ fifn yard long, the breadth of thes t curtains, making together twenty yards, would cover the tabernacle in the length of it, and then foure yards and an half would b lf to hang down as a coverig f th fahet end of the taberacl Eastward, within hl yard of th ground, as on the sides, and it might lean over on th foreont half a yard. Vers. 3. Th f curtains shall be coupled togth &c.] Swd or fstned together, and so should make two great curtain▪ which were also coupld togher wit loop and tah, as is xprssd in th following vs. Vers. 4. Ad to shlt  loop of lw p the dg of on curtain, &c.] The meaning of this clause is, That there should be loops of blew set upon th dg of th two g curtain that lay nxt together, when th urtains w spread over te tabnacle, to wit upon th farthest edg Wstwrd of the rst grt curin wh it was to be coupled to the othr grat curtain, and upon that edg of th s∣cond cuin wre i was to  coupled to the  and so with thos th ogold▪ mentioned vers. 6. these loops on the edg of th two curtin wr  tog∣ther. Now this, I coiv▪ was th ordrd, boh ha ths loop and taches on the outside might shew the division of the holy place from the most holy▪ (for jus undr that place the vail dividd them, vers. 33. Thou shl hag up th vail un∣r th taces) and also that being so astned thy might b takn asuder, and tat with the more convinci▪ and lss troubl thy migh  tm down, and fold them up when they removed the tabernacle. But besides, the fastening  curtains together signified the spirits  o couplig▪ o th Sain togher by faith and love in Christ, of which the Apostle speaks, Eps▪ 4▪ 3▪ 4. whr he exhorts us to endeavour to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, telling us that they that are Christians are one body and spirit, even as they are called in one hope of their calling, &c. And the coupling of the two great curtains together
to me o  mig also  at the Sains both in heaven  earth, owever eveed n place one from anoter, do make but one Church, all things  in heaven and earth being gathered together in one, even in Chrit, Eph. 1. 10. Vers. 6. And it shall be one taberacle.] This is addd as a reason why the two great curtains, made up each of them of five leer curtains, should be thus coupled together wth loops and taches, to wit, that they migt make one tabernacle; which had not been, if (as some conceive it was) each ve had been coupled toge∣ther, and n the five to the five. See ver. 11. Vers. 7. And thou shalt make curtains of goats hair, &c.] To wit, goats hair spunne by women (Exod. 35. 26. And all the women, whose heart stirred them up in wisdome, spunne goats hair) and woven into stuff, not much unlike our chamlet. Eleven curtains thou shalt make.] Whereas the embroydered curtains were but ten: the reason see in ver. 9. Vers. 8. The length of one crtin shall be thirty cbits.] Two cubits, that is, a yard longer then the embroydered oes: and so these reached on both sides to the ground, whereas the other came hort of the ground half a yard on both sides. S ver. 13. Vers. 9. And salt dole te sxt curti in the forefrot of the taberacle.] It was doubled or folded back in the forefront, that it might serve as a pentce to deend the vail which did hang there. Vers. 12. The half cain that remaineth, &c.] There being of this curtain one covering more then of the embroydered curtains, it was the breadth of a cur∣tain, that is foure cubits or two yards, of larger extent then the other; which over∣plus was thus used, a yard of it was doubled back in the forefront, as in ver. 9. And the other yard hung over on the backside, and so fell down lower then the other curtain by half a yard, folded or doubled. Vers. 13. And a cubit on the one side, and a cubit o the other side, &c.] Se above, ver. 8. Vers. 14. And thou shalt make a covering for the tent of rammes skinnes died red, &c.] Of the measure and fashion of these two coverings there is no mention, and happely because in all things they agreed with that of the goats hair. These served for the service of the tabernacle and things in the same, from the injury of the weather; and withall signified, 1. the safety of the Church covered and hi from the injuries of the world, whence is that of the Prophet, Isai. 4. 6. And there shall be a tabernacl for a shadow in the day time for the heat, and for a place of rfuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain; and that of David, Psal. 27. 5. In the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion; in the secret of his taber∣nacle he shall hide me, &c. And 2. the state of the Church then, which had the my∣steries of Christ under shadows and coverings, now taken away. Vers. 15. And tho salt mak boards for the tabernacle of shtim-wood, standing up.] These boards of the tabernacle (which were fastened in silver soc∣l, ver. 19.) signied the severall members of the Church, wo are built upon
the foudation of th Prphts and Apostles, s Christ himslf bing th if corner stone; In whom all the building fitly framd ogether groweth unto n holy temple in the Lord, Ephes. 2. 20, 21. See Rev. 3. 12. Him that overcomth will I mak a pillar in the temple of my God. Vers. 16. Ten cubits shall be the length of a board, &c.] Which was the height of the tabernacle, ten cubit or five yards. Vers. 17. Two tenons shall there be in one board, &c.] That is, pieces of board cut out of the same breadth and depth in the bottome of each board, to put into the sockets for their fastning. Vers. 18. And thou shalt make boards for the tabrnacle, twenty boards, &c.] Twenty boards, each of them being a cubit and an half broad ver. 16. make thir cubits, that is fifteen yards; which was the length of the tabernacle. Vers. 19. And thou shalt make fourty sockets of silver, &c.] Or footstalls, having hollow mortaises for the tenons of the boards to be fastned in. Vers. 22. And for the sides of the tabernacle Westward.] That is, for the whole West end, from one side or corner of it to the other. Vers. 23. And two boards shalt thou make for the corners, &c.] These are cal∣led the corner boards, either because they stood sloping, and so joyned the boards of the side and end together; or because they were made purposely of another fashi∣on, that standing in the corners they might strengthen the whole frame of the ta∣bernacle. Vers. 24. And they shall be coupled together bneath, &c.] That is, they shall be cut or slit in the midst, and then doubled (the Hebrew word signifieth twi∣ned) they were to be cut just of the same proportion every way, and then clapt to∣gether, one to line the other: and by this means though there were eight boards in the end, yet the tabernacle was not twelve but ten cubits, that is five yard, broad. And they shall be coupled together above the head of it into one ring.] This I understand of a plate of gold, which was put about the ends of these corner-dou∣bled boards for better binding or fast closing them together. Vers. 26. And tho shalt make barres of shittim-wood; five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle, &c.] Foure of these were rowes ofbarres; for it seems onely the middle barre did reach from end to end, ver. 28. the other were shor∣ter barres, laid in foure rowes, two beneath & two above, and some way joyned to∣gether▪ where they met, for the strengthening of them. Vers. 28. And the middle barre in the middest of the boards shall reach from end to end.] There were two rowes of barres went acrosse in the upper part of the boards, and two in the nether part of the boards; but this barre, that went athwart in the middest of the length of the boards, was all of one piece, one entire barre, reaching from end to end. Now the fastning together of these boards thus with barres sgnified the uniting of all the members together by one and the same spirit in Christ, from whom the whole body fily joyned together, and compacted by that which every joynt supplieth, according to the effectuall working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love, Ephes. 4. 16.
Vers. 31. And thou shalt make a vail of blew, &c.] This vail, which closed in the most holy place, signified, 1. the body of Christ, shadowing his divinitie, by which he hath opened for us a way into the holiest, that is, into heaven: Heb. 10. 19, 20. Having therefore, brethren, boldnesse to enter into the holiest by the bloud of Jesus, by a new and living way which he hath consecrated for us, through the vail, that is to say, his flesh, &c. See also Heb. 9. 8, 24. And 2. it signified that as yet the spirituall worship of God was in a manner hidden under the vail of legall ceremonies, which should be clearly revealed at the coming of Christ; 3. It might also signifie the separation betwixt the Church of the Jews and of the Gentiles, which is now reconciled by Christ, Ephes. 2. 14. For he is our peace, which hat made of both one, and hath broken down that partition-wall; and therefore at the death of Christ the vail rent asunder, Luke 23. 45. Vers. 32. Their hooks shall be of gold, &c.] Which did hold up the cords upon which the vail did ride, and were fastned to the heads of the pillars. Vers. 33. And thou shalt hang up the vail under the taches, &c.] Under those taches mentioned ver. 6. so that this is added to shew in what place this vail was to be hung up. Vers. 36. And thou shalt make an hanging for the doore, &c.] This hanging at the very entrance into the Tabernacle signified with what fear and reverence we should approch into Gods presence, and partake of his sacred mysteries, not rush∣ing in boldly upon them without any awe; as also the restraint of the Jewish Church from such blessings as are now opened unto us in Christ: for within this hanging the people might not come, Hebr. 9. 6. Vers. 37. And thou shalt make for the hangings five pillars of shittim-wood. &c.] Because this lay open to the wind and weather, it had the more pillars to strength∣en it; the other had but foure. CHAP. XXVII. Vers. 1. ANd thou shalt make an altar of shittim-wood.] Though the altar was made of wood, yet it was covered over with brasse to defend it from the heat ofthe fire, which lay ever burning upon it; and besides the widenesse and length of it was such that the fire needed not come near the sides, but might be kept within the compasse of the grate, which was all of brasse. Neiher is this Law contrary to that, Exod. 20. 24. An altar of earth thou shalt make, &c. For that is meant of altars to be made upon the sudden upon some extraordinary occasion, which were onely for a time, and so to be dissolved again, such as Samuel and Eli∣as made; but this was for the perpetuall use of the tabernacle, and was a type of Christ, who is now the onely altar of his Church, Heb. 13. 10. We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle. Vers. 2. And thou shalt make the horns of it, &c.] To these they bound their sacrifices, Psal. 118. 27. Bind the sacrifice with cords, even to the horns of the al∣tar: And besides, horns usually signifying power and might (Habb. 3. 4. He had horns coming out of his hand, and there was the hiding of his power) these
foure horns signified the power of Christ for the salvation of his people, gathered from the foure corners of the world. Vers. 3. And his flesh-hooks, &c.] The word in the originall may comprehend fire-tongs, forks, and other instruments, used as occasion was to remove and lay in order the wood, coals, and flesh of the sacrifices: But our Translatours have ren∣dered it flesh-hooks, that is, those instruments with teeth, used to take flesh out of pots, 1. Sam. 2. 14. All that the flesh-hook brought up, the priest took for himsel. See also 2. Chron. 4. 16. Vers. 4. And upon the net thou shalt make foure brazen rings, &c.] Where∣with it hung upon ledges or hooks within the altar, happely upon the ends or hooks in the inside of those rings which were on the outside for the carrying of the altar: And thus hanging down midway the hollow of the altar, the boards on each side would fence the flames in part from the wind and weather. Vers. 9. And thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle, &c.] This was cal∣led the court of the tabernacle, because it was reared up round about the taber∣nacle, chap. 40. 33. Here the sacrifices were killed, and other services of the Levites performed; and it was a type of the visible Church here in this world, where both true believers and hypocrites do joyn together in the outward duties of Gods worship and service: for which cause also it was so spacious and large, an hundred cubits, that is, fifty yards long, and fifty cubits, that is, five and twenty yards wide, to signifie how greatly the Church should be enlarged in processe of time, especially when the Gentiles should also become Gods people. Vers. 10. The hooks of the pillars and their fillets shall be of silver.] These fil∣lets were certain hoops or wreaths of silver, which compassed the pillars and ser∣ved for ornament, and happely for th better fastning of the hangings in some pla∣ces to the pillars: where the making of these is related, it is said that their heads al∣so (or chapiters) were over-laid with silver, chap. 38. 17. though that be not her expressed. Vers. 12. Their pillars ten, and their sockets ten.] The hangings on the West side must have ten pillars, standing upon as many brasen sockets. And here we must also note that doubtlesse there stood two pillars joyned together in each cor∣ner, for otherwise we cannot say whether the corner pillar was to be numbred a∣mongst the twenty pillars, appointed on each side for the length of the court, or the n appointed for the breadth. Vers. 16. And for the gate of the court shall be an hanging of twenty cubits, &c.] See the note, chap. 26. 36. Vers. 18. And the height five cubits, &c.] This court therefore of th taber∣nacle was but half so high as the tabernacle, and therefore the tabernacle might be easily seen; yet these hangings were so high that men could not overlook them. Vers. 19. All the vessels of the tabernacle, &c. shall be of brasse.] That is, such as were onely for the taking down and settig up of the tabernacle, as the pinnes or stakes which were driven into the ground to fasten it. Vers. 20. And thou shalt command the children of Israel, that they bring pure oyl olive beaten, &c.] It seems that oyl which was first gotten out of the olives
by beating or stamping of them, was farre purer nd clearer from dregges, then that which was afterward crushed out with a presse. This therefore th e children of Israel were appointed to provide for the lamp in the golden candlestick, even pure oyl olive beaten, wherewith the priests were to maintain the lamps, to cause the lamp to burn alwayes, that is every night, by renewing them still at the appointed times: As the daily sacrifice is called a continuall burnt-offering, Exod. 29. 42. and yet it was offered but twice every day, at morning and evening. And so this word, alwayes, is explained in the following verse, Aaron and his sonnes shall order it from evening to morning before the Lord. At the East end of the ta bernacle, ei∣ther abov the vail, or at the opening of it, there might come in light sufficient in the day time; and therefore I conceive then the lamps burnt not, but in the night onely, and were put out in the morning; which some inferre also from that, 1. Sam. 3. 3. where it is said that the Lord appeared to Samuel ere the lamp of God went out in the temple of God, to wit, before the break of day. Now by this pure oyl was signified the gifts and graces of the Spirit, whereby the ministers of God are fitted to be as lights among the people. Vers. 21. In the tabernacle of the congregation, &c.] The abernacle is here called the tabernacle of the congregation, because though the people did not enter into this place; yet to the doore of this tabernacle they brought their offerings, and there did the Lord meet with the people, and make known his will to them. Aaron and his sonnes shall order it, &c.] Signifying that the priests lippes should preserve knowledge. CHAP. XXVIII. Vers. 1. ANd take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, &c.] Because Aaron was the brother of Moses, to prevent any envy amongst the people, this is in the first place expressed, that it was by the Lords appointment and com∣mand that he and his sonnes were set apart to the office of the priesthood. Vers. 2. And thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, for glory and for beauty.] That is, glorious and beautifull. And hereby was signifyed, 1. the insufficiency of Aarons priesthood, that there was not in him (if you look on him in his own person) sufficient worth that he should mediate between God and man; for threfore was this holinesse in his garments to cover the pollution of his own prson▪ 2. the more then angelicall purity and holinesse of Christ, whose type Aaron thus attired was, Heb. 9. 14. Christ through the eternall spirit offered himself without spot to God. By whom also his Church is clothed with garments of beautifull glory, Isai. 52. 1. Put on thy beautifull garments, oh Jerusalem, the holy citie. Rev. 19. 8. To her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white; for the fine linen is the righteousnesse of the Sains: 3. to shew the extraordinary degrees of holinesse required in those that serve at the altar▪ Vers. 3. And thou shalt speak unto all that are wise-hearted, &c. that they may make Aarons garments to consecrate him, &c.] That is, to be a signe of his con∣secration and sanctification from God; therefore it was death to minister without these garments.
Vers. 6. And thy shall make the ephod of gold, &c.] It was called the ephod of an hebrew word, which signifieth to close, compasse, or gird about, because it compassed fitly the body, and was tied thereto: it was the outmost of all Aarons garments, and covered his whole body, both back and breast, from the shoulders down to the loyns, excepting onely the breast, where the breast-plate was fastened. Vers. 7. It shall have the two shoulder-pieces thereof joyned at the edges thereof; and so it shall be joyned together.] These shoulder-pieces were either the pieces which went up both before and behind from the body of the ephod, and so met to∣gether on the top of each shoulder, and were joyned together in the edge thereof, a hole being left in the midst through which the priests head went when he put on the ephod; or else it is meant of certain wings (as we call them) which were joyned to the ephod in the edge round about each shoulder. Vers. 8. And the curious girdle of the ephod which is upon it shall be of the same, &c.] By this is meant two pieces or slaps which came from the back part of the ephod under the arm-holes, and are called the curious guard, or girdle, be∣cause the nether lappets served as a girdle to fasten it below: and it is said that it should be upon it, that is, is joyned as a part of it, which is added to distinguish it from the girdle mentioned ver. 39. Thou shalt make the girdle of needlework, which was not a part of the ephod, as this, which is therefore called often the golden girdle. Vers. 9. And thou shalt take two onyx-stones, and grave on them the names of the children of Israel.] These two onyx-stones, whereon were graven the names of the twelve sonnes of Jacob, signified the firm and perpetuall love of Christ to∣ward his Church; and also how precious they be to him, & how continually mind∣full he is of them, Cant. 8. 6. Set me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thy arm; for love is strong as death. See also Hag. 2. 23. In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, will I take thee O Zorobbabel my servant, &c. and will make thee as a signet. Vers. 10. Six of their names on one stone, and the other six names of the rest on the other stone, according to their birth.] That is, first Reuben, then Simeon, and so the rest according to their age: And this signified the like precious faith and dignity which all have obtained before God in Christ, 2. Pet. 1. 1. To them that have obtained the like precious faith: So Gal. 3. 28, 29. Ye are all one in Christ Jesus: And if ye be in Christ, then are ye Abrahams seed, and heirs according to the promise. Vers. 12. And thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulders of the ephod, &c.] Hereby was signified the power and principality of the Mediatour, laid upon Christs shoulders, Isai. 9. 6. And the government shall be upon his shoulders, &c. See 22. chap. ver. 22. And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulders. In regard whereof he doth, 1. bear our iniquities, Isai. 53. 4. Surely he hath born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, &c. 2. by his mediation and intercession he presents us as pure and holy unto God, Eph. 5. 27. That he might present it to himself a glorious church, &c. so also John 17. 19, 20, 21. And for their sakes I sanctifie my self, that they also might be sanctified through the truth, &c. 3. he doth support and
defend us from all evil, Deut. 32. 11, 12. As an eagle stirreth up her nest, flutter∣eth over her young, spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings, so the Lord alone did lead him, &c. And fourthly he carried those, whose names are written in the book of life, as it were upon his shoulders into heaven, who were plunged in the gulf of sinne and death, and were utterly unable to raise themselves thither. And thus was all the occasion of envy taken away, the people being hereby taught that they were none of them excluded, but in the person of one were all presented as a royall priesthood unto God. For stones of memoriall unto the children of Israel.] That is, they shall be a visible signe to put them in remembrance of their interest in God through Christ, and to assure them that God seeing their names upon the shoulders of the priest, would remember the covenant he had made with their fathers, and accordingly would do them good: for so the like phrase is used concerning God, Gen. 9. 16. The bow shall be in the cloud, and I will look upon it, that I may remember the ever∣lasting covenant betwixt God and every living creature. Vers. 13. And thou shalt make oches of gold.] To wit for the two onyx stones to be set in, whereon were ingraven the names of the twelve sonnes of Jacob, and which were to be fastened upon the two shoulderpeices of the ephod. Vers. 15. And thou shalt make the breastplate of judgement, &c.] So called, because the priest did use to put it on when he consulted with the Lord about the cause of the people to give right judgement▪ Numb. 27. 21. And he shall stand be∣fore Eleasar the priest, who shall ask counsel for him after the judgement of Urim before the Lord, &c. Or it noted the care that the priest should have of answering judgement and equity to them that enquired of God by him. See vers. 30. And hereby was signified the righteousnesse of Christ, Isa. 59. 17. For he put on righte∣ousnesse as a breastplate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head. Vers. 17. And thou shalt set in it settings of stones, &c.] See vers. 9. Vers. 21. And the stones shall be with the names of the children of Israel, &c.] By this was signified both that the Israel of God are united to Christ and joyned so, that what he did we may be said to have done in him; (in him we are presented unto God as pure and holy) and also the love of Christ that he alwayes bears us in his heart, being ever mindfull of us, and solicitous for our salvation. Vers. 22. And thou shalt make upon the breastplate chains at the ends, &c.] These I take to be the same mentioned vers. 14. And two chains of pure gold at the ends: onely there they were spoken of in regard of their fastening to the ouches, here in regard of their fastening to the breastplate. Vers. 25. And put them on the shoulderpeices of the ephod before it.] That is, toward the forepart of the ephod. And thus was the breastplate fastened to the ephod by these two chains, which were fastened at one end to the two rings that were in the upper corners of the breastplate, and at the other end to the two ouches that were on the shoulderpices of the ephod. Vers. 26. And thou shalt put them upon the two ends of the breastplate, &c.] That is, in the two ends of the nether part of the breastplate below, towards the imbrodered girdle of the ephod.
In the border thereof which is in the side of the ephod inward.] That is, not one∣ly on the undermost edge of the breastplate, but also on the inside of that edge, that the joyning together of these rings with those of the ephod might be hidden under the edge of the breastplate. Vers. 27. And two other rings of gold thou sha't make, and shalt put them on the two sides of the ephod, &c.] The rings here mentioned were those to which the rings on the lower part of the breastplate were to be fastened, and direction is given where they should be set, to wit, first on the sides of the ephod, the right side and the left; secondly underneath, that is, in the lower part of each side of the ephod, not in the upper part or middle of it; thirdly, towards the forepart thereof, that is, though on the sides of the ephod, yet not so backward as to be under the arms, but toward the forepart of the sides nearer the breast; fourthly, over against the coupling there∣of, that is, directly against the ouches on the shoulderpieces, where the upper part of the breastplate was coupled to the ephod; and fifthly, above the curious girdle of the ephod, that is, above those lappets wherewith the ephod was girt close about the loins of the high priest, which were therefore called the curious girdle of the ephod. Vers. 30. And thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgement the Urim and Thummim, &c.] Urim and Thummim are by interpretation lights and perfections, and signified that the gifts of the holy Ghost should be in Christ without measure, even all the treasure of wisdome and knowledge, and all perfection of purity that mans nature is capable of. What these Urim and Thummim were, we cannot say▪ Amongst the divers conjectures of Interpreters thee are two that have most proba∣bility in them: the one is, that the Urim and Thummim are no other but those very rowes of pretious stones, before mentioned, that were in the breastplate, and are here called Urim and Thummim, not onely because of their brightnesse and perfecti∣on, but especially also with respect unto their use, which was, that by them the high priest did inquire of God for the people, and was by the speciall inspiration of the Spirit enabled to return them an answer, which did accordingly come to passe: and hence it is, they say, that in the thirty ninth chapter, where Moses doth exactly re∣late how all things were made according to Gods appointment, there is no mention made of the Urim and Thummim, but onely of the twelve pretious stones set in the breastplate, because these stones, set in two rowes, were usually called among the people the Urim and Thummim in regard of their use, the high priests enquiring of God by them and returning a perfect answer to those demands that were made to him. And indeed this I should readily imbrace for truth, but that one thing onely makes it doubtfull, to wit, that it is said the workmen did set the stones in the breast∣plate, chap. 39. 10. whereas Moses put in the Urim and Thummim, Levit. 8. 8. The other opinion is, that these very words, Urim and Thummim, were written in some pretious matter, not made by humane art, but by the almighty power of God, and so were given by God to Moses, and by him put within the fold of the pectorall, Levit. 8. 8. Also he put in the breastplate the Urim and Thummim. And therefore this is not mentioned amongst those things that were made by the artificers, because this was, as the tables of the Law, the work of God and not of man: This also is
very probable, but yet a conjecture onely; neither can we (the Scripture being si∣lent) certainly determine what they were. When the Jews returned out of Babylon they were lost, and therefore some businesses hung in suspense, Ezra 2. 63. Till there stood up a priest with Urim and Thummim; neither do we find in any of the Jewish Rabbins that they themselves did certainly know what they were. And Aaron shall bear the judgement of the children of Israel upon his heart, &c.] That is, the breastplate of judgement, wherein were the Urim and Thummim, so called, both because it was the type of that light and perfection in Christ which he communicates to his people; as also because hereby answers of judgement were given to the Israelites. See Numb. 27. 21. Vers. 31. And thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all of blue.] So called, be∣cause it was worn next under the ephod, and, being of it self a loose robe, was gir∣ded to the body by the curious girdle of the ephod: It signified the heavenly robe of Christs righteousnesse. Vers. 33. And beneath upon the hemme of it thou shalt make pomegranates of blue, &c.] These as they hung upon the garment, signified that onely the fragrant smell of the garment of Christs righteousnesse makes us a sweet favour unto God; as they hung intermixed with bells, they signified the sweet and comfortable effects of Christs doctrine, by which we come to be clothed with the fragrant robe of Christs righteousnesse, and from his fulnesse to receive even grace for grace. And bells of gold between them round about.] Signifying the pure and pretious voice of Christ, heard of God in his prayer and mediation; of the people, in his teaching and instruction. Vers. 35. And his sound shall be heard when he goeth unto the holy place, &c.] Of which (besides the mysteries signified, whereof above) this was also a reason, that notonely the priest but the people also might by the sound of those bells be put in mind to lift up their hearts to God, &c. Vers. 36. And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, &c.] This was made like the forepart of a coronet, and therefore called, chap. 29. 30. The plate of the holy crown, which being joyned to the miter, signified that Christ should be not onely priest but king. And grave upon it like the engravings of a signet, Holinesse to the Lord.] Signi∣fying the intercession of Christ, that by his holinesse we are presented as holy, yea perfectly holy, in the sight of God. John 17. 19. And for their sakes I sanctifie my self that they also might be sanctified through the truth. Vers. 38. And it shall be upon Aarons forehead, &c.] To wit that it might be an eminent visible token of Gods gratious acceptation of his people to be seen and read of all men to their comfort, even that God accepteth both them and their im∣perfect services in the face of Jesus Christ, who by his sufferings and mediation hath taken away the sinnes of his people which they commit in their most holy and reli∣gious actions, 1. John 2. 1, 2. If any man sinne, we have an advocate with the Fa∣ther, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sinnes, &c. Vers. 39. And thou shalt imbroider the coat of fine linen, &c.] A garment with sleeves, covering the whole body down to the feet, and being loose was girded to
the body with a girdle. Levit. 8. 7. And he put upon him the coat, and girded him with the girdle, &c. It was under the robe of the ephod; and did also signifie the garments of justice wherewith Christ and his children are arayed. And thou shalt make the girdle of needlework, &c.] This was made of fine linen, blew, and purple, and scarlet, Exod. 39. 29. It served to gird the coat with, which was under the robe, Levit. 8. 7. And he put upon him the coat, and girded him with the girdle, &c. and signified the trust, constancie, and expedition of Christ in his ministration, Isay 11. 5. And his righteousnesse shall be the girdle of his loyns, &c. for these are things usually signified in the Scripture by girding, Luke 12. 35. Let your loyns be girded about, and your lights burning. Vers. 40. And for Aarons sonnes thou shalt make coats, &c.] Called elsewhere ephods (1. Sam. 22. 18. And slew on that day fourescore and five persons that did weare a linen ephod,) because it was their uppermost garment: the high priests was imbroidered, this onely of linen, chap. 39. 27. And they made coats of fine linen, of woven work▪ for Aaron and for his sonnes; and signified the purity and sanctification of Gods Saints, who are all priests evangelicall. See Levit. 16. 4. And thou shalt make for them girdles, &c.] Aarons was of divers colours, Exod. 39. 29. these not. Vers. 41. And thou shalt put them upon Aaron thy brother, and his sonnes with him.] Now cannot the people think that Aaron had injuriously seised upon the priesthood for his posterity, since the same hand invested both father and sonnes. Vers. 42. And thou shalt make them linen breeches, &c.] See Exod. 20. 26. CHAP. XXIX. Vers. 1. ANd this is the thing that thou shalt do unto them, to hallow them, &c.] That is, to sanctifie them for the work of the priesthood: and all the following ceremonies, sacrifices, purifyings, were to this end, to teach men to look off from these men, who had need themselves of purifying, and sacrifices of atonement, and to look onely upon Christ, or upon them onely as types of Christ. Take one young bullock and two rammes without blemish.] This young bullock was for a sinne-offering, and the two rammes were the one for a burnt-offering the other for a peace-offering. Vers. 2. And unleavened bread, and cakes, &c.] This meat-offering of bread and cakes was to be unleavened, to signifie the sincerity and incorruption of Christ, of whom all sacrifices were types, and who is indeed the true bread of life, John 6. 55. and secondly, of all the sacrifices evangelicall, which through him Christians do offer unto God: and likewise the oyl wherewith they were mingled, signified the pretious anointing of Gods spirit both in Christ and the faithfull. 1. John 2. 27. But the anointing which ye have received of him abideth in you; nd ye need not that any man teach you: but as the same anointing teachth you all things, and is truth, and is no lie, &c.
Vers. 2. Of wheaten floure shalt thou make them.] The best of the principle grain, signifying the purity of Christ and all Evangelicall sacrifices. Vers. 4. And Aaron and his sonnes shalt thou bring, and shalt wash them with water.] To wit, out of the sanctified laver, Exod. 30. 18. And this signified the ho∣linesse that was required in these legall priests that were to be types of Christ. Vers. 7. Then thou shalt take the anointing oyl, and poure it upon his head.] Here Moses is expressely commanded to poure the anointing oyl (for the making whereof there is afterwards direction given, Chap. 30. 23. &c. upon the head of Aaron; but in the two following verses, where there is order given for the conse∣cration of his sonnes, there is no mention made of anointing them; whence many Expositours conclude, that onely the high priest Aaron was anointed with this oyl, and not his sonnes: yet because it is said, Exod. 30. 30. Thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and Chap. 40. 14, 15. Thou shalt bring his sons, and cloth them with coats; and thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the priests office: it is more then probable, that at their first consecration both Aaron and his sonnes vvere anointed. Indeed in succeeding times it is evident that onely the high priests vvere anointed, and therefore Levit. 21. 10. he is distinguished from the inferiour priests hereby, He that is the high priest a∣mong his brethren, upon whose head the anointing oyl was poured. But at this pre∣sent consecration of the priests, doubtlesse both Aaron and his sonnes vvere anointed. And though vve cannot say that they vvere anointed by the pouring out of the oyl upon their heads, as Aaron vvas; yet it is hard on the other side to restrain their an∣ointing to the sprinkling of the holy oyl upon them and their garments, vvhereof mention is made, Levit. 8. 30. And Moses took the anointing oyl, and the blod which was upon the Altar, and sprinkled it upon Aarons and upon his sonnes gar∣ments with him, &c. Vers. 10. And thou shalt cause a bullock to be brought, &c.] Which vvas to be a sinne-offering for the priest, vers. 14. But the flesh of the bullock, and his skin, and his dung, thou shalt burn with fire without the camp; it is a sinne-offering. And Aaron and his sonnes shall put their hands upon the head of the bullock.] In vvhich rite by the hand of faith they disburthened themselves of their sinnes, and laid them upon the head of the sacrifice, that is, upon Christ, Isa. 53. 6. God hath laid upon him the iniquity of us all. Vers. 11. And thou shalt kill the bullock before the Lord, &c.] Thus till Aaron and his sonnes were fully consecrated for the service of the priesthood, Moses him∣self did by extraordinary warrant from god do the work of the priest in offering these sacrifices; whence is that of the Psalmist, Psal. 99. 6. Moses and Aaron among his priests. Vers. 12. And thou shalt take of the bloud and put it upon the horns of the al∣tar, &c.] That is, the brasen altar of the burnt-offerings which stood in the court yard. This first sinne-offering differed from others that were offered for the sinnes of the priests: In others, the bloud was carried into the tabernacle, and put upon the horns of the golden altar of incense, Levit. 4. 7. And the priest shall put some of the bloud upon the horns of the altar of sweet incense, &c. here it was not so,
First, because this was also to sanctifie the altar it self, that it might be fit afterwards to sanctifie the sacrifices of the people (whereby also was implyed the worthlesnesse of these things in themselves if they be not looked upon with reference to Christ) Secondly, because Aaron and his sonnes being not yet full priests, it was done as was usuall at the sinne-offerings of the common ruler and private person. See Levit. 4. 25, 30. As for the doing of this with the finger, this was used in all sinne-offe∣rings, Levit. 4. and onely in them, teaching us the efficacy of Christs bloud for the purging away of sinne, when it is so particularly presented unto God and applyed by his Spirit, Heb. 9. 12, 13, 14. Neither by the bloud of goats and calves, but by his own bloud he entred once into the holy place, having obtained eternall redempti∣on for us. For if the bloud of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprink∣ling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh: How much more shall the bloud of Christ, who through the eternall Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge our conscience from dead works to serve the living God? And indeed the finger of God, Luk 11. 20. is expounded to be the Spirit of God, Matth. 12. 28. And poure all the bloud beside the bottome of the altar.] It is likely that it was poured out at the bottome of the altar on the inside; and so it might be much con∣sumed with the continuall heat of the fire: and this signified the full price that should be paid for our redemption. Vers. 13. And thou shalt take of the fat that covereth the inwards, &c.] By the at may be meant the grossenesse of our nature in all the faculties and powers of the soul, the understanding in the heart, the angry motion in the liver, the concupiscence in the kidneyes or reins, which being all corrupted are therefore to be purged by the fire of the Spirit, and so to be offered unto God. But the plainer reason of this ceremony I conceive to be, that the people might be taught highly to esteem the worship of God, by this direction of giving him the best of the sacrifices. Vers. 14. But the flesh of the bullock▪ and his skinne, and his dung, thou shalt burn without the camp, &c.] Thus it was done whereever bullocks were offered for a sinne-offering, Levit. 4. and when the bloud was carried into the tabernacle, Le∣vit. 6. 30. No sinne-offering, whereof any of the bloud is brought into the taberna∣cle of the congregation to reconcile withall in the holy place, shall be eaten; it shall be burnt in the fire. It was to imply how detestable the sinne was, which was as it were laid upon this bullock, and that the true sacrifice for our sinnes should suffer without the gates of Jerusalem, Heb. 13. 11, 12, 13. For the bodies of those beasts whose bloud is brought into the Sanctuary, by the high priest for sinne, are burnt without the camp: wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctifie the people with his own bloud, suffered without the gate, &c. It is a sinne-offering.] And therefore thus to be ordered, as is above appointed. Vers. 15. And thou shalt take one ramme, &c.] That is, one of those two rammes before mentioned verse 1. The sacrifice for sinne being first offered (with∣out which no other offering could have been accepted, for God heareth not sinners) now followeth the burnt-offering; which was first a shadow of Christ, who after that he had offered himself to God as a sacrifice for sinne, did then ascend up into heaven, there to prepare a place for his edeemed ones; secondly, a signe of our re∣generation,
as the other was of the expiation of our sinnes by Christ, signifying that through him we shall and must be clensed from sinne, crucified to the world, and present our whole man, bodies and souls, a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, Rom. 12. 1. And thirdly, to teach the priests, for whose consecration it was offered, that being purified by the Spirit of God, they must deny themselves, and consecrate themselves wholly to God, to serve him in their office holily and faithfully all the dayes of their life. Vers. 16. And thou shalt take his bloud, and sprinkle it round about, &c.] It fi∣gured the sprinkling of Christs bloud, as for our reconciliation so also our sanctifi∣cation, 1. Pet. 1. 2. Through sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprink∣ling of the bloud of Christ. Vers. 19. And thou shalt take the other ramme, &c.] This was for a congra∣tulatory or peace-offering: Now these were offered usually either to obtain some blessing, or to give thanks for something already received: in both respects was this offered at the priests consecration, both by way of thankfulnesse for the honour done him in his calling, and to beg of God that he would prosper him in the executi∣on of it. And Aaron and his sonnes shall put their hands upon the head of the ramme, &c.] Signifying that from God in Christ (figured in that ramme) they expected not onely justification and sanctification (as in the two former sacrifices) but also con∣secration to their office, and ability to perform the same. Vers. 20. And take of his bloud, and put it upon the tip of the right eare of Aaron, &c.] The eare hand and foot are anointed with bloud, to intimate the san∣ctifying of all their parts by Christs bloud to make them fit for the priesthood: And these are put for all, because the eare is the signe of obedience, Psal. 40. 6. Sa∣crifice and offering, thou didst not desire, mine ears hast thou opened; especially in hearing the word from Gods mouth, which they should teach unto the people: And again, the hands and feet are the instruments of action, not onely in their ministery, but in their whole conversation. And sprinkle the bloud upon the altar round about, &c.] See the notes upon vers. 10. for this tended to the same end. Vers. 21. And thou shalt take of the bloud that is upon the altar, and of the anointing oyl, &c.] Though this bloud and oyl mingled together was sprinkled upon the holy garments of Aaron and his sonnes, yet we may well think it was done so, that it might not marre the beauty and glory of their garments; and then some little drops of bloud sprinkled here and there would rather be for the honour, then the defiling of their garments. Now this was done to signifie that by the bloud of Christ, and the oyl of his graces, they were sanctified for the work of their mi∣nistery. Vers. 22. For it is a ramme of consecration.] That is, offered as a peace-offer∣ing in liew of his consecration. Vers. 24. And thou shalt put all in the hands of Aaron, &c.] To wit, all those things mentioned in the two former verses, amongst which the right shoulder is al∣so named. In other peace-offerings, the breast and the right shoulder were set apart
from the rest of the sacrifice, and given to the priests for their portion, Levit. 7. 31, 32. The breast shall be Aarons and his sonnes; and the right shoulder shall ye give unto the priest for an heave-offering of the sacrifice of your peace-offerings. But here the breast onely was given to Moses, as he that extraordinarily did now the priests work; the shoulder was together with the fat and other things waved by the priests, and then by Moses burnt upon the altar: and the reason was doubtlesse, because there were many priests among whom the breast and shoulder were in fu∣ture times divided, whereas here onely Moses executed now the work of the priest, and therefore the breast alone was given unto him for his portion, and the shoulder was burnt upon the altar, and offered to the Lord. And shalt wave them for a wave-offering before the Lord.] By shaking it thus to and fro they did as it were disclaim all their interest in that offering, and resigne it as a thing wholly consecrated to God; and besides, this waving it to the East West North and South might imply that all Nations should in Christ have cause to praise God. Vers. 26. And it shall be thy part.] Because he was now in the stead of the priest; yet he hath not all (viz. not the shoulder) which was afterward the priests portion, because this breast was enough to imply that he had done the priests work. Vers. 27. And thou shalt sanctifie the breast of the wave-offering, &c.] This is not spoken of the present, but is an ordinance for the future, what shall be then the priests; because Moses had now the breast onely, therefore this is now Inserted that the priests were to have both breast and shoulder. Vers. 29. And the holy garments of Aaron shall be his sonnes after him, &c.] And thus though the man was changed yet the high priest seemed in a manner the same, appearing before God in the same garments: a sweet type of that one high priest after the order of Melchisedec. Vers. 30. And that sonne that is priest in his stead shall put them on seven dayes.] So many dayes were the solemnities of Aaron and his sonnes consecration at the present to continue, ver. 35. Seven dayes shalt thou consecrate them: during which time they were to abide at the doore of the tabernacle day and night, to keep the watch of the Lord, Levit. . 33, 35. And ye shall not go out of the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation in seven dayes, untill the dayes of your consecration be at an end: for seven dayes shall he consecrate you. Therefore shall ye abide at the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation day and night, seven dayes, and keep the charge of the Lord, that ye die not, and were every day to be consecrated with the same sacrifices and ceremonies as they had been the first day, as methinks it is evident, Levit. 8. 34. As he hath done this day, so the Lord hath commanded to do, &c. And the continuance of these solemnities seven dayes signified, 1. that perfect holinesse which should be in Christ; and 2. that the whole course of the priests lives should be consecrated to Gods service. See Exod. 12. 15. Vers. 31. And seethe his flesh in the holy place.] That is, in the courtyard of the Sanctuary at the doore of the tabernacle; for there it was both boyled and eaten, Levit. 8. 31. And Moses said unto Aaron and his sonnes, Boil the flesh at the
doore of the tabernacle of the congregation, and eat it with the bread, &c. See Exod. 28. 43. Vers. 33. But a stranger shall not eat thereof, &c.] That is, none but them∣selves: in other peace-offerings the offerer did eat of it; here was no offerer but the priest. Vers. 34. Then thou shalt burn the remainder with fire.] Which was done, 1. to maintain the peoples reverence toward them, by letting them see that they were not to be usedbut in holy uses▪ 2. to prevent the superstitious abuses of them. Some peace-offerings might be eaten the next day, Levit. 7. 16. But if the sacri∣fice of his offering be a vow or a voluntary offering, it shall be eaten the same day that he offereth his sacrifice; and on the morrow also the remainder of it shall be eaten. Onely those which were offered for a thanksgiving were to be eaten the same day; whereby it may seem that these of the priests were principally for that end. See Exod. 12. 10. Vers. 35. Seven dayes shalt thou consecrate them.] See the note above upon ver. 30. Vers. 36. And thou shalt offer every day a bullock for a sinne-offering, for atone∣ment, &c.] This is meant of the same bullock mentioned before, ver. 10. which was offered for a sinne-offering for the priests. Nor doth it follow that there were not two rammes also offered on each of the seven dayes of the priests consecration be∣cause it is here onely expressed that there should be a bullock offered on each of these seven dayes. For this concerning the sinne-offering is onely repeated, to shew that this sinne-offering was not onely for the priests but also to purifie the altar, to make an atonement for the altar, and to sanctifie it, as it is expressed in the fol∣lowing verse. Now an atonement is said to be made for the altar, not because there was any sinne in the altar, but because it was hereby now so perfectly purified and sanctified according to Gods institution, that men might without sinne offer sacri∣fices thereon. Vers. 37. Whatsoever toucheth the altar shall be holy.] Some understand this clause thus, that none but holy persons might touch the altar: but rather it is meant of the sacrifices that were to be offered on this altar, that whatsoever should ac∣cording to Gods institution be offered thereon should be accepted as holy to the Lord, the altar sanctifying the sacrifice that was laid thereon, according to that which our Saviour saith, Matth. 23. 19. Ye fools and blind, whether is greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifieth the gift? Vers. 38. Two lambs of the first year, day by day continually.] This was the dai∣ly ordinary sacrifice: and it was 1. to signifie that the death of Christ the true lambe was available to the Church from the first morning of time to the evening of the same; 2. to shew what continuall need they had of reconciliation through Christs bloud applied by faith; 3. to sanctifie the morning and evening prayers of the Church by the interceding sacrifices of the Mediatour. Vers. 40. And with the one lambe a tenth deal of flower mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oyl, &c.] By a tenth deal of flower is meant the tenth part of an ephah or bushell, as is expressed, Num. 28. 5. which is called an
Omer, Exod. 16. 36. and by the fourth part of an hin of oyl, wherewith the floure was mingled, and the fourth part of an hin of wine, which was for a drink-offering, a pint and an half of each is meant; for the hin contained six pints, and so the fourth part of an hin was a pint and half: Now this meat-offering and drink-offering added to the dayly sacrifice, was to shew that Christ by his oblation of himself for us becomes not onely redemption, but also food, gladnesse, and chearing comfort to us, yea all in all: And the sweetnesse of these things, floure and oyl and wine, signified both how pleasing to God the sacrifice of Christ should be; and al∣so what care was required of Gods people to make their sacrifices by true faith and repentance (wherein God delights) a sweet savour unto God, without which their externall sacrifices must needs be unsavory, and such things as could not be likely to please him. Vers. 42. Where I will meet you to speak there unto thee.] That is, in the taber∣nacle, from the mercy-seat, Exod. 30. 6. Before the mercy-seat that is over the testimony where I will meet with thee. Wherein we have the reason given why it was called the tabernacle of the congregation, namely, because there the Lord did by glorious signes witnesse his presence, and make known by Moses his will unto them, meeting them and making a covenant with them. See Exod. 40. 34. Le∣vit. 9. 13, 24. Vers. 43. And the tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory. That is, the glo∣rious signes of his glorious presence. CHAP. XXX. Vers. 1. ANd thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon, &c.] Besides that the Lord did hereby adorn the service of the tabernacle, to work the greater reverence in the hearts of the people, and did teach them how carefull they should be of defiling their service with any unclean thing; it did also signifie that by Christ not onely the whole legall service, but particularly also the Saints prayers, are wondrous sweet and pleasing to God, Revel. 8. 3. And another Angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer, and there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden altar which was before the throne. Psal. 141. 2. Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense. Rev. 5. 8. And golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of the Saints. Vers. 2. The horns thereof shall be of the same.] See the notes upon Exod. 27. 2. Vers. 3. And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, &c.] Shadowing Christ in both his natures, his deity yielding glory to his humanity: hence it is called the golden altar, Numb. 4. 11. as the other is called the brazen altar, Exod. 38. 30. And thou shalt make unto it a crown of gold round about.] Which served as an edge to keep the coals and incense from slipping off, and was withall a type of Christs regall dignity. Vers. 4. And two golden rings shalt thou make to it, &c. by the two corners thereof, upon the two sides of it shalt thou make it, &c.] That is, two rings on each side, at each corner one.
Vers. 6. And thou shalt put it before the vail, &c.] That is, in the holy place, not in the most holy: for so it is expressely said, Exod. 40. 26. And he put the golden altar in the tent of the congregation before the vail. And besides into the most holy place the high priest entred but once a year; but upon this altar the inferiour priests burnt incense dayly, Luke 1. 8, 9. And it came to passe, that while he execu∣ted the priests office before God in the order of his course, according to the custome of the priests office, his lot was to burn incense, &c. But though it were in the most holy place, yet it was close before the mercy-seat; so that there was nothing between them but onely the vail, that so the perfume might presently passe as it were into the presence of God: whereby was signified how near God is to them that call upon him in truth, Psal. 145. 18. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him; to all that call upon him in truth. Vers. 7. When he dresseth the lamps he shall burn incense upon it.] That is, morning and evening. Some conceive that the lamp did burn both day and night in the tabernacle, because it had no windows to let in the light of the sunne, and so accordingly by dressing the lamps, here they understand the taking away any thing that did annoy them, and refreshing of them with new oyl, that they might conti∣nue burning all the day afer; and by lighting the lamps at even, the putting in of new lamps into the candlesticks, which accordingly were fresh and newly lighted. But the more generall and probable opinion of Expositours is, that the lamps burnt onely in the night time (the light of the sunne shining in by day at the East end of the tabernacle) and that therefore it is said, Exod, 27. 21. that they should be or∣dered by the priests from evening to morning; and accordingly they understand this place, to wit, that the lamps were cleansed, and dressed, and made ready to be lighted in the morning, and then that they were lighted at even. However, it is evident that both morning and evening the priests were appointed to burn incense upon the golden altar; and hereby was signified how Gods people should dayly and constantly pray unto the Lord, and persevere in praying, according to that of the Apostle, Pray without ceasing, 1. Thess. 5. 17. and especially the never-failing constancy of Christs intercession, Heb. 6. 18. He is able also to save them to the ut∣termost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them. Yea to this may be added, that the offering of incense, when the lamps were lighted, signified also that we must pray as we are taught and instructed by the word, if we desire to have our prayers accepted of God. Vers. 9. Ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, &c.] That is, no incense re∣ceived of other persons, or made of any other matter, or differing from that prescri∣bed, vers. 34, 35, &c. figuring that our prayers must be such as God prescribes, or else he will not accept them: 1. John 5. 14. And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he heareth us. Vers. 10. And Aaron shall make an attonement on the horns of it once in a year, &c.] Which was on the tenth day of the seaventh moneth, the day of recon∣ciliation. See Levit. 16. 18. With the bloud of the sinne-offering of attonement, &c.] Signifying that the sins and imperfections that cleave to the best prayers of the Saints have need of a sa∣crifice
of atonement, and that the incense of our prayers doth yield no sweet savour unto God but by virtue of the sacrifice of Christ once offered unto God. Vers. 12. When thou takest the summe of the children of Israel, &c.] Many Expositours hold that this is here enjoyned not onely for the present but for fu∣ture times also; to wit, that whensoever they numbred the people upon any occasi∣on, every man should pay his tribute of half a shekel to the Lord, which was to be expended, as now towards the making of the tabernacle, so afterwards for the repair thereof, and other necessaries that were to b provided for the publick service of the sanctuary: Yea from Josephus and others they gather, that they were every year numbred, and so paid every year this tribute-money for the use of the tabernacle and temple, which when the Romanes had conquered them, they were compelled to pay to them, and so that this was the tribute-money which was required of our Sa∣viour, Matth. 17. 24. But now others again conceive it to be the more probable opinion, that this was required to be done by Moses onely for the present, First, because there is no mention made of the perpetuity of this ordinance, as there is of other things that were to be for ever observed: Secondly, because the Lord saith not here, Whensoever the children of Israel are numbred, but, When thou takest the summe of the children of Israel after their number, as speaking of a thing that was immediately to be done by Moses: Thirdly, because the end of this collection men∣tioned was extraordinary not perpetuall, namely for the building of the tabernacle, as is evident, Exod. 38. 25, 26, 27, 28. in regard whereof it is said here vers. 16. that it should be a memoriall unto the children of Israel before the Lord: Fourthly, be∣cause where there is mention made of Moses numbring the Israelites at other times, as Numb. 1. 26. there is no mention made of the payment of this half shekel by every one that was numbred: Fifthly, because there was another rate set by Nehe∣miah to be paid yearly by every one for the service of the house of God, to wit, the third part of a shekel, Nehemiah 10. 33. The truth is, that neither of these can be demonstratively proved: But yet evident it is that though they did not constantly pay this tribute-money in future times when they were numbred, yet at least upon the like occasion this poll-money was at other times raised, because we reade, 2. King. 12. 4. that Jehoash king of Judah commanded the priests to gather of the people for the repair of the Temple, the money of every one that passeth the account, which is called in 2. Chron. 24. 6. the collection of Moses the servant of the Lord, and of the congregation of Israel for the tabernacle of witnesse. Then shall they give every man a ransome for his soul unto the Lord, &c.] When they are numbred each payeth a ransome for his soul: First, by way of ho∣mage: Princes use to take tribute-money by poll, and to that end are wont to num∣ber their people; Israel therefore being numbred must pay this as a tribute-money, acknowledging thereby Gods dominion over them, and that by right of redemption, because he had redeemed them out of the house of bondage, and so had bound them to be his servants: Secondly, by way of thankfull acknowledgement that it was of him that they were multiplied so exceedingly, according to his promise made to their fathers, that their seed should be as the starres for number; as likewise, that he
did by his good providence keep an accompt as it were of every particular person amongst them, and watch over them for their good and safety: thirdly, by way of expiation, because when they came to be thus particularly visited and looked into of God, they could not escape destruction by reason of their sinnes, should he deal with them according to justice; and therefore there must a ransome be paid, the ra∣ther because pride and presumption and many other infirmities do usually accom∣pany the numbring of a people, as we see in the example of David, 2. Sam. 24. Yet we must not think that so small a price as here was paid by every man for his ran∣some was any meet satisfaction to Gods justice; but onely hereby they were taught to judge themselves, and to acknowledge a greater ransome that was to be paid, whereof this was a kind of type, even the Lord Christ Jesus, who was himself a ransome for all to be testified in due time, 1. Tim. 2. 6. Vers. 13. Half a shekel, after the shekel of the Sanctuary; a shekel is twenty gerahs.] This was that which every Israelite paid for his ransome when they were numbred. The gerah is held to have been about a penny half penny, and by that estimate the shekel was two shillings and six pence, and half the shekel fifteen pence; and it is expressed that they should give half a shekel after the shekel of the Sanctu∣ary, either because the shekel of the Sanctuary was twice as much as the common shekel, the common shekel being but ten gerahs, but the shekel of the Sanctuary twenty, as is here expressed▪ which is indeed the common opinion; or rather be∣cause the standard of all weights and measures was kept in the Sanctuary, and so the injoyning of them to give half a shekel after the shekel of the Sanctuary, was nothing else but that they should give a true half shekel, of the full weight and value, after the standard of the Sanctuary. And indeed Ezek. 45. 10, 11, 12. where the Prophet exhorts the Princes of Israel to use none but just weights and measures, speaking of those that were commonly used among the people, he gives direction as here, that the shekel should contain twenty gerahs. Vers. 17. And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying.] By these transitions it seems very probable that the Lord did not deliver to Moses all these directions at one time, or in one day but at severall times, in the space of fourty dayes. Vers. 18. Thou shalt make a laver of brasse, and his foot of brasse, &c.] Which was made of the womens brasen looking-glasses, Exod. 38. 8. And he made the laver of brasse, and the foot of it of brasse, of the looking-glasses of the women, &c. Now the laver being lifted up upon his foot or base, the priests could not put their feet in it; whence it is inferred that it had spouts for the water to issue forth, and at the bottom some vessel or other to receive the water. Vers. 26. And thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of the congregation there∣with, &c.] All these things were anointed, first to consecrate them to Gods service, and to separate them from all profane and common uses; secondly, to signifie both that all excercises of piety used in the legall service would not be at all profitable without the secret operation of the spirit (whereof the oyl was a type) as also that there comes no good to us by those things, but onely by the working and applica∣tion of the spirit. See Heb. 9. 14. 1. Pet. 1. 2. Rom. 8. 15. Isa. 61. 1. This was done, Levit. 8.
Vers. 30. And thou shalt anoynt Aaron and his sonnes, &c.] See the note upon chap. 29. 7. Vers. 32. Upon mans flesh shall it not be poured, &c.] That is, not in any civill or profane use, whether for delight or otherwise: upon strangers it might not be poured at all; but the priests might not use it in a civill way. And hereby the peo∣ple were taught to look to the holy spirit, whereof it was a type, that nothing was to be done in Gods service without authority from God, and that none of Gods holy things ought to be diverted to any profane use. CHAP. XXXI. Vers. 2. SEe I have called by name Bezaleel, &c.] Moses might doubt how amongst a people inured in Egypt onely to base and servile imploy∣ments, he should find workmen fit to undertake such curious and cunning work, especially because it must be needs a very difficult task to make every thing exactly according to the pattern shown in the mount, though Moses gave them the best di∣rections he could; the Lord therefore prevents this fear, by letting him know that he had furnished men with an extraordinary spirit and skill for the performance of these things, and by name Bezaleel and Aholiab as the master workmen and di∣recters of others not named. Bezaleel the sonne of Uri, the sonne of Hur, &c.] It is probable that this Hur, the grandfather of Bezaleel, was the same mentioned Exod. 17. 10. And Moses and Aaron and Hur went up to the top of the hill; the same also whose Genealogy is set down 1. Chron. 2. 19. who was the sonne of Caleb: so then Caleb was great grandfather to Bezaleel, but not that Caleb the sonne of Jephunneh, 1. Chron. 4. 15. who was but fourty years old when he searched Canaan, but Caleb the sonne of Hezron. 1. Chron. 2. 18. Vers. 10. And the clothes of service, &c.] Veils, clothes, coverings, which served to wrap up the holy things in, when the host was removed. See Numb. 4. 5, 9, 11, 12. Vers. 13. Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep▪ &c.] This precept of the Sabbath is here repeated, first, to let them know that though the work of the tabernacle were studiously and speedily to be done, yet God would not have any of it done on the Sabbath; secondly, to teach them the right use of the tabernacle, which was in their coming together there especially on the Sabbaths to serve the Lord. For it is a signe between me and you, &c.] Namely, that God had taken them to be a peculiar people to himself, and that they had taken him to be their God, their Creatour, Redeemer and Sanctifier. Vers. 14. For whosoever doth any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his people.] This includes not onely death inflicted by the Magistrate, whereof see Numb. 15. but also the immediate stroke of God when that was neg∣lected, and especially Gods casting him off from being one of his people both here and hereafter. Vers. 17. And on the seventh day he rested and was refreshed.] This is spoken of God after the manner of men.
Vers. 18. And he gave to Moses, when he had made an end, two tables of testi∣mony, &c.] That is, when the fourty dayes were expired. Tables of stone written with the finger of God.] Whereby was signified, first the stability of the Law; secondly the stoninesse of mans heart for the receiving of spiri∣tuall things; thirdly the difference betwixt the Law and the Gospel, which is writ∣ten by the finger of Gods spirit, not in tables of stone but in the sleshy tables of mens hearts, 2. Cor. 3. 2. CHAP. XXXII. Vers. 1. ANd when the people saw that Moses delayed, &c.] It is evident in that of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. 7. Neither be ye idolaters, as were some of them, as it is written, The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play, that some of the people (not all) joyned in this wicked act; yet withall doubtlesse we may conclude that the greatest number conspired together herein, as therefore it is said, vers. 3. That all the people brake off their golden eare-rings, &c. because the multitude were all in a manner combined together, and but a few to speak of there were that kept themselves clear in this generall desertion. And they said unto Aaron, Up, make us Gods, &c.] This word doth imply both how violently they pressed him, and with what importunity they hastened him to do what they required; as if they had said, We have waited long enough for Moses, and therefore dispatch quickly, and with all speed do what we require: make us Gods to go before us, that is, images as representations of God, or visible signes of Gods going before them, and presence amongst them. It cannot be reasonably thought that the people were so stupid as to think that any thing made by mans hand could be the God that brought them out of Egypt, but onely that they desired some image as a signe of Gods presence, according to the manner of their idolatry in Egypt. Yea happely conceiving the cloud not to move, they took themselves to be forsaken or betrayed by Moses, and so in their rage fall into this idolatry, as it were in despight of Moses and Aaron. And therefore we see also in what a discontented manner, and how contemptuously they speak of Moses in the following words, As for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him. Vers. 2. And Aaron said unto them, Break off the golden eare-rings &c.] We may well think that Aaron did at first indeavour to disswade the people from this they desired of him: onely because he yielded at last, therefore it is in the next place related. Yea, it is probable enough that Aaron made this demand of their eare-rings, not gold in generall, with some secret hope that the womens unwillingnesse to part with these ornaments, wherein they were wont so much to delight, might be a rub in the way. Vers. 3. And all the people brake off the golden eare-rings &c.] That is, the generality of the people: and thus they dishonour God with the spoyls of the Egyptians which God had given them, Exod. 12. 35. Vers. 4. And fashioned it with a graving tool, after he had made it a molten
calf.] Aaron is said to have done this, not because he did it with his own hands, but because he appointed workmen to do it, and by his authority and command it was done. First they melted the gold, and cast it into a molten calf; and then they polished it, and finished it with a graving tool. And thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that eateth grasse,, as the Psalmist saith, Psal. 106. 20. Now in this form it seems the Israelites desired their idol should be made, happely in imitation of the idol Apis, a pyed bullock which the Egyptians used to worship. And they said, These be thy Gods, oh Israel, &c.] So encouraging on another, and especially upon this pretence, that this was onely intended for a representation of the true God. Vers. 5. And when Aaron saw it, he built an altar, &c.] That is, when he saw how violently the people pursued their purpose, and that in this idol they still intended to worship the true God, he yields further upon the peoples motion, to wit, to build an altar, and proclaim an holy day, saying, To morrow is a feast to the Lord Jehovah: wherein still he seeks to stop the mouth of his conscience with this pretence, that all was still intended for the worship of the true God. Vers. 6. And the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play.] That is, they sat down to eat and to drink of their peace-offerings, and other feasts that did accompany their sacrifices; wherein it may seem they were excessive e∣nogh by their shouting, mentioned ver. 17. and then rose up to play, that is, sing dance and play about the idol, according to the custome of idolatrous festivals. Vers. 7. And the Lord said unto Moses, Go, get thee down, &c.] That is, get thee away quickly, and so it is expressed, Deut. 9. 12. Arise, get thee down quick∣ly from hencc. Thy people which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt have corrupted themselves.] The Lord here calls the Israelites not his people but the people of Moses, thy people which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, &c. whereby he doth not onely testifie his great indignation against them, disclaiming as it were any interest which they had in him, and refusing to own them as his people any more; but withall likewise he seks to affect Moses the more with their sinne, by putting him in mind that they were his people, committed to his charge, that so he might be more solicitous to reduce them again into the right way. Vers. 8. They have turned aside quickly out of the ay which I commanded them.] Viz. after their entring into covenant with me: it is but a few dayes since they promised, that they would keep all that I commanded them, and now they have already transgressed the Law of my worship which I gave them in charge. Vers. 10. Now therefore let me alone, &c.] As a father, being angry and ma∣king as though he would smite his sonne, should say to one standing by, hold me not▪ meaning that he would have him interpose himself, and mediate for his sonne. And I will make of thee a great nation.] See Deut. 9. 14. Vers. 11. Why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy people which thou brought∣est forth, &c.] That is, let not thy wrath wax hot against thy people, &c. for it is usuall in the Scripture to expresse that which is desired by way of interrogation:
Thus, Art thou come hither to torment us before the time? Matth. 8. 29. is expres∣sed by saint Luke, I beseech thee torment me not, Luk. 8. 28. Moses had no pur∣pose to expostulate with God, but humbly to desire him to be pacified towards them, to which end he presseth him here with this argument, that he had brought them forth out of the land of Egypt with great power and a mighty hand, intima∣ting that all this would be lost if he should now destroy his people. Vers. 15. The two tables were written on both their sides, &c.] On the two inward or foresides, not within and without. Vers. 16. And the tables were the work of God, &c.] Implying how hainous the peoples sinne was, which deprived them of such a jewel. Vers. 17. There is a noise of warre in the camp.] This speech of Joshuas pr∣veth that he had neither been in the cloud with Moses, when the Lord told him of the peoples sinne, nor in the camp with the Israelites, but had waited on the upper part of the hill till Moses came down, in which time it is like that he was fed with Manna. Vers. 19. And Moses anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of his hands, &c.] In an holy anger, yet not unadvisedly, but by the motion of Gods spirit, as may seem by his relation of it again, Deut. 9. 16, 17. And I took the two tables and cast them out of my hands, and brake them before your eyes. For this was intended as a signe that the covenant was broken betwixt God and them by this their sinne. Vers. 20. And burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder, &c.] That is, he not onely melted it, but by burning it in the fire, made it brittle or it to be beaten or ground to powder, yea to powder even as small as dust▪ Deut. 9. 21. And I took your sinne, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it with fire, and stamped it, and ground it very small, even untill it was as small as dust, &c. that it might be ut∣terly abolished. And made the children of Israel drink of it.] How this was done we may reade Deut. 9. 21. where it is said that he cast the dust of their idol into the brook that descended out of the mount, which was the onely water they had in that place: for we must not think that Moses gave to every one of the people a draught of wa∣ter wherein he had first put some of the powder or dust of their idol; but therefore onely is it said that he made the children of Israel drink of it, because he cast it in∣to the water whereof they drank daily. Now this was done, 1. to make them a∣shamed of their golden God, which must come to be their food first, and excrements afterwards; 2. to terrifie them by causing them to drink as it were the matter of their damnation. Vers. 24. Then I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf.] As one that would have said, if he durst, that the calf came out beside his intention. I do not think Aaron hoped or meant to perswade Moses to this; but fain he would have said something in his excuse, if he knew what; and therefore being inexcusable, by a poore dry and slender narration he seeks however to colour and extenuate the fact. Vers. 25. And when Moses saw that the people were naked, &c.] By this sinne they were become naked, both in regard of the dishonour and shame it was to
them, and also because it had provoked God to cast them off, and so they were be∣reaved of his grace and protection, and as naked unarmed men exposed to be de∣voured by their enemies; which when Moses saw and considered, he labours by punishing the ring-leaders, and so by bringing the rest to repentance, to appease Gods wrath, &c. Vers. 26. Then Moses stood in the gate of the camp, &c.] A place of enter∣ance into the camp where he stood, 1. because it was (as afterward in cities) the place of judgement; 2. because the avengers were to passe from gate to gate; 3. as withdrawing himself from a cursed people; as for the same cause he did the like, Exod. 33. 7. Who is on the Lords side? let him come unto me.] When Moses used these words, in summoning those to come in that should be imployed in punishing the people, his meaning doubtlesse was that those that had not consented to this wicked fact of the people (though even they also had sinned, because for fear they did not oppose themselves) but did sincerely and seriously detest what was done, and grieve for it, and would now therefore take Gods part against the offenders, to do in this cause what God should require, should assemble themselves together and come unto him. And all the sonnes of Levi gathered themselves together unto him.] The Levites onely came, or at least they together with the rest that were innocent came, and that by speciall instinct of Gods spirit, who had appointed them to the priesthood. And they came all, that is, in a manner all; for some of them were punished with the rest, Deut. 33. 9. Who said unto his father and his mother, I have not seen him: neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children. Vers. 27. And slay every man his brother, &c.] That is, Moses commanded the Levites that as they went through the camp, from one gate to the other, they should slay all they met with, or rather all the ring-leaders and principall offenders in this great transgression (who were well known, and would be busie abroad whilest the penitent for shame kept within) not sparing for favour either brother, companion or neighbour, or any other that were dearest unto them. Now where∣as it may be objected▪ that if they were appointed to slay all they met with, there would be danger of killing some that were guiltlesse: To this is answered, 1. that happely when Moses proclaimed, Who is on the Lords side? let him come unto me, all that were clean of this sinne gathered themselves unto Moses though the coming of the Levites unto him be onely expressed in the text, because they were the men that were afterward imployed in punishing the offenders; and if this were so there could be no danger in slaying the innocent: 2. that God, who injoyned this, did by his providence so order it that none but the guilty should come in their way to be slain by them. Vers. 29. For Moses had said, Consecrate your selves to the Lord, &c.] One reason is here given why the Levites did so readily undertake this dangerous service, and so impartially execute Gods command upon those that were tied to them by the nearest bonds, to wit, because Moses had told them that hereby they should so onsecrate themselves to the Lord, and offer a sacrifice as it were so pleasing to him,
that the Lord would immediately set them apart as his peculiar portion to be his Ministers, in the sacred service of the tabernacle. Vers. 30. Ye have sinned a great sinne, and now I will go up to the Lord.] Though Moses had already before so farre prevailed with the Lord by his prayers, that he would not presently destroy all the people, as at first he threatned; and therefore it is said v. 14. That the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people; yet considering that the Lords anger might still be great against thē, and that he might still proceed further in punishing those that had sinned against him, he resolves yet further to intercede for them, with which he first acquaints the people, remembring them withall of the greatnesse of their sin, that so they might repent seriously of their sinne, and thereby be made more capable of Gods favou. Peradventure I shall make an atonement for your sinne.] Words that imply a difficulty though good hopes to obtain: Amos 5. 15. It may be the Lord of hosts will be gracious unto the remnant of Joseph. See also Josh. 14. 12. and 1. Sam. 14. 16. And indeed he knew not whether God would proceed any further in punishing them, or whether he would be satisfied with what was done. Vers. 31. And Moses returned unto the Lord, &c.] It seems that this was another going up unto God, then when he stayed there fourty dayes and fourty nights the second time: for this was the morrow after the Levites had slain three thousand of the people, and many things came between his second solemn going up unto God, which is rehearsed in the next chapter. Vers. 32. And if not, blot me I pray thee, out of  book which thou hast writ∣ten.] When Gods decree of election unto life everlasn is call the book of life, as Phil. 4. 3. and in many other places, it is a metaphoricall expression, wherein the Scripture speaks of God after the manner of men. Now when Moses here saith that if God would not forgive the sinnes of this people, he desired that himself might be rather blotted out of the book of life, we cannot hence inferre that Gods decree can be changed, or that those that are elected unto life may notwithstanding perish everlastingly, or that Gods justice will admit of the punishing of a righteous person together with the wicked: for in this speech Moses seeks onely to expresse, not what he thought might be, but what he could wish might be, if thereby the saving of Gods people might be procured: to wit, that out of his sorrow for the rejection of this people, his zeal for Gods glory, and his great affecti∣on to his brethren, he could wish himself deprived of heavenly glory, that they might be again received into favour. This is all that Moses intended in these words; onely being carried away with the strength of his affections and vehemency of his desires, he expresseth this by a way of request, If not, blot me, I pray thee, out of the book which thou hast written. And thus generally is this speech of Moses understood. But yet it may also be understood of the catalogue and register that is kept as it were in the divine omniscience of all the living here in this world, out of which Moses desires to be blotted, that is, to be cut off by the hand of God rather then the people should be cast off, which he had so miraculous∣ly delivered out of their bondage in Egypt. And herein Moses then dealt as a figure of our Mediatour who laid down his life for his sheep, John 10. 15. And redeem∣ed
us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. Vers. 33. Whosoever hath sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book.] This also is spoken of God after the manner of men: the meaning is onely that such and onely such should not be numbred among the elect, Psal. 69. 28. Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with the righteous: Or that such onely should be cut off by Gods revenging hand. Vers. 34. Therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which I have spo∣ken unto thee; behold mine angel shall go before thee, &c.] Here God yields not to destroy for the present those that had sinned, having before onely yielded not to destroy all the people; yet withall h addes that he will not yield to go amongst them as formerly he had promised, but he would onely send his angel to go before them, concerning which angel see before the notes upon Exod. 23. 20. Neverthelesse in the day when I visit, I will visit their sinne upon them.] I will spare them at this time, but when I begin to punish I shall reckon with them for this sinne also. Vers. 35. And the Lord plagued the people, &c,] That is, as he threatned in the former verse, in future times he punished them for this sinne also, or else it may be meant of the punishment the Levites inflicted on them. CHAP. XXXIII. Vers. 2. ANd I will send an angel before thee, &c.] God here promiseth Moses that he would send an angel before them, but withall addes, that he would not go up himself in the midst of them, as before he had promised. Some hold that the angel here meant is a created angel, not that angel of the covenant, of whom he had spoken before, chap. 23. 20. But seeing it is the same angel that had hitherto gone before them in the pillar of cloud by day, and in a pillar of fire by night, by whom God promiseth that they should be led on their way till they were possessed of the land of Canaan, I see not how we can understand it of a created angel, but that it must be meant of the Sonne of God, as before. However that which God here refuseth to do for them, I conceive is the dwelling amongst them in his tabernacle with those signes of his gracious presence, concerning which he had formerly given direction to Moses: His angel he would send, as he had promi∣sed, to conduct them to Canaan, and to drive out the inhabitants before them; this he might do for any people, and this (because he had promised it to Abraham) he would do for them; but to acknowledge them again for his people, and to testifie that by his dwelling in the midst of them, to wit in his tabernacle, that he would not grant. Vers. 3. Lest I consume thee in the way.] This is also spoken of God after the manner of men, who are most provoked when they are present to see the wrong done them; and indeed the nearer a people are unto God, the lesse will he indure their rebellion against him. Vers. 5. I will come up in the midst of thee in a moment, and will consume thee.] To wit, if thou dost not truly repent of the wickednesse wherewith thou hast pro∣voked
me. Though God had granted to Moses upon his intercession that he would not presently destroy this rebellious people; chap. 32. 34. yet withall he gave him order to make known to the people that he had threatned, in case he found them not truly penitent, utterly to destroy them, that so by the terrour hereof they might be indeed the more humbled for their sinne, and turn unto the Lord with a broken heart, as true penitents ought to do: And indeed we reade in the former chapter, verse 34. In the day when I visit I will visit their sinne upon them. Vers. 7. And Moses took the tabernacle, &c.] Or a tabernacle or tent: It was not that which after was the place of publick worship, for that was not yet made, but some peculiar tabernacle which Moses had formerly rected either for the service of God, or for matters of civill judgement amongst the people, which being now removed afarre off from the camp signified Gods departure from them as a polluted people. See Prov. 15. 29. And called it the tabernacle of the congregation.] It seems that Moses pro∣claimed that whosoever would seek the Lord, there was now the place of his pre∣sence whither they must come; whereupon he called it the tabernacle of the con∣gregation. And it came to passe, that every one which sought the Lord went out unto the tabernacle, &c.] When Moses their mediatour appeared before God in their behalf, the cloud coming down upon the tent, they stood afarre off, as ver. 8. At other times they that sought the Lord went out of the camp (the place of their sinne) toward the place where the tent was. Vers. 8. And it came to passe, when Moses went out of the tabernacle all the people rose up, &c.] That is, when Moses went to this tabernacle to desire the Lord to pardon the people, now repenting them of their sinne, all the people rose up, both reverencing him as he passed by, and that they might look after him and accom∣pany his intercession with their prayers: And stood every man at his tent doore, acknowledging themselves unworthy to approch nearer; and looked after Moses, shewing by their eyes that followed him, that all their hope was in him, and how earnestly they longed for a gracious answer by him. Vers. 11. And the Lord spake unto Moses face to face.] In a wonderous fa∣miliar manner, so as never to any Prophet. See Deut. 34. 10. Numb. 12. 8. But Joshua the sonne of Nun, a young man, departed not, &c.] Joshua is called here a young man onely in respect of his service, for he was now about fifty years old; and he stayed behind in the tabernacle (when Moses went back into the camp) to look to it, and to keep it. And thus God honoured him, making him as it were his house-keeper. Vers. 12. And thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with me.] That is, thou hast said that thou wilt not go up in the midst of us, and withall hast not expressely and by name satisfied me who it is thou wilt send along with me; and so I am injoyned to carry this people into Canaan, and yet know not what couse shall be taken, nor what help shall be afforded me for the leading of them thither. It is true that God had told him that he would send an Angel before them, ver. 2. but yet because he had not told him who that Angel was, and withall he sawthe
cloudy pillar that formerly went before them, and led them in their way, was now removed farre from the camp, and God had expressely said he would not go up in the midst of them, therefore he thus bemoans the hard province imposed on him, Thou sayest unto me, Bring up this people, and thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with me. Vers. 13. Shew me now thy way, &c.] That is, shew what course thou meanst to take with us, or be thou our guide as before; notwithstanding that threatning, ver. 3. Moses by faith resting on the promises of God was perswaded that he would not thus cast off his people; therefore he saith, vers. 12. that God had not let him know whom he would send with him, because he had not yet promised his presence as he was confident he would do: so here he desires to know what way God would take with them, not doubting but that way would be that God would be reconci∣led and lead them again as formerly with the visible signes of his presence. That I may know thee, &c.] That is, that by proof and experience I may know how good thou art to them that seek thee, and be assured that I have found grace in thy sight. Vers. 14. And he said, My presence shall go with thee.] That is, the visible signe of my presence, the pillar of cloud, and the tabernacle, as before I promised: So that this is a revocation of the sentence, verse 3. For I will not go up in the midst of thee. Vers. 14. And I will give thee rest.] If this be taken as spoken of Moses in particular, then the meaning must be, that God would satisfie his desire, and so set∣tle and quiet his mind in this, concerning which he had been so anxiously solici∣tous and full of care. But if it be spoken of Moses in the name of and together with all the people, then the meaning rather is, that God would not now leave them, but that they should be still under his patronage and protection; or that they should have rest from their enemies, and should be brought safe to the promised rest in the land of Canaan: By which rest was also figured our rest in Christ and in the king∣dome of heaven. Vers. 15. If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.] Embracing Gods promise, he shews the reason why nothing else could satisfie him but that, be∣cause they had even as good never move a foot farther as go on without Gods fa∣vour, yea though they were sure to get the possession of the land of Canaan. Vers. 17. And the Lord said unto Moses, I will do this thing also that thou hast spoken, &c.] That is, I will not onely conduct you by mine Angel, as I promi∣sed before, verse 2. but I will also go among you as my people by the visible signes of my presence. Thus God doth onely again confirm what he had said, vers. 14. Neither did Moses ask in the words before, nor the Lord here make any promise of any other blessing. For thou hast found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name.] In a speciall manner, as Princes those whom they above others favour and respect. Vers. 18. And he said, I beseech thee shew me thy glory.] Moses, having now found the Lord ready to grant all his desires, proceeds further, and makes one re∣quest more, to wit, that God would shew him his glory. Whereby I cannot think
that Moses meant the very essence of God: for is it probable that Moses was so farre ignorant of the nature and essence of God, that he did not know him to be a spirit infinite, and invisible, every where present, but no where to be seen with bo∣dily eyes, whom no man hath seen or can see, as the Apostle saith, 1. Tim. 6. 16? Surely no. Rather I think that Moses conceiving that God when he spake to him had put on as it were some corporall and visible shape, full of great majesty and glory, and therefore overshadowed with a cloud, he desired to see the lightsome brightnesse of Gods presence, the cloud being taken away, and that doubtlesse espe∣cially (though happely not without some mixture of vain curiosity) that he might by this speciall signe of Gods favour be confirmed concerning the gratious promise made to him and his people. Vers. 19. And I will make all my goodnesse passe before thee, &c.] That is, my self, namely in a transitory vision; my glory, ver. 22. or glorious goodnesse: thus God yields to his request, yet not every way as he had intended it; and in what manner he would do it he shews him afterwards, ver. 22, 23. And I will be gratious to whom I will be gratious, &c.] If bold man should dare to question in his mind, why God should pardon the foregoing sinne of Israel, whilest he punishes lesse sinnes in others, or why Moses should be honoured with such a glorious vision above all other men; his mouth is stopped with this which God saith of his freedome in communicating grace where he pleaseth without wrong to any. Vers. 20. Thou canst not see my face; for there shall no man see me and live, &c.] My face, that is, my essence, my being simply as I am in my self (and in∣deed it is most true in that sense that no man can see Gods face. Even where Mo∣ses and Christ are compared together by the Evangelist S. John, this seeing of God is made the peculiar prerogative of Christ the sonne God, John 1. 17, 18.) Or ra∣ther by the face of God here is meant the majesty and glory attending that externall shape which God had now assumed, which Moses could not behold, and therefore it was covered with a cloud; and this the Lord gives as a reason why God denied this part of his request, because he had desired that which being granted him would have been his ruine, mans weaknesse being such that he is not able to behold such a glorious brightnesse as this was, and as is that light inaccessible, which no man can approch unto, wherein God dwels, saith the Apostle, 1. Tim. 6. 16. And indeed, if by the face of God here were meant Gods essence, thou canst not see my face, that is, my essence, thou canst not see me as I am in my self, then by that following rea∣son, for there shall no man see me and live, we might inferre that it is possible for men to see the essence of God though not without perill to their lives: which is not so; for God is in his essence altogether invisible. Jacob saw God face to face, Gen. 32. 30. but it was in that shape wherein God was pleased to represent himself, and if Moses saw more then Jacob, yet he saw onely some more glorious representation of the deity, not the divine essence it self. Vers. 22. I will put thee in a clift of the rock, &c.] He was put in the clift of a rock, 1. to hide him as it were that he might not be swallowed up of the exceeding glory of God as he passed by; 2. that being thus placed he might not onely see God
going and passing away, and that onely for a short time; but withall this rock might signifie Christ, by whom we attain the true knowledge of God; and looking thorow a clift might signifie the small measure of knowledge of God we have in this life comparatively. Vers. 23. And thou shalt see my back-parts.] It is most probable that God pas∣sed by in an humane visible shape, but in such brightnesse and glory as was never shown to mortall creature; so that these passages both of Gods hand and back-parts must be understood literally. But by this representation of the back-parts and not the face to be seen by Moses, the Lord intended to teach him, that as vve knovv men very imperfectly vvhen vve see onely their back-parts, even so is the knovvledge vvhich the best can have of God in this life little and imperfect. CHAP. XXXIV. Vers. 1. ANd the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two tables of stone, &c.] Though hereby God testified that he had received the people into his favour again, and vvas minded that all things should return to their former state; yet in that he prepareth not these tables as the first, this was a kind of memoriall of their sinne, as when the scar remaineth after the healing of the wound. At the same time also God gave him order to make an ark also to keep them, untill the ark of the covenant was made, Det. 10. 1. Vers. 6. And the Lord passed by before him, &c.] To wit, in the manner pro∣mised, chap. 33, 22, 23. And proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, &c.] By this redoubling of the word Jehovah, Jehovah, the Lord, the Lord, Moses is prepared presently to compose himself with all humility and reverence to behold his glory, and to attend on God proclaiming his goodnesse. Ver. 9. And he said, If now I have found grace in thy sight, &c.] Thus Moses still prayes for the people, and in this suit spent fourty dayes and fourty nights, Deut. 9. 25. for faith, the more assured it makes us of Gods favour, the more fervent it makes us in prayer. For it is a stiff-necked people.] And therefore have need of thy mercy and go∣vernment. Vers. 10. For it is a terrible thing that I will do with thee.] The wonders which I shall work, to wit in the passage of the Israelites through the wildernesse, and af∣terward in the land of Canaan, shall strike terrour into the hearts of the wicked, and teach all to fear before God. Vers. 12. Take heed to thy self lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, &c.] First, because God hath determined to destroy them for their sins: Secondly, because the land must not be polluted with idolatry, which God had chosen to be his dwelling place: Thirdly, because by this means the people might be insnared▪ Vers. 17. Thou shalt make thee no molten gods.] One kind of idols (by occasi∣o of the molten calf) is put for all.
Vers. 20. But the firstling of an asse thou shalt redeem with a lambe.] See Ex∣od. 13. 13. Vers. 22. And thou shalt observe the feast of weeks, &c.] See the notes concern∣ing these feasts, Exod. 23. 16. Vers. 25. Thou shalt not offer the bloud of thy sacrifice with leaven, &c.] See the notes upon Exod. 23. 18, 19. Vers. 28. And he was there with the Lord fourty dayes and fourty nights, &c.] This second stay of Moses in the mount was, first, to try the peoples repentance, to see whether they would not again revolt from God; and secondly, to procure the more authority to Moses, that they might look upon him when he brought the law as an angel sent to them from heaven. And he wrote upon the tables, &c.] That is, the Lord. See ver. 1. Vers. 30. Behold the skinne of his face shone.] No such thing befell him before▪ when he was the first time upon the mount with the Lord fourty dayes and fourty nights, because then the Lord had not shown him his glory in so great a degree as now he had. Nor need we wonder that Moses wist not that the skinne of his face shone, as it is said in the former verse: for coming from the exceeding glory and brightnesse of Gods presence, that spark of shining brightnesse that was in his own face was not discernable by him, though terrible to the Israelites. Now for the shi∣ning of Moses face, it was doubtlesse to signifie the glory of the law which he preach∣ed to them, whence is that of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 3. 7▪ 8. But if the ministration of death written and ingraven in stones was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not stedfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance, which glory was to be done away; how shall not the ministration of the spirit be ra∣ther glorious? But withall the people by this were taught to reverence him, even as an angel come from heaven, to look upon him as one that stood in Gods stead when he spake to them, and to assure themselves that God had inlightned him also in∣wardly that he might teach and instruct them. And they were afraid to come nigh him.] Moses came down with vengeance before, and what might they think of this glory put upon him now, being still con∣scious to themselves of the haynousnesse of their former rebellion? Besides, this was to shew that Moses his ministration was condemnation▪ 1. Cor. 3. 7, 9. because it gives knowledge of sinne, and causeth wrath, Rom. 4. 15. The law worketh wrath▪ for where there is no law there is no transgression. Vers. 33. And till Moses had done speaking with them he put a vail on his face.] Hereby it is evident how long the brightnesse of Moses face continued, not all the time of his life, but onely the time of his going to and fro between the Lord and his people, that he might deliver to the people the laws and commandments he gave them in charge. All this time the shining of his face continued, and so when he came to speak with the people he pt on a vail, which signified, First the vail of the obscurity of the law, whereby Christ and the end of the law was hardly discerned: and secondly that vail of ignorance and infidelity which was spread upon our hearts by nature, untill it be removed by Christ. Vers. 34. But when Moses went in before the Lord to speak with him, e took
the vail off, &c.] Signifying that when we come to see God in Christ, the vail is taken away. See 2. Cor. 3. 15. 16. Even unto this day when Moses is read the vail is upon their heart, neverthelesse, when it shall turn to the Lord the vail shall be taken away. CHAP. XXXV. Vers. 3. YE shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the Sabbath day.] This clause of the law concerning the Sabbath must be explain∣ed by that, chap. 16, 23. To morrow is the holy rest of the Sabbath unto the Lord, bake that which ye will bake to day, and seethe that which ye will seethe, &c. Name∣ly, that they must not kindle any fire therewith to dresse any meat for themselves, or except in case of absolute necessity: for that they might not kindle fire either to light a candle, or to warm themselves in the extreme cold of winter, is altogether improbable. Vers. 22. And they came both men and women, as many as were willing-heart∣ed, and brought braclets and eare-rings, &c.] That is, not onely gold and silver, but also their very ornaments, contributing these things as willingly now after re∣pentance for the service of the tabernacle, as before for the making of their golden calf CHAP. XXXVI. Vers. 2. ANd Moses called Bezaleel and Aholiab, &c.] Though gifted, yet they must have a calling. Vers. 8. And every wise-hearted man among them that wrought the work of the tabrnacle made ten curtains, &c.] This is first made (though in the directions given, the ark, table, and candlestick were first mentioned) because it was to recive and contain these holy things, which might not stand without their tent. CHAP. XXXVIII. Vers. 8. ANd he made the laver of brasse, and the foot of it of brasse, of the looking-glasses of the women assembling, &c.] For it is evident by severall Writers that in ancient times they used looking-glasses made wholly of pure bright brasse. Vers. 18. And the height in the breadth was five cubits, &c.] That which is the breadth of the hanging lying is the height of it standing or hanging; and there∣fore it is said that the height in the breadth of it was five cubits. Vers. 21. This is the summe of the tabernacle, &c.] Or counted things: that is, this is the summe and particulars of the tabernacle and holy things belonging to it, which were thus taken as it were in an inventory by Ithamar at the commandment of Moses, and so delivered into the custody of the Levites, that nothing might be lost. This clause I conceive therefore may have respect both to the rehearsall of par∣ticulars which went before; and vvithall likevvise to the summe of the gold and sil∣ver
spent in making these things whereof Moses speaks in the words following. Vers. 24. Even the gold of the offering was twenty and nine talents, &c.] Twenty nine talents and seven hundred and thirty shekels (counting the talent at an hundred and twenty pound, and five and twenty shekels to a pound) will make three thousand five hundred and nine pound weight of gold, and five shekels, which in sterling money (if we account a pound weight of gold to be worth but thirty pound of sterling money) comes to above an hundred and five thousand pound, viz. one hundred five thousand two hundred and seventy pound. Vers. 25. And the silver of them that were numbred of the congregation was an hundred talents, and a thousand seven hundred hreescore and fifteen shekels, &c.] There were numbred six hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty men (and the very same number we find Numb. 1. 46. of which see the notes there) who all paying half a shekel, Exod. 30. 13. the summe of the silver amounts to three hundred and one thousand seven hundred seventy and five shekels of silver, which is as here (allowing three thousand shekels to a talent) an hundred talents and a thousand seven hundred seventy five shekels over; and this counting twenty five shekels to a pound weight amounts to twelve thousand seventy one pound weight of silver, which at five shillings the ounce comes to thirty six thousand two hundred and thirteen pounds in sterling money. Vers. 29. And the brasse of the ffering was seventy talents, and two thousand and foure hundred shekels.] That is, (allowing three thousand shekels to a talent) two hundred and twelve thousand and foure hundre shekels of brasse, and this (counting twenty five shekels to a pound weight) amounts to eight thousand foure hundred ninetie six pound weight of brasse, whereby it is evident that there was not so much brasse as silver, and therefore surely the pillars were made of wood, and onely covered over with brasse. See chap. 27. ver. 9. CHAP. XXXIX. Vers. 1. ANd of the blew and purple and scarlet they made clothes of ser∣vice, &c.] See chap. 31. 10. Vers. 43. And Moses blessed them.] That is, he not onely commended both the people and workmen, and prayed God to blesse them, but also as Gods publick minister he pronounced a blessing on them from the Lord. CHAP. XL▪ Vers. 9. ANd thou shalt take the anoynting yl, and anoynt the tabernacle, &c.] The performance of this see in Levit. 8. 10. Vers. 10. And thou shalt anoynt the altar, &c.] And sprinkle thereof upon the altar seven times. See Levit. 8. 11. Vers. 15. For their anoynting shall surely be an everlasting priesthood, &c.] So that their children after them shall not need to be anoynted, but shall execut
the office by reason of this unction of their fathers; onely the high priests were anoynted in the generations following. Vers. 17. And it came to passe in the first moneth, &c.] They went out of Egypt the fifteenth of the first moneth, and now the next year upon the first day of the moneth the tabernacle is erected, so that there wanted now but fifteen dayes of a full yeare since they left Egypt. Vers. 27. And he burnt sweet incense thereon, &c.] As supplying at present the priests office. ANNOTATIONS On the third book of MOSES called LEVITICUS. CHAP. I. ANd the Lord called unto Moses, &c.] This word, and, shew∣eth the immediate connexion of this book of this story, upon that wherewith the foregoing book of Exodus was concluded, namely that after the tabernacle was reared, Aaron and his sonnes consecrated to the office of the priesthood, and the cloud descended upon the tabernacle, immediately God spake to Moses from the mercy-seat out of the tabernacle (for into it Moses was not able to enter, because the glory of the Lord filled it) and so informed him how Aaron and his sonnes should carry themselvs n the priesthood, &c. Vers. If any man of you bring an offering unto the Lord, &c.] That is, any sa∣crifice whatsoever: This is a generall rule concerning all sacrifices, to wit, that none must be offered, but of the herd, or flock, that is, if they were cattel they intended to offer; for if they intended an offering of birds, what they must be is expressed after∣wards, vers. 14. Vers. 3. If his offering be a burnt-sacrifice of the herd, let him offer a male without blemish.] Here the Lord first gives directions for burnt-offerings, which were indeed the chief of all their sacrifices, and so called because they were all wholly burnt upon the altars; whereas of other sacrifices some part onely was burnt upon the altar, and the other parts were otherwise disposed of. And the direction that is here first given concerning these is, that if a burnt-offering were to be offered of the herd, it must be a male without blemish, that it might be the fitter to figure forth Christs perfection in himself, and ours in him, who being perfectly holy, and free from the least blemish of sinne, He did no sinne: neither was guile found in his mouth, 1. Pet. 2. 22. did yet notwithstanding by suffering death for us perfectly satisfie the justice of God on our behalf, that so he might present the Church to
himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy, and without blemish, Ephes. 5. 27. for (saith the same Apostle, Heb. 9. 13, 14.) If the bloud of bulls, and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer, sprink∣ling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh; How much more shall the bloud of Christ, who through the eternall spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God? And so a∣gain Saint Peter saith, Ye know that ye were redeemed with the precious bloud of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot, 1. Pet. 1. 18, 19. Yet withall hereby the Lord taught both them and us to give God the best in all our services. Vers. 3. He shall offer it of his own voluntary will at the doore of the taberna∣cle.] That is, he that will offer a burnt sacrifice, he must do it voluntarily of his own mind, and not be forced to it; and when he brings it he must present it to the priest at the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation; that is, at the doore of the court, close within which the brasen altar for burnt-offerings stood. The first of these might signifie the freedome of Gods grace in giving his sonne, and the wil∣lingnesse of Christ in giving himself to be a sacrifice of propitiation for our souls; but principally doubtlesse it was to teach them, that in all service done to God, it must be done freely and willingly, or God will not accept of it: The second was appointed to signifie that their sacrifices (and so consequently any service that we perform) were onely in and through Christ sanctified and made acceptable to God: The tabernacle was a type of Christ▪ that greater and more perfect tabernacle not made with hands, Heb. 9. 11. and he is the onely doore by whom we have accesse unto the father. Vers. 4. And he shall put his hand upon the head of the burnt-offering.] This was to testifie, First, that he acknowledged himself guilty of death: Secondly, that he desired and believed that that sacrifice should be accepted of God as a ransome for his soul, that all his sinnes should be laid upon it, and so it should suffer death as it were in his stead; in all which notwithstanding they that did this had not respect so much to the beast slain, in the death whereof there could not be an equall com∣pensation given to the justice of God for the death of sinners, as to Christ, of whom these sacrifices were types, who took upon him our sinnes, and the curse due to our sinnes, when he died for us: Thirdly, that he desired, and would indeavour to con∣secrate himself wholly to Gods service, as now he gave this sacrifice wholly to be offered upon the altar to the Lord, crucifying all his sinnefull lusts and affections, and yielding up his whole man to the obedience of Gods will in all things what∣soever. And it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him.] Though burnt-offerings were usually given in signe of thankfulnesse to God, and so betokened a new creature, and holy life, Psal. 51. 18, 19. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem. Then shalt thou be pleased with sacrifices of righteousnesse, with burnt-offering and whole burnt-offering, and Gen. 8. 20. And Noah builded an altar unto the Lord, and took of every clean beast, and of every fowl, and offered burnt-offerings on the altar▪ yet they were also for atone∣ment
and remission of sinnes, to wit generall sinnes, Job 1. 5. And it was so when the dayes of their feasting were gone about, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt-offerings according to the number of them all: for Job said, It may be that my sonnes have sinned, &c. whereas for speciall sinnes there was a speciall sacrifice and sinne-offering, Levit. 4. Vers. 5. And he shall kill the bullock before the Lord.] That is, the priest in the name of the offerer: for this was usually the work of the priests, and therefore Moses did it when he supplyed the priests office, Exod. 29. 10, 11. though some∣times the Levites also helped herein when there were not priests enough to do it, 2. Chron. 25. 10, 11. The priests stood in their places, and the Levites in their courses, and they killed the Passeover (that is, the Passeover-offerings) and the priests sprinkled the bloud from their hands, as being given of God to be assistant to the priests in such services, Numb. 8. 19. I have given the Levites as a gift to Aa∣ron and to his sonnes, to do the service of the children of Israel in the tabernacle of the congregation, and to make an atonement for the children of Israel. Now the sacrifice was killed to signifie the death of Christ, Who was slain that he might re∣deem us to God by his bloud, Revel. 5. 9. and the mortifying of Gods people by the word and spirit: and it was killed by the priest, to signifie that Christ should offer up himself unto God, as being both our priest and sacrifice, and that there is no possibility for men to please God by any service they do him, but onely in and through the mediation of Christ, of whose priesthood the Leviticall priest was a type and figure. As for the place where it was killed, that may be gathered, by the rule of Analogy, from that which is expressed verse the 11. concerning the second sort of burnt-offerings, namely, that it was killed at the north-side of the altar. And the priests Aarons sonnes shall bring the bloud, and sprinkle the bloud, &c.] And this was done in a large measure, so that the corners of the altar were filled with bloud, Zach. 9. 15. to teach the people that this bloud of their sacrifice should not be lost as spilt upon the ground, but should be accepted of God as a propitiation for their sinnes, as being a figure of the bloud of Christ, which should be offered up to God and accepted by him in our behalf, as for our reconciliation, so also for our sanctification, who are elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the bloud of Je∣sus Christ, 1. Pet. 1. 2. Vers. 6. And he shall flay the burnt-offering.] That is, the priest: for the flay∣ing of the sacrifice was also ordinarily the work of the priest, who had therefore the skinne for himself, Levit. 7. 8. though upon extraordinary occasions (as is before noted concerning killing the burnt-offerings) even in this also the Levites sometime helped them, 2. Chron. 29. 34. The priests were too few, so that they could not flay all the burnt-offerings; wherefore their brethren the Levites did help them. Be∣cause the sacrifices were offered (as I may say) as a holy feast unto the Lord, whence the altar is called the table of the Lord, and the sacrifice offered thereon, his meat, Mal. 1. 12. therefore nothing but what was usually eaten by men was burnt upon the altar; and hence it was that the skinne was alwayes flayed off. Yet withall it is commonly held by Expositours that this flaying of the sacrifice did also signifie,
First, the sufferings of Christ, who being first stripped of his garments, Matth. 27. 28▪ they did afterwards most shamefully intreat, so that there was no beauty in him why men should desire him: Secondly, the afflictions of Gods people under the rage of cruell oppressours and persecutours, Who, as the Prophet speaks, Micha. 3. 3. eat their flesh, and flay their skinne from off them: And thirdly, the mortification which God requires in those that give up their names to him, even that They put off concerning the former conversation the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitfull lusts, Ephes. 5. 22. Vers. 7. And the sonnes of Aaron the priest shall put fire on the altar, &c.] Here the Lord gives direction for the burning of these sacrifices by the inseriour priests, enjoyning them, first, to put fire upon the altar. Now because they were to use no strange fire in burning the sacrifices, but onely that fire which was conti∣nually nourished upon the altar, Levit. 6. 12, 13. and which at first came down from heaven, Levit. 9. 24. therefore by putting fire upon the altar, is meant onely the laying of the fire together, or laying it on again when they had laid it by for the clearing of the altar: Secondly, to lay the wood in order, and then all the pieces of the sacrifices in order upon the wood; which was so appointed, because the discreet laying of the wood doth much conduce to the well burning of the fire: And then lastly, thus to burn all upon the altar. The mistery of this might be twofold: First, to signifie the consecrating of Christ and his members by afflictions and suffe∣rings; for as he the Captain of our salvation was made perfect by sufferings, Heb. 2. 10. so must his members also be ready alwayes through these fiery trials to enter into glory, for every one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt, Mark 9. 49. Secondly, to signifie that holy zeal whereby we should wholly give up our selves to God through the operation of Gods holy spirit, which is often in the Scriptures compared to fire, as Matth. 3. 11. He that cometh after me is mightier then I, he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire: for as Christ through the eternall spirit offered himself without spot unto God, Heb. 9. 14. so likewise it is the spirit whereby we must be enabled to consecrate our selves to Gods service, Ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth (saith the Apostle Peter) through the spirit, 1. Pet. 1. 22. to which end we must not onely be care∣full not to quench the spirit, 1. Thess. 5. 19. but also by prayer, holy meditation, and all other things conducing thereto, we must do what we can to further this work of the spirit in us, as they did in burning the sacrifices, by laying in order the wood and the pieces of the sacrifice upon the wood. Vers. 9. But the inwards and his legs shalt thou wash in water.] Some conceive that by the inwards are not meant the guts, but onely the heart and liver, and such inward parts, and that because onely that which was usually eaten by men was of∣fered on the altar, Gods table, as it is called Mal. 1. 2. as was before noted upon verse 6. But however the washing of the inwards and feet did doubtlesse signifie the perfect purity of Christ, and withall our through-purification both in the outward and inward man by the spirit of Christ; greeble whereunto are those expressions of the holy Scripture, Ezek. 36. 25. Then will I sprinke clean water upon you, and you shall be clean; from all your filthinesse and from all your idols will I cleanse you;
and again, Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. Vers. 10. He shall bring it a male without blemish.] See the note upon vers. 3. Vers. 11. And he shall kill it on the side of the altar Northward.] There also the sinne-offering was killed, Levit. 6. 25. and the trespasse-offering, Levit. 7. 2. which might signifie the obscurity of the legall ceremonies, the North being farthest from the light of the sunne; or that Christ was to dye at Jerusalem, of which the Prophet saith, Psal. 48. 2. On the sides of the North is the citie of the great King. But I rather content my self with this literall reason: The altar being placed by the doore of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation (which seems was in the Southside) there was more scope on the Northside, and therefore they are there ap∣pointed to make ready the sacrifices. Onely the peace-offerings were slain at the ve∣ry doore of the tabernacle, which was more Eastwards in regard of the altar, as is evident, chap. 32. Vers. 12. And the priest shall lay them in order.] See the note above upon ver. 8. Vers. 13. But he shall wash the inwards, &c.) See the former note upon vers. 9. And the priest shall bring it all, and burn it upon the altar.] This signified that all Christ, and whatsoever he had done is ours by faith, Gal. 2. 20. I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Sonne of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me: And that we also should give our selves wholly unto God by him, 1. Thess. 5. 23. And the very God of peace sanctifie you wholly; and I pray God your whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved blamelesse, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Vers. 14. And if the burnt-sacrifice for his offering to the Lord be of fowls, then he shall bring his offering of turtle doves, or of young pigeons.] Which signified the innocency and meeknesse both of Christ and his members: And again, old tur∣tles and young pigeons are best, and so the best must be given to God. Vers. 15. And wring off his head, and burn it on the altar.] The manner how the priests should kill the burnt-offering of turtle doves, or young pigeons, is here set down▪ which was by wringing off the head of them (according to our translati∣on) or pinching of the head with the priests nail, as it is in the margin of our bibles. The most common opinion of Expositours is, that the heads of these birds were not quite wrung off from their bodies, but onely broken in sunder, and so left hanging still by the skinne unto their bodies: and their chief reason is, because elsewhere it is said, where direction is given for the killing of such turtle doves, or young pige∣ons, that were brought for a sinne-offering, that the priests should wring off his head from his neck, but not divide it asunder, Levit. 5. 8. But some other reasons may make it seem more probable that the heads of these birds that were brought for a burnt-offering were quite wrung off from their bodies: as First, because we cannot vvell else conceive hovv the bloud of these sacrifices should be wrung out at the side of the altar, as it is injoyned in the follovving vvords; and vve knovv that the Jevvs did of all things abhorre things that vvere strangled, and that the effusion of the bloud of the sacrifices vvas the chief thing vvhereby vvas signified the atone∣ment
made for us by the bloud of Christ, and how by the pinching of the priests nail a wound should be made for the letting out the bloud as some hold, it is hard to conceive: and secondly, because the following words, and burn it on the altar, seem plainly to be meant of burning the head particularly, being thus wrung off; for of the burning of the body of these birds, direction is afterwards given, vers. 17. As for that place in the fifth of Leviticus, I see not but it may be meant, not of not dividing the head from the body, but of not dividing the body asunder, for which also there is here direction given, vers. 17. He shall cleave it, but not divide it asunder. Vers. 16. And he shall pluck away his crop with his feathers, &c.] And so it figured the holinesse that was in Christ our sacrifice, who without all sinne or uncleannesse offered himself unto God for us; by which also he cleansed and puri∣fied his people and their service of God, Heb. 9. 14. And cast it besides the altar on the East part by the place of the ashes.] That is, where the priest, when he cleansed the altar, did first poure forth the ashes, which afterward were carried orth without the camp, Levit. 6. 10▪ 11. This place of the ashes was on the Eastside of the altar, both because it was nearest to the doore of the tabernacle, and so the ashes might the more conveniently be thence carried forth at the times appointed; and because it was farthest off from the Sanctuary, and so the casting away of the crop and the feathers in this place might teach them that all uncleannesse was to be removed out of Gods sight, Holinesse becomes thy house, O Lord, for ever, Psal. 93. 5. Vers. 17. And he shall cleave it with the wings thereof, but shall not divide it asunder, &c.] That is, he shall cleave it, the wings being still left, onely the fea∣thers pluckt off: and though it must be cloven, that so the inward part might be laid upon the fire, signifying that God requires chiefly the offering of the inner man unto him; yet it must not be divided asunder, whereby may be meant that we should give up our selves wholly to God, 1. Thess. 5. 23. CHAP. II. Vers. 1. ANd when any will offer a meat-offering unto the Lord, his offering shall be of fine flowre.] There was a meat-offering that was alwayes to be joyned with their burnt-offerings, for which direction is given elsewhere: but here direction is given onely for voluntary meat-offerings; and therefore it is said, When any will offer a meat-offering, &c. neither is there any set quantity here ap∣pointed▪ but it is left free to the offerer to bring what he pleased, whereas for the meat-offering that was brought together with their burnt-offerings of the herd, or of the flock, there is an expresse law how much there should be of it, to wit, a tenth deal of flower mingled with the fourth part of an hin of oyl, Numb. 15. 4. Now these voluntary meat-offerings were for the same end that the burnt-offerings were, both to make atonement for them, and also to testiie their consecrating of them∣selves to God; but withall particularly they were by way of acknowledgement that all their provision they had of his bounty. So then the meat-offering signified,
First▪ Christ his oblation of himself, of which the Apostle speaks, Ephes. 5. 2. Christ hath loved us, and given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour; and again, Heb. 10. 8, 9, 10. When he said, Sacrifice and of∣fering, and burnt-offerings, and offering for sinne thou wouldst not, neither hadst pleasure therein, which are offered by the law: Then said he, Loe, I come to do thy will, O God! He taketh away the first that he may establish the second: By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. Secondly, Christians wonne to God by the Gospell, and then consecrated to his service, Esay 66. 20. They shall bring all your brethren for an offering to the Lord, out of all nations, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the Lord, as the children of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel into the house of the Lord. Thirdly, all our Evangelicall sacrifices of prayer and praysing God, with other ser∣vices done to the Lord, and to his saints for his sake, Mal. 1. 11. In every place in∣cense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering: And last of all, more par∣ticularly their acknowledgement of Gods bounty in all the food they injoyed, and therefore it was that in all these meat-offerings they are appointed to bring fine slowre, without any mixture of branne, to signifie the purity of all Evangelicall sacrifices. He shall poure oyl upon it, and put frankincense thereon.] The oyl poured upon the flowre figured the graces and comfort of the holy Ghost, whereby we serve God with a willing mind and a chearfull spirit, Ye have an unction from the holy one, saith the Apostle, speaking of this oyl of Gods spirit, 1. John 2. 20. and the sweet∣nesse both of the oyl and frankincense signified how sweet and acceptable their ser∣vices were unto God in and through the mediation of Christ, who hath given him∣self for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour, Ephes. 5. 2. whence it was that the Prophet told the Jews that their incense was in vain when God regarded not their sacrifices, Jer. 6. 20. To what purpose cometh there to me ncense from Sheba, and sweet calamus from a farre countrey? your burnt-offerings are not acceptable, nor your sacrifices sweet unto me. Vers. 2. And the priest shall burn the memoriall of it upon the altar.] That is, the handfll which he had taken out of the meat-offering, which should in stead of all put God in mind (which is spoken of God after the manner of men) of all this offering which the offerer had given to the Lord, and of the covenant which he had made to accept it, and withall be a memoriall to the offerer that he acknowledged all the store he had to be from God, and therefore to be consecrated wholly to his service, and that God would take in good part the offering he had now brought him. Vers. 3. And the remnant of the meat-offering shall be Aarons and his sonnes.] To eat the same in the Sanctuary, Levit. 6. 16. And the remainer thereof shall Aa∣ron and his sonnes eat; with unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the holy place, in the court of the tabernacle,&c. It is a thing most holy of the offerings of the Lord made by fire.] And therefore onely to be eaten by the priests that offer it. Of other offerings others might eat, but of the most holy things, whereof part was burnt on the altar, onely the priests.
Vers. 4. And if thou bring an oblation of a meat-offering baken in the oven.] These were prepared and baked within the Sanctuary, as it seems by Ezekiel 46. 20. This is the place where the priests shall boil the trespasse-offering, and the sinne-offering, where they shall bake the meat-offering, and 1. Chron. 23. 28, 29. Their office was to wait on the sons of Aaron, &c. both for the shew-bread and for the fine flowre for meat-offerings, and for the unleavened cakes, and for that which is ba∣ked in the pan, and for that which is fried. It shall be an unleavened cake of fine flowre mingled with oyl, or unleavened wa∣fers anointed with oyl.] See the notes upon Exod. 29. 2. and upon the 11. verse of this chapter. Vers. 11. No meat-offering, which ye shall bring unto the Lord, shall be made with leaven.] This must be understood onely of these voluntary oblations, part whereof was to be burnt upon the altar; for with some eucharisticall or thank∣offerings they might bring leavened cakes, Levit. 7. 13. as also in the first-fruits, Levit. 23. 17. but these were not burnt upon the altar. And where leaven was not to be used in the oblation, the part remaining the priests might not eat with leaven, Levit. 6. 16. because part of the offering was burnt upon the altar. Now leaven was thus generally forbidden: First, to put them still in mind of their deliverance out of Egypt, a type of their redemption by Christ: Secondly, to teach them to worship God as he had appointed, and to know that all humane devices therein are an abomination to God: Thirdly, to shew the perfect purity of Christ, in whom there was not the least leaven of sinne, and the sincerity that must be in our evan∣gelicall sacrifices; for leaven signifieth sinne of all sorts, in doctrine and manners, distastfull to God, and infectious to men, Luke 12. 1. Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisie. 1. Cor. 5. 8. Let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with t he leaven of malice and wickednesse, but with the unlea∣vened bread of sincerity and truth. For ye shall burn no leaven, nor any hony, in any offering of the Lord made by fire.] Not onely leaven but hony also is forbidden: First, because it hath a kind of leavening nature: Secondly, the more fully to exclude all humane devices in Gods worship: the sweetnesse of hony might be a pretence of mixing it with their sacri∣fices: when neither soure nor sweet pleseth him but onely what is appointed, what place is left for humane inventions? Thirdly, if any mystery be thought implyed, it may be the abandoning of all carnall pleasures and delights by those that will consecrate themselves to Gods service. Vers. 12. As for the oblation of the first-fruits ye shall offer them unto the Lord.] To wit, though with leaven, Levit. 23. 17. They shall be baken with lea∣ven, they are the first-fruits unto the Lord; though hony 2. Chron. 31. 5. The children of Israel brought in abundance the first-fuits of corn, wine, and oyl, and hony. Vers. 13. And every oblation of thy meat-orig alt thou season with salt.] By this salting was signified the covenant o grace in Crist, which we by faith ap∣prehend unto incorruption: wherefore or ungenerae estate is likened to a child new born and not salted, Ezek. 16. 4.
Neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy meat-offering.] To wit, the salt which is a signe of the covenant of thy God: that is, be sure that salt be not wanting, which you are bound as by a covenant to use in all sacrifices; and be sure that faith in the covenant be not wanting, which is signified by that salt, for then all your sacrifices will be of no value with the Lord. With all thine offerings thou shalt offer salt.] Not onely meat-offerings, but al∣so burnt-offerings, and all other sacrifices, Ezek. 43. 24. The priest shall cast salt upon them, and they shall offer them up for a burnt-offering unto the Lord. Mark 9. 49. Every sacrifice shall be salted with salt. Vers. 14. And if thou offer a meat-offering of thy first-fruits unto the Lord, &c.] That is, a freewill-offering of the first-fruits, besides injoyned by the law. CHAP. III. Vers. 1. ANd if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace-offering, if he offer it of the herd, whether it be male or female, &c.] Peace-offerings were either to obtain from God some blessing which they wanted, or by way of gratulation or thanksgiving for some blessing received. The chief and most ordinary use of them was doubtlesse in a way of thanksgiving for their peace and prosperity, the severall sorts whereof are set down in the seaventh chapter. But yet sometimes they were al∣so used when men in their troubles prayed unto God for peace and salvation: so Judges 20. 26. when the Israelites fasted and sought unto the Lord for his aid and favour, because the men of Benjamin had twice beaten them in battel, they offered burnt-offerings and peace-offerings before the Lord; and when David sought to ap∣pease Gods anger, when the pestilence raged in the land because of his numbering the people, He built an altar to the Lord, and offered burnt-offerings and peace-of-ferings, 1. Chron. 21. 26. the Lord hereby teaching us that with supplications for what we want we must also joyn thanksgiving for what we already injoy. So then the peace-offerings signified 1. Christs oblation of himself, whereby he became our peace, Ephes. 2. 14. and 2. the sacrifice of praise which in and through him we offer unto God. The sacrifices appointed here for the peace-offerings are a male or female of the herd or of the flock: turtle doves and young pigeons are not here allowed for the poorer sort, as in burnt-offerings they were, and that because the peace-offerings were to be divided into three parts; one for the altar, another for the priest, and a third for the offerer, and such a division could not be conveniently made in so small sacrifices. But yet because this sacrifice was by way of thankfulnesse for temporall blessings externall, peace and prosperity, therefore a female, a lesse perfect sacrifice was here accepted of God. Why it must be without blemish, see in the notes upon chap. 1. ver. 3. Vers. 2. And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering.] See the notes upon Levit. vers. 4. And kill it at the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation, &c.] Why this sacrifice was to be killed by the priests, and the bloud to be sprinkled upon the altar, you may see by that which is said before upon chapter 1. vers. 5. That which
is particularly observable here is, that these sacrifices of peace-offerings were not kil∣led at the same place where the othr sacrifices were killed; for the burnt-offerings were killed on the one side of the altar Northward before the Lord, and so were also the sinne-offering and the trespasse-offering in the very place where the burnt-offering was killed, chap. 6. 25. and chap. 7. 2. But now the peace-offerings were to be killed in another place, to wit, at the doore of the tabernacle of the congrega∣tion, that is, the very entrance of the court, where stood the brasen altar, which was more Eastward then the place where the other sacrifices were killed. And the rea∣son of this we may well conceive was, 1. Because the fat and the breast of these peace-offerings were to be waved before the altar in the hands of the offerer, who might not go into the court, but stand at the doore, chap. 7. 30. and 2. Because these peace-offerings, whereof the offerer did eat a part, were not reckoned amongst the most holy things, which were onely eaten by the priest. And hence this is given as a reason why the trespasse-offering was to be killed in the same place where the burnt-offerings were killed, because it was most holy, and to be eaten by the priests onely, chap. 14. 13. Vers. 3. And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace-offering, a n offering made by fire unto the Lord.] Namely, that which is afterward expressed: the rest of the offering was thus disposed of▪ the breast and right shoulder were waved and heaved before the Lord, and given the priests to eat. See Levit. 7. 30. the remainer was eaten by him that brought it, his family and friends, Levit. 7. 15, 16. The fat that covereth the inwards, &c.] The fat as the best of the sacrifice is of∣fered up unto the Lord, and so teacheth that the best is to be still given unto him; and it might withall signifie, that all our carnall desires are to be mortified with the fire of the spiit. Vers. 5. And Aarons sonnes shall burn it.] To wit, being first salted, Levit. 2. 13. On the altar upon the burnt sacrifice, &c.] That is, upon the remainer of the dayly burnt-offering, which alwayes had the first place. Vers. 9. The fat thereof and the whole rump, it shall he take off hard by the back-bone▪ &c.] Because the rump of those countrey sheep was large and exceeding fat, as Writers report, and the fat was to be burnt, and withall because the rumps of sheep are sweeter and better then those of bullocks, therefore the rump of the sheep is also set apart for the sacrifice, though not of the bullocks. Vers. 11. It is the food of the offering made by fire unto the Lord.] So called, to shew Gods acceptation of it, that it should be as meat to him, and withall to ex∣presse his love, who reckons himself as a guest at their feasts. Vers. 16. All the fat is the Lords.] That is, it must be burnt upon the altar, neither may the priest nor owner eat of it. Vers. 17. It shall be a perpetuall statute for your generations, throughout all your dwellings, &c.] Upon the Lords setting apart the fat of all sacrifices to be his pe∣culiar portion, and to be burnt upon the altar, there is here a more generall statute given them in charge, towit, that the people should never eat any of this fat of these beasts fit for sacrifices, no not in their on private dwellings, when they killed them for their ordinary food, and not sor sacrifices; which was doubtlesse to keep
in them a reverend remembrance of these holy rites, and the spirituall mysteries sig∣nified thereby. Indeed there is great difference of judgement amongst Expositours concerning this law, to wit, whether the eating of all fat was here forbidden the Is∣raelites▪ or onely the eating of the fat of their sacrifices. But for this we must know 1. that it is meant onely of the fat of beasts that were appointed for sacrifices, for so much is expressed chap. 7. 23. Y shall eat no manner of fat of ox, of sheep, or of goats: 2. that it was not meant of such fat as is mixed with the flesh of such beasts, as in the shoulder, breast, &c. (for such fat they were doubtlesse allowed to eat, whence Deut. 32. 14. The fat of rammes and lambs of the breed of Bashan, and goats, is rckoned amongst the dainties which God had given the Israelites in the land of Canaan) but it is meant onely of the fat which we call suet or tallow, the fat before mentioned, which when these beasts were sacrificed was alwayes burnt upon the altar: and 3. for this fat, it is farre more probable that the Israelites were by this law forbidden to eat of it, at all times, and in all places, whenever they kil∣led either sheep, or ox, or goat, for their ordinary food, not onely because it is said that this should be a law for them throughout all their dwellings, that is, even when they killed these cattel at home in their own private dwellings; but also especially because fat and bloud are here joyntly alike forbidden: Now the bloud even of those cattel which they killed at home for their private use they might not eat (the reason whereof see in the note upon Gen. 9. 5.) and therefore not the fat neither. CHAP. IV. Vers. 2. IF a soul shall sinne through ignorance, &c.] Hitherto in this book dire∣ction hath been given for burnt-offerings, meat-offerings, and peace-offerings: Now the Lord here beginnes his directions for those offerings whereby expiation was made for some particular sinne which the offerer found himself guilty of, which in some cases were called sinne-offerings, and in some cases trespasse-of∣ferings. The first generall command concerning these is in these words, to wit, that if a soul, that is, any person whatsoever, should sinne through ignorance against any of the commandments of the Lord, then that person should bring a sinne-offering by way of expiation for that sinne: where by sinnes committed through ignorance, or errour (for so the word in the originall may also be rendered) are not onely meant such sinnes as men commit and yet know not that they sinned, as being igno∣rant of the fact done, or of the unlawfulnesse of the fact, thinking they did well when indeed they transgressed some law and commandment of God; but also such sinnes as men commit through infirmity and weaknesse, when they are suddenly overtaken in a fault, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 6. 1. overborn by the strength of their lusts and corrupt affections, which do for the present as it were blind their judgement and reason, and so they do not for the time mind the law of God, or not lay it to heart as they ought to do. Yet withall we must consider that it is no way probable that all sinnes of this nature are here intended, but onely such greater ex∣ternall sinnes for which the conscience is more likely to be stricken then for every ordinary aberration: for who can think that there was a severall sinne-offering to
be brought for every transgression of Gods law, though but in thought or word, which in the best are every day so many? No, other sinnes were expiated by the dayly burnt-offerings which were offered for the whole Church, or by the sacrifice offered on the day of atonement, concerning which it is said, Levit. 16. 30. On that day shall the priest make an atonement for you, to cleanse you, that you may be clean from all your sinnes before the Lord. These sinne-offerings were onely for such particular sinnes, for which their consciences were in a more speciall manner smit∣ten: and they were all types of Christ; for For God made him to be sinne for us who knew no sinne, that we might be made the righteousnesse of God in him, 2. Cor. 5. 21. Vers. 3. If the priest that is anointed do sinne, &c.] That is, the high priest, who onely was anointed in the ages following, as is before noted upon Exod. 29. 7. & 40. 15. now in that the Leviticall high priest had himself need of an offering for sinne, they were taught that he was not the Mediatour that could stand between God and them, and make a perfect atonement for them; but that they were to look for another, in whom there was no sinne, of whom the Leviticall high priest in his holy garments was a shadow and type. See Heb. 7. 26, 27, 28. For such an high priest became us who is holy, harmlesse, ndefiled, and separate from sinners; who needeth not dayly as those high priests to offer p sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the peoples, &c. Then let him bring for his sinne which he hath sinned a young bullock, &c.] A greater sacrifice then the common persons, vers. 28. or the rulers, vers. 22. and equall to the congregations, vers. 14. because his sinne was greatest and most per∣nicious to the people. Vers. 4. And shall lay his hand upon the bullocks head, &c.] So testifying his faith and resting on Christ, whom that sacrifice figured. See the note upon chap∣ter 1. 4. Vers. 5. And the priest that is anointed shall take of the bullocks bloud.] This anointed priest is the sinner himself, Heb. 7. 27. who is here injoyned to take of the bullocks bloud, and bring it to the tabernacle of the congregation, that is, into the tabernacle, which was not yet prescribed to be done in any other sacrifice: and this shewed that by the bloud of Christ we have a way opened into heaven, Heb. 10. 19. 20. Having boldnesse to enter into the holiest by the bloud of Jesus, by a new and living way which he hath consecrated for us through the vail, that is to say, his flesh. Vers. 6. And sprinkle of the bloud seaven times before the Lord, &c.] A mysti∣call number, signifying the full satisfaction that was given to God, and the full and perfect cleansing of sinne by the sprinkling of the bloud of Jesus, Heb. 9. 13, 14. For if the blod of bulls and of goats and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the un∣clean sanctisieth to the purifying of the flesh; How much more shall the bloud of Christ &c. purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God? and that our sinnes need much purgation, Psalm. 51. 2. Wash me throughly from mine iniquities and cleanse me from my sinne. Vers. 11. And the skin of the bullock, and all his flesh, &c.] In other sinne-offerings
after the fat was offered upon the altar, the remainer of the sacrifice was eaten by the priests, chap. 6. 26. The priest that offers it for sinne shall eat it; in the holy place shall it be eaten: but in the sinne-offering for the priest here another or∣der is given, and so likewise in the sinne-offering for the whole congregation, vers. 21. (because there the priess were included with the rest) to wit, that it should be whol∣ly carried forth without the camp, and burnt there, whence is that law, chap. 6. 30. that no sin-offering should be eaten, whereof any of the bloud was brought into the tabernacle of the congregation to reconcile withall in the holy place (which was onely done in the sinne-offering for the priest and for the congregation) but that they should be burnt with fire. The literall reason of this doubtlesse was, because the offerer himself might not eat of the sinne-offering, and in these sinne-offerings the priest himself was the offerer, either solely by himself, as here; or jointly with the rest of the people, as in the sinne-offering for the whole congregation: but with∣all assuredly there was a mystery in it: for first, hereby they wee taught how dete∣stable a thing sinne is, especially the sinnes of sacred persons, and common sinnes of a whole Church and people, which here were laid as it were upon the bullock that was carried forth out of the camp: 2. It signified that Christ, the true sinne-offering, should be carried out of Jerusalem to suffer, as the Apostle himself saith, to shew the meaning of this ceremony, Heb. 13. 11, 12. The bodies of those beasts whose bloud is brought into the Sanctuary by the high priest for sin are burnt without the camp; Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctifie the people with his own bloud, suffered without the gate: 3. To teach us that by Christs sufferings our sinnes are perfectly forgiven, cast as it were out of doores, and removed farre away from us. As for the person that was to carry forth this bullock for a sinne-osfering without the camp, and to burn him there, though the words in the 12. vers. may seem to have reference to the priest that offered the sinne-offering, The whole bullock shall he carry forth without the camp, &c. yet the meaning onely is that he should see it were done, not that he should do it himself, and so become unclean thereby, as may appear by what is said in another place that is parallel vvith this, chap. 16. 27, 28. Vers. 13. And if the whole congregation of Israel sinne through ignorance, &c.] That is, if the vvhole congregation shall of mere ignorance or infirmity, vvhich is a kind of ignorance, or errour, because such as sinne thus are for the time as men blinded carried avvay vvith the strength of their corruptions, shall do any thing that is evil, and either not take any notice of it, or not lay to heart the evil they have done, after they come to knovv it, or to be touched in conscience for it, they shall offer a sinne-offering for their atonement: vvhere by the vvay it is vvorth the noting that the vvhole assembly of particular Churches may erre. Vers. 14. When the sin, which they have sinned against it, is known, then the congregation shall offer a young bullock, &c.] In Numb. 15. 24. the Israelites are injoyned to bring a kid of the goats for a sinne-offering for the sinne of the vvhole congregation: but that vvas onely for the sinne of omitting any of those ceremoniall duties there injoyned them, but this is more generall for all sin vvhatsoever, vvhich you may see more fully explained in the note upon that place. Vers. 20. And he shall do with the bullock as he did with the bullock for a sinne-offering,
&c.] That is, the bullock for the priests sinne-offering, vvhereof before the first bullock, as it is called, vers. 21. Vers. 22. When a ruler hath sinned, &c. and is guilty, or if his sinne wherein he hath sinned come to his knowledge, &c.] That is, vvhen any civil magistrate hath sinned, vvhether he be presently struck vvith an acknovvledgement of his guilt, or vvhether his sinne be aftervvards by any means discovered to him, so soon as he comes to the knovvledge of it he shall bring his sinne-offering. Vers. 24. And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the goat, and kill it in the place, &c.] That is, on the Northside of the altar. See Levit. 1. 11. Vers. 25. And the priests shall take of the bloud of the sinne-offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar, &c.] The bloud of this sinne-offering for the ruler (as likewise that for the common people) why was it not as in the former carried into the tabernacle, sprinkled before the vail, and upon the altar of incense? surely because the sinne of the priest and congregation was more hainous then that of the ruler, therefore was there a more solemn manner of atonement appointed for their sin then for the rulers or the private persons. Vers. 26. And he shall burn all his fat upon the altar, &c.] The remainer was eaten by the priests. See Levit. 6. 26. whereas the remainer of the sin-offerings for the priest and congregation were burnt without the camp for the reason above shown in the note upon vers. 11. Vers. 27. And if any one of the common people sinne through ignorance, &c.) That is, either Israelite or stranger that is joyned unto them. See Numb. 15. 15. Vers. 30. And the priest shall take of the bloud thereof with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar, &c.] See the note vers. 25. Vers. 32. And if he bring a lambe for a sinne-offering, &c.] This sacrifice is spoken of apart from the former of the goat, because of the difference in the fat that was burned, which was not wholly the same in a lambe as it was in a goat. See the note upon chap. 3. 9. CHAP. V. Vers. 1. ANd if a soul sinne, and hear the voice of swearing, and is a witnesse, whether he hath seen or known of it, &c.] In this chapter some in∣stances are given of sinnes committed by private persons, for which they were to bring a sinne-offering to the Lord; and that especially as I conceive, to shew in what cases the offerings which they brought for their sinnes were to be of that sort which were more particularly called and esteemed trespasse-offerings: for of such it is evident that Moses speaks, at least principally in this chapter. Much arguing there is amongst Expositours to shew the difference between sinne-offerings and trespasse-offerings: some hold that the sinne-offerings mentioned in the former chapter were for sins of commission, the trespasse-offerings spoken of in this chapter were for sinnes of omission: some again hold that the sinne-offerings were for grea∣ter transgressions, and others quite contrary, that the trespasse-offerings were for greater transgressions, and the sinne-offerings for smaller offences. But the truth is
that these opinions on both sides are no other then groundlesse conjectures: Evient it is that these trespasse-offerings are also called sinne-offerings, as we may see in the 6. vers. of this chapter, He shall bring his trespasse-offering unto the Lord for his sinne which he hath sinned, a female from the slock a lambe, or a kid of the goats, for a sinne-offering. All trespasse-offerings were therefore sinne-offerings though all sinne-offerings were not called trespasse-offerings. Herein onely I conceive the dif∣ference lay, that for some particular sinnes a sinne-offering was appointed, different from the ordinary sinne-offerings injoyned particular persons in the former chapter, which because it was for such sinnes wherein some trespasse was committed upon the goods of their neighbour, or upon the holy things of the Lord, which belonged un∣to the priests, therefore they were more particularly called trespasse-offerings. The first particular instance given in the first verse of the chapter is concerning him that sinneth in concealing his knowledge, when he might have witnessed the truth, If a soul sinne (saith the text) and heare the voyce of swearing, and is a witnesse, &c. for the meaning of this place, so diversely expounded, I conive to be this, that when an oath is given for the clearing of any controversie, for any wrong done by one man to another, and those to whom the oath is given do either forswear themselves, or cannot discover the truth, if one that knows the truth, and might be or is called to be a witnesse, stands by, conceals his knowledge, and doth not reveal the truth, he is guilty and must offer a trespasse-offering, because his neighbour suffers dam∣mage in his estate through his silence; whether he hath see or known of it, that is, whether he was an eye-witnesse of that which is in question, or came any other way to the knowledge of it, he must reveal all he knows, or be guilty, and so ofer a tres∣passe-offering. Vers. 2. Or if a soul touch any unclean thing, &c.] The second instance of sins for which they were to bring a trespasse-offering is concerning those legall polluti∣ons which are afterward fully expressed, chap. 11. & 12. &c. The law is this; The man or woman that had touched any such unclean thing, he was unclean and guil∣te of a sinne, verse 2. so soon as he had touched it, though for the time it was id from him, his doing it unwittingly should not quit him of the guilt of it; but yet when he should come to the knowledge of it, vers. 3. then he should e guilty in his own apprehension, and so must offer a trespasse-offering, not so much to cleanse him from this legall uncleannesse (for in this case there was another way of legall puri∣fying appointed, Numb. 19. 11. &c.) as to expiate his sinne, because for want of due consideration he had so defiled himself; and through ignorance or unadvised∣nesse had neglected those legall purifyings, or had come into the sanctuary and in∣termeddled with Gods holy things whilest his uncleannesse was upon him. And in∣deed this was as I conceive the reason why a trespasse-offering was in this case im∣posed, because the unclean person did by this sinne trespasse upon Gods holy things, and as it were impair the worth of them. Now these things also figured that we are to be cleansed by the sacrifice and death of Christ, even from that pollution which is contracted by partaking with other mens sinnes, of which the Apostle speaks, 1. Tim. 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other mens sins: keep thy self pure; and again, 2. Cor. 6. 17. Come out from among them, and be
ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. Vers. 4. Or if a soul swear, pronouncing with his lips to do evil or to d good, &c.] In this third instance of sinnes for which they were to bring a trespasse-offering, it is not easily discerned what the sinne here intended is: some conceive it to be the carelesse neglect of doing that which a man had sworn to do, to clear him∣self of the guilt whereof he was to bring a trespasse-offering to the Lord; and be∣cause there is expresse mention of swearing to do evil, and it cannot be a sinne to omit the doing of that which he had sworn he would do, if he had sworn to do any evil to his neighbour, or generally any thing evil, that is, sinfull and against Gods law, but rather it would be commendable to break such an oath, therefore by doing vil they understand the doing of something which is hurtfll or irksome to him∣self, as if a man hath sworn to do what may bring some damage to his estate, or de∣prive him of something that is pleasing and delightfull to him: Again others con∣ceive that the sinne here intended is rash and unadvised swearing to do either good or evil to others, to wit, when it is sinfull so confidently to undertake it, as when he undertakes to do that which is not in his power to do, or which he knows not whether he shall be able to do or no; or to do some evil to his neighbour, which is against the rule of charity, and cannot be done without sinning against God, as when David sware tha he would utterly destroy Naball and all his family, 1. Sam. 5. 22. And this Exposition I conceive is the more probable, first, because the sinne of not doing what a man hath sworn he would do is not so clearly intimated in thes words, as is the sinne of rash and unadvised swearing: for these words, pronouncing with his lips to do evil or to do good, do indeed manifestly imply an ovebold un∣dertaking to do that which happely he may not or cannot do: and secondly, be∣cause they that expound this place of the sinne of not doing what a man hath sworn to do, are constraind to understand that clause concerning swearing to do evil of doing that which is evil or hurtfull to himself, whereas I conceive it must necessari∣ly be understood of doing evil to his neighbour, because for it he was to bring a trespasse-offering,▪ which implyes at least an intention of trespassing upon his neigh∣bour: so that I say the sinne here intended is, I conceive, rash and unadvised swear∣ing; and because if a man swore to do good to his neighbour when it was not in his power, he did thereby engage himself for some good to his neighbour which af∣terwards his neighbour could not enjoy; and if he swore to do evil to his neigh∣bour, there was at least a purpose of trespassing upon him, which was in Gods eye as if he had done it, therefore he is enjoyned for this sinne to bring a trespasse-offer∣ing: though at first it be hid from him, that is, when at first he bound himself by this oath through passion or unadvisedness he did not know or consider that he sinned in so swearing, yet when he knows of it, saith the ext, that is, when he i once convinced that he hath sinned herein, then he shall be guilty in one of these, then the guilt shall lye upon his conscience, whether he hath sworn to do good or evil, and for his atonement he must bring a trespasse-offering unto the Lord, as is added in the following verses. Vers. 5. And it shall be when he shall be guilty in one of these things.] That is,
when he shall be guilty in one of these three cases before named, he shall confesse his sin, laying his hand upon the sacrifices head, & so shall make an atonement for himself. Vers. 6. And he shall bring his trespasse-offering, &c.] This also no lesse then the sinne-offering was a type of Christ, whose soul was made an offering for sinne, Isa. 53. 10. The word in the originall is the same that is here translated a trespasse-offering. Now how the trespasse-offering differed from the sinne-offering, is noted befoe upon the first verse of this chapter. Vers. 7. And if he be not able to bring a lambe, &c.] This exception was not onely for these particular offenses before named, but for all where a sinne-offering was to be brought by the common people, that in no case poverty should disable a man to make his peace with God. Now concerning these turtle doves and young pigeons, see the note upon Levit. 1. 14. One for a sinne-offering and the other for a burnt-offering.] Which wer also or atonement, Levit. 1. 4. Vers. 8. And wring off his head from his neck, but shall not divide it asunder.] This direction concerning the turtle dove▪ or young pigeon, that was to be offered for a sinne-offering, may be understood two severall wayes: either that the priest was to wring off the head but not to divide the body of it asunder; or else, which is the commonest exposition, that he was to break the neck of it asunder, but yet not to pll the head quite off from the body, of which see the note upon Levit. 1. 15. Vers. 11. But if he be not able, &c. then he that sinned shall bring for his of∣fering the tenth part of an Ephah, &c.] That is, the tenth part of a bushell, the tenth part whereof was called an Oer, Exod. 16. 36. near about our pottle. He shall put no oyl upon it, &c.] To distinguish this sinne-offering from those other meat-offerings, whereof see Lev. 2. 1. Besides this happely might signifie that neither by any grace in us (whereof the oyl was a signe) nor by any prayersof ours (whereof the frankincense might be a signe) but onely by Christ we are reconciled unto God, whereof this meat-offering was a type; or else because the oyl & frankinnse might signifie the joy & gladnesse of him that brought the offering, the Lord might appoint these to be left out in the sinne-offering because of the sorrow & humiliation of spirit required in him that brought this offering, as we may see in a like case, Num. 5. 15. Vers. 15. If a sul commit a trespasse, and sinne through ignorance.] The He∣brew word translated here, commt a trespasse, though it be generally used for all transgression and disloyalty that the inferiour committeth against the superiour, yet for the most part it is applyed to evils committed against the Lord in his holy things, and so gnifieth sacrilegiously to trespasse upon the Lord and his priets by ny wrong done to God in his holy things, when by any mans ignorance, unadvi∣sednesse, or errour (for it must not be understood of th presumptuous defrauding God of those things which belonged to him) God was damaged in his offerings, as when any man payed not the full tithe due, or did work with his first-born bul∣lock, or shear his first-born sheep, or keep back ought of the price of things dedica∣ted to holy use, or take any of the priests portion in the sacrifices, &c. Then e shall bring for his trespass unto th Lora a ramme, &c.] A greater sa∣crifice then was brought for other trespasse-offerings, to shew the greatnesse of the sinne of sacriledge.
With thy estimation by shekels of silver, &c.] That is, with as much money as thou the priest shalt value the damage at, according to the shekels of the Sanctuary: for so it is explained ver. 16, 18. Vers. 16. And shall adde the fifth part thereto, &c.] For so much was also added to holy things redeemed, Levit. 27. 13, 15, 19. But if he will at all reeem it, then he shall adde a fifth part thereof unto thy estimation. And if he that san∣ctified it will redeem his house, then he shall adde the fifth part of the money of thy estimation unto it, &c. Vers. 17. And if a soul sinne, and commit any of these things, &c.] The ram injoyned for a sinne-offering makes it clear that Moses here speaks concerning the same sinne of sacriledge, whereof before, onely this particular is again more clearly urged, that though he wist it not, though he was utterly ignorant, yet he must as guil∣ty bring this sacrifice for his atonement. CHAP. VI. Vers. 2. IF a soul sinne, and commit a trespasse against the Lord, &c.] This Law is concerning sinnes done wittingly, where an injury is done to a neighbour, and God also is particularly offended by a li and false oath. Vers. 5. He shall even restore it in the principall.] That is, the very thing it self, or the full worth of it. And shall adde the fifth part more thereto, &c.] If he were judicially convicted of it, he was to be proceeded against according to those judiciall Laws, Exod. 22. which injoyn double paiment: but this Law is for those, who touched in conscience confesse that whereof they could not be convinced by the Law; in which case they were onely to adde a fifth part, and to give it unto him to whom it appertaineth, whether the first owner, or the heire, &c. Vers. 9. Command Aaron and his sonns, &c.] Hitherto the substance of the sacrifices have been prescribed, now the severall rites of each are described more particularly. And first for burnt-offerings, though the daily burnt-offering which was offered every morning, and the last every evening is here chiefly intended. Because of the burning upon the altar all night unto the morning, &c.] Not onely all day, but all night also; for as the morning burnt-offering burnt till the evening, so the evening burnt-offering burnt all night untill the morning. And the fire of the altar shall be burning in it.] That is, shall be nourisht con∣tinually. Vers. 10. And the priest shall put on his linen garment, &c.] That is, not onely the linen breeches, but also the linen coat. And take up the ashes which the fire hath consumed with the burnt-offering, &c.] Ashes are said to be consumed, when the wood and sacrifices are consumed and turned to ashes: as meal is said to be ground, when the corn by grinding is turned to meal, Esai. 47. 2. Take the milstne, and grind meal. And he shall put them besides the altar.] See the Notes upon Levit. 1. 16. Vers. 11. And carry forth the ashes without the camp unto a clean place.] The
contrary is said toching the stones and dust of a leprous house, Levit. 14. 40, 41. Then the priest shall command that they ake the stones in which the plague is, and they shall cast them into an unclean place without the city, &c. Becaue these came from the Lords holy house, therefore they were to be laid in a clean place, where no dead carkases, dung, or other filth was laid. Vers. 12. And the fire upon the altar shall be burning in it, &c.] That so the ire which first came from heaven, might in a mnner by the continuall supply of wood be still preserved upon the altar: which might signifie, 1. the excluding of all humane devices in Gods worship, wherein nothing is allowed but is given by direction from heaven: And secondly, that no sacrifice is accepted with God, but what is offered by the spirit, that fire from heaven, Matth. 3. 11. He shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire: And withall the continuing of this fire, which at first came from heaven to testifie Gods favourable acceptance of that sacrifice, was to teach them that as at first so still he did continually accept of their sacrifices and service, as long as they did it according to the direction of his law. And the priest shall burn the wood on it every morning.] Questionlesse they laid on wood upon the altar to maintain the fire thereon, not onely in the morning, but all the day long, especially at even, when the evening burnt-offering was to be burnt upon the altar; onely there is a particular direction here for laying on wood in the morning, because then having cleansed the altar, and taken away the ashes, they made the fire anew. Vers. 16. And the remainer thereof shall Aaron and his sonnes eat.] The males onely, because these things being most holy might not be touched but by consecra∣ted persons. With unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the holy place.] That is, in the cort of the Sanctuary: for so it is explained concerning the sinne-offering, verse 26. In the holy place shall it be eaten, in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation. Other holy things, as the tithes and first-frits, and the shoulder and breast of the peoples peace-offerings, &c. might be eaten elsewhere, and the priests daughters were to have a share therein, Numb. 18. 11. The heave-offering of their gift with all the wave-offerings of the children of Israel, I have given them unto thee, and to thy sonnes, and to thy daughters with thee by a statute for ever: every one that is clean in thy house shall eat of it. But those things that were most holy, to wit, the priests portion of all sacrifices, whereof part was burnt upon the altar, were onely to be eaten by Aaron and his sonnes, and that in the holy place, 1. That by their eating in Gods presence they might be put in mind to use these holy things with all sobriety; 2. To put them in mind of that singular purity and holinesse which God required in them that were honoured above the people; and 3. To signifie perhaps that none but those within Gods holy Church shall have any be∣nefit by Christ. As for this charge not to eat it with leavened bread, see the note upon chap. 2. 11. Vers. 20. This is the offering of Aaron and his onnes, &c.] That is, this is the offering that Aaron shall offer unto God in the dy  he is aninted, and which his sonnes successively that shall come to be high pries shall offer unto the Lord
in the day that they are anointed: for it is evident that this meat-offering i ap∣pointed for the high priest onely (for he onely was anointed in succeeding  as is shown before upon Exod. 29. 7.) to wit, Aaron for the present, and that son of his successively that should be anointed high priest in his stead, as it is expressed vese 22. The tenth part of an Ephah of fine flowre for a meat-offering perpetuall, &c.▪ That is, ever to be offered when any of them came to be high priests. Vers. 23. For every meat-offering for the priest shall be wholly burnt.] The priests eating of the sinne-offering sigured the bearing of the sinners iniquity▪ Levit. 10. 17. but because no priest being a sinner could make atonement for himself; therefore his meat-offering might not be eaten, but is all burnt on the altar, to teach him to expect salvation not by himself but onely by Christ. Vers. 26. The priest that offereth it for sinne shall eat it.] Except in the case mentioned verse 30. when the bloud thereof was carried into the tabernacle. Vers. 27. And when there is sprinkled of the bloud thereof upon any garment, thou shalt wash, &c.] viz. casually. Now these ordinances peculiar onely to the sinne-offering (because that in speciall sort figured Christ who was made sinne for us) shadowed the contagion of sinne, and our care to cleanse our selves by re∣pentance and faith. Vers. 28. But the earthen vessell wherein it is sodden shall be broken: and if it be sodden in a brasen pot, &c.] Because the liquour wherein the sin-offering was sodden might soak into an earthen pot, therefore that must be broken, the rather, because the losse of breaking it was not great; but if it were sod in an iron or brasse pot, that was onely to be scoured and rinsed; all which was still to shadow forth the contagion of sinne. Vers. 30. And no sin-offering whereof any of the bloud is brought into the ta∣bernacle, &c.] Namely the sin-offering for the priest and the congregation. See Levit. 4. & 16. which were burnt without the camp: and this might signifie that men cleaving to the legall priesthood, and not seeking for the better priesthood of Christ, could not be saved. CHAP. VII. Vers. 1. LIkewise this is the law of the trespasse-offering, &c.] For what trans∣gressions the sinne-offering was appointed, and for what the trespasse-offering, it is hard to determine. Some think the trespasse-offering was for smaller sinnes; but I rather conceive, that where either God in the externall duties of his worship, or their brethren in civill affairs, was any way damaged by the offender, there a trespasse-offering was due; for other transgressions the sinne-offering. See the notes upon chap. 5. 10. Vers. 2. In the place where they kill the burnt-offering.] See the note upon chap. 1. 11. Vers. 7. As the sinne-offering is, so is the trespasse-offering.] Namely, as in most other things, so in this that follows, that the priest was to have the remainer of this as he had of the other.
Vers. 8. And the priest that offereth any mans burnt-offering, &c.] All the re∣mainder of the sinne and trespasse-offering the priest had, skinne and all; but even of the burnt-offering also he must have the skinne. Vers. 9. And all the meat-offering that is baken in the oven, &c.] That is, these meat-offerings that were baken or fried, &c. and so were to be eaten hot, were therefore the priests portion that offered them, who might eat them presently; but if the meat-offerings were mingled with oyl, or dry, that is, flowre dry, not mingled with oyl or any other liquour, such as was the meat-offering for sinne, chap. 5. 11. Because these might be reserved to be dressed afterwards at their leasure, therefore these were equally to be divided amongst all the priests, as is expressed vers. 10. Vers. 13. Besides the cakes, he shall offer for his offering leavened bread, &c.] How this may be reconciled with that, Levit. 2. 11. see the notes there: Because this meat-offering was onely for food to be eaten, no part of it to be burnt upon the altar, leaven is here allowed. And besides it was a signe that this oblation was be∣fore thought upon and prepared, not suddenly offered. Vers. 14. And he shall offer one out of the whole oblation, &c.] The rest were for the owner and his family, &c. as was the remainder of the flesh. See Deut. 27. 7. Thou shalt offer peace-offerings, and eat there, and rejoyce there before the Lord thy God. See also Deut. 12. 6, 7. Vers. 15. And the flesh of his sacrifice of his peace-offerings for thanksgiving shall be eaten the same day, &c.] How the fat of the peace-offerings was to be burnt upon the altar, was shown before, chap. 3. 3, 4, 5. Here now is prescribed how the remainder of the sacrifice was to be eaten. And for the understanding hereof, we must note that there are here three severall sorts of peace-offerings mentioned, or three severall occasions of offering peace-offerings: the first were these that were offered for thanksgiving, vers. 15. that is, by way of testifying their thankfulnesse for some mercies received: the second were those that were offered in liew of a vow, and this the most Expositours conceive to be meant of such peace-offerings which men vowed they would give unto God if such or such a mercie God should grant them, and which accordingly when God had satisfied their desires they did then pay unto God; which though paid by way of thanksgiving they make to be different from the former, because those were brought onely upon the generall bond of thankful∣nesse, and that for generall mercies, these were brought upon a speciall bond of a vow made upon their obtaining some speciall blessing, which they had desired of God. But others again understand it of peace-offerings vowed and paid according∣ly, the vow not being conditionall in case any such blessing were obtained but ab∣solute; and so they make this to differ from the first which was for thanksgiving: yea and some understand it of such peace-offerings as were offered not in perfor∣mance of a vow formerly made, but at the time when a vow was made by way of seeking Gods favour for the obtaining of some blessing which they sought of God. The third were those that were brought as a voluntary offering, which were such as were not brought upon any particular obligation either of mercies received, or of the want of any blessing, but of devotion in generall, by way of acknowledging Gods goodnesse to them in generall, and testifying their desire of the continuance of his
love and favour. Agin, 2. we must note, that for the first of these one law is gi∣ven, and for the other two, another: for those peace-offerings that were for thanks∣giving, they were commanded to eat the same day they were offered, both the priest and the people; but those that were for a vow or voluntary offering, they had two dayes allowed them for the eating of them, and then what was left on the third day was to be burnt with fire. And why was this difference? Surely because God would hereby teach them that he must be worshipped as himself appointeth, and not as they in their reason should think it; and withall the appointing of that to be presently eaten which was for thanksgiving might teach them not to be remisse in returning thanks for the blessings they injoyed. Vers. 18. And if any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace-offerings be eaten at all on the third day, &c. it shall be an abomination, &c.] The Hebrew word signifieth a thing which by being kept too long beginneth to be corrupt and stink, to show how God would abhorre them. Vers. 19. And the flesh that toucheth any unclean thing shall not be eaten, i shall be burnt with fire.] The flesh of the peace-offerings was not to be eaten doubt∣lesse in the holy place, but was carried thence (after it was killed at the tabernacle and the fat burnt upon the altar) and eaten else-where: for so it is said of the right shoulder and breast which were the priests portion, Levit. 10. 14. The wave-breast and the heave-shoulder shall ye eat in a clean place, thou and thy sonnes and thy daughters with thee. And well we may conclude that if the priests did not eat their portion in the holy place, much lesse did the people eat their portion there. Now because being carried out of the holy place it might casually e touched by some un∣clean person, or some unclean thing, order is here given that it should not then be eaten as a holy sacrifice, but burnt with fire, because being so defiled it was not fit to represent Christ, who was perfectly holy, and pure from the least pollution of sin. And a for the flesh, all that be clean shall eat thereof.] That is, that which abi∣deth clean and fit to be eaten, all that be clean, both priests and owners, shall eat thereof. Vers. 20. But the soul that eateth of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace-offerings that prtain unto the Lord, &c.] Here order is given for the punishment of those that should wittingly eat of the peace-offerings when they were unclean, whether it were by reason of any naturall personall uncleannesse that was then upon them, which is that uncleannesse spoken of in this twentieth verse; or by touch of any un∣clean thing, which is afterwards added in the follovving verse, to vvit, that they should be cut off from their people, that is, put to death: if they did it unvvittingly, a sacrifice of atonement vvas appointed for them, chap. 5. 2. but if they did vvilfully and presumptuously thus profane Gods holy things, they vvere to be cut off by the civill Magistrate. And hereby also vvas shaddovved forth that those that bear the name of Christ, and professe themselves Christians, and yet continue in their sinnes, and hate to be reformed, destruction shall be their end, neither vvill God reckon them amongst his people; and more particularly vvhoever partake of the signes and seals of grace unvvorthily do eat and drink judgement to themselves, 1. Cor. 11. 27, 28, 29.
Vers. 23. Ye shall eat no manner fat, of ox, of sheep, or of goat.] See the note up∣on Levit. 3. 17. Vers. 24. And the fat of the beast that dieth of it self, &c. may be used in any other use.] Herein I conceive is implyed that such fat of beasts fit for sacrifices (when killed at home for their private uses) might also be imployed in other uses, though i might not be eaten: for else what did they do with it? It were absurd to think it was cast away and lost: so that I understand these words as if it had been said, even the fat of such beasts when they die of themselves, &c. may be used in any other use; not onely when they are killed for meat, but when they die of themselves. And hence some conclude that though the touch of such carcases did render a man un∣clean; yet the touch of the fat of those dead beasts that died of themselves did not defile them. Vers. 29. He that offeeth the sacrifice of his peace-offerings unto the Lord shall bring his oblation, &c.] That is, he that shall offer a sacrifice of peace-offerings unto the Lord, he shall himself with his own hands present that part which is to be un oblation unto the Lord, to wit, the fat with the breast and the right shoulder, as is expressed in the following verse. Because their peace-offerings they might eat i the camp, and afterwards in any part of Jerusalem, so the place were clan, there might be some danger lest the people should think that their peace-offerings might be killed in any place, and therefore for prevention hereof this law is here added, that they must bring their peace-offerings unto the Lord, and there the Lords and the priests portion must be gien them before they themselves eat of them. CHAP. VIII. Vers. 6. ANd Moses brought Aaron and his sonnes, and washed them with wa∣ter.] Namely at the brasen laver which was made for that purpose. Vers. 7. And he put upon them the coat, &c.] That is, the undermost garment, which was made of fine linen, and girded to him with a girdle of needle-work, concerning which and the rest of the holy garments of Aaron here mentioned, there is already noted what is requisite to be known in the notes upon the 28. chapter of Exodus. There was also linen breeches made for the priests, Exod. 28. 42. bt those were not appointed to be put on at their consecration, Exod. 29. but the priest was to put them on himself when he was to execute his office, and therefore they are not ere mentioned. Vers. 10. And Moses too the anointing oyl, and annted the abercle, &c.] See the notes upon Exod. 30. 26. Vers. 11. And he sprinkled thereof upon the altr seven times, &c.] He did not onely anoint the altar as he did other things, but also sprinkle it seven times with the oyl of consecration, because it was consecrated to more speciall use then other parts of the taberhacle, namely for the holy sacrifices. Vers. 14. And he brought the bullock for the sinne-offering, &c.] Concerning those rites of consecrating the pries, see the severall notes upon the 29. chapter of Exodus.
Vers. 15. And poured the bloud at the bottom of the altar, and sanctified it, &c.] See the notes upon Exod. 29. 12. After this the altar sanctified the gifts and oblations upon it, Mat. 23. 19. Here is nomention made of sprinkling bloud seven times before the Lord, nor of the altar of incense, as in other sinne-offerings for the priest, Levit. 4. 7. The reason is, because there the sacrifice was intended for some speciall sinne of the priest being then consecrated, but here for sinnes in generall of priests not yet consecrated, and indeed not so much for the expiation of their sinnes, as the consecration of their persons. CHAP. IX. Vers. 1. ANd it came to passe on the eighth day that Moses called Aaron and his sonnes, &c.] That is, on the very next day after the seven dayes of the priests consecration were ended, whereof mention was made in the 33. verse of the foregoing chapter, as is evident also by that which the Prophet Ezeklel saith in his allusion to this, Ezek. 43. 26, 27. Seven dayes shall they purge the altar, and consecrate themselves, and when these dayes are expired, it shall be that upon the eighth day and so forward the priests shall make your burnt-offerings upon the altar, &c. What day of the moneth this was done, is not expressed. Evident it is that the tabernacle was erected on the first day of the first moneth in the second year after their coming out of Egypt, Exod. 40. 17. and immediately the Lord spake unto Moses out of the tabernacle and gave him the severall Laws concerning the sacri∣fices set down in the first chapter of this Book, as is noted, Lev. 1. 1. After this Moses performed all that was injoyned him for the consecrating of Aaron and his sonnes, and for the anointing and sanctifying of the tabernacle and all that was therein, wherein seven dayes were spent, and then the next day after Aaron and his sonnes entred upon the executing of the priests office, as is here related. Indeed some hold that the seven dayes of the consecration of Aaron and his sonnes were before the first day of the first moneth when the tabernacle was reared up by Mo∣ses, and that because the Princes offered on that very day when the altar was anoint∣ed by Moses, Numb. 7. 1, 10. (which they conceive was done at the same time when the tabernacle was erected) and the priests could not have offered the Princes sacrifices if they had not been before that time consecrated and settled in their priest∣hood. But this opinion is grounded upon a double mistake, to wit, that the altar was anointed by Moses the same day the tabernacle was erected, and that the Prin∣ces sacrifices were offered on the same day whereon the altar was anointed, which indeed cannot be truly inferred from that forecited place in the 7. of Numbers, as shall be shown in the notes there. All that can be said concerning the day when Aaron and his sonnes entred upon the execution of their priesthood is, that it was the very next day after the seven dayes of their consecration were ended. Vers. 2. And he said unto Aaron, Take thee a young calf for a sinne-offering.] Before Aaron might be suffered to offer up any sacrifice, he is commanded by Mo∣ses to offer up a young calf as a sinne-offering for himself: And hence the Apostle proves the weaknesse and insufficiency of the Leviticall priesthood, to wit, that
those priests were not fit in themselves to stand as Mediatours betwixt God and the people, being sinners themselves, but were types and shadows of another to come, to wit, Christ, who was holy, harmlesse, undefiled and separate from sinners, &c. Heb. 7. 26, 27. But since a young bullock is appointed for the high priests sinne-offering. Levit. 4. 3. Why is Aaron here commanded to offer a young calf for a sinne-offering? I answer, between a young calf and a young bullock there was no great difference (the one happely was, as the Hebrews say, of the first year, the o∣ther of the second) but yet of that difference the reason we may conceive to be this, because in the fourth chapter a sinne-offering is appointed onely by way of atone∣ment for some particular sinne of ignorance committed by the high priest; but this sinne-offering here injoyned was for the sinnes of the priests in generall, and that also in a particular case, for their first entrance upon the execution of their office, and therefore here not a young bullock, as there was injoyned▪ but a young calf was offered for their sinne-offering, and that by the Lords speciall direction. Vers. 3. Take yee a kid of the goats for a sinne-offering, &c.] Here also (as in a speciall particular case) the very same sacrifices are not injoyned either for the sinne-offerings, burnt-offerings, or peace-offerings of the people, that are injoyned by the generall Laws in the former chapters; onely respect is had that some of every kind should be now offered by the priests at their first entrance upon their office. Vers. 4. For to day the Lord will appear unto you.] See ver. 24. Vers. 9. And put it upon the horns of the altar, &c.] That is, the brasen altar; herein also this sinne-offering for the high priest seemeth to differ from others that followed after, whose bloud was to be carried into the Sanctuary, Levit. 4. 5, 6, 7. and it was because Aaron as yet had not accesse into the holy place, till he had pre∣pared away by this first sacrifice into the court; the like is to be observed in the peoples sinne-offering, ver. 15. compared with Levit. 4. 13, 17, 18. Vers. 10. But the fat and the kidneys and the caul above the liver of the sinne-offering he burnt upon the altar.] That is, he offered them upon the altar, and so they were afterward burnt by that fire which came down from heaven, ver. 24. Vers. 15. And he brought the peoples offering and took the goat, &c. and offer∣ed it for sinne as the first.] That is, in the same manner as that for the priest, ver. 8. and so he burnt it also without the camp as the other was, ver. 11. for which he is reproved by Moses, Lev. 10. 17. Wherefore have ye not eaten the sinne-offering in the holy place, seeing it is most holy, and God hath given it you, &c. Vers. 17. Beside the burnt sacrifice of the morning.] That is, this was not the burnt-offering and meat-offering which was every morning to be offered, as God appointed Exod. 24. 38, 39, 40. but an extraordinary offering besides, which by speciall direction was offered at this time. Vers. 22. And Aaron lift up his hand toward the people, and blessed them.] This was a kind of applying the sacrifice to them, and to make known that God did gratiously accept of those sacrifices from them; and it was done according to the manner set down, Numb. 6. 23, &c. Speak unto Aaron and his sonnes, saying, On this wise shall blesse the children of Israel, saying unto them, The Lord blesse
thee, and keep thee, the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gratious unto thee, the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. So also it is said of our Saviour that a little before his Ascention he lift up his head and blessed his disciples; and indeed Aaron was in this a type of Christ, in whom all the Na∣tions of the world are blessed, Gen. 18. 18. Vers. 22. And came down from offering of the sinne-offering, &c.] That is, from the bank or hilly-place of the altar which was higher then the other ground. Vers. 23. And Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle, &c.] Hitherto the priests had onely made entrance upon their office in the court of the priests. Now Moses went with Aaron into the tabernacle that he might there instruct him con∣cerning the service he was there to perform, both about the lights, the table of shew∣bread, and the altar of incense. And the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the people.] That is somme visible signe of Gods glory and favour, as by the cloud, Exod. 16. 10. Vers. 24. And there came a ire out from the Lord, and consumed upon the al∣tar the burnt-offering and the fat.] That is, either from heaven, as 2. Chron. 7. 1. or else out of the tabernacle. Which when all the people saw, they shouted and fell on their faces.] With asto∣nishment and joy, giving thanks for this signe of Gods favour, and of his accept∣ing their sacrifices. CHAP. X. Vers. 1. ANd Nadab and Abihu the sonnes of Aaron took either of them his cnser, &c.] No doubt Moses had taught them and enjoyned them that after they had offered the sacrifices on the altar of burnt-offerings then they should go into the taberncle, and there should light the lamps, and burn incense on the altar of incense, as God had commanded, Exod. 30. 7. Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every morning; when he dresseth the lamps he shall burn incense on it, that is, on the altar of incense: but withall doubtlesse he had given them direction to use in this service onely the fire of the altar of burnt-offerings, which was kindled by fire from heaven: for though this be onely implyed covertly, Levit. 6. 13. The fire shall ever be burning upon the altar, it shall never go out, yet I make no questi∣on but that it was more fully given them in charge, as afterward again, Levit. 16. 10. where direction is given for Aarons going into the most holy place, He shall take a censer of burning coals of fire from off the altar before the Lord, and his hands full of sweet incense beaten small, and bring it within the vail. But now Nadab and Abihu, rashly and inconsiderately forgetting or neglecting their duty in this parti∣cular, took some other ire in their censers, that perhaps wherewith they had sod and dressed the lesh of their sacrifices, and putting incense thereon to carry it and lay it upon the altar of incense, and so offered strange fire before the Lord, that is, the fire which he commanded them not, and so were severely punished for it, as is afterwards expressed. Now that this happened that very eighth day whereof men∣tion is made, Chap. 9. 1. immediately after those first sacrifices were consumed by
fire from the Lord, may be gathered by that which follows from vers. 12. to the end of the chapter, which plainly concerneth those sacrifices whereof we reade in the former chapter. And thus God taught them betimes the weaknesse of the Leviti∣call priesthood, and withall with what fear and exact care it was fit they should carry themselves in the service of God. Vers. 2. And there went out fire from the Lord and devoured them.] That is, killed them, as the sword is said to devoure, 2. Sam. 2. 26. Then Abner called to Joab and said, Shall the sword devoure for ever? For that neither their bodies nor clothes were burnt to ashes, appears verse 5. So they went near and carried them in their coats out of the camp. Vers. 3. Then Moses said uno Aaron, This is it that the Lord spake, saying, I will be sanctified, &c.] The substance of these following words is in many places to be found, as Exod. 19. 22. And let the priests also that come near to the Lord sanctifie themselves lest the Lord break forth upon them: again, Levit. 8. 35. Therefore shall ye abide at the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation day and night seven dayes, and keep the charge of the Lord, that ye dye not; and this is suf∣ficient. Yet happely these very words also at some other time were spoken by God, though not written. As for the words themselves, I will be sanctified by them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be glorified, the meaning of them is, that God will have those that come nigh him carry themselves as become those that serve so holy a God, with all possible care and reverence and fear, and that God will else manifest his holinesse in punishing them, Ezek. 28. 22. Behold, I am against hee O Zidon, and I will be glorified in the midst of thee: Two arguments are therefore herein couched to keep Aaron from murmuring: 1. because the punish∣ment was just: 2. because God should be glorified hereby, and both the people and his posterity receive good by it. And Aaron held his peace.] That is, though happely at first he began to take on pitifully, and to give too much liberty to his passions, yet hearing those words of Moses, he presently checked himself, laid his hand upon hi mouth, and not a word more would he speak. And doubtlesse this is noted as a notable instance of his pi∣ety and quiet submission to Gods good will and pleasure: and that his carriage was herein most singalarly remarkable we shall see, if we note these particulars: First, that he had now lost two of his sonnes, yea his two eldest sonnes together at a clap. We know what Rebeckah in great angaish of soul said to Jacob when his brother Esau had resolved to kill him, Gen. 27. 45. Go, lie to Paran; why should I be de∣prived of you boh in one day? Secondly, that they were cut off suddenly, by an untinely death, as we use to say, when neither themselves not their poore father did ever dream of any such danger: Thirdly, that they were cut off by a way which might seem to testifie Gods hot displeasure against them; for they were devoured by fire from God, the Lord by the manner of their death pointing out the sinne for which they were stricken: and what father had not rather lose all his stock of chil∣dren in an ordinary way, then have execution done upon any one of them by Gods immediate hand in such a terrible manner? Fourthly, that it was at a time when heir hearts no doubt were as full of joy as ever they could hold, it being the first
day of their entring upon that high honour of their priestly function; and in such a sunshine of Gods favour to be so suddenly thunderstruck must needs adde to their calamity: And last of all, that they were cut off with such severity for so small an offense as reason might judge of it, onely for taking fire to burn the incense from one place when they should have taken it from another, and that not purposely done, but onely through mistake, an errour into which, when they had so much to do, and were yet unacquainted with the service, they might easily fall. Vers. 4. And Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan the two sonnes of Ʋzzi∣el, the uncle of Aaron, &c.] The nearest kindred it seems used to perform this of∣fice of carrying the dead to be buried, and their brethren the priests might not leave their ministery, therefore Aarons cosin germans are appointed to do it. Vers. 6. Ʋncover not your heads, neither rend your clothes, &c.] The severall laws that concern the priests mourning for their dead friends we have largely set down in the one and twentieth chapter of this book, where the inferiour priefts are allowed to be mourners at the buriall of a brother, though the high priest is forbid∣den it. But this is a speciall charge for this present occasion onely and so here not onely Aaron but also his sonnes that remained still alive are forbidden all the usuall solemnities of mourning for Nadab and Abihu, not to uncover teir heads, nor to rend their clothes, nor to go out from the doore of the tabernacl  the congrga∣tion: and that first, becuse it was an extraordinary judgemen of God that was fallen upon their brethren, and they were to testifie their bmissi thereu by not lamenting their death; Secondly, because the solemnity and service of the dy might not be interrupted; being newly anointed, and now at this time prepared for their first entring upon the execution of their priestly office, they might not break off this service to attend the buriall of their brethren. But why are they injoyned not to uncover their heads? since it may seem by other places that it was not the cu∣stome of mourners amongst the Jews to uncover their heads, but rather to cover them? as we may see, 2. Sam. 15. 30. David went up the ascent of mount Olivet, and wept as he went up, and had his head covered, and he went barefoot, and all the people that was with him covered every man his head, and they went up weeping as they went up: and so again, chap. 19. 4. But the king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud voyce, Oh my sonne Absolom, O Absolom my sonne, my sonne: See also Jer. 14. 3, 4. The answer is, that the priests are here injoyned not to uncover their heads, that is, not to take off their miters and bonnets which they wore on their heads, to the end they might not addresse themselves in the way of mourners to attend the buriall of Nadab and Abihu, to wit, by covering their heads with the usuall vail or covering of mourners. The chief aim of this command was to intimate why they might not go out as mourners to the buriall of their brethren, to wit, because they might not put off their priestly attire, and so give over the ser∣vice they had in hand, the rather because they were newly consecrated, and there were so few of them to attend the service. Vers. 9. Do not drink wine or strong drink. &c.] Nadab and Abihu, though not through wine, had erred not in putting a difference betwixt holy and profane: upon this occasion God gives charge that other things which might occasion the like er∣rour may be avoyded.
Vers. 12. Take the meat-offering that remaineth, &c.] Namely the remainder of the meat-offering that is mentioned chap. 9. ver. 17. Which Moses calls upon them to eat according to the directions formerly given them; 1. Thereby to in∣courage Aaron and his sonnes to go on in their service, lest they should have doubt∣ed because of the late judgement upon Nadab and Abihu whether God would ever be pleased that they should any more meddle with his sacrifices: 2. Because this sud∣den destruction of their brethren had let them see how exactly carefull they had need to be that all things were done according to Gods appointment; and thirdly, Because there was great danger lest being disturbed by this heavy and unexpected accident they should forget or neglect their duty herein, especially in this particular of eating the meat-offering, it being usuall with men in sorrow to refuse their meat. Vers. 13. And ye shall eat it in the holy place, &c.] That is, the court of the San∣ctuary, as Levit. 6. 16. And the remainder thereof shall Aaron and his sonnes eat with unleavened bread; it shall be eaten in the holy place, in the court of the taber∣nacle of the congregation they shall eat it. Vers. 14. And the wave-breast and heave-shoulder shall be eaten in a clean place, &c.] Moses here also puts them in mind to eat the shoulder and breast, to wit, of the peoples peace-offerings, Levit. 9▪ 21. And the breast and right shoulder Aa∣ron waved for a wave-offering before the Lord; and that in a clean place, meaning the camp of Israel, and in ages following the citie of Jerusalem, where the like holy things were eaten. Thou and thy sonnes, and thy daughters with thee.] Namely such as were onely maids, widows, and divorced returned to their fathers house, see Levit. 22. 11, 12. where others are also mentioned that might eat of them. Vers. 16. And Moses diligently sought the goat of the sinne-offering, &c.] A∣mongst other things wherein Moses feared lest Aaron and his sonnes should offend by reason of the sorrow which God had brought upon them, this was one thing, he doubted lest they should omit the eating of the sinne-offering, and therefore he sought diligently to see what was done with it, to wit, that goat of the sin-offering spoken of Levit. 9. 15. And he tooke the goat which was the sinne-offering, &c. as appeareth vers. 10. of this chapter, where Moses saith it was given them to bear the iniquitie of the congregation. Indeed it is clear that the sinne-offering for the congregation was to be carried without the camp, and burnt by that law, Levit. 4. 21. And he shall carry forth the bullock without the camp, and burn him as he burned the first bullock. But then the bloud of that sinne-offering was carried within the tabernacle, Levit 4. 16, 17. Now because Aaron had not yet accesse into the holy place, till he had prepared a way by these first sacrifices in the court, therefore the bloud of this sinne-offering was not brought into the tabernacle as in an extraordinary case, and consequently it was not to be burnt without the camp, but to be eaten by the priests, by that other law, Levit. 6. 26, 30. The priest that offereth it for sinne shall eat it, in the holy place shall it be eaten, in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation, &c. This Aaron and his sonnes in their grief either forgetting or not duly considering did burn it without the camp, which was not according to the law. See the note upon Levit. 9. 15.
And he was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar, &c.] Though Aaron was also in fault, and Moses in reproving Eleazar and Ithamar his sonnes in his presence did al∣so reprove him; yet he bends his anger chiefly against his sonnes (as sparing what he could the father in regrd of his late heavie losse of his two other sonnes) his sons, faith the text, that were left alive, which is added to intimate one chief cause of his anger, namely, that they notwithstanding they had seen what was done to their brethren had exposed themselves to like danger but that God in mercy spared them. Vers. 18. Behold the bloud of it was not brought in, &c.] Therefore it should have been eaten and not burnt. See the former note upon vers. 16. Vers. 19. And Aaron said unto Moses, Behold this day they have offered their sinne-offering, &c.] This apology of Aarons consists of three parts: 1. That though they had failed in this particular, yet the main had not been neglected, the sacrifices had been duly offered: 2. That their failing in the rites and ceremonies requisite was by reason of grief, occasioned by those dolefull accidents which had so lately befallen them: 3. That this might now extenuate his fault (though happely he did not omit it upon that reason) that if they had eaten the sinne-offering it would not have been acceptable to the Lord; because of that heavinesse and sorrow that was upon them, which made them unfit and unworthy to eat those holy things, for the law requires them that eat before the Lord to rejoyce. See Deut. 12. 7. & 26. 14. Hose. 9. 4. Vers. 20. And when Moses heard that, he was content.] Either as approving his fact, and allowing his excuse to be sufficient; or else rather as finding it a lesse fault then he supposed it had been, to wit, that he did it not willingly but of humane frailty and perplexed with grief: whereupon he passeth it by with pity, as loth to adde affliction to affliction, and perhaps deferred his further admonition till ano∣ther time. CHAP. XI. Vers. 1. ANd the Lord spake unto Moses and to Aaron, saying unto them, &c.] The former laws concerned the sanctification of the priests, and the rites and ceremonies of the sacrifices, now generall laws are given concerning the sanctification of the people, and first for avoyding that uncleannesse which co∣meth from things without the man: and in giving these laws the Lord spake both to Moses and to Aaron, because it belonged both to the magistrate and priest to see these laws executed, the priest being to teach the difference between clean and un∣clean, Ezek. 44. 23. And they shall teach my people the difference between the holy and profane, and cause men to discern between the unclean and clean, and the Ma∣gistrate to take care that this difference was observed: and hence is that, Numb. 9. 6. And there were certain men who were defiled by the dead body of a man, that they could not keep the passeover on that day, and they came before Moses, &c. Vers. 2. These are the beasts which ye shall eat among all the beasts that are on the earth.] No doubt this distinction of clean and unclean beasts was by re∣velation made known to the Fathers from the very first, whence is that direction
given to Noah immediately before the floud, Gen. 7. 2. Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male and his female▪ and of the beasts that are not clean by two, the male and his female. But this was then onely in respect of sacrifices; for eating or not eating it seems they had then no distinction of clean or unclean beasts, Gen. 9. 3. Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you, even as the green herb have I given you all things. But now by this law the Israelites are forbidden the eating of divers meats, both flesh and fowl and fish as unclean: And that, first, to move this stubborn people to absolute obedience, and to depend upon Gods word and will in all things whatsoever, yea even in their ve∣y meat; and secondly by restraining them from that which was usually eaten amongst the Gentiles, to put them in mind of the difference which God had put betwixt them and all other nations, reputing them of his mercie as clean, and all other nations to be unclean, and to teach them what speciall purity God required in them above other nations as his own peculiar people. And therefore we see that the Apostle reckons this amongst the legall shadows, Col. 2. 16, 17. Let no man judge you in meat or in drink, &c. which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ. And after the death of Christ, when the partition-wall was broken down, and believers of all nations were taken in to be Gods people no lesse then the Jews, the Lord by forbidding the Apostle Peter to put any difference betwixt clean and unclean meats, Act. 10. 15. did also as in a figure covrtly signifie unto him not to count the Gentiles unclean, but to go unto them, and to preach the Gospel to them as well as to the Jews. Vers. 3. What soever parteth the hoof▪ &c.] Why these are allowed as clean, others forbidden as unclean, I think no sound reason can be given, but Gods good will and pleasure, and his power to give what laws he pleaseth unto his people. The most probable mysticall reasons given are these: First, that the parting of the hoof in twain signified the right discerning of the word and will of God when we are able to judge of it, not carually but spiritually, 1. Cor. 2. 14, 15. But the carnall man receiveth not the things of the spirit, for they are foolishnesse unto him, nei∣ther can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned: But he that is spiri∣tuall indgeth all things, &c. Secondly, that the chewing of the cud signified the serious meditation of the law of God day and night, Psal. 1. 2. But his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law doth he meditate day and night. For that is the food of our souls, Amos 8. 11. Behold the day is come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of water, but of hearing the words of the Lord. And therefore having received this our food, we should repeat and recall it to mind, Mal. 4. 3. Remember ye the law, of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Isral with the statutes and judgements. 1. Cor. 11. 2. Now I pray you brethren that you remember me in all things, and keep the ordinances as I delivered them to you. For which the men of Berea are commanded, Acts 17. 11. These were more noble then those of Thessa∣lonica, in that they received the word with all readinesse of mind, and searched the Scriptures dayly whether those things were so. Yea as much as in us lies we should have the word of God ver in our mouthes, Deut. 6. 7. Thou shalt talk of them
when thou sittest in thy house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou lyest down, and when thou risest up: And thirdly, that the requiring of both these joyntly did signifie that God is not content with them that cleanse themselves by halves, but will have us clean throughout both within and without. See 2. Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selve's from all filthinesse of the fles and spirit, &c. Vers. 8. And their carcase shall ye not touch, &c.] Not onely eating▪ but touch∣ing also is forbidden, to teach us to refrain from all fellowship in evil, Esa. 52. 11. Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing, go ye out of the midst of her, be ye clean, &c. Vers. 9. Whatsoever hath sinnes and scales in the waters, &c.] See the note above upon vers. 3. Those fish that have innes and scales being a brighter and more cleanly sort of fish, not so much delighting in the mud as others, were the fit∣ter to signifie the purity that God required in his people. Vers. 10. And of any living thing that is in the waters, &c.] This is added to exclude shelfish and sea-monsters, that do not swimme like fish, &c. Vers. 13. The Eagle, the Ossifrage, and the Ospray, &c.] These and the most of the fouls here reputed unclean are ravenous, such as live by rapine, and unclean food, and were the fitter to signifie how farre Gods people should be from oppressi∣on, rapine, and all uncleannesse of sinne whatsoever. Both the Ossifrage and the Ospray here mentioned are severall sorts of Eagles: the Ossifrage by interpretation is bone-breaker, somewhat bigger then the ordinary Eagle, and much of the same kind; the Ospray hath her name in the Originall from her strong eyes and limbes, for she is able to look upon the sunne, and by that tryeth her young, as Writers re∣port: it seems to be the Sea-eagle, that from on high espieth fishes in the sea and lakes, and falling violently upon the water takes them. Vers. 15. Every Raven after his kind.] As the Crows, Choughes, Rooks, Caddaws, Pyes, &c, Vers. 16. And the Owl, and the night-Hawk and the Cuckow, &c.] Amongst other birds forbidden them as unclean all the severall sorts of Owls are here men∣tioned, as the Howlet mentioned in the first place under that common name, the Owl; and the night-Hawk, or night-Raven, and the little Owl vers. 17. that is, the Scrichowl; and the great Owl, which is a kind of Owl that dwelleth in de∣serts and solitary places: whence is that of the Prophet, Psal. 102. 6. I am like an Owl (or the great Owl) in the desert. Now these being all night-birds, that cannot endure the light of the day, might signifie to them that God abhorres those that hate the light of the word, and requires that his people should be children of the light and of the day, and should abhorre the works of darknesse, and the wor∣kers of them, according to that of the Apostle, Ephes. 5. 11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitfull works of darknesse, but rather reprove them. The first word here translated the Owl, is in the Hebrew the daughter of the Owl, concerning which some Interpreters have noted, that because many fowls are desired for meat while young, which are refused being old, as yung Daws and Rooks, therefore the young ones of this kind are forbidden, and much more then the old ones also.
Vers. 18. And the Geir-eagle, & the Stork.] These two fowls are little known in our parts: the Geir-eagle in the Hebrew hath its name from dear love, which these kind of birds bear to their young ones; and the Hebrew word translated here the Stork signifeth kindnesse, such as young Storks (whereto also agreeth the Greek word ) are said to shew to their dammes, whom they nourish in their age. It is a bird much like a Crane, cometh in Summer, and goeth away in Winter, and in cities buildeth her nest on tops of houses and chimneys, as the Swallow also doth, though elsewhere upon the tops of firre trees. Psal. 104. 17. Where the birds make their nests; as for the Stork the firre trees are her house. It feedeth much on fishes, snakes, frogges, &c. and so it is forbidden as unclean. Vers. 20. All fowls that creep, &c.] That is, not onely the Bat, last mentioned in the foregoing verse, but all of that sort are unclean; both because being of a mun∣grell kind they do well resemble men of a mungrell religion, as also because in their crawling with all foure they set forth men given wholly to cares and delights of the world. Vers. 22. And the Bald-locust after his kind, &c.] These are undoubtedly fly∣ing creeping things though with us unknown. Vers. 24. Whosoever toucheth the carcase of them shall be unclean untill the even.] That is, till the end of that day and beginning of a new. And this might signifi mans pollution by sinne, till he come to the new day of salvation by Christ; or that those legall pollutions were to continue onely till the new day of the Gospel, Col. 2. 16, 17. Let no man therefore judge you in meat or drink or in re∣spect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath dayes, which are a sha∣dow of things to come, but the body is of Christ. Vers. 25. And whosoever beareth ought of the carcase, &c.] That is, though he do not touch them with his flesh: here the clothes must be washed, because by carrying it both the man and his clothes also are defiled; and this legall washing was a type of our cleansing by repentance and faith in the bloud of Christ. Vers. 31. Whosoever doth touch them when they be dead, &c.] And so by the rule of proportion grounded upon vers. 25. if he did bear them he was to wash his clothes, and be unclean untill the even. Vers. 34. That on which such water cometh shall be unclean.] That is, water out of any such defiled vessell. Vers. 35. Whether it be oven or ranges for pots, &c.] This is added to shew the full extent of this law; and by this strictnesse of the law were they taught how strict they were to be in avoiding the least pollution of sinne. Vers. 37. And if any part of their carcase fall upon any sowing seed that is to be sowen it shall be clean.] To wit, because of necessity; since there might be too great inconvenience in being deprived by such accidents of seed to be immediately sowen, as for the like reason fountains and wells of water, were to be excepted, vers. 36. Vers. 38. But if any water be put upon the seed, &c.] Not because then being wet with water it was more apt to take polltion, as most Expositours; but because being wet with water it was not in case to be presently sowen and scattered abroad,
and therefore was not by the foregoing rule grounded upon necessity excepted from being polluted. Vers. 39. And if any beast of which ye may eat die, &c.] That is, as he that toucheth the carcase of an unclean beast whereof ye may not eat shall be polluted thereby, so also he that toucheth the dead body of any clean beast of which you may eat, to wit, if it dyeth of it self, or be strangled, or torn by a wild beast; for in those cases indeed they might not eat of the dead bodies of clean beasts, and so consequent∣ly not touch them neither without pollution. Yet by the law, Levit. 7. 24. And the fat of the beast that dyeth of it self, and the fat of that which is torn with beasts▪ may be used in any other use; but ye shall in no wise eat of it, it is evident that they were allowed to make use of the fat of such beasts, and therefore by the touch of the fat perhaps they were not defiled. Vers. 40. And he that eateth of the carcase of it, &c.] To wit, unwittingly or of urgent necessity; for if he did it presumptuously and in contempt of Gods law he was to die for it, Num. 15. 30. But the soul that doth ought presumptuously, whe∣ther he be born in the land or a stranger, the same reprocheth the Lord, and that soul shall be cut off from among his people. Vers. 42. What soever goeth upon the belly, &c.] That is, no manner of creeping thing may ye eat, whether it goeth upon the belly, as snakes or wormes, &c. or crawls upon all foure, as toads and scorpions, &c. or ath any feet to creep withall, as caterpillars, &c. CHAP. XII. Vers. 2. SPeak unto the children of Israel, saying unto them, If a woman have conceived seed, &c.] As former laws concerned uncleannesse which came from without, so those which next follow in this and the following chapters concern uncleannesse which came from within: and the first which we have in this chapter is concerning the uncleannesse of women in childbirth, to wit, that if a wo∣man had conceved seed, and born a man-child, then she should be unclean seven dayes, according to the dayes of her separation for her infirmity, that is, for those first seven dayes she should be unclean with as contagious a pollution as in the seven dayes of her separation for the infirmity of her monethly fluors, wherein as we may reade in the law, Levit. 15. 19. 24. she was not onely debarred from going to the Sanctuary, but was also separated from all communion with others, and defiled whatsoever she did sit or lie upon or touch, &c. and was therefore restrained to her chamber though not shut out of the camp, as lepers and others were. Now this law was delivered as others were to the children of Israel in generall, though it principally concerned women, even because the men were to take care that their wives did duly observe this course according to the commandment: And the end and drift of it doubtlesse was to shew how exceedingly corrupt man is from the very conception, who rendreth his mother unclean that conceives and bears him. But why then did the Virgin Mary accomplish the dayes of her purifiation accor∣ding to this law of Moses, Luke 2. 22. seeing the child she bare had no unclean∣sse
nor corruption in him, being neither conceived nor born in sinne, no nor▪con∣ceived of the seed of man as other children are? I answer, first, Because Christ was made after the similitude of sinfull flesh, and taking upon him the person of all ma∣kind he so became sinne for us; and secondly, Because even the Virgin Mary by rea∣son of the bloud of her purifying (whatsoever Papists without warrant from the Scripture say to the contrary) was legally unclean, and so became obedient to the Law. Vers. 3. And in the eighth day the flesh, &c.] Wherein one reason seems im∣plyed why God set a part the eighth day for circumcision, because till then the mo∣ther because of her separation, and the child because of the mother wer unclean. Vers. 4. And she shall continue in the bloud of her prifying three and thirty dayes.] That is, the bloud whereby her body is cleansed and purified: in which time she might converse with others, though not communicate in holy things, be∣cause her greatest uncleannesse had an end at seven dayes. Vers. 5. But if she bear a maid-child, &c.] Both the time of her uncleannesse and the dayes of her cleansing are doubled for a female child, either because the wo∣mans infirmity is then in greater measure upon her by the ordinary course of Na∣ture, and so longer time of purgation is required; or because thereby the Lord would signifie that the woman had the first and great hand in bringing sinne into the world, 1. Tim. 2. 14. Adam was not deceived, but the woman being decei∣ved was in the transgression; or 3. because the man-child being circumcised on the eighth day, then the uncleannesse of the mother ceased, but the female-child not be∣ing circumcised, the uncleannesse of the mother continued the longer. Vers. 6. When the dayes of her purifying are fulfilled, &c. she shall bring a lambe, &c.] This sinne-offering was doubtlesse for the sinne of the mother, to wit, the pollution she had contracted by the originall pollution of her child; and there∣fore it is added in the following verse, that by the offering thereof the priet should make an at onement for her, and so hereby the faith of the mother was confirmed that by Christ her sinne was forgiven her, and that the curse of her pains and sor∣row in child-bearing was taken away, so that, if she made a good use of them, they might now be a blessing and means of good to her, rather then a curse, accordiug to that of the Apostle, 1. Tim. 2. 15. Nothwithstanding she shall be saved in child-bearing, if they continue in faith and charity and holinesse with sobriety. Vers. 8. And if she be not able to bring a lambe▪ thn she shall bring two ttle dovs, or two young pigeons, &c.] This was the offering which the Virgin Mary brought, Luke 2. 24. for her purifying, which was an evident proof that Joseph and Mary lived in a poore and mean condition. CHAP. XIII. Vers. 1. ANd the Lord spke unto Moses and Aar sayg.] Se the note ∣on Exod. 11. 1. Vers. 2. When a man shall have in the kinne of is flesh, a ising, a sob, r bright spot, &c.] These three particulars here mentioned, a rising, a scab, and
bright spot, are named as dangerous signes of a leprosie beginning to grow upon a man, for which it was fit that men should be tryed, and concerning which there are given afterwards severall directions, whereby it might be discerned whether they were leprosies or no. For which such care was taken, because the leprosie was a disease usuall in those hot countreys, especially in Egypt, whence arose that ma∣licious slander which Josephus speaks of, that Moses and the Iraelites were expel∣led out of Egypt because they were leprous persons. Then shall he be brought nto Aaron the priest, &c.] The priests are chosen to judge of it, 1. because the main thing questioned concerning them was, whether they might come into the Sanctuary, &c. 2. because there were rtain rites, ceremonies, nd sacrifices appointed for their cleansing if they were found leprous, which the priest was to see done, and therefore the judgement also of the disease was proper unto him. Vers. 3. And the priest shall lok on the plague in the skinne of the flesh, &c.] Three signes are mentioned in the former verse which might justly render men su∣spected of a leprosie growing upon them, to wit, a rising, a scab, and a bright spot▪ Here now the priest is informed in the first place concerning the bright spot, which is the lat there mentioned, and called here the plage in the skinne of the flesh, to wit, how he should know whether it were a leprosie or no. Because one kind of leprosie made the skinne very white, Exod. 4. 6. Moses put his hand in his bosome, and when he took it out, behold his hand was leprous as snow; and Numb. 12. 10. Miriam became leprous white as snow, therefore the white bright spot rising in the skinne of the flesh was esteemd a dangerous signe of that kind of leprosie: yet with∣all because there were some white bright spots that did arise in mens skinnes which were not leprosies, as is vident in the 4. and 38. verses of this chapter, therefore certain directions are here given whereby the priest might be able to judge of such white bright spots, whether they were leprosies or no, to wit, 1. by observing the colour of the hair that grew in the skinne where the bright spot was, for if the hair being of some other colour before were turned white, then it was a leprosie; and 2. by observing whether the plague were in sight deeper then the skinne of the flesh, for that wa also another sure signe of a leprosie, the nature of the leprosie be∣ing to eat away and consume the flesh, Let her not be as one dead, saith Moses of Miriam, Numb. 12. 12. of whom the flesh is half consumed when he cmeth out of his mothers ombe: nd therefore when Naaman was cured of his leprosie, it is said, that his flesh came again like unto the flesh of a little child, 2. King. 5. 14. Vers. 4. Thn the priet shall shut him up that hath the plg seven dayes.] To wit▪ for further tryall, the case being yet doubtfull: whereby we are taught to be well advised ere we passe censurt upon any man concerning his spirituall le∣prosie. Vers. 6. And he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.] Though it proved no leprosie, y he was to wash▪ teaching that the righteous man is not wholly clean, Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sinne? Prov. 20. 9. but till nedeth repentance▪ raving mercy for Christs sake and amendment of his life. . John 1. 8, 9. If we ay that we have  sinne we deceive ur selvs▪ nd there
is no truth in us. If we confesse our sinnes he is faithfull and just to forgive, &c. Vers. 7. But if the scab spread much abroad in the skinne, after it hath been seen of the priest, &c.] Direction was given in the former verse that when the par∣ty, in whose skinne there was a bright spot, had been twice shut up for seven dayes, and still after those foureteen dayes expired, the plague stood at a stay, and did not spread in the skinne, then the priest should pronounce him clean, because it was but a scab, it was not a leprosie. But here now direction is given what the priest should do in case the bright spot did spread, to wit, that if the scab did spread much abroad in the skinne after he had been seen of the priest, to wit, after the first seven dayes of his being shut up, then he should be seen of the priest again, to wit, after he had been shut up the second time seven dayes, and then if still the scab did spread in the skinne, the priest was then to pronounce him unclean. Vers. 9. When the plague of leprosie is in a man, &c.] Here directions were given for judging of another probable signe of a leprosie, to wit, a rifing or swell∣ing, first mentioned ver. 2. but handled here in the second place, namely that if 1. it were a white rising; and 2. had turned the hair in it white; and 3. there was a quick raw flesh in the rising, then it was a leprosie. Vers. 13. If the leprosie have covered all his flesh he shall pronounce him clean that hath the plague.] Because in such strength of nature in the party expelling the inward corruption all over his body, it proves not the infectious leprosie, which makes the flesh raw, but is indeed a kind of scurf or scab, though termed here a leprosie, because it was ordinarily so esteemed by the people. Vers. 14. But when raw flesh appeareth in him, he shall be unclean.] This is an exception given to the direction in the two former verses, to wit, that though a man should be covered all over from head to foot with such a white leprosie or scurf as is before spoken of, yet if there were here and there any raw flesh appearing, he should be pronounced unclean, and that because his raw flesh was a signe that the poyson of the disease was not wholly driven out, but did still lurk within the flesh, and so rendred the disease more perillous to him that had it, and more infectious to others. Vers. 16. Or if the raw slesh turn again, and be changed into white, &c.] That is, when the party, in whom there was found such places of raw flesh, was by the priest pronounced unclean, if afterwards this raw lesh turned to white like the rest of his body, then he should again be pronounced clean, to wit, because this did manifest that the venome of the plague was wholly come forth. Vers. 18. The flesh also, in which, ven in the skinne thereof, was a bil and is healed.] Here begins the description of a third sort of leprosie arising of a scab, mentioned verse the 2. in the second place, but here handled in the third. And first he begins with the scab that comes of a bile healed, then ver. 24. he proceeds to that which comes of a burning. In both which it is observable that out of the scab of an healed sore there springs a leprosie, which may wel shew how sinnes, after we are healed of them, when they return do make us worse then before. Vers. 24. Or if there be any flesh in the skinne wherein there is an ht burning, &c.] This is not a new kind of leprosie (for still the Law speaketh of a leprosie
that groweth from the scab of an ulcer) but another cae is propounded of another kind of ulcer which ariseth from a burning of fire, coals, hot iron, &c. as is be∣fore noted. Vers. 29. If any man or woman hath a plague upon the head, or beard.] Hither∣to of the leprosie in the body in generall, now of that in the head or beard. Vers. 31. And that there is no black hair in it, &c.] For if there had been black hair in it, he had been undoubtedly clean, black hair being a signe of oundnesse and strength of nature. Se ver. 37. Vers. 34. And he shall wash his clothes and be clean.] See the note above upon verse 6. Vers. 45. And the leper in whom the plague is, his clothes shall be rent, &c.] Both to testifie their sorrow for sinne, which had provoked God to punish them thus; as also that by this mark they might be known from others, who used to wear long robes or garments close before, &c. And he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, &c.] This was also both to ex∣presse sorrow and shame: for this was one thing that was used by mourners, and those that were dejected. See Ezek. 24. 17. Make no mourning for the dead, bind the tire of thine head upon thee, and put on thy shooes upon thy feet, and cover not thy lips. and Mich. 3. 7. Then shall the seers be ashamed, &c. yea, they shall all co∣ver their lips: also it might distinguish the unclean from the clean, and withall se∣cure the parties whom he met, that they might not be infected with his breath. And shall cry, unclean, unclean.] As bewailing his condition, and giving warn∣ing to those he met to keep aloof from him, Lam. 4. 15. They cried unto them, De∣part ye, it is unclean; depart, depart, touch not, &c. Vers. 46. He shall dwell alone, without the camp shall his habitation be.] And so afterwards without the towns and cities where the Israelites inhabited: for so we reade that as Christ entred into a certain village there met him ten men that were lepers, and stood a farre off, Luke 17. 12. And that when Samaria was straightly shut up and besieged by the Syrians, there were foure leprous men without the citie at the entring in of the gate, 2. King. 7. 3. Even Asariah king of Judah, being stricken with a leprosie, dwelt in a severall house apart by himself unto the day of his death, 2. King. 5. 5. Now hereby they were taught how hatefull to God the spi∣rituall leproie of inne is, and how perilous and infectious to men the company of unclean and wicked persons is. Vers. 50. And shut up it that hath the plague seven dayes.] To see whether it will spread: for then it is a fretting leprosie, verse 51. and the garment must be burnt. Vers. 54. And he shall shut it up seven dayes more.] To see whether upon wash∣ing it will change colour or no: for if the colour were not changed by washing, the garment must be burnt, though it did not spread, verse 55. Because that was a sige that it did fret inward. Vers. 56. Whether it be bare inward or without.] That is, whether the plague be on the inside of the garment, or on the out side.
CHAP. XIV. Vers. 2. THis shall be the law of the leper in the day of his cleansing, &c.] The solemn rites for cleansing the leper were for two ends so ordained of God: 1. To shew how the Lord abhorred the spirituall uncleannesse of sinne, since the leper might not after his pollution be received again into the camp, though healed, without a sacrifice of reconciliation were first offered up for him: 2. That the leper might testifie his thankfulnesse to God who had removed so heavie a judgement from him; whence is that of Christ to the leper he healed, Matth. 8. 4. And Jesus said unto him, See thou tell no man, but go thy way, shew thy self to the priest▪ and offer the gift that Moses commanded for a testimony to them. Vers. 3. And behold, if the plague of the leprosie be healed in the leper.] When God had healed the leprosie, then the priest was to pronounce him clean: and so it is God onely that forgives sinnes; the minister is onely to pronounce according to that which God hath done, nor can absolve any whom God hath not absolved. Vers. 4. Then shall thepriest command to take, &c. two birds alive, and, clean, & cedar-wood, and scarlet, and hysop.] The birds must be clean birds, to wit, either doves or turtles commonly used in sacrifices, or sparrows (as some translate the word here) or any other clean fowls, such as all are save those excepted Levit. 11. 13. &c. Onely they must not be of a tame kind▪ but such as used to fly in the open field, vers. 7. The cedar which the priest here was injoyned to take, was a cedar-stick, which was to be a handle for the sprinkle: and it was to be of cedar-wood (as most conceive) because the nature of this wood is, that it corrupts not, but pre∣serveth other things from putrefaction; and so hereby was signified the perfect hea∣ling of the leprosie, which before corrupted and putrified the body. Yet I rather think there was a respect had (as in the scarlet) to the reddish colour of it, which made it the more suitable for this work, the chief drift whereof was to signifie the cleansing of the sinner by the bloud of Christ: The scarlet was a scarlet thred or lace, used to bind the sprinkle to the cedar-stick: And the hysop was appointed for the sprinkle, being fit for that use; and withall the fragrant smell of this herb might signifie that the evil savour of the leprosie was gone away. Vers. 5. And the priest shall command that one of the birds be killed in an ear∣then vessell over running water.] That is, over an earthen vessell that hath running water in it. And as the bloud of the killed bird signified the bloud of Christ, so the earthen vessell the basenesse and infirmity of the ministers, by whom this bloud is presented unto men in the preaching of the Gospel, 2. Cor. 4. 7. But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power might be of God, and not of us. Now because the bloud of the bird of it self would not have sufficed to dip the living bird and the sprinkle in, therefore it was mixed with water; but it must be the purest and most cleansing water, running water, that is, spring water, because it signified the cleansing of the sinner by Christs bloud, who came not by water onely, but by water and bloud, 1. Joh. 5. 6. Vers. 7. And he shall sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed, &c.] The sprink∣ling of this bloud signified the applying of Christs bloud to the cleansing of the sin∣ner,
which is therefore called the bloud of sprinkling that speaketh better things then that of Abel, Hebr. 12. 24. Why it was done seven times, see the note upon Levit. 4. 6. And shall let the living bird loose into the open field.] The letting of the living bird loose figured the deliverance of Christ from death, Who though he was cruci∣fied through weaknesse, yet he liveth by the power of God, 2. Cor. 13. 4. being put to death in the flesh, but quickned in the spirit, 1. Pet. 3. 18. and of all such as are cleansed from their sinnes by his bloud: and therefore particularly it represented the condition of the leper now cleansed, who being civilly dead and buried, was now as the bird let loose to live amongst his fellows, and restored again to the commu∣nion of Saints. And why was this? by virtue of the bloud of Christ, wherein fi∣guratively he was dipped. Vers. 8. And he that is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, &c.] That no part of the filth issuing from his leprosie might remain upon him he was to wash both his garments and his flesh; and because washing could not sufficiently cleanse the hair of his body, therefore all the hair of his body must be clean shaved off: and this was done the first day of his cleansing; which signified how exactly every one that hath hope of being cleansed by Christ must labour to purifie himself even as he is pure, 1, John 3. 3. And after that he shall come into the camp, and shall tarry abroad out of his tent seven dayes.] That is, after he hath the first time washed himself and shaved off his hair, he shall be admitted into the camp, town or citie, but yet he shall not go into his tent or dwelling-house, but shall tarry abroad, to wit, in some place or house appointed for that purpose, where he was to continue for seven dayes apart by himself; which was, I conceive, because as yet he was not perfectly cleansed, and therefore was not familiarly to converse with others as formerly, no not with them of his own family. Vers. 9. And it shall be on the seventh day, that he shall shave all the hair off his head.] The reiteration of these ceremonies the second time on the seventh day may imply how exactly carefull we should be to cleanse our selves from all filthi∣nesse of sinne, and withall how hardly we are brought either to hate sinne, or ac∣knowledge Gods mercy as we should do. Vers. 10. And on the eighth day he shall take two he-lambs without blemish, and one ew-lamb, &c.] The two he-lambs were the one for a trespasse-offering, verse 12. the other for a burnt-offering, as is evident, verse 19, 20. See also Levit. 1. 10. The ew-lamb was for a sinne-offering, Levit. 4. 32. And three tenth deals of fine flowre for a meat-offering mingled with oyl, and one log of oyl.] These three tenth deals were three homers or pottles, three tenth parts of an ephah or bushell, as is before noted upon Exod. 29. 40. and the log of oyl is commonly thought to be half a pint: the three tenth deals of fine flowre were for accessory meat-offerings for the three sacrifices afore mentioned. Indeed in the fifteenth of Numbers meat-offerings are appointed onely for burnt-offerings and peace-offerings, nor do we any where reade of a meat-offering that was to be joyned either with sinne-offering or trespasse-offering. And besides, where an
offering of fine flowre is injoyned for a sinne-offering, Levit. 5. 11. to wit, to be offered apart by it self, not as accessory to any other sacrifice, they were forbidden to put any oyl upon it, whereas these are appointed to be mingled with oyl: And therefore it seems these sacrifices for the cleansing of the leper had peculiar rites, and were not in all things performed according to the ordinary way of other sacrifices. Vers. 12. And wave them for a wave-offering] See the notes upon Exo∣dus 29. 24. Vers. 1. And he shall slay the lamb in the place, &c.] See the note upon Le∣vit. 1. 11. and upon Levit. 7. 7. Vers. 14. And the priest shall put it upon the tip of the right ear, &c.] Hereby was signified that by virtue of Christs bloud the leper was now restored to his for∣mer freedome of entercourse and commerce with others; as also that the whole man was to be renewed and consecrated to Gods service. See the note upon Exod. 29. 20. Vers. 15. And the prest shall take some of the log of oyl.] The oyl in the hand of the priest fignified the spirit by Christ conveyed unto us. Vers. 16. And sprinkle of the oyl with his finger, &c.] Figuring our consecraion to Gods service by the same spirit. Vers. 17. And the rest of the oyl that is in his hand shall the priest put upon the tip of the right ear, &c.] This signified the sanctification of the whole man by the same spirit. Ʋpon the bloud of the trespasse-offering.] That is, upon the very same place where the bloud was sprinkled. Vers. 20. And the priest shall offer the burnt-offering.] To wit, that other he∣lamb mentioned, vers. 10. Now by these rites the lepers were to professe their thank∣fulnesse to God in and through Christ, as for the cure of their leprosie, so also for the remission of their sinnes (which had brought that judgement upon them) and for their sanctification by his spirit. Vers. 31. And the other for a burnt-offering with the meat-offering.] That is, the meat-offering that was to accompany the turtle dove or young pigeon offered for the burnt-offering: whereby it appears that even the smaller burnt-offerings of turtle doves had also their meat-oferings as well as the greater of lambs, &c. Vers. 36. Then the priest shall command that they all empty the house, &c.] The priest must before he goeth into the house, to view the place in the house sus∣pected of leprosie, command all that are in the house to come forth; and the reason is given, that all that are in the house be not made unclean. Whereby it is evident that though the house had indeed the plague of leprosie, yet the inhabitants that were in the house were not rendred unclean thereby, till the priest had pronounced it to be a leprosie: but then all that came ito the house were thereby unclean. And so it seems therefore it was with men too that were infected with leprosie. No man was unclean by being in the company of a leprous person till the priest had pro∣nounced him to be a leper. Vers. 40. And they shall cast them into an unclean place without the citie.] That by the uncleannesse of the place they may be known to be unclean things, that so oemay be defiled thereby.
Vers. 41. And he shall cause the house to be scraped, &c.] To wit, lest the plague of leprosie should be in any other part of the walls of the house, and being hidden under the plaister should not be discovered. CHAP. XV. Vers. 3. WHether his flesh runne with his issue, or his flesh be stopped from his issue, it is his uncleannesse.] That is, he shall for it be counted unclean. The issue here spoken of which rendred men unclean is that which we call the running of the reins. Now because this disease men have in a different manner (for sometime their seed being of a thinne substance runs continually from them, and sometimes again being of a thicker substance it slows not so freely forth, bu stops in the passage, and so putrifies the place through which it should passe) in both these cases they are declared to be unclean. Now though by this legall pollu∣tion they were taught the filthinesse of all sinne whatsoever, yet more especially I conceive it was to signifie that originall corruption and filthinesse of our nature, which is conveyed unto us in our first conception, by that very seed and substance whereof we are made. Vers. 4. Every bed whereon he lyeth that hath the issue is unclean.] These laws following shew the contagion of sine, which defileth not onely men them∣selves, but every thing besides which a wicked man hath to do with: for unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, Tit. 1. 15. Vers. 12. And every vessll of wood shall be rinsed in water.] That is, of wood, or any other such strong matter, as silver, copper, brasse, &c. Vers. 16. And if any mans seed of copulation go out, &c.] This is not meant of the issue forespoken of, nor when a man lyeth with a woman, whereof vers. 18. but of the seed of the healthfull, issuing by reason of nightly dreams, or any such ac∣cident, whereof see Deut. 23. 10. Vers. 19. And whsoever toucheth her shall be unclean, &c.] To wit, every one that is of years of discretion, and so fit to be ordered by this law. For it is not likely that infants that lay in the arms and sucked on the breasts of their mothers, when they were in this condition, were rendred unclean thereby. Vers. 24. And if any man lie with her at all, &c.] To wit, ignorantly: for if he did it presumptuously, not pollution but cutting off was his punishment, Levit. 20. 18. And if a man shall lie with a woman having her sicknesse, and shall unco∣ver her nakednesse, he hath discovered her fountain, and he hath uncovered the fountain of her bloud, aud both of them shall b cut off from among the people. Yet some conceive that this place is onely meant of lying in the same bed with a woman, and not of carnall copulation. CHAP. XVI. Vers. 1. ANd the Lord spake unto Moses after the death of the two sonnes of Aaron, &c.] That is, upon that occasion, lest they should again en∣danger themselves, by entring into the most holy place, as before by offering strange
fire; and so also within a short time after that happened: for it doth not follow that because the Lord upon that occasion gave this ensuing charge, therefore the laws set down in the former chapters are transposed, and were not given in any interim of time before this. Vers. 2. Speak unto Aaron thy brother, that he come not at all times into the holy place, &c.] That is, not whensoever he pleaseth, but onely once a year, as I have appointed, Exod. 30. 10. namely to minister: at other times both he and his sonnes might and did enter at the taking down of the tabernacle, but not to mini∣ster. And this was thus appointed, first, to teach them to have a most reverend re∣spect of Gods presence; and secondly, that hereby more evidently might be repre∣sented that one particular sacrifice of the sonne of God once offered, as the Apostle hath noted, Heb. 9. 7, 8. But into the second went the high priest alone once every year, not without bloud, &c. The holy Ghost this signifying that the way into the holiest of all was not yet made manifest, while as the first tabernacle was yet stand∣ing; and again, vers. 1, 12. Christ being come an high priest of good things to come by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, &c. by his own bloud he entred in once into the holy place, having obtained eternall redemption for us. For I will appear in the cloud upon the mercy-seat.] This is added as a reason why the high priest might not enter into the most holy place whenever he pleased, but onely once a year, which was on the tenth day of the seventh moneth, and that in the manner as is here appointed, to wit, because the Lord would there appear in the cloud upon the mercie-seat. The conceit of the Papists, That God appeared there in an humane shape upon the mercie-seat, hath no ground for it in the text: Nor do we any where reade that God did ever so appear in the tabernacle either to the high priest or to Moses himself. All that is hee said is, that God would by a cloud upon the mercie-seat testifie his presence; which whether it were the cloud raised by the smoke of the incense, which the high priest was now to bring with him, or any other cloud alwayes abiding upon the mercy-seat, we need not inquire. Sufficient it is that we know hereby that God did testifie his presence, and doubt∣lesse in some glorious manner, upon the mercy-seat, and therefore the high priest might not when he would go in thither, but onely once a year, and then with the smoke of incense ascending from his censer that might darken the glory of that fore∣mentioned sight of Gods presence for the safety of the high priest. Vers. 3. With a young bullock for a sinne-offering, &c.] Namely for himself, vers. 6. But withall we may observe that besides the fire-sacrifices here expressed, he offered also on this day two lambes for the dayly burnt-offering, Numb. 28. 3. and one bullock, one ramme, and seven lambes for a burnt-offering, and one he-goat for a sinne-offering (besides the goat mentioned vers. 5.) as is particularly ex∣pressed, Numb. 29. 7, 8, 11. Here these onely are expressed which concerned the solemnity of his going into the most holy place: the other were sacrifices appointed for the day, and offered in the remainder of the day, when the solemnities which ad respect to his entring into the most holy place were wholly finished. Vers. 4. He shall put on the holy linen coat, &c.] Some Expositours conceive that these holy linen garments here spoken of were those mentioned Exod. 28. 39.
which the high priest wore under his other rich attire, and that together with these here mentioned all his other garments are to be understood also. But because it is ex∣presly said, vers. 23. that when Aaron returned out of the most holy place into the tabernacle of the congregation, he should put off the linen garments, which he put on when he went into the holy place, and should leave them there; therefore I ra∣ther conceive with others that these were other plain linen garments, like those that were made for the inferiour priests, Exod. 39. 27, 28. And that the high priest did wear these onely when he went into the most holy place, as being reserved for this peculiar service, and did therefore put them off again, when he came out from thence, as it is said verse 23. Yet was not this thus ordered, because this day of ex∣piation, when the priest went into the holy of holies, was a fasting day, verse 29, 30. and therefore it was not fit that he should wear now his glorious garments: for after he was come back out of the most holy place, and had put off these linen gar∣ments, verse 23. he put on his other glorious attire, and wore them in the remaining service of the day. But other reasons are given for this by Expositours more proba∣bly: as 1. that it was to teach the people thereby that his rich attire was onely for their sakes, that in them they might behold him as representing the person of the Messiah, richly adorned with all righteousnesse and grace, and not that God was delighted with such rich garments; and so he left them off when he went into the place of Gods speciall presence; and 2. that in this plain attire he might be a fi∣gure of the base estate of Christ upon earth, and how he should without worldly glory perform the work of our redemption. Vers. 6. And Aaron shall offer his bullock of the sinne-offering.] In what time and manner this was done, see vers. 11. Vers. 8. And Aaron shall cast lots on the two goats.] Which signified, that God would accept no sacrifice but what was of his own chusing; and that in the work of our redemption by Christ nothing should be done but what Gods hand and his counsell had determined, Act. 4. 28. Vers. 12. And he shall take a censer-full of burning coals of fire, &c.] Here we see what the high priest was to carry along with him when he went within the vail; to wit, 1. a censer-full of burning coals of fire from off the altar before the Lord, that is, from the altar of incense; and 2. his hands full, that is, two handfull of sweet incense beaten small to burn upon the coals as soon as ever he entred with∣in the vail; and 3. the bloud of the sinne-offerings: for though that be not mentio∣ned here, yet that he carried the bloud along with him is evident, verse 14, & 15. both of the bullock his own sinne-offering, and the goat the peoples sinne-offering. Vers. 13. And he shall put the incense upon the fire, &c.] As the way was pre∣pared into the most holy place by the cloud before the bloud was sprinkled▪ so Christ before he entred with his own bloud into the most holy place of heaven prepared his way by prayer▪ John 17. And this also signified that the incense of Christs prayers and mediation should ascend into heaven before God for his Church, Heb. 9. 24. For Christ is not entred into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. So also Revel. 8. 3, 4. And another angl came and stood at the altar, having
a golden censer, and there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden altar which was before the throne: And the smoke of the incense, which came with the prayers of the Saints, ascend∣ed up before God out of the angels hand. Vers. 13. That the cloud of incense may cover the mercy-seat, &c.] Whereby they were taught how formidable the majesty of God was, and with what reverence we ought to present our selves before him. Vers. 15. Then shall he kill the goat of the sinne-offering, &c.] We must not con∣ceive that he came forth out of the most holy place to kill this goat of the sin-offering for the people, for the bloud of this goat (as it is said here) was also sprinkled before the mercy-seat, and had he gone in once with the bloud of his own sinne-offering, and then came out and killed this goat for a sinne-offering for the people, and gone in again to sprinkle the bloud of that before the mercy-seat, then had he gone in twice on this day within the vail, which is expressely against that of the Apostle, Heb. 9. 7. But into the second went the high priest alone once every year, not with∣out bloud, which he offered for himself and for the errours of the people. These words therefore, then shall he kill the goat of the sinne-offering, do onely intend that he killed the bullock first for himself, vers. 11. and then this goat for the peo∣ple; for both of them were killed before he entred into the most holy place. Vers. 16. And he shall make an atonement for the holy place.] As being defi∣led, though not in it self, yet in regard of the peoples guilt, partly by reason of any unwitting approching to the sanctuary, when they were not legally clean; and partly by reason of all other their sinnes: whereby appears the horrour of sinne: for though the people never went into the holy place, much lesse into the most ho∣ly, yet were the altar, ark, and Sanctuary defiled in the sight of God by their sins, and could not be cleansed without bloud. So our sinnes do defile Gods Church and most holy ordinances, and do, ascend into heaven it self, whereinto we can have no entrance but by bloud. See Heb. 9. 7, 11, 12. Vers. 17. And there shall be no man in the tabernacle of the congregation, &c.] That is, neither of the priests nor people; neither in the holy place nor in the court of the tabernacle: for else why is it said, no man, since the people at no time used to come into the holy place. The reasons of this were two: 1. As by way of chastise∣ment▪ and for their humiliation, they were all excluded from the places and holy things till they were purged from the uncleannesse which they had contracted by their sinnes; 2. Hereby was signified that our high priest Christ should without help of any other perfect the work of our reconciliation with God. Vers. 18. And he shall go out unto the altar that is before the Lord.] That is, the altar of incense. See Exod. 30. 10. Vers. 21. And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat.] This is the onely unbloudy sacrifice which was appointed in the Law; yet was it not, if it be well considered, wholly without bloud: For this and the goat which was killed was indeed but one sacrifice, the one representing Christ dying for our sinnes, the other Christ rising again for our justification, Rom. 4. 25. the one the price paid for our redemption, the other the effect thereof, that God laying our
sinnes upon Christ had removed our sinnes farre away from us. See Psal. 103. 12. As farre as the East is from the West, so farre hath he removed our transgressions from us. Vers. 21. And shall send him away by the hand of a fit man into the wildernesse.] That is, a man who for ability of body, knowledge of the way, and sufficiency for this service was chosen and in readinesse as appointed hereunto. Vers. 22. And the goat shall bear upon him their uniquities unto a land not in∣habited.] That so the place might signifie, that by Christ sinne is removed farre away even from all mankind that will believe in him. Besides, it might signifie that Christ was not onely put to death for our sakes, but also forsaken in a manner of God, cast off and left in a forlorn and comfortlesse condition. Vers. 24. And he shall wash his flesh with water in the holy place.] To wit, be∣cause he had touched the goat upon which the sinnes of the people were laid. The Hebrews say that this washing was not (as at other times) in the laver of brasse, but in some vessell which stood in the Sanctuary, which seems probable, because after this done he is said to come forth that he might offer the burnt-offerings in the court. And put on his garments, &c.] The garments which he was now to put on were his ordinary high priests garments. See the note above upon ver. 4. And the burnt-offerings here appointed to be offered by him were the rammes mentioned ver. 3. and ver. 5. Vers. 26. And he that let go the goat, &c. shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward come into the camp.] Being unclean till the evening is not here mentioned, as I conceive, because it was usually evening ere they return∣ed from these services; or else in these cases they might presently come into the camp to bring back word that▪ they had done what was injoyned. Vers. 29. In the seventh moneth, on the tenth day of the moneth, ye shall afflict your souls, &c.] To wit, by fasting and abstinence from all fleshly delights, as al∣so by the duties of inward humiliation and contrition, and therefore was this day called their fast, Sailing was now dangerous because the fast was now already past, Act. 27. 9. And this we must know was the very same day wherein all those things before mentioned in this chapter were done by the high priest for the expiation of the sinnes of the people, and was therefore called the day of atonement, Levit. 23. 27. Indeed the solemnity of the day began the evening foregoing the tenth day, and therefore it is said Levit. 23. 32. Ye shall afflict your souls on the ninth day of the moneth at even: but the tenth day it was that was allotted for this service. On this day the Jubile was also proclaimed, of which see chap. 20. 8, 9. As likewise for the extraordinary sacrifices of this day, see Numb. 29. 7, 11. CHAP. XVII. Vers. 3. WHat man soever there be of the house of Israel that killth ano, &c.] Namely with an intent of offering it as a sacrifice to the Lord: It is not meant of oxen, lambes, or goats killed for their own private uses,
but onely of killing these beasts for an offering to the Lord, as is expressed in the following words, ver. 4. And bringeth it not unto the doore of the tabernacle, &c. For herein lay the sinne, that they should dare to kill a sacrifice, and not bring it to the priest to be killed by him at the doore of the tabernacle; by forbidding where∣of Israel was taught, 1. to serve God in Christ onely, who is the true tabernacle, Heb. 9. 11. in whom God dwelleth among men, and through whom all our services are made acceptable to God: John 14. 6. I am the way the truth and the life; no man cometh unto the Father but by me; and 2. that no service is acceptable to him but what is performed in his Church and amongst his people. Vers. 4. Bloud shall be imputed to that man, &c.] That is, his sacrifice shall be no more accepted of God then if he slew a man (according to that of the Prophet, Isai. 66. 3. He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man) or rather, he shall be repu∣ted and proceeded against as a murtherer, he shall be esteemed as one that hath shed bloud, & so shall be cut off from among his people. And this happely was the rather ordained, because the bloud of their sacrifices was, as I may say, the ransom of their persons that had sinned, and so shedding of such bloud otherwise then God had ap∣pointed should be accounted as if they had shed the bloud of a man; so strictly were they tied in those times to one place for the killing and offering of all their sa∣crifices. Indeed we reade of many of the Worthies of God that did after this offer up sacrifices in other places, as Samuel in Mispeh, 1. Sam. 7. 9. and in Gilgal, 1. Sam. 11. 15. and in Bethlem, 1. Sam. 11. 2. And David in the floore of Ornan, 2. Sam. 24. 18. and Elias in mount Carmel, 1. King. 18. 22. but that was by ex∣traordinary dispensation from God; ordinarily they were tied to bring their sacri∣fices to the tabernacle, whereas now again under the Gospel we have liberty every where to offer up spirituall sacrifices to God. John, 4. 21, 24. The houre cometh when ye shall neither in this mountain nor yet in Jerusalem worship the Father. God is a spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and truth. So also Mal. 1. 11. From the rising of the sunne, even unto the going down of the same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering, &c. Vers. 5. To the end the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices which they offer in the open field, &c.] That is, which they have been accustomed to offer any where in the open fields. This is added to shew why the Lord had appointed the man to be so severely punished that should kill or offer any sacrifice any where but in the tabernacle, namely that by the severitie of this law they might the better be restrained from the liberty of offering sacrifices in all places, whereto they had here∣tofore been accustomed, and that without sinne, and might be strictly tied to bring all their sacrifices, where ever they dwelt, to the doore of the tabernacle unto the priest; yea even their peace-offerings, which are particularly mentioned in the last clause of this verse: 1. because these were most usuall, and were a kind of feast to the offerer, whence there was most danger lest they should take liberty to kill and make feasts of these sacrifices in their private dwellings; and 2. because naming of the lesse doth the more strongly imply the greater: if they might not offer peace-offerings (which are onely said to be holy) where ever they pleas, much lesse
burnt-offerings which are every where said to be most holy, and therefore are set in the first place, Josh. 22. 26, 27. Therefore we said, Let us now prepare to build us an altar, not for burnt-offering, nor for sacrifice, but that it may be a witnesse be∣tween us and you, &c. Vers. 6. And the priest shall sprinkle the bloud, &c.] This which follows is ad∣ded also to imply why the Lord tied them so strictly to one place for their offering up of sacrifices, namely, that by this means they might be kept in that one uniform way of Gods worship which he had appointed, and not bring in every one their own superstitious devices, which is the next step to idolatry: for that is the mean∣ing of these words, that by being bound to one place the priest would now order all things according to Gods direction; and so they should be a sweet avour ac∣ceptable to the Lord, whereas otherwise being adulterated with mens inventions they would be an abomination unto him. Vers. 7. And they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils.] That is, by the means above named this evil shall be prevented, They shall no more offer to de∣vils. The Hebrew word signifies rough and rugged as hairy goats, because in such shapes the devils sometimes appeared like Satyrs, Esay 34. 14. And indeed to de∣vils did all those Jews and Gentiles sacrifice that sacrificed not by faith in Christ, and in such sort and place as God approved of, Deut. 32▪ 17. They sacrificed to de∣vils not to God, to gods whom they knew not, new gods, &c. 1. Cor. 10. 20. But I say that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, not to God, &c. Now so the Israelites had done both in Egypt, Ezek. 23. 8. Neither left she her whoredomes brought from Egypt, &c. and also now lately in the wildernesse, Exod. 32. when they sacrificed to that idol the golden calf, and in other their secret idolatries, Act. 7. 41. And they made a calf in those days and offered sacrifice un∣to the idol, and rejoyced in the work of their own hands: Then God turned and gave them up to worship the host of heaven, as it is written in the book of the Pro∣phets; O ye house of Israel, have ye offered to me slain beasts and sacrifices by the space of fourty years in the wildernesse? and therefore are they said to sacrifice to devils, as Jeroboams idols are also called devils, 2.  11. 15. And he appointed him priests for the high places, and for the devils, &c. and Antichrists likewise, Revel. 9. 20. And the rest of the men which were not killed by those plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship de∣vils, &c. Vers. 8. And thou shalt say unto them, Whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel or of the strangers, &c.] Here the former law is extended to strangers also, namely, such as were turned to the religion and church of the Israelites; and with∣all this also is expressed, that as the sacrifice might not be killed, ver. 3. so neither might it be offered without the Sanctuary though it were killed therein. Vers. 10. I will set my face againct that soul that eateth bloud, and will cut him off from among his people,] To wit, though by partiality or other means he escape the hand of the magistrate. See the notes upon Gen. 9. 4. Vers. 11. For the life of the flesh is in the bloud, and I have given it to you up∣on the altar, &c.] That is, I have set it apart for a better imployment then for food,
and therefore in reference to that spirituall imployment it must not be eaten at all. Vers. 13. Whatsoever man there be of the children of Israel, or of the stranger that sojourneth among you which hunteth & catcheth, &c. It is particularly pressed in this place, that even when by hunting or otherwise they did catch any beast or fowl that might be eaten, that is, that might lawfully be eaten, though at such times men used to be in great haste and to take great liberty to themselves, they must let out the bloud thereof, and cover it with dust, before they eat the flesh thereof, and much more when at more leisure they killed any beast at home for their own parti∣cular use. Now this covering of the bloud with dust was injoyned, not onely to make sure that it might not be eaten, but also happely, first, to shew a reverent regard of the life of the beast, by burying the bloud, which was the seat of the life, with a kind of onour (for buiall is honourable, Eccles. 6. 3. An untimely birth is better then he that lives many years, and wen he dyeth hath no buriall) and secondly, to im∣ply the lawfulnesse of killing the creatures in this manner for the covering of teir bloud might signifie that it should not be imputed unto them, as appears by those places where the not covering of the bloud implyes the contrary, as Job 16. 18. O earth cover thou not my bloud! and Ezek. 24. 7. 8. For her bloud is in the midst of her, she set it upon the top of a rock, she pourd it not upon the grund to cover it with dust, that it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance, &c. Vers. 15. And every soul that eateth that which dyed of it self, &c.] This must be understood of him that did eat any such thing ignorantly, in which case he was also to bring those sacrifices appointed Levit. 5. For he that willingly offend∣ed herein was liable to a greater punishment, &c. And the strangers here mentioned are such as were converted to the faith, and joyned to the Church of Israel, for other strangers in Israel might eat these things. See that place Deut. 14. 21. Ye shall not eat of any thing that dyeth of it self; thou shalt give it unto the stranger, &c. CHAP. XVIII. Vers. 3. AFter the doings of the land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, ye shall not do, &c.] That is, you must not think their doings a warrant for you whom I have chosen as a peculiar people to my self: the rule is generall, but the in∣tent is thence to inferre the necessity of their obeying these particular laws concer∣ning unlawfull marriages that do immediately follow. And withall a reason is im∣plyed of the giving these laws, to wit, let the Isralites should be corrupted by that they had seen in Egypt, and should see in Canaan. Vers. 5. Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgements, which if a man do he shall live in them.] This is in it self the voice of the law, and propounded to them a way of righteousnesse and life, which man by reason of his frailty and co∣ruption was never able to attain, as S. Paul saith alluding to this place, Rom. 10. 5. Moses describeth the righteousnesse which is of the law, that the man that doth thse things shall live by them. But therefore we must know that God did not pro∣pound this to the Israelites, as intending that they should thereby be justified and saved or not at all, but much as Christ propounded it to that rich man, Matth. 19. 17.
If thou wilt enter into life keep the commandments: namely, first, to discover unto them how weak and unable they were to obtain life in this way, and so to beat them off from all confidence in their own works; secondly, to make them know that this obedience which God required of them was a due debt, and must be paid either by them or by their surety; thirdly, to bring them hereupon to look out after a Medi∣atour, and so the law was a schoolmaster to bring them unto Christ that they might be justified by faith; and fourthly, as including a promise of life even to the evan∣gelicall desire and endeavour of believers to keep all the laws and commandments of God. Vers. 6. None of you shall approch to any that is near of kin to him to uncover their nakednesse.] That is, to lie with them carnally, yea though it be under pre∣tence of marriage; yet withall whatever immodest carriage is contrary to the re∣spect we ought to bear to such as are thus nearly allied to us is also by consequence forbidden too. But by near kin is onely meant such near kindred as are afterwards particularly expressed: for else how should we know how farre this prohibition were to reach? Vers. 7. The nakednesse of thy father or the nakednesse of thy mother thou shalt not uncover.] Some by discovering the nakednesse of the father here understand that the daughter should not lie with the father: but I find the act of uncovering still ascribed to the male; and indeed it were a very improper speech to use the phrase concerning the woman. The words therefore are rather to be understood thus: In the beginning of this verse the law is given that man should not lie neither with his fathers wife (for that is meant here by the fathers nakednesse) nor with his own mother; in the next clause of this verse the reason of the last is given, be∣cause it was a thig odious in nature to uncover the nakednesse of a mans own mo∣ther, she is thy mother, &c. In the next verse the first is confirmed, he must not lie with his fathers wife, because it is his fathers nakednesse, which doth evidently explain this. The husband and the wife are both one flesh, and therefore whoever uncovereth the nakednesse of his fathers wife doth all one as if he did uncover his fathers nakednesse. Vers. 9. The nakednesse of thy sister, the daughter of thy father, &c.] That is, thou shalt not marry not lie with thy sister, whether she be the daughter of thy father and mother both, or the daughter of thy mother onely (for here the Lord speaks onely of sisters by the same venter, of sisters by a mother in law he speak vers. 11.) Whether she be born at home or abroad, that is, whether the sister be law∣fully born at home in marriage, or unlawfully abroad by fornication: for his fa∣thers and mothers bastard that is begotten out of marriage is his sister, and there∣fore he might not uncover her nakednesse. Vers. 10. The nakednesse of thy sonnes daughter, &c.] And so other of further descent: how much more then his next daughter, though she be not named? Vers. 11. The nakednesse of thy fathers wives daughter, &c.] That is, the daughter of thy father, not the daughter of thy mother. See above vers. 9. Vers. 16. Thou shalt not uncover the nakednesse of thy brothers wife.] To wit, except in that speciall case, when a man deceasing without children his nex bro∣thr
by an expresse exception of the law, Deut. 25. was to marry the wife of the deceased, and to raise up ee unto his brother, as Onan the sone of Judah did, Gen. 38. 8. Vers. 18. Neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister to vex her, &c.] This is all one with one wife to another, as it is translated in the margin of our Bibles, as Ezek. 1. 9. the wings of the beast are said to touch a woman to her sister (as it is directly in the Hebrew words) that is, one another. Though the ordinary exposi∣tion be that this is meant of sisters, that man having married any woman must not afterward marry her sister to vex her, &c. yet these reasons so farre sway me, that I cannot but understand it of any two women: First, because incest with sisters is above forbidden, vers. 9. 11. Secondly, because polygamie is no where else forbidden if not here, unlesse to the King, Deut. 17. 16. Thirdly, because the following words cannot, unlesse extremely forced, be brought to agree with that exposition of sisters; for would not the marriage of her husband with another woman vex her as much as with her sister? happely more. And why is it added in her life? as if it were lawfull for a man to marry his wives sister after his wives decease: those things winne me to think that it is meant of any two women. Vers. 19. Also thou shalt not approch unto a woman to uncover her nakednesse as long as she is put apart, &c.] To wit, though she be thy lawfull wife. Vers. 21. And thou shalt not let any of thy seed passe through the fire to Molech.] Molech was an idol worshipped by the Ammonites and other heathen, called also Moloch, Amos 5. 26. But ye have born the tabernacle of your Moloch: and is thought of some to be the starre Saturn, the highest; or the Sunne, the chief of the Planets, thence called the starre of your God, Amos 5. 26. And it is derived of Melech, which signifies a Prince or King. It is thought by many to b the same idol that is ordinarily in Scripture called Baal, which they gather by compa∣ring together 2. Kings 23. 10. And he defiled Topheth which is in the valley of the children of Hinnom, that no man might make his sonne or his daughter to passe through the fire to Molech. Jer. 19. 5. They built also the high places of Baal, to burn their sonnes with fire for burnt-offerings unto Baal, &c. chap. 7. 31. And they have built the high places of Tophet, which is in the valley of the sonne of Hinnom, to burn their sonnes & their daughters in the fire, &c. & chap. 32. 35. Now to this idol they caused their children to passe through the fire two wayes: for some burned them to death, or at least killed them, and then burnt them on their altars: for so it is said of Ahaz, 2. Chron. 28. 3. He burnt incense in the valley of Hin∣nom, and burnt his children in the fire. &c. and of the Israelites in generall, Psal. 106. 37, 38. They sacrificed their sonnes and their daughters unto devils, and shed innocent bloud. But some onely made them to go through between two fires, as a signe of their consecration. This sinne is here forbidden amongst whoredomes and incests, because as all idolatry is spirituall fornication, so this especially, because their seed was here given away unlawfully, which i therefore called a going a whoring after Molech, Levit. 20. 3, 5. But though this idol be here named, yet under this the like wicked service to any idol is forbidden. Nithr shalt thu profane the name of thy God.] This is added as a reason
why in the foregoing law they were forbidden to let their seed passe thorow the fire to Molech, to wit, because it would be a vild profanation of Gods holy name, and that first, in regard it would be an horrible vilifying of the Lord God to for∣sake him, and yield such onour to such a base idol-god; and secondly, because horrible wickednesse in a people called by his name, that is, called the people and servants of God, would be a dishonour to God, and would cause the name of God to be blasphemed even among the Gentiles. Vers. 24. For in all these the Nations are defiled which I cast out before you.] That is, with all these incestuous mixtures the Canaanites defiled themselves, and so provoked me to cast them out of the land; and therefore take you heed that you do not provoke me by the same sinnes. Now hereby it is manifest that all the seve∣rall sorts of incest before mentioned are sinnes against the law and light of nature▪ because the Lord abhorred the heathen that had no other law, and punished them so severely for these very sinnes. Vers. 26. Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgements.] The mention of Gods statutes here doth intimate what a shame it would be for them that had the light of the word, to walk in these evil courses, whereinto the heathen fell because they lived in darknesse. CHAP. XIX. Vers. 3. YE shall fear every man his mother and his father.] Because the mo∣ther is usually most despised, the Lord injoyns the fear of the mother in the first place. And keep my Sabbaths.] Because the commandment for sanctifying Gods Sabbaths is directed to the fathers and mothers of the family, who are to take care that children and servants profane not Gods holy day, therefore the charge for fear∣ing mother and father is here prefixt bfore this of sanctifying the Sabbath: The meaning is, that children and servants must have such an awfull fear of their supe∣riours as willingly to be guided by them according to Gods word in the matter of sanctifying Gods Sabbaths, and not to resist them in it. Vers. 6. It shall be eaten the same day ye offer it, and on the morrow.] That is, if it were a peace-offering for a vow or a freewill-offering; otherwise if it were for a thanksgiving, it was to be eaten the same day, Levit. 7. 15. And the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace-offering for thanksgiving shall be eaten the same day that it is offered, he shall not leave any of it untill the morning. And so that which was left of the one was to be burnt the second day, and that which was left of the other upon the third; which must needs make them more willing to call the poore to eat with them of their peace-offerings, because the remainders might not be reserved for themselves but were to be burnt. Vers. 11. Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to another.] Though all lying be here forbidden, yet principally all lying whereby men are de∣frauded of their right, either in buying or selling, or otherwise. Vers. 12. And ye shall not swear by my name falsely.] Next after the Law against
all false dealing in defrauding this is here inserted, because by perjry men use to help forward their false dealing. Nether shalt thou profane the name of thy God.] To wit, nether by perjury nor vain swearing. Vers. 14. Thou shalt not urse the deaf, &c.] Under these particulars of cursing the deaf, and laying a stumbling-block before the blind, there is also forbidden all other injuries done to men in confidence that the parties injured shall not be able to know who wronged them, and so not have power to defend or right themselves; yea even the putting of stumbling-blocks before the consciences of men, and that because the Lord will plead the cause of those that are thus wronged, which is im∣plyed in the last words, but shalt fear the Lord thy God: as if he had said, Let the fear of God in these cases restrain thee, though the deaf and blind need not be feared. Vers. 16. Neither shalt thou stand against the bloud of thy neighbour.] Though the doing of any thing against the life of our neighbour is here forbidden, yet the evil principally here forbidden is the standing up in courts of Justice to take away a mans life, either as a false accuser, or a false witnesse: and the rather is this sub∣joyned to the foregoing Law, Thou shalt not go up and down as a tale-barer a∣mong thy people, because tale-bearing doth usually tend, as in Doegs example we may see, to derprive men of their lives, according to that of the Prophet, Ezek. 22. 9. In thee are men that carry tales to shed bloud. Vers. 17. Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart; thou shalt in any wise rebuke, &c.] That is, when any man hath wronged you in any thing, you shall not go away and closely nourish hatred in your hearts against them, or secretly carry tales of them to others, and in the mean season never open your mouths to them that did the wrong; but quite contrary, you shall in a brotherly manner rebuke them for the evil they have done, that so you may reclaim them from those evil wayes. This I conceive is the drift of this precept: yet withall it may imply that he that doth not rebuke his brother when he sees him do amisse, doth indeed hate him and not love him, and that because he suffers him to runne on in his sinne, and seeks not his amendment. Vers. 18. But thou shalt love thy brother as thy self.] This clause, as thy self, doth not denote an exact and perfect equality of love, but a certain proportion of likenesse: it doth not bind men to love their neighbour with the same degree of love, but 1. that they should no more desire or seek the hurt of their neighbour then of themselves; 2. that they should endeavour to do all good to their neighbour as to themselves; and 3. that they should love their neighbour in the same manner, heartily, sincerely, constantly as they love themselves. This expression therefore is not unlike that, Joh. 17. 21. where our Saviour prayed that all true believers might be one with him and his father, as thou father art in me, and I in thee, which doth not impart the same union, but onely a likenesse of union. Vers. 19. Ye shall keep my statutes.] This is repeated and prefixed here, to shew that the ordinances following must not be neglected though seeming slight, be∣cause even these also were Gods statutes. Thou shalt not let thy cattle gender with a diverse kind.] Of this Law there may
be two reasons: one naturall, to teach his people not in vanity or curiosity of mind to alter the shape or nature of the creatures, or seem to make more then God created; another mysticall, to teach them how God did hate both mixture of persons, I mean the children of God with infidels, as also all mixtures of religions, and of mans de∣vices with Gods ordinances, and whatsoever hypocrisie or corruption of manners is contrary to that sincerity and simplicity which God requires in his children; and this also was intended in the following prohibitions, against sowing their fields with mingled seed. Vers. 20. Whosoever lieth carnally with a woman that is a bondmaid bet rothed, &c. she shall be scourged.] And so consequently the man also, as being both equally guilty: And indeed, in the Hebrew, there shall be a whipping, which may have re∣ference to both: because she was a bondwoman a lighter punishment is inflicted; for had she been either born or been made free, both should have been put to death, Deut. 22. 23▪ 34. Thus still the Lord debaseth bond-servants, to teach his children to hate the bondage of sinne. Vers. 21. And he shall bring his trespasse-offering▪ &c.] Both for himself and the servant with whom he committed uncleannesse, if she were an Israelite. But be∣cause the man onely is appointed to bring a trespasse-offering, this seems to imply the former Law was meant of heathen bondwomen, which might not bring an offering. Vers. 23. And when ye shall come into the land, and shall have planted all manner of trees for food, then ye shall count, &c.] The first-fruit that grew upon young trees newly planted was for the first three years to be accounted as uncircum∣cised, and not to be eaten, that is, they were to be cut or plucked off betimes, and cast away as an unclean thing▪ even as the fore-skinnes of men in circumcision were cut off and cast away as unclean. And though herein they were taught to benefit themselves in way of husbandry, because if a young tree be suffered to bear fruit too soon, neither will the fruit ever be good, nor will the tree indure so long, this over∣early fruit drawing away the nourishment which should make the root and tree strong; yet chiefly I conceive it was thus ordained for religious respects, as 1. be∣cause the first-frit was to be consecrate to God, to whom it was fit the best should be given; and at the best they use not to be till after three or foure years bearing: and 2. to shew that through the contagion of sinne all things are rendred unclean to us, Tit. 1. 15. To them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, so that we have no right to eat of them till by Christ, the seed promised in the circum∣cision, they be rstored as pure to us again, and untill they be sanctified by the word of God and prayer, 1. Tim. 4. 5. Vers. 24. But in the fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be holy, &c.] That is, they shall be given the priests as first-fruits. See Numb. 18. 12, 13. Vers. 25. And in the fifth year shall ye eat of the fruit thereof, that it may yield you the increase thereof.] That is, abundantly. For this last clause hath refe∣rence to the whole foregoing Law concerning the first fruit of trees, to wit, that if they did pluck off and cast away the fruit for three years as uncircumcised and un∣clean, and give the fruit of the fourth year to the Lord, and then on the fifth year
and not till then gather fruit and eat it themselves, the Lord would cause the land to yield the fruit thereof in such abundance, as in other things, so also in the fruit of their trees, that they should have no cause to repent themselves that in obedience to Gods command they had deprived themselves of the fruit of the first foure years. Vers. 27. Ye shall not round the orners of your heads, neither shalt thou marre the corners of thy beard.] It is not easie t determine what is meant by rounding the corners of their heads and marring the corners of their beards. Some conceive that by rounding the corners of their heads, was meant the polling of their heads with round curled locks, after a nice and effeminate manner: and by marring the corners of their beards, the shaving away their beards, as if they affected to be like women: and so they conceive the drift of this Law in both particulars is to forbid all effeminate delicacie and quaintnesse in the trimming of their heads, and shaving of their beards, after the manner and custome of the heathen. Again others hold that by rounding the corners of their heads, and marring the corners of their beards, is meant the cutting off the locks of their heads, and the hair of their beards, that they might offer them to Idol-Gods, as most certain it is the heathen used to do. But last of all others determine that hereby is meant the shaving off the hair of their heads and beards when they were in mourning and extreme heavinesse: And in∣ded this was a custome amongst the heathen: whence is that, Isai. 15. 2. Moab shall howl over Nebo, and over Medeba: on their heads shall be baldnesse, and e∣very beard cut off; and that Jerem. 48. 37. Every head shall be bald, and every beard clipped. And the more probable this opinion seems, because the heathenish customes here forbidden are joyned together with those in the following verse of cutting their flesh, &c. when they mourned for the dead, chap 21. 5. They shall not make bald∣nesse upon their head, nether shall they shave off the corners of their beard, nor make any cutting in their flesh. Vers. 28. Ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead.] As the heathen used to disfigure themselves both by cutting and shaving their hair, espe∣ially in their mourning; so also they used to cut and lance themselves, Jer. 16 6. 2. Reg. 18. 28. and to imprint marks upon their flesh, cutting themselves and then filling up the place with ink or some other colou, that the marks thereof might re∣main: all which customes God here forbids his people to take up, both because they were the desperate effects of immoderate mourning, as also because they were the customes of idolaters, let conforming themselves to idolaters in these things, they should also grow to a conormity with them in their idolatrous worshipping of false Gods. Vers. 30. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths and reverence my Sanctuary.] That is, ye shall esteem of it as of the house which I have chosen to be my dwelling-place, that accordingly you may be carfull to come thither with an inward aw and fear of my presence; and not to approch to it in your uncleannesse, or any other way to pol∣lute it. To the commandment of sanctifying Gods Sabbaths this of reverencing his Sanctuary is joyned, because the Sabbaths were the chief times whereon they reor∣ted to the Sanctuary. Vers. 32. Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head.] Under this all honour de to them is included.
Vers. 36. Just ballances, just weights, a just epha, &c.] Concerning the E∣phah, see chap. 5. 11. and concerning the Hin, see Exod. 29. 40. And know we must that under these the most usuall measures all other measures are comprehended. CHAP. XX. Vers. 2. AGain thou shalt say to the children of Israel, Whosoever he be of the children of Israel, &c.] Here the punishments are appointed for the transgression of thoe Laws delivered n the former chapter. Vers. 3. And I will set my face against that man, &c.] That is, if any ma shall sacrifice his children to that idol Molech, and his sinne be not known, or can∣not be sufficiently proved against him in a judiciall way, or that you neglect to pu∣nish him, and through conivence forbear to proceed against him according to the former Law, then will I set my self against that man to destroy him and cut him off. And the reason is added, Because he hath given of his seed unto Molech to defile my Sanctuary, and to profane my holy name. Now these that sacrificed their children to Molech are said to defile Gods Sanctuary. 1. Because generally the Land was defiled, and so the Sanctuary being in the midst of them was polluted by this, as by other their innes, from which it was therefore purged upon the day of expia∣tion, chap 16. 16. 2. Because it was a horrible profanation of Gods Sanctuary, that men defiled with such abominable innes▪ as idolatry and bloud-shed, and that too of their own children, should yet come into Gods Sanctuary: 3. Because it was a vild debasing and contempt of Gods Sanctuary, that they should forsake that to go and sacrifice in the valley of Tophet to that idol Molech. Why they are said also to profane Gods holy name, is noted before, chap. 18. 21. Vers. 5. Then will I set my face against that man, and against his familie, &c.] That is, his poterity or kindred. The word in the originall is sometime translated kindred, Gen. 24. 38. But thou shalt go unto my fathers house, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my sonne: Sometimes it is meant of the whole people of Israel, because they came all from one stock, as Jer. 8. 3. And death shall be chosen ra∣ther then life by all the residue of them that remain of this evil familie; and Micah 2. 3. Thereore thus saith the Lord, Beold against this familie do I devise an evil, from which ye shall not remove your necks. It is here used, because they of his own family and kindrd were most likely to be partiall and to follow his example; but all are here threatned, that either by solicitation, or defending and excusing them, or by not accusing them, that is winking at their sinne, shall further their escaping de∣served punishment, as likewise all that should tread in his steps, and go awhoring after Molech as he had done. Vers. 6. I will even set my face against that soul, and will cut him off from among his people.] That is, if you do not punish him according to that Law before given, Exod. 22. 18. Tho shalt not suffer a witch to live. Ver. 9. For every one that curseth his father or his mother shall surely be put to death.] This word, for, hath reference to the foregoing exhortation, sanctiie your selves and be ye holy, &c. and it must be extended also to all the paricular pe∣nall
statutes, that follow in this chapter: as if it had been said, For if you do not sanctifie your selves, and keep my statutes, behold thus and thus, as you shall now hear, have I in all those following particulars appointed you to be punished. The Law that is first here delivered is for the putting of him to death that curseth his father or his mother, which is not meant of every wayward word, but of such revi∣ling speeches as they might plainly perceive proceeded from a manifest contempt of their parents, of which see Exod. 21. 17. By what manner of death they were to die, it is not expressed: Some conceive that because stoning is appointed both in the beginning and end of the chapter, as may be seen ver. 2. and ver. 27. therefore in all other places of this chapter where no other kind of death is expressed this of stoning is intended. But however in this particular of children that cursed their parents, we may the rather think it was so, because elsewhere this kind of death is appoint∣ed for rebellious children, Deut. 21. 20, 21. His bloud shall be upon him.] That is, he is the cause of his own death: which is added to shew that however men may think this Law too severe, yet he hath de∣served this punishment, and must therefore undergo it. Ver. 10. He that committet adultery with his neighbours wife, the adulterer and the adulteresse shall surely be put to death.] Namely by stoning, as it may pro∣bably be gathered from these places, Deut. 22. 22, 23, 24. If a damsell that is a virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and a man find her in the citie, and lie with her: Then ye shall bring them both unto the gate of the citie, and ye shall stone them with stones that they die: and so also Deut. 16. 38, 40. and John 8. 4, 5. The words of this Law are onely expresse for the adultery of the wife, and so they are also, Deut. 22. 23, 24. Nor do we any where reade, that the husband breaking the cove∣nant of marriage, by lying with a single woman, was punished with death: and that because the adultery of the wife in some degrees is more injurious to the hus∣and, by causing him to father a bastard brood. Vers. 14. And if a man take a wife and her mother, t is wickednesse; they shall be burnt with fire, both he and they.] That is, the man, and both mother and daughter married to him, if both consented to this wickednesse; or either of them indifferently, whether mother or daughter, that is taken to the other. And the seve∣rity of the punishment was to shew the ainousnesse of the sinne. Vers. 15. And if a man lie with a beast▪ he shall surely be pt to death: and ye shall say the beast.] Both to shew how horrible and detestable that fact was, as likewise that the ight of such a beast (being unfit for other imployments also, for no man would willingly keep such an one) might not bring to remembrance so filthy a sin. Vers. 16. They shall surely be put to death, their bloud shall be upon them.] That is, both the woman and the man before spoken of that are found guilty of this unnaturall sinne of beastiality. Vers. 17. And if a man shall take his sister, &c.] In this law concerning the punishment of incest between the brother & the sister, there is mention made of their seeing one▪anothers nakednesse, whereby either nothing else is intended but what in other Laws is called uncovering their nakednesse; or else because this might hap∣pen, this is added to shew the hainousnesse of the sinne, and how justly it is appoint∣ed
to be punished with death. The manner of their death is not expressed (and therefore happely that was left to the Magistrate, or else it was stoning, as is noted before upon ver. 9.) onely it is said, they shall be cut off in the sight of their people, whereby is intended that they were immediately to be put to death, and that openly, for a warning to others; and that if the Magistrate should forbear to cut them off, then the Lord himself would do it. Vers. 18. And if a man shall lie with a woman having her sicknesse, &c.] That is, if he doth it wittingly: for if he did it unwittingly he was onely rendred unclean thereby, and was to be purified, and to make an atonement for himself ac∣cording to the direction of other Laws. Vers. 19. They shall bear their iniquities.] That is, they shall be cut off: for the punihment of incest being expressed in other places, here it suffices to expresse their guiltinesse. Vers. 20. They shall bear their inne, they shall die childlesse.] That is, they shall presently be put to death. Here the phrase is thus carried, to shew that one reason why the Lord appointed such to be cut off was, that the Land might not be filled with the issue of such unclean mixture. CHAP. XXI. Vers. 1. THere shall none be defiled for th dead among his people.] That is, none of the inferiour priests shall by reason of mourning for the dead defile themselves, to wit, by touching their dead bodies, or being in the house where their dead bodies were, or coming nigh them, ad so consequently being present at their funeralls, &c. And severall reasons may be given why this was forbidden: 1. that they might not too frequently be thereby disabled from attending the work of their priely office; 2. that hereby it might be seen, that there was a higher degree o holinesse required in the priests then in the rest of the people; 3. that they might be the clearer types of the Messias, who should be so exactly holy; 4. that their re∣faining to mourn might be a reall inruction to the people of the hope of the re∣surrection; and 5. to teach us what purity is required in those that are by Christ made priests unto God, Rev. 1. 6. Vers. 2. But for his kinne that is near to him, that is, for his mother, and for his father, &c.] Amongst others here expressed for whom the priests might defile themselves, the brother is one. But why then were Eleazar and Ithamar the sonnes of Aaron forbidden to bewail the death of Nadab and Abihu their brethren, Lev. 10. 6. Uncover not your heads, neither rend your clothes let you die, &c. I answer, that charge was extraordinary and peculiar: 1. Because hereby they were required to testifie their submission to that severe proceeding of the Lord against their bre∣thren; and 2. Because they were newly that day entred upon the execution of their priestly office, for which it was not therefore fit they should disable themselves by defiling themselves with the dead, there being no other priests at that time to do the work in their stead. Vers. 3. And for his sister a virgin that is nigh unto him, &c.] That i, his
own sister by father or mother, if unmarried; but if she were married, he might not be a mourner at her buriall to defile himself thereby, because she was then trans∣planted into another familie. Vers. 4. But he shall not defile himself, being a chief man among his people, to profane himself.] Some reade this place as it is in the margin of our Bibles, But being a husband among his people he shall not defile himself for his wife, &c. and then the sense must be, that though the priests might defile themselves for those their nearest kindred, mentioned in the former verses, yet they might not defile themselves for their wives. But the wife being nearer to the husband then the nearest of his kindred can be, it is hard to say why the priests should be allowed to defile themselves for their near kindred and not for their wives: and farre more probably we may conceive that by allowing them to mourn for their near kindred, their defiling themselves for their wives is implyed as farre more necessary; which also we may the rather think, because to Ezekiel, being a priest, this is given in charge as a strange and unusuall thing, that he should not mourn for his wife when she dyed, Ezek. 24. 16, &c. and hence it is that few approve of this translation. But reading it then, as it is in the text of our Bibles, But he shall not defile himself, being a chief man among his people, to profane himself, all the difficulty lies in knowing what is meant here by being a chief man among his people: concerning which I find three severall opinions of Expositours. For first, some understand it of the high priest, that being a chief man, that is, the high priest, he might not defile himself, no not for his nearest kindred; which they say is afterwards more fully expressed vers. 10. But because the laws against the high priests mourning are afterwards set down by themselves, I think it very improbable that this should be meant of the high priest. Secondly, some understand by a chief man here the master or chief man of the house or family, where there is a dead corps to be buried; and so take the meaning of the words to be this, That no priest should defile himself for any but for his near kin∣dred before mentioned, no though he were the chief man or master of the familie where they dyed. And thirdly, some by a chief man understand any of the priests, and conceive the meaning of this place to be, that though none of the people were allowed to defile themselves for the dead so as to profane themselves, that is, after the profane manner of the heathen, according to that Law, chap. 19. 18. yet the priest especially might not do it, being a chief man among his people. So that accor∣ding to this interpretation, the emphasis of this prohibition lies in these words, to profane himself. The inferiour priests might defile themselves for their nearest kin∣dred, but yet not so as to profane themselves, to wit, after the manner of the heathen, by making baldnesse upon their heads, &c. as it is expressed in the following verse: though none of the people might do this, yet not the priest especially, being a chief man among his people. Vers. 5. They shall not make baldnesse upon their heads, &c.] That is, when they did mourn for their kindred. See chap 19. 28. Vers. 6. For the offering of the Lord made by fire, and the bread of their God they do offer. See the note upon chap 13. 11. The word and here is not in the originall: so that by the bread of their God is meant both the sacrifices burnt
upon the altar, and the heave-offerings, which were the priests portion: and they are so called, partly because they were offered upon the altar, the table of the Lord, Mal. 11. 12. and partly because they were eaten by the priests of the Lord. Vers. 7. They shall not take a wife that is a whore or profane.] That is, neither a common whore, nor a woman whose chastity had been violated, though she did not as a common whore prostitute her self. Some also conceive that under this word, profane, all those were forbidden to be taken in marriage by the priests, that were for any other cause of ill name and basely esteemed, as a bastard, or one that was of light behaviour; yea it seems that they might not marry a widow, un∣lesse she were a priests widow: For so it is expressely said, Ezek. 44. 22. They shall take maydens of the seed of the house of Israel, or a widow that had a priest before. Now all this was to maintain in the people an high opinion of the dignity of the priesthood, and that they might be the fitter to be types of Christ. Neither shall they take a woman put away from her husband.] That is, divorced, nd not for the cause of adultery, which to the Israelites was permitted under Moses Law, Deut. 24. 1, 2. but it was for the hardnesse of their hearts, as our Saviour saith, Matth. 19. 8. Vers. 8. Thou shalt sanctifie him therefore, &c.] That is, thou Moses, thou shalt command him thus to be sanctified, Exd. 19. 10. And the Lord said unto Moses, Go unto th people, and sanctifie them to day and to morrow, &c. or else it is an Apostrophe to the people, that they should, as much as in them lay, take care that the priests did thus carry themselves as holy persons. Vers. 9. She shall be burnt with fire.] Other persons were not put to death for sim∣ple fornication, neither the man nor woman, Exod. 22. 16, 17. And if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall surely endow her to be his wife. If her father utterly refuse to give her unto him, he shall pay money accor∣ding to the dowry of Virgins: onely the priests daughter, because of the dishonour done to her fathers house, is appointed here to be burnt; and it may well be thought by the rule of Analogy the same punishment was to be inflicted on the priests wife, if not his sonnes, when guilty of the same sinne. Vers. 10. And he that is the high priest among his brethren, upon whose head the anointing oyl was poured, and that is consecrated to put on the garments, shall not uncover his head, &c.] Either therefore the uncovering of the head was it seems then an expression of mourning, though afterward a contrary custome was used, to wit, when they mourned to cover their heads; or else that which is forbid∣den the high priest here is, that he should not take off his miter to the end he might put on a covering on his head after the fashion of mourners, as it is noted before, chap. 10. 6. Vers. 12. Neither shall he go out of the Sanctuary, nor profane the Sanctuary of his God.] That is, he shall not go out of the Sanctuary to mourn for his nearest dead friends, because this forsaking of the Sanctuary and the service thereof would be a kind of vilifying of Gods Sanctuary and service; and if he should return again from his dead friends into the Sanctuary, this would be a manifest defiling and pro∣faning of the Sanctuary.
For the crown of the anointing oyl of his God is upon him.] That is, because be∣ing the anointed high priest, and so advanced above the rest of the priests, he may not doe that which the other priests may doe. The oyl of anointing poured upon the high priests head is here called the crown of the anointing oyl, both because by that anointing he was separated to a place of speciall dignity above his brethren, and also because therein he was a type of Christs royall priesthood; yet withall happely this phrase may be used with respect had to the plate of pure gold, fastened to the miter, which was upon the high priests head when he was anointed, and is called the holy crown, Exod. 29. 6, 7. Thou shalt put the miter upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the miter: then shalt thou take the anointing oyl and poure it upon his head, and anoint him. Vers. 13. And he shall take a wife in her virginity.] And so the high priests wife was a figure of the church, which is to be chast, pure, holy, 2. Cor 11. 2. I have esposed you to one husband, that I may present you as a chast virgin to Christ. Rev. 14. 4. These are they which were not defiled with women: for they are vir∣gins: These are they which follow the lamb whithersoever he goeth. Vers. 14. But he shall take a virgin of his own people to wife.] That is, of the Israelites, not of any other nation, though a virgin, Ezek. 44. 22. They shall take maidens of the seed of the house of Israel, or a widow that had a priest before. Some would have a virgin of his own people to be a virgin of his own tribe; but it is evident that the high priest was not bound to marry to none but to the tribe of Levi, for Jehoshubeath the daughter of King Jehoram was the wife of Jhoida, 2. Chron. 22. 1. Vers. 15. Neither shall he profane his seed among his people.] That is, he shall not by marrying any of these here forbidden render his sonnes unfit for the priestly office. So that this is added to imply one reason why the priests might not marry any of these before mentioned, to wit, because any blemish in his wife would tend to the reproch and dishonour of his children born of her, and so make them unfit to succeed their father, or to execute the priests office. Vers. 17. Whosoever be of thy seed in their generations that hath any blemish, &c.] This law, whereby all Aarons posterity that had any blemish in their bodies were excluded from the priests office, was first, to signifie the perfection of Christ, of whom the priests were types, who had not indeed the least blemish of sinne in him; and secondly, to signifie how perfectly pure all the Saints should be through Christ, of whom it is said, Rev. 14. 5. that they are without fault before the throne of God; and thirdly, how pure all those should be that are imployed in sacred functions from any thing that might be a blemish to their profession and mi∣nistery. Vers. 22. He shall eat the bread of his God, both of the most holy and of the holy.] Herein the blemished priests had a priviledge above the unclean, who might not eat of the holy things, Levit. 22. 3. What man soever of the seed of Aaron is a leper, or hath a running issue, he shall not eat of the holy things, untill he be clean. Vers. 23. Onely he shall not go in unto the vail, &c.] That is, into that part of
the Sanctuary wherein the vail was that hanged before the ark, to wit, to dresse the lamps, or to order the shewbread, &c. CHAP. XXII. Vers. 2. SPeak unto Aaron and to his sonnes that they separate themselves from the holy things, &c.] That is, that they wholly abstain from meddling with them, or eating of them, to wit, whilst any legall uncleannesse is upon them, as is expressed vers. 3. And by the holy things of the children of Israel are meant all their oblations, whereof the priests were to eat, yea even their first-fruits, Numb. 18. 13. onely of the tithes it seems they might eat, even whilst they were unclean. In the former capter the Lord shewed what naturall and personall ble∣mishes made the priests unfit for his service; here he shows now what accidentall pollutions should make them for the time unfit for the same service: for however it might seem needlesse to enjoyn the priests to separate themselves in the time of their uncleannesse, since it was before forbidden the people not to pollute Gods holy things by intermeddling with them at such times, Levit. 7. 20. But the soul that eateth of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace-offerings that pertain unto the Lord, ha∣ving his uncleannesse upon him, even the soul shall be cut off from his people; yet because men honoured above others use to abuse their advancements, as if they had  priviledge to sinne, lest the priests should pretend such a priviledge, this is also particularly forbidden them. Vers. 4. What man soever of the seed of Aaron is a leper, or hath a running issue, &c.] This concerneth women also, Aarons daughters, who might eat of some of the holy things, yet not when they were unclean. Vers. 9. They shall therefore keep mine ordinance, &c.] That is, they shall ab∣stain from eating of the things before spoken of. Vers. 10. There shall no stranger eat of th holy things, &c.] That is, none but those of Aarons posterity, though Israelites or Levites: yet an exception is added in the next verse, to wit, that any servants the priests had bought with their money, might eat of these things, whether Israelite (who was yet to go out after seven years service) or servants bought for ever from other nations. Vers. 14. And if a man eat of the holy things unwittingly then he shall put the fifth part thereof unto it, &c.] And withall offer a ramme for his sinne against God, chap. 5. 15. If a soul commit a trespasse and sinne through ignorance in the holy things of the Lord, then he shall bring for his trespasse unto the Lord a ramme with∣out blemish, &c. But here onely satisfaction is made to the priests. Vers. 15. And they shall not prfane the holy things of the children of Israel, &c.] That is, the priests; to wit, by eating them when they are unclean. Vers. 16. Or suffer them to bear the iniquity of trespasse, when they eat their holy things, &c.] That is, the priests shall not, by suffering the people to eat of the holy things, expose them to the guilt of such a sinne, and the punishment that will follow thereon. Vers. 18. Whatsoever he be of the house of Israel, or of the stranger in Israel,
&c.] In this precept three things are required in all burnt-offerings, whether they were brought by Israelites born, or proselytes (who though they were strangers born, yet embracing the religion of the Israelites were admitted to offer sacrifices, as being ingrafted, as it were, into Gods Israel) and whether they were brought for a vow or a freewill-offering: to wit, first, that they must be of the beeves, or sheep, or goats; secondly, that they must alwayes be males: in other sacrifices a female was sometimes accepted, but never in burnt-offerings; and thirdly, that they must be without blemish, of all which see the notes upon the first chapter of this book. Vers. 21. And whosoever offereth a sacrifice of peace-offerings, &c.] Here di∣rection is given for their peace-offrings, to wit, that whether they were brought for a vow or for a freewill-offering▪ they must be first of the flocks or herds, beeves or sheep or goats; and secondly, that they must be perfect and without blemish, that is, as some distinguish them, perfect in regard of the inwards, and outwardly without blemish. Yet in peace-offerings that were not for a vow, but for a freewill-offering, though no blemish was allowed, yet something was allowed that was after a sort a blemish, as appears in the exception that follows, vers. 23. to wit, a bullock or a lamb or kid, that had any thing superfluous or lacking in his parts; for this is not meant of such cattel as were any way monstrous, that had of any part too many or too few, as five legs, or three ears, or but one eye; but it is meant of such as had any part too long or too short, over big or over little, not according to th ordinary proportion of nature, as is usually in other catel of that kind: and this though it were some kind of defect, yet it was not accounted a blemish, and so it was allowed in peace-offerings that were brought for a freewill-offering, not in peace-offerings that were brought for a vow. Vers. 2. Ye shall not offer unto the Lord that which i bruisd, &c.] No not in freewill-offerings. Vers. 25. Neither from a strangers hand shall ye offr the brad of your God, &c.] Some understand this of strangers that were proselytes; le (say they) any man should think that such blemished sacrifices, as are before spoken of might serve for proselytes, expresse mention is made, that from their hands they should not be excepted. Some again by strangers will have such meant, as were neither of the seed, nor the religion of the Israelites, uncircumcised strangers; and these expound this law three severall wayes: to wit, first, that though such blemished sacrifices were bought from the hand of strangers uncircumcised with their money, yet they might not offer them to God, because they were blemished, and so their corruption was in them, that is, they were corrupted and polluted, and so were not fit for sa∣crifices; or secondly, that if a stranger, that is, any of the hathen uncircumcised would bring any sacrifice to be offered for them, and brought any of those fore-men∣tioed blemished sacrifices, it should not be accepted; or thirdly, that from the hand of any pagan they should not offer the bread of their God, that is, his sacrices of any of these, that is, of any of the cattel before mentioned whether blemished or without blemish, and that because they are blemished and polluted, even because they are brought by the uncircumcised. But neither of these two last Expositions seem to me probable. Not the first of them, because I no where find that the hea∣then
were allowed to bring any sacrifices at all, and therefore it was needlesse to forbid the taking of a blemished sacrifice from them: Nor the last, because thi law doth onely speak of sacrifices that should be accepted from the Israelites (and not for heathens) as the last clause doth evidently shew, they shall not be accepted for you. Vers. 27. When a bullock or a sheep or a goat is brought forth, then it shall be seven dayes under the damme, &c.] The same is enjoyned concerning their first∣born cattel, Exod. 22. 30. Because till they were eight dayes old they were not fit to be eaten by men; therefore till then the Lord would not allow them to be brought for sacrifices. Vers. 28. And whether it be cow or ew, ye shall not kill it and her young both in one day.] To wit, that being taught mercie in killing of beasts for sacrifices, they might learn much more to shew mercie to men, and also how they should labour after perfect purity when they came to offer sacrifices to God. Vers. 30. On the same day it shall be eaten up, &c.] See chap. 17. 15. CHAP. XXIII. Vers. 2. COncerning the feasts of the Lord, which y shall proclaim to be holy convocations, even these are my feasts, &c.] That is, these are the feasts which you my people shall cause to be proclaimed as holy convocations, to wit, by the priests; for it is generally held that the priests did by sounding of the trumpets proclaim these festivals. The Lord having before given direction for sacri∣fices, now gives order for festivall times whereon many sacrifices were usually offered. Vers. 3. The seventh day is the Sabbath of rest, an holy convocation; yè shall do no work therein.] That is, no work appertaining to their earthly businesses or imployments: upon other festivall dayes, they were not tyed so strictly, except onely the day of Expiation; for upon other festivall dayes the restraint is, ye shall do no servile work therein, as we may see vers. 7, 8, 21, &c. but upon the Sabbath and the day of Expiation, vers. 28. the Law runnes, ye shall do no work therein: and the difference betwixt these is commonly held to be this, that on the other festivals they were forbidden all servile work, that is, all work appertaining to their worldly callings, wherein usually on other dayes their servants were imploy∣ed, but were allowed any work in providing food for the day; and so indeed that which was forbidden on the first day of unleavened bread in the seventh verse of this chapter under the name of servile work, In the first day ye shall have an holy con∣vocation, ye shall do no servile work therein, is expressed thus, Exod. 12. 16. And in the first day there shall be an holy convation: no manner of work shall be done in them, save that which every man must eat, and that onely may be done of you. But on the Sabbath day, and day of atonement, they were restrained from all bodily labour, yea even that of providing or dressing their food, as is evident Exod. 16. 23. and Exod. 35. 3. where they were forbidden to kindle a fire, or to dresse that which they should eat on the Sabbath day: yet did not the Jews understand this
law so, as to restrain them from those works which were necessarily to be done, and therefore they used to water their catel, as our Saviour faith, Luke 13. 15. on the Sabbath day, and if need were would pull out of a pit either ox or asse that were fallen into it, Luke 14. 5. It is the Sabbath of the Lord in all your dwellings.] That is, to be observed in all your dwellings. The other feasts were especially to be kept before the Sanctuary, whither all the men of Israel were to assemble, Exod. 23. 14. Three times thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year; and vers. 17. Three times in the year all thy males are to appear before the Lord God. Deut. 16. 5, 6. Thou mayest not sacrifice the Passeover within any of the gates which the Lord thy God hath given thee. But at the place which the Lord thy God shall chuse to place his name in, there shalt thou sacrifice the Passeover; and vers. 16. Three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy God in the place which he shall chuse: But the Sabbaths were to be sanctified in all places where they dwelt, to which purpose their Syna∣gogues were built, Acts 15. 21. Moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day. Vers. 7. In the first day ye shall have an holy convocation, ye shall do no servile work therein.] See the first note upon vers. 3. Vers. 8. But ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord seven dayes.] What the sacrifices were that were to be offered on each of these seven dayes of un∣leavened bread, we may see Numb. 28. 18, 24. Vers. 10. When ye be come into the land which I give unto you, and shall reap the harvest thereof, &c.] That is, and shalt addresse thy self to reap the harvest thereof: for the sheaf of the first-fruits of this harvest, which they were here en∣joyned to bring unto the priest, was to be the first corn they cut down when they began to put the sicle to the corn, as it is expressed Deut. 16. 9. Nor might they reap their harvest, till this sheaf of first-fruits was brought unto the Lord. Vers. 11. On the morrow after the priest shall wave it.] That is, on the sixteenth day of the first moneth called Nisan, the second of the seven dayes of unleavened bread: Upon the fourteenth day of that moneth the Passeover was kept; the fifteenth day was the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, which day was a Sabbath of rest, vers. 7. and is called, the feast, Numb. 28. 17. and this is the Sabbath here meant: for on the morrow after, being the sixteenth day of that moneth, the sheaf of the first-fruits was by the care of the Magistrate, in the name of all the people, brought unto the priest, and this sheaf was of barley, for that was first ripe in the land of Canaan, Ruth. 2. 23. She kept fast by the maydens of Boaz to glean unto the end of barley-harvest and of wheat-harvest; and Exod. 9. 31, 32. The barley was in the ear, and the flax was bolled; but the wheat and the rie were not smitten, for they were not grown up, to wit, at the feast of the Passeover, but wheat-harvest was after, at Pentecost or the feast of weeks, as we may see Exod. 34. 22. where the feast of Pentecost, or the feast of weeks is also called the feast of the first-fruits of wheat-harvest. Vers. 12. And ye shall offer, the day when ye wave the sheaf, an he lamb with∣out blemish, &c.] To wit, besides the dayly morning and evening sacrifice, which
upon no occasion were intermitted, and besides the sacrifices appointed for every of the seven dayes of this solemn feast of unleavened bread, Numb. 28. 23, 24. For this was appointed peculiarly to accompany this sheaf of the first-fruits, and it figured Christ by whom those first-fruits were sanctifyed. Vers. 13. And the meat-offering thereof shall be two tenth deals of fine flowre▪ &c.] To wit, two tenth deals of an Ephah, that is, two Omers, and this was double to the usuall proportion in all other sacrifices of lambs, which was but one tenth deal, Numb. 15. 4. He that offereth his offering unto the Lord, shall bring a meat-offering of a tenth deal of flowre; the reason whereof may be, because this was a gratulatory sacrifice for the fruits of the earth. Vers. 15. And ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the Sabbath, &c.] Here direction is given how they should know on what day they were to keep the next great feast after that of unleavened bread, to wit the feast of weeks, or Pente∣cost, namely, that they were to number from the morrow after the Sabbath, that is, from the sixteenth day of the moneth Nisan (as is before said in the note upon vers. 11.) which was the very day that they brought the sheaf of the wave-offer∣ing, seven compleat Sabbaths, that is seven compleat weeks, which was nine and fourty dayes, and that then on the morrow after the seventh Sabbath, that is, after the seventh week, which was the fiftieth day, they were to keep the feast of weeks or Pentecost, and to offer a new meat-offering unto the Lord: which shows the reason why this feast was called the feast of weeks, namely, because it was seven weeks after the Passeover, or the beginning of the feast of unleavened bread; as also why it was afterward called in the New Testament, Pentecost, Acts 2. 1. to wit, from the Greek word , which signifieth fifty, because it was fifty dayes after the first and great day of unleavened bread: for they began to num∣ber these fifty dayes from the morrow after that Sabbath inclusively, which was the second day of unleavened bread, the day whereon the sheaf of first-fruits was offered. Vers. 17. Ye shall bring out of your habitations two wave-loaves, of two tenth deals, &c.] That is, on the feast of Pentecost you shall bring this offering, which was to be offered as the first-fruits of their wheat-harvest, as the sheaf offered at the Passeover, mentioned vers. 10. was brought as the first-fruits of their barley-harvest: now it is expressed, that these two wave-loaves were to be brought out of their habitations, either to signifie that these two loaves were to be made of the new wheat of their own land, not of forein corn or bought of strangers; or else to signifie that though there were but one sheaf of first-fruits offered at the Passe∣over in the name of all the people, yet now every family was to bring two wave-loaves of first-fruits out of their severall habitations. But indeed because the sacri∣fices mentioned in the following verse, that were offered together with these loaves, were not brought severally by every family, but provided at the common charge, and offered in the name of the whole Church; and because that it is said expresly vers. 20. that these two loaves of the first-fuits were waved by the priest together with the peace-offerings▪ which could not be if every familie in Israel brought two loaves, therefore I onely think that the onely reason why it is said, Ye shall bring
two wave-loaves out of your habitations, was to signifie that the loaves were to be made of the wheat of their own land. They shall be of fine flowre, they shall be baken with leaven, they are the first-fruits unto the Lord.] Thusthere is a difference made betwixt the meat-offerings which were in part burnt upon the altar, and were therefore ever without leaven, Levit. 2. 11. and these of the first-fruits, which where wholly for the priests food, and therefore allowed to be leavened. Vers. 18. And ye shall offer with the bread, seven lambes, without blemish, of the first year, and one young bullock, &c.] In Numb. 28. 27. there is appointed two bullocks and one ramme, here one bullock and two rammes; the reason of this difference we may conceive was this: Those were as the peculiar sacrifices of that feast-day, these are a further addition in respect of the two loaves, as a particular te∣stimony of their thankfulnesse for the fruits of the earth, and of their faith in Christ, by whom they were restored to the use of the creatures, and their sacrifices of praise made acceptable to God. Vers. 19. Then ye shall sacrifice one kid of the goats for a sinne-offering, &c.] Lev. 4. 14. a bullock is prescribed for a sinne-offering of the people, and nothing was to be eaten thereof, it was to be burnt without the camp: But this was for some speciall sinne of the congregation, whereas the sacrifice here appointed was in generall for all their sinnes, and was therefore in the kind of a common sacrifice, whence a goat is appointed, and the priest to have the remainder. Vers. 20. They shall be holy to the Lord for the priest.] Whereas ordinarily the priest had but the breast and the right shoulder of the peace-offerings, Lev. 7. 32, 33. &c. The breast shall be Aarons and his sonnes: And the right shoulder shall ye give unto the priest of the sacrifices of your peace-offerings, &c. Here he had all, because this was offered in generall for all the congregation, and so no par∣ticular man had right to eat thereof, therefore it belonged to the priest wholly. Vers. 21. And ye shall proclaim on the self same day, that it may be an holy convocation unto you, &c.] This was the feast-day of Pentecost, or of Weeks, whereon the two loaves and the sacrifices before mentioned were offered unto the Lord; and it was instituted partly as a memoriall of their coming out of Egypt, Deut. 16. 10, 12. Thou shalt keep the feast of Weeks unto the Lord thy God, ac∣cording as he hath blessed thee. And thou shalt remember thou wast a bondman in Egypt, and shalt observe and do these stautes; and of the giving of the Law at this time of the year at mount Sinai, Exod. 19. 11. and partly by way of thankful∣nesse for the fruitfulnesse of the Land. One thing prefigured might be the giving of the Law of Christ by the Apostles, when the holy Ghost came down upon them, the first-fruits of the Spirit, in the likenesse of cloven tongues, Act 2. 1, 2, 3. where∣upon they went forth to reap that which the Prophets had sown, John 4. Vers. 22. And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not make clean riddance, &c.] Speaking of the feasts in the harvest, he repeateth this Law con∣cerning the poore▪ whose relief he joyns with his own service. Vers. 24. In the seventh moneth, in the first day of the moneth shall ye have a Sabbath.] For Ecclesiasticall businesses God hath appointed the moneth Nisan
or Abib to be the fist moneh of the year to the Iselites, which answere to part of our March and Aprill, and that in remembrance of their coming then out of E∣gypt, Exod. 12. 2. and so the seventh moneth from that was this here spoken of, which they called Tisri, and agreeth in part with our September, and had been for∣merly the first moneth of their year; yea and so still coninued for civil affairs, and therefore the year of Jubile begun still at this moneth, and so was on this moneth proclaimed, chap. 25. 9. Then shalt thou cause the trumpet of the Jubile to sound on the tenth day of the seventh moneth, &c. Now the first day of this moneth God here appoints them to keep a Sabbath, that is, a solemn feast-day; and it was called the feast of trumpets, because it was olemnized with blow∣ing of trumpets. Indeed the first day of every moneth, which was their new Moon, they kept as an holy day, a day of speciall solemnity, and thereon the priests did blow with their silver trumpets over their sacrifices, Numb. 10. 10. In the begin∣nings of your moneths ye shall blow with your trumpets over your burnt-offerings, &c. But the first day of this seventh moneth was kept as a farre more solemn festivall, and that with blowing of trumpets in way of rejoycing, as it may pro∣bably be thought, throughout all the cities of Israel. And the end of this festivall was, 1. to be a memoriall that this was the first day, the beginning of their New year for civil afairs, whereon it was therefore fitting that they should with rejoy∣cing acknowledge the blessings injoyed in the foregoing year; 2. to be a memoriall to them when they were come into Canaan of the severall victories which God had given them over their enemies, where the priests with the holy trumpets did sound an alarm. See Numb. 31. 6. 3. That it might be a preparation for the fol∣lowing day of atonement, their solemn fast-day on the tenth day of this moneth, that so by the sounding of the trumpets they might be put in mind to wake out of the sleep of sinne, and with trembling fasting and prayer to turn unto the Lord: and 4. to put them in mind of the speciall holinesse of this moneth; for as the se∣venth day of every week was a Sabbath, and every seventh year was kept holy as a Sabbaticall year; so the Lord would have the seventh moneth of every year to be holy in some singular manner above the rest of the moneths: and therefore though it was not wholly spent in sacred festivities, yet there were more holy-dayes in this moneth then in all the year besides, to wit, the feast of trumpets, the feast of expia∣tion, and the feast of tabernacles. Vers. 25. Ye shall do no servile work therein; but ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord.] What the sacrifices appointed for this feast of trum∣pets were, see Numb. 29. 2▪ 6. Vers. 27. And ye shall afflict your souls, and offer an offering made by fire be∣fore the Lord.] See that note upon Lev. 16. 29. and Numb. 29. 7. where the se∣verall sacrifices of this day are also described. Vers. 34. The fifteenth day of this seventh moneth shall be the feast of taber∣nacles for seven dayes unto the Lord.] It was called the feast of tabernacles, or, of booths, because when the Israelites came up to Jerusalem to keep this feast, during the feast they dwelt not in houses, but onely in booths, or arbours made of boughs, it is afterwards more fully expressed, ver. 40. and it was kept, 1. in remembranc
of Gods shadowing protection over them for fourty years together, both summer and winter, in their travelling through the wildernesse, whilst they dwelt in tents and booths, and were not yet come to their place of rest, as is expressed ver. 43. (and hereby it is evident that they never kept this feast till they were settled in the land of Canaan, because they kept it in remembrance of their dwelling in booths whilst they wandred through the wildernesse) 2. to testifie there thankfulnesse to God for the fruits of the earth▪ which this moneth they gathered in, Deut. 16. 13, 14. Thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles, seven dayes after that thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine; and thou shalt rejoyce in thy feast, &c. and 3. as a figure both of Christs incarnation, who coming into the world about this time of the year to dwell in the tabernacle of our flesh, was made flesh, & dwelt (or pitched his tent) amongst us, John 1. 14. and also of our condition, who are strangers and pilgrims here on earth, Heb. 11. 13. dwelling in earthly tabernacles which must be disolved, untill our labours being ended we come at length to a place of rest, that dwelling of God eternall in the heavens, 2. Cor. 5. 1. and should therefore with thankfulnesse remember how Gods hand is continually over us to protect us in our pilgrimage; of which spirituall keeping the feast of tabernacles Zachary speaketh, Zach. 14. 16, 19. As for the time allotted to the keeping of this feast, to wit, seven dayes, this compleat number signified that all the dayes of our pilgri∣mage in this frail tabernacle of our bodies should be consecrated as holy to the Lord. Vers. 36. Seven dayes ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord.] What sacrifices were appointed for this feast, and in what manner they were to be offered, see Numb. 29. 13, 38. On the eighth day shall be an holy convocation unto you, &c.] Though this eighth day was a part of the feast of tabernacles, or at least belonged thereto, and therefore is called the last and great day of the feast, John 7. 37. yet most properly the first seven dayes were onely counted as the dayes of the feast of tabernacles, as is before said, ver. 34. The fifteenth day shall be the feast of tabernacles for seven dayes unto the Lord, and that because they dwell in tabernacles or booths onely during those first seven dayes, but on the eighth day they met together in the Tem∣ple to keep there an holy assembly, as it were in remembrance of their being settled in peace, in the land of Canaan, after their long travels through the wildernesse: and so this eighth day was rather an appendix to the feast of tabernacles, then any part properly of the feast it self. Vers. 37. A sacrifice, and drink-offerings, every thing upon his day, &c.] A∣mongst the severall sacrifices appointed for these feasts, one is called peculiarly a sa∣crifice, which comprehend both sinne-offerings and peace-offerings. Vers. 38. Beside the Sabbath of the Lord.] That is, beside the weekly Sab∣baths and the sacrifices thereto belonging. Two things are implyed in these words: 1. that as God required the keeping of these solemn easts, so also especially the sanctifying of the Sabbath; 2. that when any of these feast-dayes lighted on a Sab∣bath, they must not think to make the Sabbath sacrifices serve for these festivals. Beside the gifs, and beside all your vows, &c.] By gifts are meant the first∣born
cattel and first-fruits, and all other contributions and gifts which of their own free will they were wont to give to the priests; by vows are meant vowed sacri∣fices; the drift of this is to prevent any covetous thoughts which might arise in their minds of thinking with such gifts or vowed sacrifices to supply the extraordinary sacrifices of these festivals: for these God requires over and above their gifts and vows and freewill-offerings; if they offered ever a whit the lesse because of the sa∣crifices of these feasts, they should be judged as men that dealt fraudulntly with God. Vers. 39. Also in the fifteenth day of the seventh moneth, when ye have ga∣thered in the fruit of the land, &c.] Now he proceeds to set down more parti∣cularly how that feast of tabernacles was to be solemnized, whereof he had begun to speak ver. 34. and first by mentioning that this feast was to be kept when they had gathered in the fruit of the land, he puts them in mind that they might be the better at leisure to keep this extraordinary Sabbath, and withall implies that one main end of it was to return thanks for the fruit of the land which they had now gathered: where also by the fruit of the land, is meant not their corn, which was gathered long before, in the time of Pentcost; but the latter fruit of their vines and olives, &c. whereupon this feast is called the feast of ingathering, Exod. 23. 16. Vers. 40. And ye shall take you on the first day the boughs of goodly trees, &c.] That is, upon the first day of the feast of tabernacles, which was the fifteenth day of the seventh moneth, ver. 34. This day it seems they made their booths, or ta∣bernacles, some upon the roofs of their houses, some in the streets and courts of Je∣rusalem, &c. as is largely xpressed, Neh. 8. 15, 16. Go forth unto the mount, and fetch olive-branches, and pine-branches, &c. to make booths as it is written; so that the boughs they are here appointed to take were it seems to make or at least to adorn the booths they were to dwell in: yet withall that is not unlikely which the Jews say, that they carried boughs and branches also in their hands in signe of joy. And to make their booths the more beautifull, and that all things might re∣present a glad and joyfull time, they are appointed to choose the boughs of the goodliest trees, such as are the olive, pine, myrtle, mentioned, Neh. 8. 15. and the boughs of thick trees (for the thicker they were the more glorious shew they made, and the fitter they were to make booths or arbours for a shadow and shelter) and willows of the brook, to intimate a land well watered, which might be of use to bind the other boughs, &c. and also to be either in the hand or on the booths, or∣naments and signes of joy, and that especially for the fruitfulnesse of the land where∣in God had planted them, whereof these severall boughs of goodly trees were a evident signe. Vers. 43. That your generations may know that I made the children of Israel to dwell in booths, &c.] Se Exod. 12. 37. CHAP. XXIV. Vers. 2. Command the children of Israel, that they bring unto thee pure oyl∣olive, &c.] This which is given here in charge to the Israelites, is
for the continuall supply both of lamp oyl and shewbread, to wit, that as they brought them at first, so they must still be supplyed by them: either therefore these things were provided by the civil magistrate out of the common sock, or else ra∣ther hey were provided, as were also the daily sacrifices, and whatsoever else was offered in the name of the whole people, out of the treasury of the temple; into which therefore towards the supply of these things both the Princes and people did ordi∣narily cast in what they were willing to give. So it is noted of Hezekiah, 2. Chron. 31. 3. He appointed also the Kings portion of his substance for the burnt-offerings, to wit, for the morning and evening burnt-offerings, and the burnt-offerings for the Sabbaths, for the new Moons, and for the set feasts; and of the people, Luke 21. 1. He saw the rich men casting their gifts into the treasury, and a cer∣tain poore widow casting in thither to mites. Vers. 3. In the tabernacle of the congregation shall Aaron order it from the evening unto the morning, &c.] Or his sonnes by his appointment. See the note upon Exod. 25. 37. Vers. 5. And thou shalt take fine floure, and bake twelve cakes thereof.] These were the cakes of shewbread, concerning which see the note upon Exod. 25. 23. The floure was provided at the common charge (as is before said upon ver. 1.) and brought to the priests, but the cakes were made and baked by the Levites of the family of Kohath, as is evident 1. Chron. 9. 32. where it is said that some of the sonnes of the Kohathites were over the shew-bread, to prepare it every Sab∣bath. Vers. 6. And shalt set them in two rows, six on a row, &c.] The common opinion is, that those twelve cakes of shewbread, representing the twelve tribes of Israel, were not set one by another, but six one upon another, and six one upon another. But because this way it cannot so properly be said that they were set in two orders or rows, and because in the following verse there is order given for the put∣ting of frankincense upon each row, I rather think that they were set in order along the table, six in one row and six in another. Vers. 7. And you shall put pure frankincense upon each row, that it may be on the bread for a memoriall, even an offering made by fire unto the Lord.] For the incense was burned upon the altar, when they took away the bread, and was before∣hand laid upon the bread, as a signe that God would through Christ remember his people with thoughts of favour and gracious acceptance. Vers. 9. And it shall be Aarons and his sonnes, and they shall eat it in the ho∣ly place.] That is, after it had stood a week upon the table before the Lord. For it is most holy unto him of the offerings of the Lord, &c.] Because of the incense which was burnt, the bread was reputed most holy, as if it had been of the offerings made by fire. Vers. 10. And the sonne of an Israelitish woman, whose father was an Egypti∣an, &c.] Thus by the providence of God in the party thus blaspheming, and thus punished for it, as is here related, they were taught, 1. How the curse of God doth usually follow the issue of such unlawfull mixtures, as was this of an Egyptian with a Israelite; 2. How severe God must needs be against this sinne in his own ge∣nuine
people, who would not suffer it unpunished in one that was the sonne of a stranger by the fathers side. The inserting of this story in this place makes it more then probable, that it was done whilst they were yet in the desert of Sinai, even whilst the Lord was giving these Laws to Moses which are before mentioned, as is expressed in the next chapter, ver. 1. Whether the Egyptian had this sonne by Shelomith in marriage, or by fornication, we cannot say: but that this their sonne the blasphemer had embraced the religion of the Israelites, it is very likely, both because he came away with them out of Egypt, and also because he is here said to have gone out amongst the children of Israel, which implies more then his going in their company, namely, that he went out amongst them as one of them. And this sonne of the Israelitish woman and a man of Israel strove together in the camp.] This of his striving is expressed, to let us know that a blasphemer, though provoked, is not therefore to be excused. Vers. 11. And the Israelitish womans sonne blasphemed the name of the Lord, and cursed.] His sinne I conceive was not rash, vain, and unadvised mentioning Gods name either in swearing, cursing the man with whom he was to contend, or otherwise; but of an higher nature (though even these are blasphemy) even some execration or reprochfull speeches uttered in his fury directly against God: as if for instance we should suppose this, that in the heat of contention the Israelite upbraid∣ing him with his idolatrous father, and denying him to be a true member of the Church of God he should thereupon speak scornfully and opprobriously of the God of Israel, slighting the priviledge of being one of his people. Some such blasphemy I conceive this was, and that because the Law which God gave them upon this occa∣sion speaks of cursing God, ver. 15. Whosoever curseth his God shall bear his sinne; not cursing in Gods name, but directly and expressely of cursing God. And they brought him unto Moses, &c.] According to the order mentioned Exod. 18. 26. The hard causes they brought unto Moses. Vers. 14. Let all that heard him lay their hands upon his head.] That is, those that heard him were to come forth, and laying their hands upon his head to give in evidence against him, and so thereupon he was to be condemned, and the congregation was to stone him. Now this ceremony of the witnesses laying their hands upon his head was 1. to signifie, that they did charge this sinne upon him, and approve of the punishment that was to be inflicted for it; 2. that having witnessed nothing but the truth, they were free from his death, but his bloud must be upon his own head; 3. to imply that he was to be sacrificed as it were to the justice of God: for as those that brought any sacrifice to the tabernacle, were to lay their hand upon the head of the sacrifice, thereby signifying their desire and faith, that the death of that sacrifice might and should satisfie the justice of God in their be∣half; so here the laying of the witnesses hands upon the head of the blasphemer did signifie their desire that God would accept of his punishment as a sacrifice offered to the satisfying of his justice, and not punish the land and people for it. Vers. 15. Whosoever curseth his God shall bear his sinne, and he that blasphe∣meth the name of the Lord, &c.] These Laws were given to the Israelites, upon the occasion of the foregoing story of the blasphemer that was stoned. Evident it is
that these are two distinct Laws, Whosoever shall curse his God shall bear his sinne, and, He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, he shall surely be put to death; and yet hard it is to say wherein the difference lies between cursing and blasphe∣ming the name of the Lord. But the best resolution of this doubt, I conceive, is this, that by cursing God is meant when a man shall directly and purposely speak re∣prochfully of God, and by blaspheming the name of the Lord, is meant when men do so profanely mention the name of God, either in cursing or otherwise, that what they say of God tends much to the reproch and dishonour of God, though they do not directly speak against God. Vers. 16. All the congregation shall certainly stone him.] The people must all have their hands in the execution, 1. to prove their zeal in revenging the dishonour done to God, and his Laws; 2. that themselves might learn to fear those sinnes which with their own hands they had punished in others. Vers. 17. And he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death.] This Law is here inserted upon the occasion of the blasphemers striving with the Israelite, ver. 10. and to show that God was tender, as of his own honour, so of the safety of his people. CHAP. XXV. Vers. 2. WHen ye come into the land which I give you, then shall the land keep a Sabbath unto the Lord, &c.] That is, every seventh year the land shall lie at rest, ye shall neither plow it nor sow it, &c. Concerning this Sab∣baticall year, and the grounds thereof, see the notes upon Exod. 23. 11. This year also they did forbear exacting their debts of those that were indebted to them, be∣cause that year there was no tillage nor harvest to make money of: of which see also the notes upon Deut. 15. 1. It is also commonly held by Expositours that this year all Hebrew servants were set free, of which see Exod. 21. 2. for of this I find no clear ground in the Scriptures, but rather the contrary. When the first Sabba∣ticall year was kept by the Israelites it is hard to determine, and yet sure we are that it was not till they came into the land of Canaan. The most probable opinion is, that it was the fourteenth year of Joshua's government: for if the land was first di∣vided among the Israelites in the seventh year of Joshua, as may be gathered from Calebs age, Josh. 14. 10. then the seventh year after that, when they had tilled the land, and reaped the crop of it six years, was doubtlesse their first Sabbaticall year. Vers. 5. That which groweth of it own accord of thy harvest thou shalt not rap, &c.] That is, as in other years, by a peculiar right and interest, but in com∣mon as others did, onely taking what might serve for food. Vers. 8. And thou shalt number seven Sabbaths of years unto thee, &c.] Here direction is given for the year of Jubile, so called, as it is most generally held, from an Hebrew word Jovel, which signifies a ramme, because it was proclaimed with trumpets or cornets made of rammes horns. A great question there is amongst Ex∣positours, nor is it easily to be resolved, concerning the numbring of this year of
Jubile, as likewise at what time of the year it did begin. Some conceive that the fourtyninth year, which was the last of the seven times seven years, was the year of Jubile: and whereas it is said, ver 10. Ye shall hallow the fiftith year, they say it is called the fiftieth year by reckoning from the year before inclusively, and so con∣ceive that the year of Jubile did alwayes concurre with the seventh Sabbati∣call year. But against this manner of accounting the year Jubile, there may be se∣rall strong objections made, which cannot well be answered: as 1. that the Jews do constantly reckon otherwise, making the Jubile every fiftieth year, not concur∣ring with the Sabbaticall year: 2. that according to this manner of accounting eve∣ry year of Jubile was then to be counted twice, as the last of one fifty years, and the first of another; and besides, in the computation for the first fifty years, there was no Jubile before to be included: and 3. that it had been superfluous to forbid, as ver 11. all sowing and reaping in the year of Jubile, if it had alwayes concurred with the seventh Sabbaticall year, since all such works had then been unlawfull, even in regard that it was a seventh year. And therefore I conceive that the more probable opinion is that, which is commonly held by Expositours, namely, that they did reckon seven times seven years, which was nine and fourty years, and then the next year after, to wit, the fiftieth year, was the year of Jubile: and this year was not reckoned in the Sabbath of years following, but the one and fiftieth year was the first of the next seven years; for else they should not have sowed and reaped six years in this week of years. Vers. 9. Then shalt thou ause the trumpet of the Jubile to sound on the tenth day of the seventh moneth, &c.] That is, on the tenth day of the seventh moneth in the year following the seventh Sabbath of years thou shalt throughout all the land with the sound of a trumpet or cornet proclaim that to be the year of Jubile. It was proclaimed on the seventh moneth, because it was the first moneth of the ci∣vil year, and so then the year of Jubile began: and it was proclaimed on the tenth day of that moneth, which was the day of atonement, and a publick fast-day for all the people, 1. to shew that our freedome from the spirituall bondage, wherein we lie by nature, is through the atonement made by Christs death, according to that of the Apostle, Heb. 2. 12, 15. For as much then as the children ar partakers of flesh and bloud, he also himself likewise took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil, and deliver them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage: and 2. to teach us that the way to attain spirituall joy and comfort (whereof the Jubile was a signe) is to humble and afflict our souls, as the Jews on this day did: and 3. to teach us that if we expect mercy from God in the pardon of our sinnes (which was assured to them on this day of expiation) we ought to shew mercy to our brethren, as they did this day by releasing their servants, and restoring to every man their possessions again. A great dispute there is amongst Expositours, when the year of Jubile began: Some hold that though it were proclaimed on the seventh moneth, the moneth Tisri, yet it began not till the spring following, in the moneth Nisan: but this is no way probable; for the time of sowing was about the seventh moneth, and it is not likely they sowed that which because of the following Jubile
they might not reap. I make no question therefore but the year of Jubile began on this seventh moneth, but whether it began on the first day of this moneth, as the Jews generally hold, or not till the tenth day, is somewhat questionable; yet the last seems to me most probable, because it may seem strange, that it should begin ten dayes before it was proclaimed. Vers. 10. And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty through∣out all the land, &c.] That is, ye shall set it apart to be an holy year, and shall proclaim liberty throughout all the land, to wit, to your brethren that had been sold to you for servants, who shall hereupon be set at liberty. Now the year of Jubile was called an holy year, because it was separated from the ordinary imploy∣ments of other years in tilling and sowing their land, &c. that they might be at more leisure to spend it in holy imployments, and that it might be to them a year of holy rejoycing before the Lord; and withall because it was to be a type of that evangelicall Jubile at the coming of Christ, when by the trumpet of the Gospel, first sounded by the Baptist, and after by Christ and his Apostles, there should be great joy proclaimed unto all nations; whence it is that the time of the Gospel is called the year of Gods redeemed, Esa. 63. 4. and the acceptable year of the Lord, Esa. 61. 2. the accepted time, and the day of salvation, 2. Cor. 6. 2. One of the main priviledges of this year was that which is here mentioned, that all their servants were set at liberty. Ordinarily when their brethren were sold to them for servants, they were to serve them six years; but if the year of Jubile came after the first or second year, they were presently set free: yea even those that at other ordinary times did refuse to be set free, and so had their ears bored through, and were by the Law thereupon to serve for ever, Exod. 21. 16. were yet set free at the year of Jubile. And herein was the year of Jubile, a notable type of the evangelicall Jubile at the coming of Christ, when all Gods redeemed ones were set free from the bon∣dage of the Law, Satan, sinne, and death, Joh. 8. 36. If the sonne shall make you free, you shall be free indeed. It shall be a Jubile unto you, and ye shall return every man to his possession.] This was another priviledge of the year of Jubile, That when that year came all the land that had been sold returned to the owners that had sold it, or to their heirs: for no man might sell his land for ever, ver. 23. but onely for so many years as were behind from the sale to the year of Jubile, and then the owners entred upon the land again. And this was the reason why Naboth would not sell his vineyard to Ahab, to wit, for ever. 1. King. 21. 3. The Lord forbid it me, saith he, that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto thee. Now the reasons of this Law were, 1. that it might prevent the confusion of the tribes by the alienation of their severall portions in the land of Canaan from one to another; 2. that it might be a barre in the way of the rich, that they might not hope to swallow up the inheri∣tance of their poore brethren, and so to enlarge their own; 3. that it might be a perpetuall memoriall to them that God had planted them in the land, because they might not sell it, the Lord challenging the land to be still his by a peculiar right, and willing them onely to esteem themselves as sojourners therein with him, whence it is called the Lords land, Hos. 9. 3. They shall not dwell in the Lords
land; and Esai. 8. 8. The stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel. And fourthly, That it might be a figure of our recovering by Christ, at the evangelicall Jubile, that heavenly inheritance which we had lost by sinne; and that the heavenly Canaan which God had prepared for his in Christ cnnot be utterly alienated from them but is surely confirmed in his bloud, and re∣served in heaven for them, so that though by their sinnes they may for a time de∣prive themselves of the comfortable use of this their inheritance in the Church, yet they shall return thereto at the great Jubile of Christs second appearing, when the trumpet of God shall sound, 1. Thess. 4. 16, 17. The Lord himslf shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangell, and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first; Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the aire, and so shall we be for ever with the Lord. Vers. 12. Ye shall eat the increase thereof out of the field.] And not out of the barn. The meaning is, that they might not gather and lay up the encrease that grew of the land in the year of Jubile, but what they did eat hereof in common to∣gether with others, they must take it immediately out of the field. Vers. 14. And if thou sell ought unto thy neighbour, or buyest ought of thy neigh∣bours hand, ye shall not oppresse one another.] That is, the seller shall not exact more of him that buyes then the use of the land is truly worth from the time of the sale to the year of Jubile, nor shall the buyer seek to get the land for lesse then it is truly worth, taking advantage of the necessity of him that is forced to sell. Vers. 20. And if ye shall say, What shall we eat the seventh year, &c.] An ob∣jection is here made and answered, concerning the rest of the Sabbaticall year en∣joyned vers. 4. The objection is, how they should live the seventh year if they should therein neither sow nor reap: And the answer is, vers. 21, 22. That God would command such a blessing upon the sixth year, that it should bring forth fruit for three years, that is, from the sixth to the ninth, not for three years compleat, but for part of three years, (as Christ is said to have been three dayes in th grave, because he was in the grave part of three dayes (for the increase of the sixth year ser∣ved them, first, for part of the sixth year; to wit, from barly-harvest that year, which was about the Passeover, till the seventh moneth, when the Sabbaticall year began; secondly, for all the Sabbaticall year; thirdly, for the eighth year, till both barly and wheat harvest of that they had sown that year was fully gathered and made ready for use, which was not till the ninth year was wellnigh come: and thus the increase of the sixth year served for three years. Now for the year of Jubile (con∣cerning which they had more reason to doubt, because then they did neither sow nor reap for two years togeher, to wit the fourtyninth year, which was the seventh Sabbaticall year, and the fiftieth, which was the year of Jubile) by what is said concerning the seventh year, e like must be conceived concerning that too, namely that then God would give such a blessing to the sixth year, that the increase thereof should serve for foure years, that is, for part of foure years. Vers. 23. The land shall not e sd for ever, &c.] See the note upon vers. 10. Vers. 25. If any of hi kin come to redeem it, then shall he redeem that which
his brother sold.] This kinsman that was allowed to redeem the possession which his poore brother had sold was a figure of Christ, who being near to us, and allyed in the flesh, is called our God, that is, our redeemer or deliverer, Esai. 59. 20. and our brother, Heb. 2. 11. He is not ashamed to call them brethrew: and he it is that hath redeemed us, and our heavenly inheritance unto us, in our low depressed and poore estate, Hos. 13. 14. I will ransome them from the power of the grve, and will redeem them from death. 2. Cor. 8. 9. Though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poore, that ye through his poverty might be rich. Vers. 29. And if a man sell a dwelling-house in a walled city, &c.] In two particulars the Law here given for the sale of houses in walled towns differs from that before given for the sale of their land: first, whereas they might redeem their land at all times, their houses in walled towns they might not redeem unlesse they did it within a year; secondly, whereas their lands did alwayes return to the first owners at the year of Jubile, their houses in walled towns did not return to those that sold them at the year of Jubile, but if the owners redeemed them not within a year they were alieated from them for ever. Of which differences these reasons are probably given: First, because pon these houses, if not redeemed within so short a time, much cost might be bestowed by him that had bought them, for the alter∣ing, repairing or enlarging of them; and therefore it was not fit they should be re∣deemed as lands were: and on the otherside in many years they might be much de∣cayed, and so not be restored in the same condition they were in, when they were sold, as lands might: Secondly, because the perpetuall alienating of these houses in walled cities did not make such confusion in the tribes, as the alienating of their lands, since it cannot be thought that in populous cities, onely men of one and the same tribe inhabited: Thirdly, because men might better part with their houses then their ground, that should yield them food and sustenance, yea these houses might be burthensome to the owners becoming poore, rather then usefull. Vers. 31. They may be redeemed, and they shall go out in the Jubile.] That is, the houses in villages, to wit, because the lands could not be without farmhouses, stables, &c. Vers. 33. For the houses of the cities of the Levites are their possession, &c.] Therefore as the Israelites had liberty to redeem their possessions of lands, and enjoy∣ed the priviledge of receiving them back again at the year of Jubile; so it was fit the Levites should have the same priviledges concerning their houses in the cities al∣lotted them, because they had no other possession in the land. Vers. 34. But the field of the suburbs of their cities may not be sold, &c.] The field of the suburbs (of which see Numb. 35. 4, 5.) appointed for the keeping of their cattel might not be sold at all, left wanting that necessary help, they should be forced to leave their dwellings, to the great damage of the whole people, God having thus dispersed them in severall cities in every tribe, that they might watch over the souls of the people. This continued during the politie of the Jews, what was after done see Acts 4. 36, 37. Joses a Levite, having land sold it, and brought the money and laid it at the Apostles feet. Vers. 36. Take thou no usury of him nor increase.] That is, of thy poore decayed
brother, whether he be an Israelite born, or a stranger that is become a proselyte; for to both these they are commanded to lend in the foregoing verse, and therefore from both these they are here forbidden to take usury or increase. Vers. 39. Thou shalt not compell him to serve as a bond-servant.] That is, thou shalt not compell him to serve for ever, nor use him basely and hardly, but as a brother. Vers. 40. And shall serve thee unto the year of Jubile.] The ordinary time of their service was but for six years, Exod. 21. 2. but in some cases their ears were bored, and they were to serve for ever, Exod. 21. 6. But in the first, if not in both these cases, the Jubile was to put an end unto their service, and they were to be set free. And as their serving for ever had an end at the year of Jubile, so also all their other legall ordinances, which were ordained to continue for ever, had their period at the evangelicall Jubile, of which this was a type. Vers. 41. And then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children with him, &c.] And so also his wife, Exod. 21. 3. If he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself: if he were married then his wife shall go out with him. Vers. 46. They shall be your bond-men for ever.] That is, those servants which you buy, that are of other nations; for these, yea though they were proselytes, were not set at liberty at the year of Jubile. But over your brethren the children of Israel, ye shall not rule one over another with rigour.] Namely first, they must not be put to such vile works and base im∣ployments as their bondmen of the Gentiles: secondly, they must not be held in perpetuall bondage, but must go out free,, they, their wives, and children, at the year of Jubile; thirdly, they must not be sold to others for bondmen as the Gentiles were: these things are meant here by ruling over them with rigour; for cruelly they might not deal with their bondmen that were of the Gentiles. CHAP. XXVI. Vers. 5. ANd your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, &c.] That is, you shall have such plentifull harvests, that before you can have threshed out your corn, the vintage shall come; and such rich vintages, that before they be ended, it shall be time to sow your seed, &c. Vers. 6. Neither shall the sword go through your land.] That is, ye shall live in peace, and shall not be destroyed by the sword of your enemies. But yet some Expositours hold that this phrase is here used of the sword going through the land, because armies of souldiers are wont to destroy countreys, not onely by fighting against them, but also by going through them. Vers. 10. And ye shall eat old store and bring forth the old because of the new.] That is, you shall have such store of old corn, even when your new corn is gather∣ed in, that you shall not need presently to be spending the new, but may still live upon the old store; and yet withall your new harvests shall be so plentifull, that of necessity you must empty your barns of old corn that you may have room to lay up the new.
Vers. 16. I will even appoint ver you terrour, consumption, and the burning ague, &c.] These words, I will appoint over you, imply the unresistablenesse of the judgement, because those diseases should come with power and authority from God upon them, and so should consume their eyes, &c. as indeed such diseases being in extremity do oft weaken and darken the sight. Vers. 19. And I will break the pride of your power.] That is, I will break your exceeding great strength wherein you are wont to pride your selves. Vers. 20. And your strength shall be spent in vain, &c.] That is, though you spend your strength with excessive toyling and moyling in plowing and manuring your ground, all will be to no purpose, for still your land shall not yield her increase. Vers. 26. And when I have broken the staff of your bread, ten women shall bake your bread in one oven.] This is mentioned as a signe or effect of the great scarcity of bread that should be in the land, that one oven should contain the bread of many families. Bread is here called the staff of bread, because it strengtheneth mans heart, Psal. 104. 15. because it is the chief prop and support of mans life: So that by breaking the staff of bread is meant the depriving them of this stay of their life by bringing famine and penury upon them, as it is evident in other places, Moreover he called for a famine upon the land, he brake the whole staff of bread, Psal. 105. 16. and Ezek. 4. 16. Sonne of man, behold I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem that they may want bread and water▪ and of this judgement this is mentioned as a notable effect, that ten women, that is, many families, should bake their bread in one oven; for ten in the Scripture doth often signifie many, as is formerly shown upon Gen. 31. 7. And they shall deliver your bread again by weight.] This is reckoned as another great signe of scarcity and want, that te baker should deliver them their bread by weight. So it is said, Ezek. 4. 16. I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem, and they shall eat bread by weight and with care, and they shall drink water by mea∣sure; and therefore of him, whom S. John saw riding upon a black horse, which was famine, Rev. 5. 6. it is said that he had a pair of ballances in his hand, to wit, to measure out bread to men, because it should be so scarce. And ye shall eat and not be satisfied.] To wit, either because of the small quan∣tity, or for want of Gods blessing upon the little which they have: for so some ex∣pound the staff of bread, the strength which by the command of God it hath to nourish our bodyes. Vers. 30. And cast your carcases upon the carcases of your idols.] That is, up∣on your idols now mangled and broken to pieces; for their broken images are here called the carcases of their idols, not because they had life before they were broken to pieces, but by way of derision, to let them see, first, what goodly gods they had wor∣shipped▪ that should in that day lie tumbled in a heap together with their dead car∣cases; and secondly, to intimate that these their idols were as abominable to God as dead stinking carcases are unto men. Vers. 31. And I will make your citie waste, and bring your Sanctuaries unt dsolation.] The tabernacle is called a Sanctuary, Exod. 25. 8. and so is the tem∣ple
also 1. Chron▪ 22. 19. and each of them, for the severall distinct places in them▪ the outward court, the holy and most holy place, was called plurally Sanctuaies, Jer. 51. 51. For strangers are come into the Sanctuaries of the Lords house. And besides the Synagogues may be in this word Sanctuaries comprehended als. Vers. 34. Then shall the land enjoy her Sabbaths, &c.] As resting from llage, from which she should have rested on the Sabbaths, but could not be permitted be∣cause of their covetousnesse; as also from bearing such wicked wretches, under the burthen of whom whilst the earth lay groning, it could not enjoy her Sabbaths as she ought: for where there is not a resting from sinne the Sabbaths are not truly kept. CHAP. XXVII. Vers. 2. SPeak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, &c.] The Lord having given them laws hitherto concerning the necessary duties of his service, concludeth now with this concerning vows and voluntary services, When a man shall make a singular vow, the persons shall be for the Lord by thy estimation. That is, when any man shall after a singular manner separate any thing by vow from common use for the Lords service, the persons (supposing it be some person▪ whether man or woman that is vowed) shall be for the Lord accord∣ing to thy estimation, that is, they shall be thenceforth the Lords, and accordingly either they shall be set apart to the Lords service, or else they shall be redeemed ac∣cording to thy estimation, to wit, according to that value which the priests, by the direction which thou Moses shalt now give, shall set upon them: for it was Mo∣ses to whom the Lord now spake, but it was the priest that did value that which was vowed, as is evident ver. 12. though according to that direction which Moses by Gods command did now prescribe them. Now for these vows of persons, we must know that they were usually made in time of some affliction or distresse; as when married persons had no child▪ they did sometimes vow that if the Lord would give them a child, they would give themselves or that their child unto the Lord, which was Hannahs vow, 1. m. 1. 11. and so in times of sicknesse, or any other distresse, they were wont to vow unto the Lord delivering them, that they would give such and such persons, themselves or their children, over whom they had power, unto the Lord. And if it be questioned, after what manner and to what use they were vow∣ed unto the Lord: To this some Expositours answer, That in case it was a Levite that was vowed, he was then bound by that vow to serve lwayes in the tabernacle or temple (whereas otherwise he should have served there onely in his course) and such an one they say could not be redeemed. But if the person vowed were of any other tribe, they were onely vowed to such service of the tabernacle, as they not being of the tribe of Levi were capable of, as for drawing of water, or hewing of wood, which the Gibeonites afterwards did, Josh. 9. 27. or if they were women, for spinning for making the priests garments, and providing those things that were necessary for the repair of the tabernacle, and other such like services, which ac∣cordingly they did perform, or else paid the price of their redemption here prescri∣bed.
But others again hold that the aim and intention of these personall vows, was onely that they should pay the price of their redemption to the priests, which was imployed either for the maintenance of the priests, Numb. 18. 14. or else for the re∣parations of the Sanctuary, 2. Kings 12. 4, 5. Vers. 3. And thy estimation shall be of the male from twenty years old even unto sixty years old.] He begins with this age, because it comprehends the chief of mans time for ability of body and mind. Vers. 4. And if it be a female, then thy estimation shall be thirty shekels.] As here, so again also vers. 5, 6, 7. still a smaller summe is appointed for the redemption of a female vowed unto the Lord, then for the redemption of a male, and that not so much because of the dignity of the man above the woman, as because the labour and service of a man is counted usually of much more value then the ministery and service of a woman. Vers. 5. And if it be from five years old even unto twenty years old, &c.] These that were vowed to God so young, could not be vowed by themselves, but by their parents, who might as well vow them to God, as sell them to be servants to others, and therefore they were bound by their parents vow, and were to be redeem∣ed. Now though the service of those that were vowed to God in their childhood may seem to be more worth, by reason the time of their service was likely to be long∣er, then those that were vowed at thirty and fourty years old; yet is there here a lesser ransome appointed for the redemption of children then for those of farre more years, and that because they were valued not according to the years they might live, which vvere uncertain, but according to their present estate and condition. Vers. 6. And if it be from a moneth old, even unto five years old, &c.] Un∣der this age there vvas no valuation at all, see Numb. 13. 40, 47. and 18. 16. yet some conceive that by those of a moneth old, are meant all that vvere in their first moneth, even from the first moneth birth unto a moneth fully complete. Vers. 8. But if he be poorer then thy estimation, then he shall present himself be∣fore the priest, and the priest shall value him, &c,] The party vovved unto the Lord together vvith the party vovving, as vvhen the father vovved his sonne or daugh∣ter: and it is left to the discreet charity of the priest to s reasonable rate upon him according to his ability. Vers. 9. And if it be a beast whereof men bring an offering unto the Lord, &c.] That is, a clean beast vvithout blemish. Vers. 10. And if he shall at all change beast for beast, then it and the exchange thereof shall be holy.] To vvit, by vvay of penalty, and because both vvere in a manner consecrated to God; and such things as are once consecrated to God must not return to the ovvner again. Vers. 11. And if it be any unclean beast, of which they do not offer a sacrifice un∣to the Lord, &c.] This vvhich is said of unclean beasts, to wit, that if any such be vowed, they must be redeemed at such a price as the priest shall value them, &c. may be meant of blemished beasts, otherwise fit for sacrifice; or rather generally of unclean beasts, that might not be offered in sacrifice: onely some will have the dog excepted, because of that place, Deut. 23. 18. yea, according to this law, Expositours
conceive they were bound to do in all other moveable goods that were vowed, to wit, that the priests having set a price upon them, the party that vowed them might redeem them; and that otherwise the priests might sell them, or dispose of them as they thought fit. Vers. 13. But if he will at all redeem it, then he shall adde a fifth part, &c.] As is enjoyned in the case of purloyning holy things, chap. 5. 16. And he shall mae amends for the harm that he hath done in the holy things, and shall adde the fifth part thereto. So in this case of vows, when he that voweth will not stand to his promise, the Lord layeth on him this penalty for his inconstancy and lightnesse of mind, that men might learn to be stable-minded, even in such voluntary vows, and not think to have any interest in that which is once by a vow given to God. Vers. 14. And when a man shall sanctifie his house to be holy unto the Lord, &c.] That is, by a vow, which men were wont to do, as desiring to obtain from God a safe healthfull and prosperous habitation in them. Vers. 15. And if he that sanctified it will redeem his house, then he shall adde the fifth part, &c.] Why this was enjoyned, see the note before upon vers. 13. The priests did usually value those things that were vowed at a reasonable rate, and therefore they might the better pay a fifth part more then the price set upon them. But if they did not redeem their houses at the year of Jubile, the priests had the per∣petuall possession of them, and this made them the more carefull and willing to re∣deem them. Vers. 16. And if a man shall sanc fie unto the Lord some part of a field of his pos∣session, &c.] That is, if a man shall vow unto the Lord some part of a field that came by inheritance (for direction is afterwards given, vers. 22. for fields purchased of others, wherein onely they should have right unto the year of Jubile) the priest then was to set an estimation upon it according to the quantity of seed that would sow the land so vowed, and that price the owner of the land was to pay to the priest if he would redeem it, and a fifth part over and above. This vowing of some part of their land unto the Lord was usually done, in expectation of having their fields yield the greater increase▪ and the price here set for the redemption of such land was, that they were to pay according to the rate of fifty shekels for so much land as required an homer of barley seed to sow it, as for instance, if an homer would sow it, then they were to pay fifty shekels of silver for the redemption of it; if it required two homers to sow it, then they were to pay a hundred shekels; if three homers, then a hundred and fifty shekels, &c. and again, if half an homer would sow it, then they were to pay twenty five shekels, and so ratably they paid for all land they had vowed according to the quantity of seed that would sow it. Indeed it is questioned amongst Expositours whether this summe set for the redemption of such land was but once paid, or whether so much was paid yearly till the year of Jubile came. This last many do hold, and that because they judge that fifty shekels was not a valuable consideration (unlesse it were paid yearly till the Jubile came) for so much land as required an homer of seed to sow it. But doubtlesse in rating the land that was vow∣ed there was a favourable respect had to the owner, neither did the Lord intend i should be rated according to the exact worth of the land; and therefore also the
same price is here set down upon all land, whereas we know that an acre of some land may be worth foure times as much of other land. So that to me it seems most probable that the summe here set was not paid yearly, but onely once, when the land was redeemed. Vers. 17. If he sanctifie his ield from the year of Jubile, &c.] That is, if a man do vow a fild unto God immediately after the year of Jubile is past, in the first of the fifty years that must runne to another Jubile, according to thy estimation it shall stand▪ that is, that estimation of his land shall stand before mentioned, to wit, he shall pay for the redeeming of t fifty shekels for every omer it will take in barley∣seed answerable to the fifty years from Jubile to Jubile. But if he sanctifie his field after the Jubile, then the priest shall reckon unto him the money according to the years that remain, that is, the priest shall then demand of him for the redemption of his land proportionably according to the years that are behind unto the year of Jubile; as for instance, if there remain but thirty years unto the year of Jubile, the land that requires an omer of seed to sow it shall then be valued but at thirty shekels, & if there remain but twenty five years to Jubile, it shall then be valued but at twen∣ty five shekels, and so proportionably still according as the land is more or lesse. Vers. 19. And i he that sanctified the field, will in any wise redeem it, then he all adde the fifh part, &c.] See the notes upon vers. 19. and vers. 15. Vers. 20. And if he will not redeem the field, or if he have sold the field to an∣other man, &c.] The meaning of the first clause is clear, namely, that if the party that had vowed some part of his land unto the Lord, refuse to redeem it, to wit, when the priest had set a price upon it, it should be taken as if he had voluntarily given the possssion thereof wholly unto God, and then afterward he might not re∣call it, but it was wholly separated from him. But the meaning of the second clause, or if he have sold the field to another man, is more questionable: for many Exposi∣tours understand the party selling to be the priest, or the treasurer of the priests at least: if it be meant of the owner that vowed the land, that then by his selling the land is meant onely his permitting it to be sold by the priests, and therefore many Interpreters translate this second clause thus, or if the field be sold to another man, and so they conceive the meaning of this second clause to be, that if the field were once sold to another man, because the owner refused to redeem it, the owner might not afterwards redeem it, and so it should be for ever alienated from him. But con∣sidering that these two lauses are joyned together by that copulative particle Or, And if he will not redeem the field, or if he have sold the field to another man, it is hard to understand the sst clause of him that vowed the land, and the second of the priests; and therefore other Expositours do better understand this second clause, as well as the first, of the party that had vowed the land to the Lord, to wit, that if he refused to redeem the land, or if afer he had vowed it to God, he never sought to per∣form his vow, but sacrilegiously robbed God by selling his land to some other man, in either of these cases he should not ever after that have power to redeem his land; though when he had sold it, the man that had bought it should enjoy it to the year of Jubile, yet then it should return not to the seller, but to the priest, who should enjoy it as the Lords by a former vow, It shall not be redeemed any more, saith the
text, and vers. 21. The possesion thereof shall be the priests. But yet first, becaue it is expresly said, that the priests should have no inheritance in the land▪ Numb. 18. 20. And the Lord spake unto Aaron, Thou shalt have no inheritance in their land, neither shalt thou have any part amongst them; secondly, because there was suh care taken by the law of God that the land belonging to one tribe should not for ever be alienated and passed over to another tribe, therefore many Expositours hold▪ that though the possession of such lands as were vowed to God, came to the priets in the year of Jubile, because they were not redeemed, yet the priests were bound a every Jubile, when they returned to them, to sell them again to some of the tribe to which the land belonged, yea to the next kinsman of the first owner if he would buy them, and that the priests might not keep them in their own hands. Vers. 21. But the field when it goeth ot in the Jubile shall be holy unto the Lord, as a field devoted, &c.] See the note upon vers. 28. Vers. 23. And he shall give thy estimation in that day, as a holy thing unto the Lord.] Here in the redemption of lands, which were not of a mans inheritance, but purchased of another, there is no addition of the fifth part required, as before, vers. 19. because the party vowing it was himself but a termer in it or a leassee unto the year of Jubile, and so had no more advantage by repossessing it then another should have by buying it, if he refused it. Vers. 26. Onely the firstlings of the beasts which should be the Lords firstlings, no man shall sanctifie it whether it be ox or sheep.] That is, no man shall vow to give unto the Lord the male firstling of an ox, sheep or goat, and that because their male firstlings were already the Lords in that regard as they were firstlings. But might they then vow any other male firstlings? Doubtlesse no: for all such first∣born whatsoever were the Lords, Numb. 8. 17. All the first-born of the children of Israel are mine saith the Lord, both man and beast: But because the first-born of sheep and such other catel, as used to be sacrificed, could not be redeemed, Numb. 18. 17. and so could never be vowed unto the Lord, whereas all other first-born might be redeemed, and after that might again be consecrated to the Lord by a vow, yea before they were redeemed they might be vowed with respect to the time after redemption, as Samuel Hannahs first-born sonne was vowed, 1. Sam. 1. 11. there∣fore the firstlings of oxen and sheep are here particularly mentioned, because they were never capable of being vowed unto the Lord. Vers. 27. And if it be an unclean beast then he shall redeem it according to thy estimation, &c.] That is, if any shall vow an unclean beast, then he may re∣deem it; and if he will redeem it, it shall be redeemed according to thy estimation, &c. for this is not spoken of redeeming the first-born of unclean beasts, but of un∣clean beasts that were vowed, as before vers. 11. which is evident in that here is injoyned the adding of a fifth part over and above the price of the cattel redeemed, which is no where enjoyned for the redeeming of the first-born. Vers. 28. Notwithstanding no devoted thing that a man shall devote unto the Lord, &c.] That is, nothing that is anathematized, so it is in the Greek: nothing destroyed or wholy cut off, as the Hebrew word signifieth. Things devoted, I con∣ceive, were such things as were consecrated and set apart absolutely unto God with∣ou
power of redemption, and that not by an ordinary vow, but with a curse of de∣struction denounced and desired upon any whosoever it be, that shall divert that to any private use. Hence the offerings of the temple, mentioned Luke 21. 5. are there called anathemata. Vers. 29. None devoted which shall be devoted of men shall be redeemed, but shall surely be put do death.] Three severall wayes this clause of the law concerning devoted things is understood by Expositours: first, some understand it onely of beasts, yea principally of unclean beasts, devoted of men, that is, devoted by men, conceiving that this is added to satisfie a doubt, namely, that if things devoted might not be sold, what then shall be done with those devoted unclean beasts which were not fit for the Lords use? to which they say an answer is here given, namely, that however they might not be sold, but must be put to death. Again secondly, some understand it generally of all devoted things, whether men or beasts or lands, &c. and these by the last clause, wherein it is said, that such things shall surely be put to death, understand a finall separating such things from all civill use unto the Lord, either by death or otherwise, to wit, that such things were either to be put to death, or else that they were to be irrecoverably cut off from all civill use, which in a meta∣phoricall phrase is a kind of death, such things being civilly dead (as we use to say) in regard of the former owner. But thirdly, some understand it onely of men that are devoted: for men, they say, are here mentioned, not as the persons devoting, but as the persons devoted; and therefore it is not translated, None devoted, which shall be devoted by men, but, None devoted, which shall be devoted of men, or from amongst men, shall be redeemed, that is, no men that are devoted shall be redeemed, but shall surely be put to death. And this seems the most probable Exposition, and most agreeable with our translation. Onely then it must be understood of such as were devoted unto destruction, which was done sometimes by a speciall and extra∣ordinary vow, and so the Canaanites were devoted, Numb. 21. 2. Israel vowed a vow unto the Lord, and said, If thou wilt indeed deliver this people into my hand, then will I utterly destroy their cities; or else by Gods speciall command, and so the inhabitants of Jericho were devoted, Josh. 6. 17. and the Amalekites, 1. Sam. 15. 3. for if we extend it to the devoting of men to Gods service, then that last clause, they shall surely be put to death, cannot be meant otherwise then in that metapho∣ricall sense before spoken of, namely that such were to be wholly given up for ever to the Lord, as men dead unto the world, and so Samuel, they say, was devoted to the Lord. Vers. 30. And all the tithe of land, whether of the seed of the lad, or of the fruit of the tree, is the Lords.] There are two sorts of tithes in the Law, the first which was given to the Levites, Numb. 18. 21. the second which (after the pai∣ment of the former tithe) was separated and carried up to Jerusalem, and there eaten by the owners, Deut. 12. 6, 7, 11. this may be meant of both, though princi∣pally of the first, as is methinks evident by that generall expression, all the tithe of the land, &c. Vers. 31. And if a man will at all redeem ought of i tithes, he shall adde thereto the fifth part thereof, &c.] Which was to make su that the Levites should
lose nothing by the cunning of the owners buying: the second tithe might be turned into money, Deut. 14. 23. but for the Lords use, not their own private com∣modity. Vers. 32. And concerning tithe of the herd or of the flock, even whatsoever passeth under the rod, &c.] This phrase hath respect unto the manner of tithing, which was thus; as they went out of the fold or barn one by one, the tithing man with his rod numbred them, and the tenth, as it casually passed by, whether good or bad, male or female, was marked out for the tithe. ANNOTATIONS On the third book of MOSES called NUMBERS. CHAP. I. ANd the Lord spake unto Moses in the wildernesse of Sinai, &c.] This third book of Moses is called Numbers, because therein are related two severall numbrings of the people, the one here in the first entrance of this book, the other after∣wards, chap. 26. besides many other numbrings, as of the offerings of the Princes, and of the severall stages of the Israe∣lites in their journeyings towards the land of Canaan, &c. In these first words he tells us the place and time when they were numbred, to wit, in the wildernesse of Sinai, and that on the first day of the second moneth in the second year after their return out of Egypt: In the beginning of the third moneth of the first year they came first into the wildernesse of Sinai, Exod. 19. 1. upon the very first day of the first moneth of the second year the tabernacle was erected, Exod. 40. 17. and now on the first day of the second moneth of this year this command was given for the numbring of the people: whereby it is evi∣dent that all those things, which are related in the foregoing book of Leviticus, were done within the compasse of one moneth, to wit, the first moneth of this second year. And if we consider also that the Israelites went not out of the wildernesse of Sinai till the twentieth day of this moneth, into which they enterd the first day of the third moneth of the first year, it is manifest that they were in this wildernesse a full year within a few dayes. Now whereas it is said also here that God gave Moses this command for the numbring of the people in the tabernacle of the congrega∣tion, hence some Expositours inferre that God did not speak now to him, out of the doore of the tabernacle, as many times he did, but within the tabernacle from off the mercy seat, as it is expressely said he did, chap. 7. 8, 9.
Vers. 2. Take ye the summe of all the congregaion of the children of Israel, &c.] In Exodus and Leviticus Laws were given fo Gods worship and service; and here now the Lord settles the church and common-wealth in order. They had been once numbred the year before, the first year after their coming out of Egypt, when every man paid a ransome for his soul, whereby their redemption by Christ was figured, Exod. 30. 11, 12. Now another muster is enjoyned: 1. that they might be still put in mind both of Gods faithfulnesse in performing his promise, that espe∣cially of multiplying them so exceedingly, as also of his power and providence in maintaining such a huge multitude of people in such a desert place: 2. that the distinct knowledge of their numbers might be an encouragement to the people, being now to go forward against their enemies: 3. that as they numbred them they might withall rank them in order according to their tribes and families, to the end they might travell along in good array without tumult and confusion: 4. to intimate how tenderly carefull God was over them, and what precious account he made of them: for those things men highly eseem, and for which they are solicitously care∣full, they are often numbring, as we see in the shepherds often numbring their sheep, and the rich mans telling over his coyn: yea 5. some adde another reason, to wit, that they might gather of every man that was numbred that poll-money enjoyned to be paid at their numbring for the service of the tabernacle, Exod. 30. 12. When thou takest the summe of the children of Israel after their numbers, then shall they give every man a ransome for his soul unto the Lord. But, as there it is noted, it is questionable whether that were commanded as a perpetuall Law that was alwayes to be observed. Every male by their poll: from twenty years old and upward.] So that it is ma∣fest, that neither women nor children were numbred, nor any that were not full twentie years old; the reason whereof was, because onely those were numbred that were fit for the warre: yet others would have another reason added besides, to wit, that none might presume to take the full number of those of whom God had said hat they should be innumerable, according to that, 1. Chron. 27. 23. But David ook not the number of them from wenty years old and under, because the Lord had said he would increase Israel like to the starres of the heaven. Vers. 3. All that are able to go forth to warre in Israel.] Those therefore that were by age, sicknesse, or any oher infirmity disabled for the warre, were not numbred amongst the rest of the people. Vers. 4. And with you there shall be a man of every tribe, &c.] To wit, to see that the work was carried fairly without any wrong done to any of the tribes. We cannot say whether these hereafter named were the heads and princes of the tribes before, and onely here by name appointed to this work, both to avoid contention about it, and withall that their names might be honoured in the memoriall of the work; or whether they were now chosen of God to have the preheminence, and o be the heads of each tribe. Indeed some Expositours do conclude for certain that hey were the heads of each tribe before, and that because they take it for granted that that which is related concerning these men by name, chap. 7. to wit, that as princes of ach tribe they brought their everall offering for the service of the taber∣nacle,
was done a moneth before this numbring of the people, to wit, in the first moneth of the second year, on the day the altar was anointed, which they gather from the 1. verse of the 7. chapter of this book. But whether this may be thence so certainly concluded, see the note upon the place. Vers. 10. Elishama the sonne Ammihud.] Numbers 7. 48. it is written Am∣miud. Vers. 14. Of Gad; Eliasaph the sonne of Düel.] Who is called, chap. 2. 14▪ Reüel, because the Hebrew letters are like one another, and often changed. Vers. 21. Those that were numbred of them, even of the tribe of Ruben, were fourtie six thousand and five hundred.] Reubens number was lss then any of the sonnes of Jacob (except Gad, Asher, and Benjamin) which may be esteemed as an effect of that curse denounced by Jacob, Gn. 49. 3▪ 4. that he should lose the priviledge of his birthright, the excellency of dignity and the excellenc of power▪ because he went up to his fathers bed. Vers. 24. Of the children of Gad, by their generations, &c.] Gad is here rec∣koned in the third place, because this tribe was joyned with Reubens and Simeons on the South quarter of the host, Numbers 2. 10, 14. and so it is in the rest. Vers. 27. Those that were numbred of them, even of the tribe of Judah, were threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred.] Judahs number was almost twelve thousand more then the greatest tribe, which may well be esteemed a part of the dignity which together with a part of the birth-right was conferred upon him, out of whose tribe the Messiah was to come, Gen. 49. 8, 9, 10. Vers. 33. Those that were numbred of them, even of the tribe of Ephraim, were fourtie thousand and five hundred.] Ephraims number is above eight thousand more then Manassehs (and yet the Philistins slew many of this tribe in Egypt, for which their father Ephraim mourned many dayes, 1. Chron. 7. 20, 21, 22.) Thus Jacobs prophecy is in part fulfilled, his younger brother Ephraim shall be greater then he, Gen. 47. 19. Vers. 37. Those that were numbred of them, even of the tribe of Benjamin, were thirty five thousand and foure hundred.] Benjamins number is of all the sonnes of Jacob the least (though at the first his children were moe then any of his brethren, Gen. 46. 21.) and after his tribe was almost rooted out, Judg. 20. no marvell therefore though it be called, Psal. 68. 28. Benjamin the little. Vers. 46. All that were numbred were six hundred thousand and three thou∣sand and five hundred and fifti.] When all the tribes were first numbred the year before, there were also found just as here, six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fiftie; at least, if there were some small difference, it was under fifty (such small numbers being indeed usually not set down in the Scriptures) yet then it is most probable that the tribe of Levi was numbred, which are here lest out. And if so, thence it must needs follow that there were then at their first num∣bring so many young men of nineeen years of age that now were twenty years old, as made up the number of the Levites, that they might see they should lose nothing by whatsoever was imployed in Gods service. Vers. 48. For the Lord had spoken unto Moses, saying, &c.] His numbring
of the tribe of Levi by themselves, not amongst the rest, some might think did pro∣ceed from an ambitious desire to exalt s own tribe; and therefore he makes ex∣presse mention that it was done by Gods speciall command, and that to shew that God had exempted them both from warres and all other secular imployments, and separated them onely to attend upon the service of the tabernacle; and besides be∣cause consequently their number was to be taken after another manner, to wit, from a moneth old and upward, chap. 3. 15. Vers. 51. And the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.] That is, whosoever is not of the tribe of Levi▪ and this the Lord enjoyned, both to bring them to the more reverend esteem of Gods holy things, and withall to make them ever mindfull of this, that there was no drawing nigh unto God without a Me∣diatour. CHAP. II. Vers. 1. ANd the Lord spake to Moses and Aaron, saying.] The people be∣ing all numbred as God had appointed in the former chapter, in this chapter the Lord gives direction for the ordering of every tribe when they pitched their tents, and when they marched forward; for to prevent confusion in their marching some order was necessary, and to cut off all matters of contention, the Lord himself appoints unto every tribe their severall place. Vers. 2. Every man of the children of Israel shall pitch by his own standard with the ensigne, &c.] For the understanding of this we must know 1. that every tribe was to have a particular ensigne, or banner, called here the ensigne of their fa∣thers house, and so where that was displayed all of that tribe were to pitch their tents together, as in one bodie: 2. that the camp being divided into foure quarters, in each quarter there was to be three tribes, who besides their severall ensignes had one standard in common for them all, which the chief of the three tribes carried, and so every man of the children of Israel was ordered to pitch by his own stand∣ard: 3. that being thus divided orderly into foure quarters, they were appointed to pitch their tents about the tabernacle of the congregation, to wit, three tribes in one quarter in the East, and three tribes in another quarter in the West, and so three likewise on the South, and three on the North, and then the tabernacle was in the middest of them. So hereby they were taught that God would dwell a∣mongst them as his people, to provide for them▪ to protect and defend them, &c. and withall they were taught to have God still in their mind, and so to fear him alwayes and worship him as they ought to do: and 4. that though the tribes did thus pitch their tents round about the tabernacle, yet it was, as the text saith, a farre off, that is, there was a good distance betwixt them and the tabernacle: how farre off it was we cannot say, yet it may be probably ghessed, that it was two thousand cubits, which is an English mile, because we find that such a distance was between the ark and the people when they passed over Jordan, Josh. 3. 4. And thus we may conceive what a glorious sight it was to behold the tribes thus orderly ranked in their severall places, and that it was no wonder though Balaam was stricken
with admiration to behold it, Numb. 24. 5, 6. How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob' and thy tabernacls, O Israel! as the valleys are they spread forth by the rivers side, &c. Vers. 3. And on the East-side toward the rising of the sunne shall the stand∣ard of Judah pitch, &c.] Thus the tribe of Judah, out of which Christ was to come, hath the preheminence and goes foremost as Captain of the rest; and is therein a type of Christ, the lion of the tribe of Judah, who also is Michael, that with his Angels fighteth against the Dragon and goeth before his heavenly armies, Rev. 12. 7. Thus Judah hath the dignity of the first-born, which was taken from Reuben; neither can Reuben wihstand it, because God hath so ordered it. Vers. 5. And those that do pitch next unto him shall be the tribe of Issachar.] And with him Zebulun, ver. 7. both younger brothers to Judah, that they might the more willingly be under his regiment. Vers. 9. And all that were numbred in the camp of Judah were a hundred, &c.] Thus the greatest number were in the first quarter, for the more safety of the Sanctuary, and all Israel, almost thirty thousand mo then in any other quarter. These shall first set forth.] That is, when the camp removes, these tribes before mentioned, to wit, Judah ad Issachar and Zebulun, which went together in one regiment under Judahs standard, were to advance forward in the first place: where∣by it is evident that when they journeyed from one place to another they did not march in that order as their tents were pitched about the tabernacle when they stayed in any place; but first those of Judahs standard advanced forward in the forefront, then immediately behind followed those of Reubens standard, ver. 16. then next behind them came the regiment under the standard of Ephraim, ver. 24. and then in the last place came those that belonged to the standard of Dan, ver. 31. onely the Levites went some of them betwixt the regiment of Judah and the regi∣ment of Reuben, as is expressed, chap. 10. 17. and other next after Reubens re∣giment just in the midst of their armies, having six tribes before them and six be∣hind them. Vers. 10. On the South-side shall be the standard of the camp of Reuben.] The South was to them that were ranked now with their faces Eastward on their right hand, and so the right wing is given unto Reuben, because he was the first∣born though he lost his birthright, Gen 49. which Judah and Joseph had shared between them. Vers. 12. And those which pitch by him shall be the tribe of Simeon, &c.] Who was his next brother, and that by Leah his mother. Now his other brother by Leah being already disposed of, who was fitter to be joyned with him then Gad, the first-born of Zilpah Leahs handmaid? Vers. 14. Then the tribe of Gad, &c.] See chap. 1. 14. Vers. 17. Then the tabernacle of the congregation shall set forward with the camp of the Levites in the middest of the camp, &c.] It is expressely said, chap. 10. 17. that in their journeyings, when the camp removed from one place to ano∣ther, the sonnes of Gershon and the sones of Merari set forward, bearing the ta∣bernacle, that is, the boards and coverings of the tabernacle, next after Judahs re∣giment,
between Judahs and Reubens regiment, and then afterwards the Koha∣thites, onely bearing the Sanctuary, went just in the midst of the camp, having six tribes before them, and six behind them. This therefore that is said here, that the tabernacle of the congregation shall set forward with the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camp, must either be understood onely of the Kohathites, who carried the Sanctuary, even all the holy things, just in the midst of the camp; or else by the midst of the camp, must not be meant precisely the just midst of the camp, but onely that they went between the regiments of the other tribes, some im∣mediately after the regiment of Judah, and the rest next after the regiment of Reu∣ben, and so these last onely were precisely in the midst of the camp. Vers. 18. On the West-side shall be the standard of the camp of Ephraim, &c.] Unto Josephs sonnes a double priviledge is here given, because he was to have a part of Reubens birthright, as it is expressely said 1. Chron. 5. 1, 2. for first the poste∣rity of his two sonnes are made two severall tribes, which might have been an oc∣casion of much contention, had not God thus expressely ordered it; and 2. unto them the West quarter is given for their pitching of their tents, and that I conceiv as the second place of honour in the camp: for in the same regard is the West quar∣ter amongst the Levites given to the posterity of Gershon the eldest sonne of Levi, chap. 3. 23. and so as amongst them Moses and Aaron and the priests pitched im∣mediately before the tabernacle, and then the Gershonites, that were of Levies el∣dest sonne, just behind the tabernacle, so in the ordering of the other tribes, Judahs regiment pitched before the tabernacle, and the sonnes of Joseph behind it. And besides, when they journeyed, they went in the forefront of those tribes that fol∣lowed the tabernacle, and so both when they marched, and when they pitched their tents, they had the tabernacle still in their faces, as if appointed to take speciall care of it; whereto some Expositours conceive the Psalmist alludes in that expression, Psal. 80. 2. Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Mansseh stirre up thy strength and come and save us. For with the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh in this regi∣giment and quarter Benjamin is here joyned, ver. 22. and so all Rachels posterity encamped together. But yet Ephraim, Josephs younger sonne, is appointed to be standard bearer in the camp before his elder brother Manasseh, according to Jacobs prophecy of Ephraims superiority, Gen. 48. 19, 20. where he set Ephraim before Manasseh. Vers. 24. All that were numbred of the camp of Ephraim, &c.] This was the smallest number of all the armies. Vers. 25. The standard of the camp of Dan shall be on the North-side by their armies.] He was the first-born of the handmaids children, and Jacobs fifth sonne, Gen. 30. 6. and by prophecy he was to judg his people as one of the tribes of Is∣rael, Gen. 49. 16. So God appointed him the standard in the left wing: with him are joyned the other two remaining sonnes of the handmaids, to wit, Asher, ver. 27. and Naphtaly, ver. 29.
CHAP. III. Vers. 1. THese also are the generations of Aaron and Moses, &c.] That is, these mentioned and numbred in the sequele of this chapter are of the stock whence Aaron and Moses dscended, to wit, of the tribe of Levi: for by the generations of such and such persons, in the Scripture, is meant sometimes their an∣cestours, sometimes their children and posterity, and sometimes their whole kind∣red and family, as here it is taken. Yet even the children of Aaron and Moses are numbred amongst the rest: for though there be no mention made of Moses sonnes, as there is of Aarons, ver. 2. yet even Moses sonnes are included amongst the Ko∣hathites, of which family Moses was, ver. 28. And therefore is Aron in this place prefixt before Moses, because in this regard Aarons sonnes, as being priests, had the preheminence of Moses posterity, who were but ordinary Levites. As for that clause, in the day that the Lord spake with Moses in mount Sinai, that I conceive is purposely added, because some of these here mentioned, though they were living when the Lord spake with Moses in mount Sinai, yet they were now dead, in the second moneth of the second year, when this command was given for the num∣bring of the people, namely Nadab and Abihu, mentioned ver. 2. Vers. 6. Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron, &c.] Aaron and his sonnes entred upon the office of the priesthood in the first moneth of the second year after their going out of Egypt, as it is evident, Levit. 10. but it seems the Levites were not set apart to enter upon their office till they were now numbred, and appointed how they should pitch their tents about the tabernacle, and what the severall charge should be of each family of them, which was in the se∣cond moneth of the second year, chap. 1. 1. But yet that they should be set apart to this imployment in stead of the first-born was promised them before, when they were appointed to slay those that had worshipped the golden calf, as is before no∣ted upon Exd. 32. 29. How this may be reconciled with that in Deut. 10. 8. see in the notes upon that place. Vers. 7. And they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole congrega∣tion, &c.] That is, they shall pitch their tents round about the tabernacle, that they may be near at hand to be subservient and helpfull unto Aaron in the severall duties of Gods worship, and the service of the tabernacle, which God hath given in charge to Aaron, and which God hath given in charge to the whole congrega∣tion. Vers. 8. And they shall keep all the instruments of the tabernacle of the con∣gregation, and the charge of the children of Israel, &c.] That is, that wherewith the children of Israel must have stood charged, but that the Levites are separated to take it upon them in Israels behalf. Vers. 10. And thou shalt appoint Aaron and his sonnes, and they shall wait on their priests office, &c.] That is, though the Levites are given unto Aaron and his sonnes for his help, that they may minister unto him and be assistants in those things which are fit for them▪ yet with those things that belong peculialy to the priests office even the Levites themselves must not upon pain of death intermeddle,
nor must the priests turn over the work of the Sanctuary to the Levites, so to ease themselves; they must wait themselves upon their office, and have the chief hand in those holy imployments, the Levites are onely appointed to be subservient and helpfull unto them. Vers. 15. Number the children of Levi, after the house of their fathers, by their families.] See the note upon chap. 1. 48. Every male, from a moneth old and upward shalt thou number them.] Male-children were not reputed wholly purified from their uncleannesse till they were a moneth old, Levit. 12. 4. and then were the first-born brought and presented be∣fore the Lord, Luke 2. 22. and then were they redeemed, chap. 8. 16. Now there∣fore from that age were the Levites numbred, who were given unto God in stead of the first-born. And besides, there would not have been any thing near so many of the Levites as there were of the first-born, if the Levites had not been numbred from a moneth old. Vers. 23. The families of the Gershonites shall pitch behind the tabernacle, West-ward.] Thus the rereward (the second place of honour to that in the fore∣front, where Moses and Aaron with the priests encamped) is given to the Gersho∣nites, as descended of Levies eldest sonne; but the most holy things were not com∣mitted to their charge, the reason whereof, see ver. 31. Vers. 25. And the charge of the sonnes of Gershon in the tabernacle, &c.] Thus the Gershonites had under their charge 1. the tabernacle; not the boards of the ta∣bernacle (for they were under Meraries charge, ver. 36.) but the tabernacle men∣tioned Exod. 26. 1. made of tenne curtains of fine twined linen and blue and pur∣ple and scarlet, &c. 2. the tenth which was that made of eleven curtains of goats hair, Exod. 26. 11. 3. the covering▪ that is the coverings, both that of rammes skinnes and that of badgers skinnes; for both were the Gershonites charge, Numb. 4. 25. and 4. the hangings for the doore of the tabernacle. Vers. 28. In the number of all the males from a moneth old and upward were ight thousand and six hundred.] There were therefore of these Kohathites eleven thousand more then were of the Gershonites, ver. 22. Vers. 31. And their charge shall be the ark and the table, &c.] Thus God of his free grace honoured the house from which Moses was descended, to wit, that of the Kohathites, with the charge of all the most holy things, the rather also because the priests, who were to make use of these holy things in the service of God, were of the same house. But withall to clear Moses from an ambitious and partiall pre∣ferring those of his own stock, the Lord gave no dignity to his sonnes above their brethren, but they were ranged amongst the ordinary Levites, as we may see 1. Chron. 23. 14. As for the hanging here mentioned amongst the most holy things under the Kohathites charge, it was the vail which hung between the holy and the most holy place, wherein the Ark was wrapped up when the Kohathites carried it, chap. 4. 5. Vers. 32. And Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the priest shall be chief over the chief of the Levites, &c.] Hence he is called that hath this charge the second priest, 2. Kings 25. 18. Thus Eleazar being high priest in Aarons room, Phinehas Elea∣zars sonne was governour over the Levites, 1. Chron. 9. 20.
Vers. 36. And under the custodie and charge of the sonnes of Merari shall be the boards of the tabernacle, &c.] And because these things were heavy, there were twice as many waggons and oxen allowed to them as to the Gershonites' Numb. 7. 8. Vers. 38. Keeping the charge of the Sanctuary for the charge of the children of Israel.] See the foregoing note upon ver. 8. Vers. 39. All the males from a moneth old and upward were twenty and two thousand.] To wit, the first-born of the Levites being deducted. If we summe up together the particular numbers before mentioned, to wit, seven thousand and five hundred of the Gershonites, ver. 22. eight thousand and six hundred of the Koha∣thites, ver. 28. and six thousand and two hundred of the Merarites, ver. 34. we shall find that all the males from a moneth old and upward were not twenty and two thousand, as is here said, but twenty and two thousand and three hundred: and therefore it seems the three hundred here left out in the generall sum were the first-born amongst the Levites, who being the Lords in that regard as they were the first-born, were not therefore to be reckoned amongst those that were to be given to the Lord in stead of the first-born of the other tribes: and the main reason why the number of the Levites was now taken, was to shew how they were taken in exchange for the Israelites first-born. Indeed it may seem strange that there should be but three hundred first-born males amongst so many thousand Levites: But for that we must know, that in all probabilitie onely those were reckoned for first-born, that were first-born males since their coming out of Egypt, when God did first challenge the first-born to be his in remembrance of his slaying all the first-born amongst the Egyptians. And whereas it may also seem strange that there should be of the whole tribe of Levi numbred from a moneth old and upward but two and twenty thousand and thre hundred, whereas the least of the other tribes being numbred but from twenty years old and upward had two and thirty thousand and two hundred, to wit, the tribe of Manasseh, chap. 2. 21. we must consider that this was doubtlesse by the speciall providence of God, that he might have the whole tribe of Levi in stead of the first-born: for if the tribe of Levi had been as numerous as the other tribes, there would have been farre more of them then the first-born were, and so they could not have been taken in stead of the first-born. But what became, may some say, of the Levites male-children that were under a moneth, and so not now numbred amongst those that were to be taken for the first-born? I answer doubtlesse the whole tribe was consecrated to the Lord, and therefore we may probably conceive that either by the speciall providence of God there was none at present under that age, or else those few that were under that age were taken in exchange for so many of the first-born of the Israelites that were afterwards born, who should otherwise have paid for their redemption. Vers. 41. And thou shalt take the Levites for me (I am the Lord) in stead of all the first-born among the children of Israel.] That is, in stead of the first-born males that were now at present amongst them: for all the first-born that came af∣ter this both of man and beast were to be redeemed▪ or given to the priest, chap. 18▪ 15▪ Every thing that openeth the matrice in all lesh which they bring unto the  ther it be of men or beasts, shall be thine, &c.
And cattel of the Levites in stead of all the firstlings, &c.] As the Levites are taken for the first-born of the Israelites; so the Levites cattel were taken in exchange for the first-born of the Israelites cattel: yet we must not think therefore that the Levites cattel were offered in sacrifice as the first-born of the cattel afterwards were, but it sufficed that the Levites had them, who were Gods peculiar portion, and appointed to receive in his name what was to be given to him. Vers. 43. And all the first-born males by the number of names &c.] All the Levites being numbred were twenty and two thousand, and now the first-born be∣ing numbred were twenty and two thousand two hundred seventy and three; wherein Gods speciall providence appeareth, that the number of the first-born should be so near the number of the Levites taken in their stead, to wit, but two hundred seventy and three more then the Levites were. Vers. 46. And as for those that are to be redeemed of the two hundred and threescore and thirteen, &c.] There being two hundred seventy and three of the first-born more then there were of the Levites, it is ordered that these should pay for their redemption five shekels a piece by the poll, which was the price they after∣wards paid for the redemption of the first-born, Numb. 18. 15. Now whereas it may seem unequall that some of the first-born should pay redemption-money and others should pay none, because the Levites were taken in their stead; to this it is answered by Expositours, that either this was decided by lot, who should pay and who should not pay, and then there was no wrong done; or else that the money that was to be raised for the redemption of these two hundred seventy and three was paid in common by them all. Vers. 48. And thou shalt give the money, wherewith the odde number of them is to be redeemed, unto Aaron and to his sonnes.] Because the Levites were given to him, vers. 9. and when the Levites failed, this money was in their stead. CHAP. IV. Vers. 3. FRom thirty years old and upwards, even untill fifty years old, all that enter into the host, &c.] In the former chapter all the Levites of a moneth old and upward were numbred, because all were numbred that were to be taken in stead of the first-born, and so to be accounted as those that were set apart as holy to the Lord; but here onely those that were thirty years old and upward are numbred, to wit, those that were to be imployed in carrying the tabernacle and the holy things thereof. Indeed in the eighth chapter of this book, vers. 24. it is said that the Levites should enter upon their service at five and twenty years old: to which some answer out of the Hebrew traditions, that at five and twenty years they were admitted to be instructed and trained up to the service of the tabernacle, but did not actually enter upon the service till they were thirty years old. But I con∣ceive the truer answer is, either that they entred upon the service of the tabernacle at five and twenty years, but not upon this of removing and carrying the tabernacle and the holy things therein (of which at present Moses onely speaks) untill they were thirty years old, because a good settled strength of body was required to that
service; or else that the chief charge and care of the service of the tabernacle ly up∣on those onely that were thirty years old, onely when they were but five and twen∣ty years they were admitted to assist and help their brethren upon whom the chrg lay, in those things that they should set them to do. And therefore we find that this numbring of the Levites for the service of the tabernacle from thirty years old con∣tinued even in Davids time, 1. Chron. 23. 3. Now the Levites wer numbred from the age of thirty years end upward; the Lord teaching us by this maturity of years at first required in the Levites, that the ministers of God, attending upon holy things, the charit of Israel and the horsemen thereof, 2. Kings 2. 12. should be no novices or young scholars, but ripe in knowledge and of solid jugement; and there∣fore we see that both the Baptist and Christ were full thirty years old ere they en∣tred upon their office and ministry, Luke . 2, 23. And for the same cause it was that none were now numbred that were above fifty years: for because at that age strength useth to decay, and naturall infirmities to grow upon men, therefore they were then exempted from the harder service of the tabernacle (and so were not now numbred amongst those that were to carry the tabernacle) yet still they were to minister with their brethren in the tabernacle of the congregation, to keep the charge, chap. 8. 26. that is, they were still to be assistant as overseers, to see that the work was done: that charge lay upon them still though they were exempted from all laborious service in their own persons; and besides they were still to be imploy∣ed in teaching and instructing the people. As for the description which we have here of those that were to be numbred, all that enter into the host to do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation, we must know first, that the meaning is not, that those that were now numbred from thirty years old and upward▪ &c. were all that were at any time imployed in the service of the tabernacle (for I say it is evident chap. 8. 24. that from twenty and five years old and upward they went in to wai upon the service of the tabernacle, though happely as subservient onely to those of thirty years old and upward, upon whom the charge of the work chiefly lay) but the meaning is, that those that were now numbred were all such as did enter into the host to do the work of the tabrnacle of the congregation; and scondly, that the company of the Levites that did the service of the tabernacle are here called an host, because they had their severall orders, and offices, and places under the com∣mand of their heads and governours, and were not admitted into the service if thy were crasie or lame, or any way unfit for these holy imploymnts. Vers. 4. This shall be the service of the sonnes of Kobath, &c.] To preven confusion and ambition very family hath their service seveally appointed. Vers. 5. And they shall take down the covering-vail, &c.] That is, the vil which hung between the holy and the most holy place, called by the Apostle th second vail, Heb. 9. 3. Herewith the ark was covered whilst the tabernacle stood, Exod. 40. 3. Thou shalt put therein the ark of the testimony, and cover the ark with the vail; and herein it was wrapped up and covered now when the tabernacle was to be taken down and removed, and that by t priests, the uns of Aron: so that hereby it is also evident, that thogh the high priests alone wnt into th most holy place where the ark was, and that too but once  year, Heb. 9. 7. to wit
whilest the tabernacle was standing to do service there; yet when the tabernacle was to be taken down▪ the ineriour priests might freely go in thither, to wit, ha∣ving first taken away the vail, because then there was no difference betwixt the holy and the most holy place; and the Lord, no doubt, at those times withdrew the cloud upon the mercy-eat, Levit. 16. 2. which was the signe of Gods presence there; yea and the Levites too afterwards, when the holy things were covered, to remove the ark from thence, as seems to be implyed vers. 16. Vers. 6. And shall put thereon the covering of badgers skins, and shall spread over it a cloth wholly of blue.] This covering of badger skinnes was not that where-with the tabernacle was on the outside coved (for that was amongst the carriage of the Gershonites, vers. 25.) but it was a smaller case or covering of these skinnes laid over the ark to keep it dry when the Levites carried it: and therefore we see there was such a covering fitted for the table, vers. 8. and so also for the rest of the holy things, vers. 10, 11, &c. and these with the clothes of blue and scarlet, used in the covering of these things, were those lothes of service mentioned Exod. 31. 10. And shall put in the staves thereof.] It is said of the staves belonging to the ark, Exod. 25. 15. The staves shall be in the rings of the ark, they shall not be taken from it; and hereupon it becomes questionable how it can be said here, that the priests should put in the staves thereof, if the staves were to remain alwayes in the rings, and were upon no occasion to be taken out. Some Expositours to remove this seeming contradiction hold that the staves here spoken of were not the staves of the ark, mentioned Exod. 25. but certain other staves that were put through the covering of the ark▪ and wherewith they carryed the ark being thus covered. But because they are called here he staves thereof, and where afterwards Moses speaks of the candlestick which had no staves belonging to it, there another exprssion is used for the carrying of it, vers. 10. And shall put it upon a barre; therefore I conceive this place is meant of the very staves that were made together with the ark▪ and covered over with gold as the ark was; and that two other wayes this doubt may be more probably resolved: to wit first, that though the staves of the ark were never to be taken out of the rings whilet the tabernacle was standing▪ of which that law is meant. Exod. 25. 15. yet when the tabernacle was taken down, and the holy things to be removed, then they might and must necessarily take ot the staves till the coverings were put upon it, and then were to put them in again, as here is enjoyned, for the carrying of it; or secondly, that this which is here said of putting in the staves thereof, is meant of putting in the end of the staves under the covering, to wit, that because the staves were a part of the ark▪ and covered over with gold as the ark was, therefore not so much as the ends of the staves that stuck out were to be let bare to the injury of the weather, nor might be seen or touched by the Levites when they came to carry it, but were therefore to be carefully put in under the covering; and to that end happely the cases or covering of the ark were so made that there were places to put in the ends of the slaves, and so the Levites did not touch so much as the staves uncovered. Vers. 7. And the continuall bread shall be thereon.] That is, the shewbread▪ here called the continuall bread, because it was to be continually upon the table
before the Lord, Exod. 25. 0.) shall not be taken off from the table▪ when it is thus covered and wrapped up▪ but shall be left still upon the table, even when the Levites remove it from one place to another. And hereby it is evident that they had loaves of shewbread standing upon the table all the time of their travelling through the wildernesse: for though they were chifly fed with manna all the time▪ Exod. 16. 35. The chilren of Israel did eat manna fourty years, till they came to a land inhabited; yet it may be probably enough conceived that they had too some small supply of corn to make bread from the neighbouring countries, whereof how∣ever they would be sure to provide every week the loaves of shewbread that were to stand upon the holy table. Vers. 13. And they shall take away the ashes from the altar.] In giving directi∣on how the altar of burnt-offerings was to be wrapped up and covered every time they took down the tabernacle, and were to go forward to some other place, here is order taken that first they should take away the ashes, whereby to me it seems not so probable, which most Expositours hold, that the Israelites never offered any sacrifices in the time of their travelling through the wildernesse after they were once gone from mount Sinai: for why then should they be here enjoyned to take the ashes from off the altar when ever they removed the tabernacle? happely they did not indeed for want of store of cattel so constantly observe all the sacrifices enjoyn∣ed as they did afterwards when they came into the land of Canaan: But that God should cuse them at mount Sinai to build such a goodly tabernacle, and then set apart a whole tribe to the service of the tabernacle, and destroy Nadab and Abihu for not being exact in that service, to render the priests thereby more carefull and wary, ad yet that after this for above eight and thirty years together they should never offer any sacrifices, sems to me vey improbable. And as for that place. Amos 5. 25. Hav ye offered unto me sacrifices and offerings in the wildernesse fourty years, O house of Israel? the meaning is not that all those fourty years they never offered sacrifices nor offerings (for at Sinai it is evident they did) but that they did even in those times adulterate the worship that he had enjoyned them: so that it cannot be concluded, I conceive, that they did never sacrifice in their pas∣sing through the wildernesse. But what became of the fire when they cleared the altar of the ashes, and put the coverings upon it? I answer▪ thogh it be not ex∣pressed how it was done, yet that it was put into some pot or other vssel▪ and o preserved still with supply of wood, cannot well be questioned; because they were not to use any strange fire in their sacrifices, but onely that which was kindled fom heaven, Levit. 9. 24. which therefore they were appointed continually to keep burn∣ing, Levit. 6. 12. The fire in the altar shall be burning in it, it shall not be put out. Vers. 15. And when Aaron and his sonnes have made an end of covering the Sanctuary, &c.] Here direction is given for the carriage of all the holy things of the Sanctuary before mentioned, to wit, that being so covered, so soon as the camp bgan to remove, the Levites that were the posterity of Kohath should come and take them up, and carry them in their place, onely with this caution added▪ but they shall not touch any holy thing lest they die. And thus the charge of the Kohathite,
a it was more honourable then that of the other Levites, because they had the chage of the most holy things; so it was more burthensome, because they bre it not in carts as the other Levites did theirs, but on their shoulders; and withall more perillou, which must needs much take away the envy of this honour. The ak indd was oftn caryed by the priests themselves, as it is evident, Deut. 1. 9. Mos wroe this Law, and delivered it to the priests the sonnes of Lev▪ which bare the Ark of the covenant of the Lord; for though this service was im∣posed upon the Levites as subservient to the priests, yet the pries were no exclu∣ded, who did therefore upon speciall occasions carry it themselves, as when they passed over Jordan, Josh. 3. 6. & when they compassed the walls of Jericho, Josh. 6. 6. But ordinarily this service was performed by the Levites, especilly till the number of the priests was increased, they carried it as they did all other the holy thing of the Sanctuary. The braen laver, I know, is not here mentioned amongst the holy things which they were to carry; but the reason of this may be, because onely those things are named which were covered by the priests, but this laver could receive no hut by the wer, and therefore was not covered. Vers. 16. And to the office of Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the priest pertain∣th the oyl for the light.] Two things are here affirmed concerning the charge or office of Eleazar, the eldest sonne of Aaron, to wit, in this service of removing the abernacle: namely 1. that to him pertained the oyl for the light, and the swet nnse, and the daily meat-offering, and the anointing oyl, that is, that he himself was to carry these things; for if his charge had been onely to oversee the carrying o these things by the Kohathites, why should these things be particularly mentio∣ned, since the overseeing of them in all their carriages belonged to him: and then 2. that to him appertained the oversight of all the tabernacle▪ &c, that is, he was to oversee the Kohathits concerning the carrying of these things, and to appoint every one to their severall burthens. And thus as the Kohathites had the honour of carrying the most holy things, so Eleazar, the eldest sonne of Aaron▪ was appointed to have the overght of them, as Ithamar his younger brother had the overight of the Gershonites, ver. 28. and the Merarites, ver. 33. Vers. 25. And they shall bear the curtains of the tabernacle, &c.] To wit, the foure severall coverings wherewith the tabernacle was covered, that is, 1. the ten curious curtains, mentioned here in the second place, though they were the first coverings, and were called as here the tabernacle of the congregation, Exod. 26. 1▪ and 2. the eleven curtins of goats hair, which were laid over that, named here in the first place▪ and called the curains of the tabernacle: 3. the covering which was of rammes skinns died red: and then 4. the covering of badgers skinnes, which lay uppermost of all. Vers. 32. And by name ye shall reckon the insruments of the charge of their burthen.] Whereas the sockets, pillars, pis▪ cords, and other instrument coitted to their charge were many, and ight some of them at least seem of le importane, therefore the Lord ppointed that of these there should be a note kept, and so ccordingly thy should be delivered by name▪ lest any should be to seek whn the tabernacle was to be et up again. Herby also was signiied how care∣full
God is of the least member of his church, and so also of all his orinance▪ John 10. 3. Vers. 44. Even those that were numbred of them after thir amilis were three thousand and two hundred.] Usually in all families the younger and aged ort, if reckoned togethr, are more then the middle aged: and so it was in the other families of the Levites: of the Grhonites there was little more then a third part fit to serve in the tabernacl, nd of the Kohathites there was not a third par▪ and yet the Merarites are more then half able men for Gods service; a most remark∣able proof of the wisdome and providence of God. Because the greatest burthen was imposd upon the Merarites, therefore God giveth them more able men then any of the other families, and yet the generall number of these were lesse then any of the other two. Vers. 48. Even those that were numbred of them ere eight thousand and five hundred and fourscore.] Note how few there were of the Levites in comparison of the other tribes: O Judah there were seventy and foure thousand and ix hundred able men for the outward wafare in the host of Israel, Numb. 1. 27. but of the Levites there were but eight thousand five hundred and fourscore men fit for their service. CHAP. V. Vers. 2. COmmand the children of Israel that they put out of the camp every leper, &c.] To wit, the lepers and those that had running issues, till they were cured and cleansed, and those that were unclean by the dead, till after certain dayes they were purified according to the Law. More concerning this e in the note upon Levit. 13. 46. Vers. 6. When a man or woman shall commit any sinne that men commit, &c.] That is, when they shall commit any sinne ereinto by reason of humane frail∣ty men are subject to fall, to wit, in regard of any wrong done to their neighbour, which is a inne highly displeasing to God, they shall then confesse and make satis∣faction as is here appointed. Because the purloyning of the goods of our brethren, and all other such acts of injustice, are innes that do more especially indr the well ordering of camps, therefore doth the Lord in this place urge this  Law against these kind of offences▪ that the camp of Israel now set in ordr might nei∣ther be defiled nor disordered thereby. Vers. 7. And he shall recompence his trespasse with the principal hereo, and adde unto it the fifth part thereof.] That is, he shall, by way of recmpncing the wrong he hath done to his neighbour, not onely restore fully the whole princi∣pall he hath defrauded him of, but also give him more ver and above the fifth part of so much as he had detained from him, which was njoyned both by way of sa∣tisfying the party wronged as concerning the want of his goods whilst they were detained, and also by way of a penalty on the party offning. Neither doth this contradict thos Laws, Exod. 22. where the thief that had tllen fom his neigh∣bour is appointed to restore double what he had taken away, yea in some cae
fourfold and fivefold: for those Laws were for such against whom the crime was proved by witnesses in a legall way, but this is for those that did voluntarily confesse the wrong they had done, in which case the Lord impoeth a lighter penal∣ty, to wit, onely a fifth part over and above the principall. Vers. 8. But if the man have o kinsman to recompence the trespasse unto, &c.] In these words one direction is onely implyed, to wit, that if the party were dead to whom the wrong was done, then the recompence must be made to his heir or next kinsman; and then another is expressed, to wit, that if there be no such kinsman to be found, then must the trespasse be recompenced unto the Lord, even to the priest, because in all trespasses done to our neighbours God is also injured, and the priests the Lord had appointed to be his receivers. But now this the He∣brews understand onely of trespasses done to strangers: for there is no man in Isra∣l, they say, without an heir or kinsman, either child, or brother, or other of his bloud. Vers. 9. And every offering of all the holy things of the children of Israel, which they bring unto the priest, shall be his.] This is here added by way of am∣plification, to shew why in the verse before he had said, that the trespasse shall be recompenced to the Lord, even to the priest; for, aith he, it is no otherwise ordered in this then in other things, my priests I have appointed to receive in my name whatever is due to me; every offering, or every heave-offering, &c. shall be his, that is whatever is of all the holy things onely heaved or offered unto the Lord, and not burnt in my service upon mine altar, the priest shall have it. Vers. 10. And every mans hallowed things shall be his.] That is, not onely those meat-offerings, and those parts of the peace-offerings which were waved and heaved before the Lord, but generally all the hallowed things▪ such as were the first-fruits and things vowed, &c. were appointed for the priest: as if he should have said, in a word, whatsoever any man giveth the priest as due to God, it shall be the priests; for to him God hath given it. See this more fully expressed, Ezek. 44. 30. Vers. 12. If any mans wife go aside and commit a trespasse against him, &c.] This is the order which God took for the tryll of  wife, whether guilty or not guilty, of whom her husband was jealous: and prescribed it was at this time happe∣ly, when God was now setting all things in order concerning the camp, both to prevent the defiling of the camp by such filthinesse, by keeping wives in aw with the fear of this triall; and likewise to prevent the inconveniencies that might arise by the jealousies of men, where the dwellings of fmilies were not so severall as in towns and cities. For though it be a sinne in a husband unjustly to suspect his wie, yet God allowed the husband to bring his wife to this triall, because of the hard∣nesse of their hearts, lest the wife should be subject to a greater mischief for want of this triall, to wit, of being cast off, or lain, or otherwise oppressed by her husband in the rage of his jealousie. But why was there not the ame Law for the triall of the husband, if his wie were jealous of him? I answer, there are severall reasons given for this by Expositours: as 1. because women are naturally more prone to be jealous and suspicious then men, and therefore not so fit to enjoy this liberty;
2. because women by reason of their subjection to their husbands were n so fit to call their husbands to such a triall; 3. because the adultery of the wife is more mis∣chievous then the adultery of the husband, in regard that thereby the husband is made often to father another mans issue, & to leave his estate & inheritance to chil∣dren that are not his; & lastly, because wives in their jealousie had not so much pow∣er to oppresse and wrong their husbands as the husbands had to wrong their wives. Vers. 15. Then shall the man bring his wife unto the priest.] The priest was in his office a figure of Christ, by whom God will judge the srets of men, Rom. 2. 16. and the tabernacle was the igne of Gods preence amongst them. The jealous husband was therefore to bring his wife unto the priest, and the priest, ver. 16. was to bring her near, to set her before the Lord, to wit, at the doore of the tabernacle, that so perceiving her self set as it were before Gods tribunal, the very fear of Gods all-seeing ey, and the shame that would fall upon her in the ight of all the con∣gregation now gazing upon her, might sare her from submitting her self to this tri∣all if indeed she were guilty. And he shall bring her offering for her, the tenth part of an ephah of barley meal.] The generall drift of this offering no doubt was, that it might be a testi∣mony that she willingly proffered her self to b tried by the Lord, to whom she presented this offering, whether she were guiltie or no: yet because the ame quantity is presribed here that is prescribed for the trespasse-offering, Levit. 5. 11. namely the tenth part of an ephah, I conceive it was also brought by way of atonement for her other sins, as desiring that the Lord in his mercy, for his Christs sake, passing by her other trespasses, would in this particular deal with her according to her deserts: And indeed he that will in regard of his innocency in any one particular appeal to Gods judgement with David, Psal. 7. 8. Judgeme, O Lord, according to my righteous∣nesse, &c. must yet for the generall course of his life ay with David, Psal. 143. 2. Enter not into judgement with thy servant: for in thy ight shall no man living be justified. Other meat-offerings were of fine wheat floure, this of barley meale; others had oyl and frankincense, Levit. 2. this noe; no doubt both the course of∣fering and the forbidding of oyl and ncense (ignes of joy and gladnesse of heart) were to expresse the poore ad and dolefull condition of this suspected woman. And he shall poure no oyl upon it, nor put frankincense thereon; for it is an offering of jealousie, &c.] That is, it is an offering whereby she yieled her self to be judged by the Lord, if guilty of that iniquity whereof her husband was jealous, and did desire the Lord to shew that he did remember it; and therefore nothing im∣plying sweetnesse or joy was to be put to this offering. Vers. 17. And the priest shall take holy water in an arthen vessell.] This ho∣ly water was either that water of separation, wich was used for purifying, chap. 19. or rather water taken out of the holy laver, conecrated to holy ues. No doubt the holinesse of these things thus used was to strike the greater terrour into her, that if guilty he might not dar to adde perjury to her other inne: for the abuse of ho∣ly things by the light of nature we know is a foul inne, and perilous. As for the earthen vessel, the basenesse of the vessel tended also to expresse the hmiliation of the woman, and the adnesse of the businesse now in hand. Besides, because it was
imployed in bringing uncleannesse to light, if any were, it may be probably thought that God would have no monument to remain of it, but appointed it to be broken after this work was ended, as in other cases, Levit. 6. 28. and 11. 33. and 15. 12. Vers. 17. And of the dust tht is in the floore of the tabernacle the priest shall take, and put it into the waer.] It was fit the drink should be distastfull, to put her in mind of the bitter curse that would follow upon her drinking if he were guilty: and to this end dust is put into it. But beides, it was also first, because dust in all uses was a igne of basenesse, sorrow and afflictions, as Job 2. 12. Psal. 1. 7, 5. Psal. 22. 15. Lam. 3. 29. and so was fit to imply both the foul and unclean inne which was in question, the afliction of the woman suspected, and the sorrow she would bring upon her self if guilty: and secondly, because dust was the food of the cursed serpent, Gen. 3. 14. and so might signifie, that if she had harkened to his tempta∣tions he should be partaker of his curse. Withall it was holy dust▪dust of the loore of the tabernacle (as the ground whereon Moses tood, Exod. 3. 5. was holy gound) that it might be the more terrible, and teach her to fear judgement from the Lord. Vers. 18. And the priest shall set the woman before the Lord, and uncover the womans head. The uncovering of the head was a signe of sorrow, Levit. 21. 10. And he that is the high priest among his brethrn, upon whose head the anointing oyl was poured, shall not uncover his head nor rend his clothes; and to have her head bare in such an assembly was a shame, 1. Cor. 11. 6. For if the woman be not cover∣ed, let her also be shorn; but if it be a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be covered. The covering of this womans head was therefore pulled off by the priest, first, to shew the sad and wofull condition this woman was now in; second∣ly, by the shame hereof to make other women carefull so to carry themselves that they might not give any occasion of suspicion to their husbands; thirdly, and chifly, to signifie, that it was in vain any longer to hide her sinne, if she were guilty, be∣cause God would now lay er open, and discover to the eyes of all Israel whether or no she were fauly. And the prist shall have in his hand the bitter water tha causeth the curse.] It is called the bitter water, from the effet, because it caused the curse: to express which the better it was no doubt made unpleasing to the taste by the dust put nto it. Vers. 21. The Lord make thee a curse and an oath among thy people, &c.] That s, the Lord make thee such a fearfull example of his wrath and indignation by causing thy thigh to rot, and thy belly to swell, that in time to come when any of thy people would use a fearfull curse or imprecation upon any, they may therein make mention of thee, desiring that such plagues and misries might fall upon them s fell upon such a woman, that being guilty of adultery did yet drink the water of jealousie. The like xpression we have, Jer. 29. 22. Vers. 22. And this water that causeth the curse shall go into thy bowels▪ o ake thy bely to swell, and thy thigh to rot.] And so God should punish her in ose very parts which had been abused in the service of inne. And the oman shall say, Amen, Amen.] This word of consent is doubled, to
shew the fervency of her zeal, the innocencie of her cause, the uprightnesse of her conscience, and the purity of her heart. Vers. 23. And the priest shall write these curses in a book, and he shall blot them out with the bitter water.] That is, he shall write them in a scroll of parchment, and then wash and scrape them off into the water. And this, I conceive, was done, to assure the woman that the curse threated should surely fall upon her, if she were guilty; and that because though there were no natr ll cause why this water thus ingled with dust should have such a range operation, yet the word written should cause the water to work this effect. And therefore as sure as she saw the writing of that scroll washt off into the cup, so sure she migt be that the urse from the word should, as I may say, passe into the water, and in that water should passe into her bowels. Vers. 24. And he shall cause the woman to drink the bitter water, &c.] To wi, after she had offered the jealous-offering; for it is evident in the following verse, that first the priest did take out of her hand and offer her meat-offering for her, vers. 25, 26. and then afterwards he made her to drink the bitter water, vers. 27. Vers. 26. And the priest shall tak an handfull of the offering, &c.] See he note upon Levit. 22. Vers. 28. And if the woman be not defiled, but be clean, then e shall be free, and shall canceive seed.] That is, the drinking this water shall no wie hurt her, in∣somuch that she hall be as capable of bringing forth children as ever she was before; whereas the guiltie woman should by drinking the water be utterly disabled for ever conceiving with child by reason of those ad effects it should work in he body, the innocent woman should be free from all such inconveniencies, and should conceive and bring forth children as formerly. This may well be taken to be most probably the full meaning of the words; yet the most of Expositours judge that there is farre more intended thereby, to wit, that there is a promise here made to the innocent wie as by way of recompense from the Lord for the shame she should undergo by being so unjustly suspected, to wit, that upon the drinking of this water she should not fail to conceive and bring forth children to her husband that was then bound to re∣ceive her to favour again, yea though before she had been barren. Vrs. 31. The shall the man be guiltlesse, &c.] That is, whereas if the husband should nourih jealous thoughts in his mind concerning his wife, and thereupon ei∣ther cast her off, or any way oppresse her, this would be sinne to him; if on the other side he should take this legall way to find out whether his wife were faulty or no, he should be guiltlesse whatever the event should be: if upon the drinking the water, her belly should swell and her thighes rot, her miseries should no way be impued to him, but must lie upon his wife, who by her uncleannesse and impudent denyall of it had drawn this judgement upon her self; and on the other side, if the woman upon is tryall should be found innocent, the husband must not be lyable to any censure or it, because he onely used the liberty given him of God for the disco∣very ofthe trth, the blame, if any, must lie upon the wife who had given occasion of suspicion to her hsband, and so still aith the text, the woman shall bear her ini∣quity. And indeed iis most probable that husbands were not admitted to bring
their wives to this tryall unlesse they could show that their wives had given some cause of jealousie, though they could not prove them guilty of adultery, in which case no wonder at all it is though the husband were judged guiltlesse in bringing his wife to this tryall, and all the fault laid upon the wife, what ever the event of the tryall was. CHAP. VI. Vers. 2. WHen either man or woman shall separate themselves, &c.] Having ordered those things that concerned his people in generall the Lord now takes order for those who desired to be more nearly and closely bound to God by a speciall vow, to wit, what they should do who desired by vow to sepa∣rate themselves from the ordinary course of men, that they might the more freely and wholly dedicate themselves to God, that is, to a more strict and pure course of serving of God then other men used, and were therefore called Nazarites, that js, men or women separate from others and bound to a peculiar profession or course of life. These God here allows, first, that their example might allure others to strict holinesse, these being the miroirs of their times, and admired amongst the people, Lam. 4. 7. Her Nazarites were purer then snow, they were whiter then milk; and secondly, that they might be types and shadows of Christ, who was in∣deed the true Nazarite, even holy, harmlesse, undefiled and separate from sinners, Heb. 7. 26. and was therefore by the providence of God (though upon another ground, namely his dwelling in Nazareth) called a Nazaren or a Nazarite, Matth. 2. 23. But withall God prescribes laws to these men and women to prevent the excesse of superstition. Vers. 3. He shall separate himself from wine and strong drink, &c.] Because the Nazarites were to give themselves wholly to the service of God during the time of their separation, therefore as the priests were forbidden the drinking of wine or strong drink when they were to go into the tabernacle of the congregation, Levit. 10. 9, so were the Nazarites also; yea the drinking or eating of any thing that came of the vine, vineger, or raisons, &c. thereby also to signifie their full and pefect re∣nouncing of all worldly pleasures, or any thing tending thereto, and how exactly carefull we ought to be not onely to avoid all evil, but also to abstain from all ap∣pearance of evil, 1. Thess. 5. 22. But yet still we must note that both this and the other laws following these Nazarites were bound to observe onely during the dayes of their separation, as is expressed vers. 4. 5, 6. There were indeed some Nazarites perpetuall during their whole life, such as were Samuel, 1. Sam. 1. 28. and Samson, Judg. 13. 7. and these were Nazarites by commandment, not vow. But these Nazarites, concerning whom these laws are given, were such as did of their own ac∣cord take upon them the vow of a Nazarite for some certain dayes, some for a longer time, some for a shorter, as they pleased themselves. Vers. 5. All the dayes of the vow of his separation there shall no rasour come upon his head, &c.] To wit, that his hair being kept thus uncut might be a memoriall to him of his separation and consecration unto the Lord, and therefore in the next
words it follows, Untill the dayes be fulfilled in the which he separateth himself unto the Lord, he shall be holy: for indeed the chief thing that God required of these Nazarites was inward and spirituall holinesse, these outward ceremonies being but onely signes and remembrances of that, and without that nothing but mere vanity. That this law is to be understood onely of men, and not of women Nazarites (of whom mention was also made in the beginning of the chapter) we may easily con∣ceive, because their hair was alwayes kept uncut, and so could not be to them a me∣moriall of their consecration. But for men Nazarites this was enjoyned as a memo∣riall of their consecration, and that for these reasons, as may be probably conceived: First, that it might be a signe of their cleannesse from pollutions: for when the Naza∣rites casually defiled, vers. 9. or the Leper, Levit. 14. 8. 9. were cleansed from theirim∣purity, their hair was shaven off; and therefore the Nazarites keeping his hair from shaving was a signe that he had kept himself from being defiled: Secondly, that it might be a signe of their speciall subjection to God, as the womans long hair is a signe of her subjection to her husband, 1. Cor. 11. 5, 10. Thirdly, that the neg∣lect of trimming their hair might be a signe of the neglect of the outward ador∣ning of ther bodies, and how wholly they were intent upon the service of God and the adorning of their souls, that they were mortified to all worldly delights, and onely taken up with spirituall and heavenly things. Vers. 7. He shall not make himself unclean for his father, &c.] Namely by touching, mourning for, or burying them: wherein as much exactnesse was requi∣red of the Nazarite as was required of the high priest, Levit. 21. 11. and thus by avoiding these legall impurities they were taught what exactnesse of spiritall purity and holinesse God required of them: for this refraining from the dead (in whom the image as it were of Gods curse for sinne was to be seen, for the wages of sinne is death, Rom. 6. 23.) figured our abstaining from sinfull and dead works, that we may keep our selves unspotted of the world, pure and undefiled before God, Jam. 1. 27. Besides, this taught them to moderate their affections and sorrow for their earthly friends, that they might be holy to their father in heaven. Because the consecration of his God is upon his head.] That is, because the signe of his consecration is upon his head, to wit, his long hair. Vers. 9. Then shall he shave his head in the day of his cleansing, on the seventh day shall he shave it.] The hair of the Nazarites was as it were a holy thing con∣secrate to God, as being the signe sanctified or set apart to be a memoriall of that strict vow of singular holinesse, whereby he had bound himself: this being there∣fore defiled, it was to be shaven off, that new hair might come in the room; where∣by was signified how strict God is in exacting purity in those that consecrate them∣selves to his service. And this must be done on the day of his cleansing, on the seventh day: for this last clause, on the seventh day shall he shave it, is added by way of ex∣plaining the clause before, in the day of his cleansing; for the seventh day was the usuall day of cleansing for those that were defiled by the dead, as we may see, chap. 10. 11, 12. Vers. 11. And the priest shall offer the one for a sinne-offering, &c.] Though it were no fault in the Nazarite that a man should die very suddenly by him, yet
because it was contrary to the Law that enjoyned the Nazarite not to come nigh any dead body, therefore he was to bring a sinne-offering for his cleansing. Vers. 12. And he shall conscrate unto the Lord the dayes of his sparation.] That is, he shall begin anew to consecrate unto God the very same number of dayes which before his defiling he had vowed unto God. And he shall bring a lambe of the first year for a trespasse-offering.] By this trespasse-offering (which also figured Christ) he was prepared for the observati∣ons of his renewed vow; because all grace and ability to do good is of God ob∣tained by Christ Jesus our Lord. Vers. 13. And this is the Law of the Nazarite.] That is, this that follows is the Law that must be observed by the Nazarite, when he hath fulfilled his vow, and is to be discharged thereof in an orderly manner. Which Law, it is concei∣ved, the Apostle Paul was perswaded to observe, to decline the offence of the Jews, Acts 21. 26. Vers. 14. And he shall offer his offering unto the Lord, one he-lambe, &c.] Those offerings the Nazarite was to offer when he had fulfilled the dayes of his se∣paration, and was now to be freed from his vow, 1. by way of thankfulnesse to God, as acknowledging that it was through his grace that he had been enabled to fulfill his Nazarites vow; and 2. to make atonement thereby for his sinnes com∣mitted under his vow, thereby also confessing that, notwithstanding his strictest en∣deavours after holinesse, he had failed many wayes if God in Christ should not be mercifull to him. Vers. 15. And their meat-offering and their drink-offerings.] That is, beside the cakes and wafers before mentioned, enjoyned as an extraordinary meat-offer∣ing, he was also to bring the ordinary meat-offerings and drink-offerings appoint∣ed for appendances to all sacrifices, whereof see Numb. 28. Vers. 18. And the Nazarite shall shave the head of his separation, &c.] All the time of his separation he was to keep his hair uncut, but now he was to shave his head (called here the head of his separation, because the hair on his head was the signe of his separation) and that at the doore of the tabernacle, to shew that his vow was now at an end, whereby he had consecrated himself to the Lord; and then afterwards he was to put it in the fire, which is under the sacrifice of the peace-offerings, that is, not the fire on the altar of burnt-offerings (for there onely the fat of the peace-offerings was burnt) but the fire under the cadrons or pots wherein the peace-offerings were boyled: and all this was done as by way of thankfulnesse to God, to signifie that he had the perfection of his Nazariteship from him. Vers. 19. And the priest shall take the sodden shoulder of the ram, &c.] That is, the left shoulder, the right shoulder was due unto him raw of all peace-offerings, Levit. 7. 32. And the right shoulder shall ye give unto the priest for an heave-offer∣ing of the sacrifices of your pace-offerings; this gift of the sodden shoulder was pe∣culiarly given from the Nazarites ram onely, and taught them that as they had re∣ceived more speciall grace of God, so they should give him more speciall thanks then other men.
Vers. 21. This is the Law of the Nazarite who hath vowed, and of his offer∣ing unto the Lord for his separation, besides that that his hand shall get.] That is, besides that which of his own free will he shall vow to give according to the estate wherewith God hath blessed him: That which is formerly prescribed was necessa∣rily to be done both by rich and poore, when they took upon them this vow of Nazariteship; if being able they vowed more offerings, they must perform their vow, but this before prescribed must by all be brought; the poorest are not allow∣ed lesse. Vers. 23. On this wise ye shall blesse the children of Israel, &c.] This bles∣sing thus pronounced by the priest did include a promise of Gods blessing them, delivered as it were out of Gods own mouth, and that by and through Christ, of whom they were types, Acts 3. 26. Unto you first God having raised up his sonne Jesus, sent him to blesse you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities; and so again, Luke 24. 50. And he led them out as farre as Be∣thany, and he lift up his hands, and blessed them. Therefore when Christ was to come the priest of Aarons seed was speechles, Luke 1. 22. to teach them to look for another priest in whom all nations were to be blessed, Gal. 3. 8. Vers. 24. The Lord blesse thee and keep thee, &c.] Some conceive that the repeat∣ing of this word the Lord, or Jehovah, three severall times in this blessing did imply the mystery of the Trinity: But whether so or no, sure w are it was pro∣nounced in the name of God who is one in essence, but three in persons, the Fa∣ther Sonne and holy Ghost; and evangelically we have this very blessing explain∣ed by the Apostle, 2. Cor. 13. 14. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the holy Ghost be with you all: Amen. Vers. 25. The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gratious unto thee.] That is, the Lord be favourable kind and loving to thee, and let him so manifest his love and grace to thy heart and conscience, that thou mayest plainly perceive it. A chearfull loving countenance we call lightsome, as on the other side we call an angry countenance cloudy: In the sight of the kings countenance is life, saith So∣lomon, Prov. 16. 15. So that by the Lords making his face to shine upon his peo∣ple, nothing else is meant but his love, and the manifestation of his love and favour to them, according to that, Psal. 44. 3. They got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own arm save them, but thy right hand and thy right arm and the light of thy countenance, because thou hadst a favour unto them. Vers. 26. The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee and give thee peace.] By this clause of the Lords lifting up his countenance upon them two things may be implyed: 1. the Lords love and favour, as in the former clause: for as the hi∣ding and casting down and turning away of the face testifies the displeasure and wrath of a man (the light of my countenance they cast not down, saith Job, chap. 29. 24. that is, they did not anger or grieve me and so turn the smiles of my coun∣tenance into frowns) so the lifting up the face readily upon a man is an argument of his good liking and favour towards him: and 2. the Lords provident care over them, to protect and blesse them, and so is the same with that, Psal. 33. 18. Be∣hold the eye of the Lord is upon thm that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy.
Vers. 27. And they shall put my name upon the children of Israel, and I will blesse them.] That is, they shall pronounce them blessed in my name and by my favoùr which shall be upon them, as if now given by the priests: and this it seems was sig∣nified by the lifting up & spreading forth their hands towards the people, as Aaron did, Levit 9. 22. and thus the name of the Lord is elsewhere taken, as Prov. 18. 10. The name of the Lord is a strong tower: the righteous runneth into it and is safe. CHAP. VII. Vers. 1. ANd it came to passe on the day that Moses had fully set up the ta∣bernacle, &c.] In this chapter Moses relates the offerings that were brought by the Princes of the tribes for the carriage of the tabernacle, and for de∣dicating of the altar. Now because it is said here, that these twelve princes brought six waggons and twelve oxen for the carriage of the tabernacle, on the day that Moses had fully set up the tabernacle and had anointed it, &c. it is much questi∣oned amongst Expositours, when this was done: Some conceive that they offered these things precisely on the day that Moses had fully set up the tabernacle, &c. which was on the first day of the first moneth in the second year after their coming out of Egypt. Exod. 40. 17. a full moneth before the numbring of the people, whereof Moses spake in the beginning of this book (for the charge for that was given on the first day of the second moneth, chap. 1. 1.) and so they conceive that this is here inserted, though done a moneth before, onely because these things for∣merly offered by the Princes were now given to the Levites. But then others conceive that these waggons and oxen were now offered by the Princes in the order as it is here set down, after the tribes were numbred and placed in their severall stations round about the tabernacle; and that therefore by these words, And it came to passe on the day that Moses had fully set up the tabernacle and had anointed it, &c. onely thus much is intended, that these things were brought and offered by the Princes after that Moses had fully finished the erection of the tabernacle, &c. and the ordering of all things belonging thereto, amongst which we may well reckon the placing of the tribes in their severall stations, and the Levites also in their pla∣ces round about the tabernacle. And indeed this exposition seems most probable, 1. because it is said here that the Princes that offered these things were those that were set over the numbring of the people, ver. 2. to wit, those mentioned by name, chap. 1. 5. &c. 2. because it is not likely that these oxen and waggons were offered for the service of the tabernacle a moneth before the Levites were set apart to their ser∣vice, and had their severall charge assigned them for the carrying of the tabernacle and those thing that belonged thereto: and 3. because it is said in the end of this chapter, vers. 88. This was the dedication of the altar after it was anointed, which shews that these things were not done just on the day that Moses set up the taber∣nacle, &c. Vers. 5. And thou shalt give them unto the Levites, to every man according t his service.] That is, according as the weight is more or lesse of those things which re committed to their charge.
Vers. 8. And foure waggon ad ight oxen he gave unto the sonnes of Mera∣ri.] See the note upon chap. 3. ver. 36. Vers. 10. And the Princes offered for dedicating the altar in the day that t was anointed, &c.] That is, for the first imploying thereof in those holy services for which it was ordained. Indeed Moses first offered burnt-offerings and other sa∣crifices thereon seven dayes together for the consecrating of the priests, Levit. 8. (which was in the first moneth of the second year) and the next day after Aaron and his sonnes offered sacrifices thereon for himself and the people in generall, Levit. 9. 7. on which day it was that Nadab and Abihu perished. But now in the second moneth of the second year, when the tribes were all pla∣ced about the tabernacle, the Princes brought their offerings, and because these were the first offerings that were offered for any particular persons or tribes, there∣fore they are said to be offered for the dedicating of the altar, and so those fol∣lowing words, in the day that it was anointed, must not be taken strictly of the very day whereon it was first anointed, but more generally, as before, ver. 1. Vers. 12. And he that offered his offering the first day was Nahshon, &c.] Here the Captains of the tribes offer every one in his day, according to the order wherein God had set them round about the Sanctuary, beginning at the East-quarter, proceeding to the South, and then to the West, and so ending at the North. Vers. 13. And his offering was one silver charger, &c.] To wit, for the use of the altar of burnt-offerings, which stood in the court whereon these sacrifices which they brought were to be offered: for all that were used in the tabernacle were of pure gold. Vers. 17. And for a sacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen, &c.] Of these the Princes with the priests, &c. did eat, and so keep a feast with joy before the Lord for his mercy toward his people. Vers. 88. This was the dedication of the altar after it was anointed.] See the note upon ver. 1. Vers. 89. And when Moses was gone into the tabernacle of the congregation, &c.] This may seem to be here added, because after that all things were thus ordered concerning the tabernacle, and that Aaron and his sonnes were thus farre entred upn their priestly office, Moses went into the tabernacle to receive further direction from the Lord, and so the Lord spake unto Moses from the mercy-seat, as is here expressed; and he spake unto him, that is, Moe spake un∣to the Lord, propounding such things to the Lord as he desired to be satisfied in. CHAP. VIII. Vers. 2. WHen thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light over against the candlestick.] Hitherto I conceive the priests had one∣ly entred upon their service on the altar of burnt-offerings; now the dedication of
the altar being finished, and Moses being now to entr the priests into the service of the Sanctuary, the Lord doth again give direction about the lamps, When thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light over against the candlestick. In the originall it is, over against the face of the candlestick; the common exposition of this is, that the seven lamps should give light round about whereever the candle∣stick was to be seen. But this cannot be the meaning: for here is some particular di∣rection given for ordering the lamps; now however they were ordered or lighted, they would have given light round about. The meaning of these words I thus con∣ceive: That place is said to be over against the candlestick, where the candlestick stood in full view: Now it was not to be seen on the Southside (for on that side close to the walls or boards of the Sanctuary it was placed, Exod. 26. 35. And thou shalt set the table without the vail, and the candlestick over against the table on the side of the tabernacle toward the South: and thou shalt put the table on the North∣side: nor did it stand full in the eye either Eastward or Westward (for so the seven lamps stood all in a row one behind another) but to one that stood on the North∣side the seven lamps were in full view; that way therefore Aaron was to light the lamps, that is, he was to place the loose bowls on the top of the branches, wherein the lamps were, in such manner that the wick or flame of the lamp might issue out on the Northside, toward that side of the tabernacle which was over against the face of the candlestick, and that, no doubt, because the table of shew-bread stood on that side. Vers. 6. Take the Levites from among the children of Israel, and cleanse them.] The priests being fully entred upon their service, now the Levites are consecrated to their imployments as assistants to them: but lest they should think themselves equally admitted to the work of the priesthood, they are neither consecrated at the same time with the priests, nor with the same ceremonies. Vers. 7. Sprinkle water of purifying upon them, and let them shave all their flesh, &c.] This water of purifying, wherewith the Levites were now to be sprinkled at their consecration, was doubtlesse that made with the ashes of a red heifer: and there∣fore it is evident, that directions for maing this water were given before this time, though they are not set down by Moses till  19. chapter of this book. As for the shaving of their flesh, that was done to the end they might be the more perfectly cleansed from all pollution whatsoever: and both the one and the other signified the exact purity and holinesse that God requires in those that are imployed in the sacred ministery. Vers. 8. And another young bullock shalt thou take for a sinne-offering.] This second bullock, the second here named, was first offered, vers. 12. And no bullock was offered for sinne, save for the sinne of the high priest or of the congregation, Lev. 4. yet the Levites now taken for all the first-born of Israel offered such a sinne-offering as the whole congregation should. Vers. 10. And the children of Israel shall put their hand upon the Levites.] That is, some of the chief (as the first-born) in stead of the re, by this signe trans∣ferring the charge and service of the Church from themselves on them, whom they did now freely offer to the Lord to be wholly set apar for that service.
Vers. 12. And thou shalt offer the one for a sinne-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering, &c.] That is, thou shalt cause them to be offered, to wit, by Aaron and his sonnes. See also the notes upon the sacrifices that were offered at the conse∣crating of the priests, Exod. 29. 10, &c. Vers. 15. And after that the Levites shall go in, &c.] That is, into the court of the priests, for within the tabernacle it self the Levites might not enter, nor was there any service there for them to do. Vers. 19. And to make an atonement for the children of Israel, &c.] The Levites are said here to make an atonement for the children of Israel, not because they offered sacrifices for the people (for that the priests onely did) but either be∣cause they were subservient to the priests when they were offering those sacrifices, whereby atonement was made for the sinnes of the people; or else because by their other service in the tent, which for or in stead of the people they performed accord∣ing to the will of God, he was pleased with the pople, and sent no plague upon them, as otherwise there would have been, if they themselves had intermeddled with those holy services. Vers. 24. From twenty five years old and upwards, &c.] See the notes on Numb. 4. 3. Vers. 25. From the age of fifty years they shall cease waiting, &c.] That is, in the hard labours of bearing the Sanctuary. See again Numb. 4. 3. CHAP. IX. Vers. 1. ANd the Lord spake unto Moses in the wildernesse of Sinai, &c.] Be∣ing here to relate according to the order of the story how the Passco∣ver was kept by some few particular persons on the fourteenth day of the second moneth, he first begins with the relaion of Gods command for the keeping of it by the whole congregation at the appointed season, which was omitted before, that so he might shew upon what occasion the Passeover was kept by these particular per∣sons in this second moneth. Vers. 2. Let the children of Israel also keep the Passeover at his appointed sea∣son.] This commandment concerning the Passeover is again enjoyned the second year, because by the first institution they seem bound onely to keep it in the land of Canaan, Exod. 12. 25. And it shall come to passe when ye be come to the land which the Lord will give you according as he hath promised, that ye shall keep this servic. And indeed after this we find not that they kept any till they came into the land, Josh. 5. and that because they knew not how long they should stay in a place, and when they should remove. So that it seems they would not have kept this without speciall warrant. Vers. 3. According to all the rites of it, and according to all the ceremonies thereof shall ye keep it.] Here are to be excepted the speciall rites which belonged onely to the first Passeover in Egypt, as the sprinkling of their posts with bloud, the ating of it standing, &c. whereof see Exod, 12.
Vers. 6. And there were certain men who were defiled by the dead body of a man, that they could not keep the Passeover that day, &c.] If they meddled with holy things being legally unclean, by that law given since the first Passeover, Levit. 22. 3. they were to be cut off; if they did not keep the Passeover, they were also to be cut off, Exod. 12. 15. hence the straits they were in. Vers. 7. Wherefore are we kept-back that we may not offer an offering of the Lord, &c.] The Passeover is so called, as being commanded by the Lord, and kept unto his honour. See Exod. 12. 27. Vers. 10. If any man of you or of your posterity shall be unclean by reason of a dead body, &c.] Upon the occasion of these men that complained for being debarred from keeping the Passeover, because at the usuall time when they should have kept it, on the fourteenth day of the first moneth, they were defiled by the dead body of a man, the Lord here established this for a perpetuall law, that in case any person should in time to come be defiled by a dead body at the ordinary time in the first moneth, when the rest of the people kept the Passeover; or should be then in a journey about necessary businesse, so farre off that he could not come home against the fourteenth day of the first moneth, but was forced to be absent a while longer, that in this case such a person or persons should keep the Passeover on the fourteenth day of the second moneth. And under these two particular cases here expressed I conceive that all other necessary hinderances, whereby men were kept from celebrating the Passeover, are comprehended, as in case they were unclean by any other legall pol∣lution besides that of being defiled by a dead body, or were detained by sicknesse, &c. and that the rather because in Hezekiahs time there was a Passeover kept on the fourteenth day of the second moneth (by warrant it seems of this law) when yet they were other occasions then these here mentioned that disabled them for keep∣ing it at the usuall time. Vers. 17. And when the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle, then after that the children of Israel journeyed.] That is, when the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle it removed before the camp, and so whithersoever that led them they followed it: for so it is expresly said, Exod. 13. 21. And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way, and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light to go by day and night. Vers. 19. And when the cloud tarried long upon the tabernacle many dayes, then the children of Israel kept the charge of the Lord.] That is, they kept the charge of serving the Lord, whilst the tabernacle was erected and the cloud tarried still upon it; or they kept the charge of the Lord, to wit, the charge he had given them of staying so long as the cloud rested upon the tabernacle; and therefore the last clause is added by way of explaining the former, and journeyed not. CHAP. X. Vers. 2. MAke thee two trumpets of silver, &c.] Here at first were but two trum∣pets for Aarons two sonnes Eleazar & Ithamar; but the number of the priests increasing in Solomons time, there were an hundred and twenty priests
sounding with trumpets, 2. Chron. 5. 12. And these trumpets were signes of the ministry of the word, and the office of teaching, discharged by men called and fitted thereto: for as the use of these trumpets was first to assemble the congregation be∣fore the Lord in his Sanctuary; secondly, to give warning and direction for their marching toward the land of Canaan; thirdly, to incourage the people when they went forth to warre; fourthly, to be a signe of rejoycing at all their festivals and dayes of rejoycing: so the work of Gods ministry is, first, to perswade the people to assemble themselves before God, there to perform with fear and reverence the publick duties of his worship and service, Joel 2. 15, 16. Blow the trumpet in Zion, sanctifie a fast, call a solemn assembly. Gather the people, sanctifie the Congrega∣tion, assemble the Elders, gather the children and those that suck the breasts, &c. secondly to give them warning and direction for all the duties of Christianity, which being performed in faith and obedience to God are as so many severall mo∣tions towards the heavenly Canaan; thirdly, to give them warning of danger approching, and to stirre them up to fight the Lords battels against Satan, Sinne, Antichrist, &c. See Esa. 58. 1. Cry aloud, spare not, lif up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sinnes; and fourthly, to encourage and comfort sinners with the promises of the ospel, to quicken them with faith and readinesse of mind to perform the duties of Gods wor∣ship, and with thankfull and glad hearts to praise God for all his mercies, and espe∣cially for Christ. See Esa. 27. 13. And it shall come to passe in that day that th great trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come which were ready to perish in the land of Assyria, and the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and shall worship the Lord in the holy mount at Jerusalem. Besides, as the trumpets were not to give an uncer∣tain sound, but such as the people might distinctly perceive what they were to do: so the ministers must both pray and preach so that the people may understand them, 1. Cor. 14. 8, 9. For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battel? So likewise you except you utter by the tongue words easie to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the air▪ Secondly, of silver these trumpe must be made, which was the purest mettal and fittest for sound, to signifie also the purity and zeal required in Gods ministers, The tongue of the just is as choise silver, saith Solomon, Prov. 10. 20. That thou mayest use them for the calling of the assembly, and for the journeying of the Camps.] Thus they were taught to depend upon God for all their attempts both in peace and warre. Vers. 3. And when they shall blow with them, all the assembly shall assemble themselves to thee, &c.] That is, when they shall blow with both of them, as ap∣pears by the next verse, And if they blow but with one trumpet, then the princes, which are heads of the thousands of Israel shall gather themselves unto thee. Vers. 6. They shall blow an alarm for their journeys.] That is, not for these two quarters onely before mentioned, but for the other also▪ Vers. 8. And the sonnes of Aaron the priest sall blow with the trumpets.] The priests are appointed to be the trumpeters, that so the people might entertain the sound thereof as coming from God, and so assemble themselves as into Go
presence, and go forth both in their journeys and battels, as in obedience to Gods command, and in faith believing and expecting his direction and assistance. Vers. 9. And if ye go to warre in your land against the enemy that oppresseth you, then ye shall blow an alarm with the trumpets.] So it is said Numb. 31. 6. And Moses sent them to the warre a thousand of every tribe, them and Phinehas the sonne of Eleazar the priest to warre, with the holy instruments and trumpets to blow, in his hand; and 2. Chron. 13. 12. And behold God himself is with us for our Captain, and his priests with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against yo. And ye shall be remembred before the Lord your God, and ye shall be saved from your enemies.] The sounding of an alarm with these trumpets, when they were to go forth to warre against their enemies, was to the people a sacred signe that God would assuredly take notice of their danger, and help them against their enemies; and in these words now there is a promise of grace annexed to these signes, to wit, that when they did rightly use these trumpets in faith and obedience to Gods com∣mandments, the Lord would remember them, and give them victory over their enemies. Vers. 10. Also in the day of your gladnesse, and in your solemn dayes, &c.] Here is prescribed the last use they were to make of these trumpets, to wit, that they were to blow with them over their burnt-offerings and over th sacrifices of their peace-offerings, upon all solemn festivall dayes: as first, when they kept any extra∣ordinary day of rejoycing for any publick extraordinary mercie, which is called here the day of their gladnesse, such as was the day when the ark was carried into the temple, 2. Chron. 5. 12, 13. and when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the Lord in the dayes of Ezra, Ezra 3. 10. and secondly, upon all their set festivalls appointed by the law, as the feast of unleavened bread, the feast of ta∣bernacles, &c. called here their solemn dayes; and thirdly, on their new moons, in the beginning of every moneth, whence is that of the Psalmist, Blow the trumpet in the new moon, in the time appointed on our solemn feast-day, Psal. 81. 4. Now hereby was signified both their earnest desire that God would hear their prayers and accept of their sacrifices and also the inward joy and gladnesse of their hearts from their assurance that God in Christ would accept of them and their service: for which cause also afterwards the Lord by David and other prophets ordained other instruments also whereon the Levites played, as psalteries, harps, cymbals, &c. 1. Chron. 16. 5. David also and other holy men made psalmes and songs, which some of the Levites sung whilst others played on the instruments, 1. Chron. 25. 6, &c. whence is that of the Psalmist, Psal. 89. 15. Blessed is the people that know the joyfull sound; they shall walk O Lord in the light of thy countenance; and there∣fore also it is said in the close of this verse, that this blowing of these trumpets over their sacrifices should be to them for a memoriall before their God: for hereby is signified bot th if they performed this service in faith of Gods mercie with joy∣full and glad hearts, the Lord would then remember them and accept of their ser∣vice, and also that it should be to them a sacred signe to mind them and assure them that God would hear their prayers, and accept of their sacrifices. Vers. 11. And it came to passe on the twentieth day of the second moneth, &c.]
The Israelites came into the wildernesse of Sinai in the beginning of the third moneth of the first year, Exod. 19. 1. and now the cloud being taken up from off the tabernacle, and going into the forefront of their camp, they went out of the wilder∣nesse on the twentieth day of the second moneth in the second year, about six dayes after those men had kept the Passeover that being defiled by the dead could not keep it at the appointed season, whereof Moses spake before, chap. 9. 6, &c. So that here∣by it is evident that they stayed in this wildernesse of Sinai a full year wanting nine or ten dayes: and though there be here onely mention made of the taking up of the cloud, which was the signe that they were to be gone thence; yet withall God spake unto them to remove, Deut. 1. 6, 7, 8. The Lord our God spake unto us in Horeb, saying, Ye have dwelt long enough in this mount; turn you and take your journey and go into the land of the Amorites, &c. and thus both by word and signe God called them from Sinai, the place of bondage, by reason of the law there given, Gal. 4. 24, 25. unto the land of promise, which figured the state of grace and free∣dome by Jesus Christ. Vers. 12. And the children of Israel took their journeys out of the wildernesse of Sinai; and the cloud rested in the wildernesse of Paran.] To wit, in a place of this wildernesse which by occasion of the following story was called Kibroth∣hattaavah; and in this wildernesse they journeyed along time, and in severall places of it pitched their tents; and therefore it is said again, Numb. 12. 10. that they pitch∣ed in the wildernesse of Paran. Vers. 14. In the first place went the standard of the cmp of the children of Judah according to their armies.] When they rested any where they pitched their tents in foure quarters about the tabernacle, but removing they march in order one after another as is here expressed. Vers. 17. And the tabernacle was taken down.] To wit, the priests having first with vails and clothes covered the ark, and other holy things, as was enjoyned, Numb. 4. 5. And when the camp setteth forward, Aaron shall come and his sonns, and they shall take down the covering vail and cover the ark of the testimony with it. This taking down and setting up and removall of the tabernacle signified the in∣stability of that legall figurative worship which Christ at his coming was to abo∣lish, Heb. 12. 27, 28. And this word, yet once more, signifyeth the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken may remain: Wherefore we receiving a kingdome which cannot b moved, let us have grace, &c. and also the unsettled estate of the Church and all the members thereof in the wildernesse of this world. See 2. Cor. 5. 1, 4. For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternall in the heavens: for we that are in this tabernacle do groan being burdened, not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life. See also 2. Pet 1. 14. Vers. 21. And the Kohathites set forward bearing the Sanctuary.] That is, th holy things of the tabernacle, but the ark went foremost, vers. 37. Vers. 22. And the standard of the camp of the children of Ephraim set forward according to their armies.] So that the Sanctuary went immediately before them,
unto which the Psalmist seemeth to have reference, Psal. 86. 3. Turn again, O God, and cause thy face to shine and we shall be saved. Vers. 25. And the camp of the children of Dan set forward, which was the rereward of all the camps, throughout their hosts.] Who had most souldiers next Judah, as we may see chap. 2. 31. Thus the Sanctuary had the middest, the most safe and honourable place: the greatest camp went foremost, the next in greatnesse went hindmost, to defend it against enemies before and behind. But the Lord himself was he that went before, and was the rereward behind, as the Prophet speaks, Esai. 52. 12. For the Lord will go before you, and the God of Israel will be your rereward. Vers. 29. And Moses said unto Hobab the sonne of Raguel, the Midianite, Moses father in law, &c.] Some conceive that it is Raguel the Medianite, and not Hobab that is here called Moses father in law, even the same that is else∣where called Reüel Exod. 2. 18. and Jethro, Exod. 3. 1. and that Hobab, to whom Moses now spake, being the sonne of this Raguel or Jethro was the bro∣ther in law of Moses, who stayed still with Moses at mount Sinai after their father Reguel or Jethro was returned home to his own countrey, Exod. 28. 27. But be∣cause Hobab is elsewhere expressely called, according to our translation, the father in law of Moses, Judge 4. 11. it must needs be he also that is here also called Mo∣ses father in law, even the same that is in Exodus called Jethro and Reüel, and that Raguel the Midianite was his father, as is noted before upon Exod. 3. 1. And if it be objected that Jethro the father in law of Moses departed from him before, Exod. 18. 27. to this I answer, as before in the note upon that place, that though his go∣ing from Moses be mentioned there, yet it was not till now that he left him, when both Moses and the Israelites were to depart mount Sinai. Vers. 31. Leave us not, I pray thee, &c.] That is, go not away from us, or if thou goest away return again, Though Moses had lived fourty years about these parts, yet knowing the difficulties they were likely to meet with in their passage through the wildernesse, he much desired the stay of Hobab with them, who knew the countrey farre better then himself, and might be a great help unto them, and therefore he presseth him again to stay with them, that he might be to them in stead of eyes, that is, that he might shew them how they might best advantage them∣selves in disposing their camp. And indeed though thee was no need of his help to lead them and shew them which way they should go, because the pillar of the cloud and the ark went before them to lead them their way, yet many other wayes Ho∣bab might be helpfull to them, as by telling them when they were to stay in any place, where they might have water for their camp, where there was most danger of being assayled by the neighbouring nations, and in many other particulars: whether Hobab yielded hereupon to stay with Moses, it is not expressed; yet be∣cause there is no mention made here of a second denyall, it is generally conceived that he did stay. But because it is expressely said, Exod. 18. 27. that this Hobab or Jethro the father in law of Moses was dismissed by Moses and returned again in∣to his own land, it seems more probable that he did now return home to his coun∣trey, as is there said. But yet that he returned again, or at least that some of his
posterity were deputed in his room to go along with the Israelites, is most mani∣fest and clear, because his posterity dwelt afterwards amongst the Israelites in the and of Canaan, as we may see, Judg. 1. 16. And the children of the Kenite Moses father in law, went up out of the cite of palmtrees, &c. and again, Judges 4. 11. Heber the Kenite was of the children of Hobab the father in law of Moses. Vers. 33. And they departed from the mount of the Lord three dayes jour∣ney.] They travelled three dayes together without resting (for because the cloud stayed not they might not stay) which seems to have been the cause of their com∣plaining, chap. 11. ver. 1. And the ark af the covenant of the Lord went before them in three dayes jour∣ney, to search out a resting place for them.] The Hebrew word signifieth went in their faces or sight, which it might do, and yet be in the middest of the armies, car∣ryed amongst the other holy things by the sonnes of Kohath, ver. 21. and so the most expound it, it went before them, that is, in their sight as their guide; for when the cloud stayed, then the priests stayed with the ark, and upon the stay of the ark all the armies stayed. But I see no reason why we may not think the ark went before in the forefront of their armies, though the other holy things went in the midst, as ver. 21. to wit, together with the cloud, and that to search out a rest∣ing place for them, a place convenient to pitch their tents where they might have water and pasture for their flocks, &c. CHAP. XI. Vers. 1. ANd when the people complained, it displeased the Lord.] The word in the originall (here translated complained) may also be rendred as it is in the margin, were as it were complainers, and so may intimate that they did onely secretly begin to murmur and mutter, and not break forth into such an open complaint as afterwards they did at Kibroth Hattaavah, when they lusted for meat. Indeed many Expositours understand this and that afterwards mention∣ed, ver. 4. of one and the same murmuring, which they say is first summarily set down here, and afterwards more particularly related in the sequele of the chapter, and especially because, Psal. 78. 19, 20, 21. the fire that now devoured the people is mentioned, as the punishment of their lusting for flesh, They said, Can God fur∣nish a table in the wildernesse? Therefore the Lord heard this and was wroth; so a fire was kindled against Jacob, and anger also came up against Israel. But in that Psalm it is evident that the severall passages of their murmuring are not related hi∣storically in order, but many things are promiscuously inserted here and there. However evident it is that the murmuring for flesh, mentioned ver. 4. was another from this, because it is said here that they wept again, and besides that was done at Kibroth Hattaavah, this at Taberah. The cause of their present complaining in∣deed is not expressed, but in all likelyhood we may conceive it was because they were weary of following the ark three dayes journey through the wildernesse to∣gether without intermission, whereof there was mention made in the latter end of the former chapter ver. 33.
And the fire of the Lord burnt among them.] That is, a fire sent from God: but whether it brake out of the earth, or from the pillar of fire, or were poured down upon them from heaven, it is not expressed. And thus their fiery tongues were punished with fire. And consumed them that were in the uttermost parts of the camp.] This is ad∣ed, to let us see how the whole army escaped when God sent a fire amongst them, it was because the fire brake out onely upon the uttermost parts of the camp; and withall it may imply the cause of the punishment, because by these words it seems probable that in the uttermost parts of the camp the sinne began, amongst those that were faint and weay with travel, as in Deut. 25. 18. How he met thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of thee even all that were feeble behind thee, when thou wast faint and weary: and he feared not God; and upon them therefore the judgement did principally fall. Vers. 2. And the people cried unto Moses.] The reasons why they ranne to Moses for his intercession may be these: 1. the sudden terrour of the plague; 2. the guilt of their own consciences stopping their mouthes; 3. the opinion they had of his holinesse and speciall interest in God; 4. because their repining against him, who was Gods instrument in leading them along, they might think was now punisht, and theefore they come and desire him to forgive them, and pray for them. Vers. 3. And he called the name of the place Taberah.] This name imposed upon the place where the fire brake out, shews that it was not the same where they pitched their tents after their three dayes travel, which by occasion of the follow∣ing story was called Kibroth Hattaavah, but rather some other place in the wayes they travelled thither when they were faint and weary, a little before they came to Kibroth Hattaavah. Vers. 4. And the mixt multitude that was among them fell a lusting, &c.] What this mixt multitude was, see in the note upon Exod. 12. 38. Amongst them it seems the murmuring began, though the Israelites soon joyned with them in the sinne. Once before they murmured for want of meat, Exod. 16. 2. when upon their murmuring the Lord gave them both manna and quails; but that was in the wildernesse of Sin, immediately after they were come out of Egypt, this was in the wildernesse of Paran, above a twelvemoneth after that, when not having any other food but manna from eaven, which now they began to loath, they murmured, and who, say they, shall give us flesh to eat? where by flesh is meant fish as well as that which we more peculiarly call flesh, as is evident in the following words, We remember the fish which we did eat in Egypt freely; and ver. 22. where Moses ob∣jects to the Lod, Shall all the fish of the sea be gathered for them to suffice them; and so the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 15. 39. There is one kind of flesh of men, another flesh of beasts, another of fihes. Many indeed are of opinion that the Egyptians, at last some of them, were strictly superstitious therein, used not to eat the flesh of heep, no nor leeks, onions and garlick, which they worshipped as Gods, according to the Poet▪
Porrum & cepe nefas violar a frangere morsu. O sanctas gentes quibus ha nascuntur in hortis Numina! lanatis animalibus abstinet omnis Mensa, nefas illic foetum jugulare capellae. But however the Israelites did use to eat of them freely, and wanting them now, therefore they murmured against Moses and against the Lord. Vers. 6. But now our soul is dryed away.] That is, we languish and pine away, having nothing to cat that will either nourish us or satisfie our appetite: for the soul is often put for the body, or the whole man, or for the appetite or desire after meat drink and other things. Vers. 7. And the manna was as coriander-seed, &c.] See the note upon Exod. 16. 31. it was therefore pleasant to the eye, delightfull to the taste, and was fit to be dressed severall wayes, and therefore not to be thus loathed and despised. Vers. 10. Then Moses heard the people weep throughout their families, every man in the doore of his tent.] That is, openly, as desiring to make known their discontent, and to stirre up discontent in others also that should heare their com∣plaints. Vers. 15. And let me not see my wretchednesse.] That is, let me not see my self slain by the people in a shamefull and disgracefull manner, or rather let me not live to see my self thus miserable: for it is all one as if he had said that it were bet∣ter for him to be killed out of hand, then living to see so many heart-breaking miseries continually befalling him day after day. Vers. 16. And the Lord said unto Moses, Gather unto me seventy men, &c.] Though the speech of Moses to the Lord in the foregoing verses were so full of di∣stemper & passion, yet the Lord commiserating his condition commands him here to chuse and gather together seventy choice men of the elders of Israel, whom he knew to be elders of the people, and officers over them, that is, whom he knew to be not onely elders in regard of their years, but also men of singular gravitie and wisdome, and for that chosen to be governours over the people; and these were by Gods ap∣pointment (which the better to testifie they were to be presented before the taber∣nacle) to undertake the government as helpers to Moses, that so his burthen might be the lesse. Indeed once before upon Jethroes counsel there were certain men cho∣sen to be rulers and judges over the people, for the case of Moses, Exod. 18. 25, 26. But those were onely chosen to determine of small matters, but these now were to be judges in the greatest and most difficult causes, both of religion and civil affairs, which were formerly wholly referred to Moses, and were therefore chosen amongst those that were already in those inferiour places of government, because by reason of their experience therein they were the fitter to be imployed in the weightier works. And this many conceive was the originall of that great councel of the Jews, which they called their Sanhedrin, and was continued amongst them till Herods dayes. Vers. 17. And I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them.] That is, I will give of the same spirit to them, which I have given to thee. It is not to be thought, that there was now any impairing of Moses gifts, as some
conceive; for how could the joyning of these with him be then any advantage to him, or where do we find any thing in the following story that argues the least abate∣ment in the gifts of Moses? but becaue the Lord intended to give the same gifts to them, which he had given to Moses, as if some part of Moses spirit dwelt now in them, therefore is this expression here used, I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them. Vers. 18. Sanctifie your selves against to morrow, and ye shall eat flesh, &c.] The originall word doth sometimes signifie to prepare, and so might intend that they should prepare themselves for the receiving of the flesh which God would give them the next day in abundance. But being rendred sanctified, it must needs be meant of a religious preparing themselves, but may be spoken either ironically, onely thereby to glance at the sordid basenesse of their spirits, and their indisposi∣tion to receive any such provision from God, as if he should have said, God will make you a feast to morrow, and you are in a goodly temper for such a businesse; or else as a serious exhortation▪ that they should addresse themselves to receive with pure and good hearts this mercy of God, being also legally prepared according to those times by washing their garments. For because the working of such miracles was a signe of Gods speciall presence, therefore before such miraculous works they were called upon thus to sanctifie themselves. Vers. 21. And Moses said, The people amongst whom I am are six hundred thousand footmen, &c.] See chap. 2. 32. Vers. 23. And the Lord said unto Moses, Is the Lords hand waxed short, &c.] God here winks at Moses his distrust▪ and bears with his weaknesse; but when he was not instructed and bettered by Gods patience, and the experience he had day∣y of Gods al-sufficiencie, he is afterwards punished. See Numb. 20. 12. And the Lord spake unto Moses and to Aaron, because ye believe me not to sanctiie me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have given them, and that espcially because then too he shewed his distrust before the people. Vers. 24. And gathered the seventy men of the elders of the people and set them round about the tabernacle.] That is, he appointed them to come before the Lord at the doore of the tabernacle, though two of them, ver. 20. did not come as they were appointed. Now this presenting them before the tabernacle was both to put them in mind that God had set them apart to this work of government, and there∣fore they should be carefull to carry themselves uprightly and well, as they would answer it before his tribunal who had put them in their places, and bestowed his spirit upon them to make them fit for their employments; as also, to teach the peo∣ple to acknowledge them in their places, as set over them by God. Vers. 25. They prophecied and did not cease.] They were not now created prophets, but had onely at this time a gift of prophecy wrought in them by the spi∣rit, that it might be a seal both to them and to the people that God had called them to this office, and would furnish them with such gifts as were requisite for their pla∣ces, as it was with Saul being newly anointed King, . Sam. 10. 10▪ And the spi∣rit of God came upon him, and he propheied among them. And by prophecying
here is meant, either that they foretold things to come, or rather that they spake unto the people concerning the wonderfull works and secret mysteries of Gods truth, and that in such a manner that they might be easily discerned to speak as men inspired with the spirit of God: for thus this word prophecying is sometime used for declaring the word of God unto the people▪ 1. Cor. 14. 3. Exod. 7. 1. And Aaron thy brother shall be thy Prophet. Gen. 20. 7. Now therefore restore the man his wife, for he is a Prophet; and for setting forth the praises of God in songs and psa ms, as 1. Chron. 25. 13. Thus these men prophecyed and did not cease, that is, they continued all the day prophecying without intermission, as is also expresly mentioned of Saul, 1. Sam. 19. 24. And prophecyed bfore Samuel in like manner, and lay down naked all that day, and all that night: and this is added because their continuing so long in this supernaturall work did much adde to the confirmation of their calling. Vers. 26. But there remained two of the men in the camp, &c.] Severall rea∣sons may be conceived why these two men came not with the rest being inrolled by Moses amongst the seventy that were now to be joyned in commission, as assistants to him; for either they might not be found when warning was given, or rather, as Sal afterwards did, 1. Sam. 10. 22. they might hide themselves▪ or for∣bear to go, not as contemning Gods command (for then it is not likely that they should have had the same gift of the spirit with the others) but as distrusting their own sufficiency. However Gods secret providence was the chief cause of it, who had determined by this means to make the miracle the more remarkable, that all the people might plainly see they were called of God. Vers. 28. My lord Moses forbid them.] This Joshua spake of envious zeal for his Master Moses, as appears by Moses answer, vers. 29. enviest thou for my sake? yet not so much, as I conceive, because the eminency of these through their gifts of prophcie would obscure the eminencie of his master Moses (for then he had as much reason to have spoken against the other as against these two) as because they did it as it were of their private authority without any dependency upon Moses, which was manifest in the other, because by Moses appointment they came and received this gift and authority from God, whereas these two by staying away seemed to refuse to have any dependency upon him. Vers. 31. And there went forth a wind from the Lord and brought quails from the sea, &c.] That is, God by his almighty power did cause a strong wind to blow from the seaward, and therewith brought a multitude of quails amongst thm, and round about the camp. What sea it is that is here meant is not of any great consequence to know; yet most probable it is that they came from the red sea, be∣cause that lay Southward of the Israelites camp at present, and the Psalmist saith that these quails were brought in with a Southeast wind, Psal. 78. 26. He caused an East wind to blow in the heaven, and by his power he brought in the Southwind. He rained flesh also upon them as dust, and feathered fowls like the sand of the sea. Once before the Lord did thus miraculously fed them with quails, Exod. 16. 13. But that was in the wildernesse of Sinne, in the second moneth after their departure out of Egypt; but this was in the wildernesse of Paran, about a year after that.
Vers. 31. And as it were two cubits high upon the face of the earth.] Most Expositours understand this of their flying but two cubits above the ground, where∣by it came to passe that they were easily taken. But I think it unquestionable that the quails lay upon the ground two cubits thick: first, because of the clause before, where there is mention of letting them fall by the camp; secondly, because of that phrase. Psal. 78. 27. He rained flesh upon them as dust, &c. thirdly, because the Is∣raelites are said to gather them, not to catch them; fourthly, because otherwise this should not set forth the miraculous abundance of them, which is plainly the drift of this description of the miracle. And yet I think not that the ground was all over covered two cubits thick, as farre as a dayes journey reached round about the camp (for where then did they spread them abroad, when they had gathered them) but that they lay here and there scattered, the heaps being in many places two cubits thick. Vers. 32. He that gathered least gathered ten homers.] That is, a hundred bushels: for an ephah was near the same with our bushel, and an homer contained ten ephahs, Ezek. 45. 11, 14. The ephah and the bath shall be of one measure, that the bath may contain the tenth part of an homer, and the ephah the tenth part of an homer: and indeed hereby we may see how miraculously abundant this flight of quails was, which makes the Psalmist say that God rained flesh upon them as dust, and feathered fouls as the sand of the sea, Psal. 78. 27. And they spread them all abroad for themselves round about the camp.] To preserve them from putrifying: to which end it is likely that they used art also in salting and drying them, or else they were as miraculously preserved as sent, for they eat of them a moneth together. Vers. 33. And while the flesh was yet between their teeth, &c.] It is evident in the twentieth verse of this chapter that the people did eat of these quails a moneth together ere the wrath of the Lord brake out against them; and therefore we may well conceive that it is thus expresly noted that the wrath of the Lord was kindled against the people, and that he smote them with a very great plague, while the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was chewed, to imply, first, the insatiable greedi∣nesse of the people, who after a moneths feeding on these quails were still so eager upon them; secondly, how opportunely the Lord punished them, that they might see the Lord punished them for lusting after flesh, and for their murmuring against Moses because they had it not, he made the very flesh they had desired to be the cause of their destruction, and while they were glutting themselves with these dainties they lusted after, his wrath brake forth upon them; and thirdly, how fully he made good what he had before threatned, vers. 20. that they should eat flesh till it came out of their nostrils, and it became loathsome unto them. What this great plague was wherewith God smote them, it is not expressed; but it may seem probable by the expressions here used that the Lord caused them to surfet of this their feeding without fear, and so hereof many of them dyed.
CHAP. XII. Vers. 1. ANd Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses because of the Ethi∣opian woman, &c.] Miriam is here named first, and that, as it may be probably conceived, because she it was that began the quarrell, and Aaron was stirred up by her; and therefore also afterwards we see that she onely, not Aaron, was tricken with leprosie. However by the providence of God doubtlesse it was (the better to clear it that Moses was exalted by Gods speciall favour, not by any compat amongst themselves) that his own brother and sister did thus rise up against him. What the ground or occasion of that quarrell was may seem questi∣onable: onely thus much is more then probable, first, that one main ground of their quarrell was their envy at the preheminence of Moses above them, as appears by that their expostulation, vers. 2. Hath the Lord indeed spoken onely by Moses? Hath he not spoken also by us? Because Miriam was a prophetesse, Exod. 15. 20. and Aaron the high priest, and imployed by God together with Moses in fetching the Israelites out of Egypt, therefore they grudged that the supreme power of govern∣ment should be solely in Moses. And perhaps this envy was newly stirred in Mi∣riam, because she being a prophetesse was not one of those seventy, of whom men∣tion is made in the foregoing chapter, that were chosen to be assistants to Moses in the government of the people. And secondly, that whatever was the cause of this their quarrell against Moses, yet the onely cause they alledged was that he had mar∣ried an Ethiopian woman or a Cushite (as it is in the margin) not one of Abra∣hams holy stock: and this was doubtlesse no other but Zipporah the Midianitesse; for of her death we reade not, and ordinarily in the Scriptues the Midianites and other neighbouring nations that inhabited Arabia, Cush his land, are called Cushites or Ethiopians, as Hab. 3. 7. I saw the tents of Cushan (or Ethiopia) in affliction, and the curtains of the land of Midian did tremble. Vers. 2. Hath the Lord indeed spoken onely by Moses? hath he not spoken also by us?] That is, have not we the gift of prophecy as well as he, and what rea∣son then that he should be all in all who hath matched himself to one that is a stran∣ger to the holy seed of Israel? Vers. 3. Now the man Moses was very meek, &c.] Implying that first, he had given them no cause thus to quarrell with him; and secondly, that he was now con∣tent to swallow these affronts patiently, and made no complaint, but the Lord took his cause in hand. Nor is it strange that Moses should thus commend himself, if we consider that he did it by the immediate inspiration of the holy Ghost, that his meeknesse might be a pattern for the Church in all ages (and therefore elsewhere we see also that he relates his sinnes and weaknesses) and thus also doth S. Paul speak of himself, as 1. Cor. 11. 1. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ, and 2. Cor. 11. and 12. But withall it may be held without wronging the au∣thority of Moses writings, that here and there by Joshua, or some other of the pro∣phets after him, some passages were inserted, which Moses himself wrote not, such as that, Deut. 34. concerning the death and buriall of Moses. Vers. 5. And the Lord came down in the pillar of the cloud, and sood in
the doore of the tabernacle, and called Aaron and Miriam.) Before God had commanded Moses and Aaron and Miriam, vers. 4. to come all three together to the tabernacle of the congregation, where being all three together, and the cloud being withall descended to the doore of the tabernacle, the Lord now from thence calls to Aaron and Miriam to stand forth, both because he was now particularly to speak to them, and not to Moses, as also that this separating them from Moses might intimate their folly in going about to make themselves equall with him. Vers. 7. My servant Moses is not so, &c.] That is, I do not make known my will to him so as to other prophets, in dreams and visions, but with him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently and not in dark speeches, and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold. But what is the meaning of this? doubtlesse God is invisible. Col. 1. 15. No man hath seen God at any time, John 1. 18. nor can see him, 1. Tim. 6. 16. It is not possible for any mortall creature to behold the very essence of God, as he is in himself: even Moses himself could not so see the face of God, Exod. 33. 20. Thou canst not see my face (saith the Lord to Moes) for there shall no man see me and live: and secondly, neither could there be at any time pre∣sented to Moses any similitude or likenesse of Gods essence and being; for no mate∣riall visible thing can be a representation of the spiritall and invisible essence of God, To whom willye liken God, or what likenesse will ye compare unto him? saith the prophet. Esa. 40. 18. that therefore which is said here concerning the priviledge of Moses above all present and succeeding prophets, consists in two things: first, that God manifested not his will to Moses in deams and visions, as to other prophets, in both which they had onely imaginary representations set before the eye of their minds, but that he spake to him with an audible voice out of the cloud and out of the tabernacle, and that he did oftentimes appear to him in a visible shape, and spake to him in a familiar manner, mouth to mouth, as one friend should speak to another, and had at times discovered to him more of his glory then ever he did to the eye of mortall man, as we see in that story of his seeing Gods back-parts, Exod. 33. 20. And then secondly, that when he spake to him, he did not make known his mind to him in obscure figurative expressions, as he did to the prophets, as when he told Ezekiel of a great eagle with great wings, &c. Ezek. 17. 3. but plainly and clearly, apparently and not in dark speeches, as it is here expressed. Vers. 9. And the anger of the Lord was kindled against them, and he depart∣ed.] Not abiding their answer, which was a signe of great displeasure. Now this departing of the Lord ws by removing the signe of his presence, the cloud, out of which he had spoken to them, as it is explained in the following words, vers. 10. And the cloud departed from off the tabernacle. Nor yet did the cloud remove away from the tabernacle (for when it did so, that was a signe that the people were to remove) but it removed from the doore of the tabernacle whither it did usually descend when God meant to speak unto them, and so rising up did hang over the ta∣bernacle as at other times. Vers. 10. And behold Miriam became leprous white as snow.] Though Aa∣on joyned with Miriam in speaking against Moses, yet onely Miriam was punish∣ed, 1. because she began the quarrel; and 2. because he was the high priest, and so
the Lord would not strike him with leprosie, lest in his dishonour the priesthood should suffer, but chose rather to punish him in his sister. As for the leprosie where∣with Miriam was stricken, it did well answer her sinne, a virulent, envious, mur∣muring tongue being like a fretting leprosie that spreads where it comes, if it be not prevented to the infetion of many. And indeed how memorable a thing this was, we may see by the Lords putting them in mind afterwards of it, Deut. 24. 9. Remem∣ber what the Lord thy God did unto Miriam by the way, after that ye were come forth out of Egypt. Vers. 12. Let her not be as one dead, &c.] Miriam stricken with this white le∣prosie was like a child▪ that hath been sometime dead in the wombe, when it comes into the world; the flesh of such a child will be white, putrified as if it were sod∣den, and half consumed, and so was Miriams. And though she were still alive, yet as one dead she was to be carried out from the communion of the Church, as one that must needs defile all that touched her, Numb. 5. 2. Command the children of Is∣rael that they put out of the camp every leper; and besides, this fretting plague would in the end have utterly consumed and killed her, if God had not healed her. Vers. 14. And the Lord said unto Moses, If her father had but spit in her face, should se not be ashamed seven dayes? &c.] God having immediately heard the prayer of Moses, and healed her, gives order notwithstanding that she should be shut out seven dayes from the camp. Indeed other lepers being cleansed were yet shut up by themselves seven dayes, but it was in the camp, Lev. 14. 8. And he that is to be cleansed, shall wash his clothes, and shave off all his hair, and wash himself in water that he may be clean: and after that he shall come into the camp, and shall tarry abroad out of his tent seven dayes. But, sayes the Lord, if her earthly father had in great displeasure spit in her face, she would have been ashamed to shew her face for a time; and therefore much more is it fit in this cause, both as an expression of her shame and sorrow for that she had done; and that his secluding her from o∣thers may be a reall instruction to all the people▪ that he would have them take heed of being corrupted with the same sinne: now this expression of spitting in her face God useth, because spitting is a signe of anger, shame, and contempt. Job 30. 10. They abhorre me, they flee farre from me, and spare not to spit in my face. Isa. 50. 6. I hid not my face from shame and spitting; and God by this punishment had shown his anger against her, and had poured shame and contempt upon her. Vers. 15. And the people journeyed not till Miriam was brought in again.] But stayed mourning for her, which was a speciall honour unto Miriam above other lepers, for whom the people stayed not, Numb. 5. 2, 4. Command the children of Israel that they put out of the camp every leper, &c. And the children of Israel did so, and put them out without the camp. Vers. 16. And afterwards the people removed from Haxeroth, and pitched in the wildernesse of Paran.] Which I conceive to be all one as if he had said, and pitched again in another place▪ but still in the wildernesse of Paran (for that they came not now first into that wildernesse is evident, because it is said before, chap. 10. 12. And the children of Israel took their ioxrneys out of the wildernesse of Si∣nai, and the cloud rested in the wildernesse of Paran) and the place where they
pitched in this wildernesse is called Rithmah, chap. 33. 18. and Kadesh-Barnea, chap. 13. 26. Deut. 1. 19. which was close upon the borders of the land of Canaan. CHAP. XIII. Vers. 1. ANd the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, &c.] In Deuteronomie it is said that the people desired that some might be sent to search the land. Thus therefore it was: When God had led his people from mount Horeb to Kadesh-Barnea, through the great and terrible wildernesse, and they were come to the mountain of the Amorites, Moses assembled the people, and encouraged them now to go up and take possession of the land which God had promised them, Deut. 1. 20, 21. And I said unto you, Ye are come unto the mountain of the Amorites, which the Lord our God doth give unto us. Behold, the Lord thy God hath set the land before thee, go up and possesse it, the people already, no doubt, through ifidelity be∣ginning to fear the event, desire that first they might send some certain men not one∣ly to search out the fertility and strength of the land, but also to take knowledge of the wayes and passages, rivers, fords and mountains, by which they were to go, ver. 22. Moses, not knowing their distrustfull hearts, likes well the motion, vers. 23. and consulted with God, who thereupon returned this answer here set down, yield∣ing or giving way to their motion, but in displeasure, for their greater hurt, and that no question because of their present infidelity; and appointing them to send men that might search the land of Canaan, even the land which God before had spied for them, Ezek. 20. 6. and searched out, Deut. 1. 33. Vers. 2. Of every tribe of their fathers shall ye send a man, every one a ruler among them.] There was one sent of every tribe, that every tribe might be satisfied by a witnesse of their own; and all Princes in their tribe, as most likely to be cou∣rageous, and that their testimony might be of more credit; not of the baser sort, be∣cause the businesse was weighty. Vers. 6. Caleb the sonne of Jephunneh.] His name signifieth hearty, and he brought Moses word again as it was in his heart, Josh. 14. 7. Vers. 11. Of the tribe of Joseph, namely of the tribe of Manasseh.] Why is this clause prefixt before the tribe of Manasseh rather then Ephraim? either because Manasseh was Josephs first-born, or rather onely as a hint of that priviledge which Joseph had: and so it is no more then if he had said, of that tribe which came of Josephs other sonne, namely of Manasseh, you shall send Gaddi the sonne of Susi. Vers. 16. And Moses called Oshea the sonne of Nun, Jehoshua.] This name Jehoshua is elsewhere ordinarily written Joshua, and sometimes Jeshua, as Neh. 8. 17. and in Greek Jesus, as Acts 7. 45. where Stephen saith that the tabernacle of witnesse, made in the wildernesse, their fathers that came after brought in with Jesus into the possession of the Gentiles; and Heb. 4. 8. If Jesus, that is, Joshua, had given them rest, then would he not afterward have spoken of another day; and Jesus we know signifieth a Saviour Matth. 1. 21. Thou shalt call his name Je∣sus (saith the Angel to Joseph concerning Christ, the sonne of the virgin Mary) for he shall save his people from their sinnes: so that evident it is that this faithfull
servant of God, who afterwards succeeded Moses in the government of Israel, and was now one of the spies sent to search the land of Canaan, was called Jehoshua or Joshua by Moses, to signifie that he should save his people from their enemies, the Canaanites, and bring them into the promised land, and should therein be a notable type of Christ, the onely Saviour of the world. But, may some say, Oshea, which was his former name, doth also signifie a Saviour; and why then was his name changed? I answer many reasons are given for this by Expositours, but the most probable is this, that by adding Jah, which is the proper name of God, Psal. 68. 4. contracted of Jehova; or as some think by adding the first letter of Je∣hova, to Oshea, so to make his name Jehoshua, thereby was signified that he should not onely be a Saviour, but also the Lords Saviour, implying that he should by authority from God, and by the help and assistance of God, be the Saviour of his people, and therein also the more manifestly a type of Chrit, who is the Lords anointed, and the Lord our righteousnesse, Jer. 23. 6. When his name was thus changed, it is not expressed: onely we see that he is called Joshua in the story of Moses before this, to wit, at the ight which he had with the Amalekites, Ex∣odus 17. 9. Vers. 17. Get you up this way South-ward, &c.] Or by the South, meaning the South part of the land of Canaan, which was nearest to them. Vers. 21. So they went up, and searched the land, &c.] It may be probably thought that they went not all together, but divided themselves; for going all toge∣ther, they would have been suspected, neither could they have viewed the whole countrey in so short a time: and so they went quite through the land from one end to the other, that is, from the South to the North; for so much is implyed in these words, so they went up and searched the land from the wildernesse of Zin, &c. for the wildernesse of Zin here spoken of, is not the wildernesse of Sin, that bordered upon Egypt, Exod. 16. 1. but a wildernesse called by a name much like, the wildernesse of Zin, which lay on the South of the land of Canaan, Numb. 34. 3. Joshua 15. 3. and Rehob and Hamath are cities that were on the utmost North part of the land, onely Rehob lay more towards the West-side of the land, and Hamath towards the Ea-side; and therefore it is said that they searched the land unto Rehob, as men come to Hamath, because being come to Rehob they struck over East-ward from Rehob to Hamath, or because they searched all that Nor∣thern tract as men usually go from Rehob to Hamath. Vers. 22. And they ascended by the South and came unto Hebron, where A∣himan, &c.] Having in the former verse generally related how the spies searched the land quite through from the South to the North, and from the West to the East, here Moses undertakes to relate ome particular passages that were most memorable either in their going out or coming back again, and so shewing how they went up by the South (for there they entred the land) he tells us how they came to He∣bron, a citie in the South parts of Canaan, where Abraham and Isaac and Jacob with their wives were buried, and there they saw certain huge giants, Ahiman, Shesui, and Talmai, who were afterwards expelled thence, and slain by Caleb, Josh. 15. 14. and are here called the children of Anak, ether because they were
indeed his sones (which seems most probable, because it is said, Josh. 15. 13. that Ar∣bah, from whom Hebron was called Kiriath-arbah, or, the citie of Arbah, was the father of Anak; or else because all giants were in those times called the chil∣dren of Ana. Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.] This declareth not onely the antiquity of Hebron, but also by consequence the goodnesse of the land. Vers. 23. And they came unto the brook of Eshcl, and cut down thence a branch with one cluster of grapes, &c.] Of admirable bignesse, which therefore they brought upon a staff betwixt two, that it might not be marred in the bring∣ing. Vers. 26. And they went and came to Moses, and to Aaron, and to all the congregation of the children of Israel unto the wildernesse of Paran, to Kadesh.] There was a city of the Edomites called Kadesh, chap. 20. 16. from whence the wildernesse by it was called the wildernesse of Kadesh, Psal. 29. 8. But this was ano∣ther Kadesh, called usually Kadesh-Barnea, Deut. 1. 29. and Rithma, Numb. 33. 18. That Kadesh upon the borders of Edom was in the desert of Zin, chap. 10. 1. this was in the wildernesse of Paran: The next station after they went from that Kadesh was mount Hor, where Aaron dyed, and that was in the fourtieth year after the Israelites came out of Egypt, chap. 33. 37, 38. but from this Kadesh they were appointed to turn back towards the red sea, chap. 14. 25. because they refused to enter the land of Canaan, and thereupon as God had threatned did wander eight and thirty years in the wildernesse, Deut. 2. 14. So that it is evident that this Ka∣desh, whither the spies returned, was not that Kadesh upon the borders of Edom, but another that was close upon the South parts of Canaan, where Moses and the congregation had stayed for them all the while they were searchng the land. Vers. 29. The Amalekites dwell in the land of the South, &c.] This their rec∣koning up of so many mighty nations with whom they must look to grappel, was purposely added to discourage the people from entring the land. As for the Amale∣kites, though they were not of the nations that inhabited the land of Canaan, yet the spies first mention them, because they borderd in the South parts close upon the land of Canaan, where the Israelites were to enter, and so were likely to come forth against them, and to withstand them with all their power: which they might the rather think because the year before, at their first coming out of Egypt, this nation had drawn out some forces against them to withstand them in their passage through the wildernesse, and had there fought with them. And the Canaanites dwell by the sea, and by the coast of Jordan.] The sea here in∣tended was not the mid-land sea, which was on the West of Canaan; but the dead sea, which lay on the East of Canaan, where the river Jordan ran into it, as we may well conceive by that which seems most probable to be the drift of these words, to wit, that as they had told the people▪ in the former words, of the Amalekites dwelling upon the South of Canaan, and the Hittites & Jebusites & Amortes dwelling in the mountains, that is, those mountains in the South of the land nigh unto the wilder∣nesse where the Israelites now lay, thereby intending to let the people see that there
would be no entring the land on the South, because of those mighty nations that would be there ready to oppose them (as indeed it is said, Deut. 1. 44. that when aftewards the Israelites would needs go up against Gods expresse command, The Amorites which dwelt in the mouains ame out against them, and chased them as bees do) so in these words, the Canaanites dwell by the sea and by the coast of Jordan, they intended further to shew the people that in case they should think to fetch a compasse about, and to enter into the East-side of the land, there they would be kept out by the river of Jordan, and the dead sea, which ran along on that side, and by the Canaanites (one of the nations of the land so particularly called) who dwelt by the sea and by the coast of Jordan, and so being a valiant and strong people would improve those advantages for the best defence of their countrey, and not suffer the Israelites to enter there. Vers. 30. And Caleb stilled the people before Moses, &c.] And Joshua with him, chap. 14. 6, 7. And Joshua the sonne of Nun, and Caleb the sonne of Jephun∣neh, which were of them that searched the land, rent their clothes. And they spake unto all the company of the children of Israel, saying, The land which we passed through to search it is an exceeding good land: yet now at first it may be Joshua advisedly held his peace, because he was Moses minister. However, for this it was that Moses made promise to Caleb concerning Hebron and the country adjoyning, Josh. 14. 9. And Moses sware on that day, saying, Surely the land whereon thy feet have troden shall be thine inheritance, and thy childrens for ever, because thou hast wholly followed the Lord my God. Vers. 32. The land through which we have gone to search it is a land that eat∣eth up the inhabitants thereof.] That is, a land wherein the people of the land are continually devoured, by reason of their bloudy warres, wherein they are ever involved either with their neighbours, or amongst themselves; implying how lit∣tle hope there was for them to prevail against such a fierce untamed people, and how little comfort they could expect, if they should drive out some of the inhabi∣tants and plant themselves in their room, they should be sure to be eaten out with continuall warres. Look as formerly the Amorites had conquered the Moabites, Numb. 21. 28▪ 29. the Caphterims or Philistins had destroyed the Anims▪ Deut. 2. 23. so it would be with them: and indced this very phrase was after used against this land, when the heathen had destroyed the Israelites in it, Ezek. 36. 13▪ 14. Thus saith the Lord God, Because they say unto you, Thou land devourest up men, and hast bereaved thy nations; therefore thou shalt devoure mn no more▪ CHAP. XIV. Vers. 3. ANd wherefore hath the Lord brought us into this land, &c.] Deut, 1. 27. this is more fully expressed, to wit, that they said, Because the Lord hated us he hath brought us forth out of the land of Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorite to destroy us. Vers. 4. And they said one to another, Let s make a captain, and return into Egypt.] This above all discoverd their wonderfll rage and madnesse, if we con∣sider,
1. the difficulties they must needs meet with in their return to Egypt (for they could not expect to be fed with manna from heaven, nor the red sea to be divided before them again) and 2. the scorn and ruell bondage they might well expet when they came thither: for if the Egyptians oppressed them so sorely before, how much more hardly were they like to deal with them now, even in remembrance of the death of their first-born, and the drowning of Pharaoh and his army in the red sea? How farre they proceeded in this their wicked intention may not happely be expressed: but if they did no more but consult about it, observable then it is that these thesr evil purposes are counted to them as if they had been done by them, Neh. 16. 17. But they and our fathers dealt proudly,—And in their rebellion appointed a captain to return to their bondage. Vers. 5. And Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly, &c.] Either to pray unto God for them, as in Numb. 6. 22. or to testifie their great sorrow and astonishment of mind, or to intreat the people not to proceed in their rebellion: for now happely Moses spake that, Deut. 1. 29, 30, 31. Then I said unto you, Dread not, neither be affraid of thm: the Lord your God which goeth before you, he shall fight for you, &c. Vers. 6. And Joshua the sonne of Nun, and Caleb the sonne of Jephunneh, which were of them that searched the land, rent their clothes.] In signe of sor∣row and detestation of those blasphemous speeches which the people had uttered a∣gainst God. Vers. 8. If the Lord delight in us, then he will bring us into this land, &c.] That i, unlesse by this rebellion we provoke God so farre that he take no more delight in us. Vers. 9. For they are bread for us.] That is, we shall easily consume and de∣vour them, to wit, with the sword, according to that expression, Deut. 32. 42. I will make mine arrows drunk with bloud, and my sword shall devour flesh; and this I conceive is opposed to that speech of the other incredulous searchers of the land, chap. 13. ver. 32. The land, through which we have gone to search it, is  land that eateth up the inhabitants thereof. Their defence is departed from them, &c.] In the Hebrew it is, their shadow is departed from them, but thereby is meant their desence, covert and protection, that whereby men are preserved from dangers, as the shadow gards a man from the scorching heat of the sunne, as Psal. 91. 1. He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most high shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty; and Psal. 121. 5. 6. The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand. The snne shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night: and the meaning is, that God had now forsaken them, as appears by the following clause whic is opposed a∣gainst this, and the Lord is with us; so that the aim of Joshua and Caleb in these words was to assure the people that however God had hitherto preserved them from being destroyed, because their iniquity was not then full; yet now he had withdrawn his help from them, and would certainly give them up to destruction, and that they had no cause therefore to fear them, but might go boldly against them as against a naked people, left destitute of ll means to preserve and shelter
them: for what are strong cities and high walls to defend a people whom God hath forsaken? Vers. 10. And the glory of the Lord appeared in the tabernacle, &c.] The Lord, seeing the danger his faithfull witnesses were in, did suddenly cause the cloud (the usuall signe when God meant to speak to Moses concerning his people) to de∣scend upon the tabernacle, and that no doubt in a more glorious appearance then or∣dinarily, thereby to astonish the people, and to stop them in that furious attempt they were going about. Vers. 17. And now, I beseech thee, let the power of my Lord be great, accor∣ding as thou hast spoken, saying, &c.] Two severall wayes these words may be un∣derstood: first, of the power of God in carrying the Israelites into Canaan: and because this would be an act of wonderfull mercy in God, to do this for a people that had now so horribly rebelled against him, therefore the next words are ad∣ded, according as thou hast spoken, saying, The Lord is long-suffering, &c. or se∣condly, of the power of God in pardoning their sinne, let the power of my Lord be great, that is, by pardoning this people now let it be seen how great thy power is in this regard, how able thou art to forgive a people that by so many sinnes and so ex∣ceeding great do still provoke thee. Nor need it seem strange that Moses, speaking of God after the manner of men, should make it an act of power to forgive, since the power of man is in nothing more seen then in overcoming his anger, and par∣doning those whom he may destroy, according to that of Solomon▪ Prov. 16. 32. He that is slow to anger, is better then the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit, then he that taketh a citie. Vers. 18. The Lord is long-suffering and of great mercy▪ forgiving iniquity and transgression, and by no means clearing the guilty, &c.] The drift of Moses prayer, and so also of his alledging these words, which the Lord had spoken concerning himself, being to procure of God that he would shew mercy to the Israelites, and not to poure out his wrath upon them as their sinne had deserved, it may seem strange that he should adde the last clause, that God would by no means clear the guilty, but would visit the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, &c. But for the resolving of this doubt, we must know, that these words being taken joyntly with those which went before do no way crosse the aim of Moses prayer, and that be∣cause he did not sue to God that he should not punish the sinne of this people, but onely that he would not utterly destroy them, as he had before threatened, vers. 12. and accordingly the drift of Moses plea in these words is this, That since God had said of himself that he was a long-suffering God, and that though he would by no means clear the guilty, &c. yet withall he was a God of great mercy, and ready to forgive the iniquities of his people, that he would now, according to this which he had said, deal with this people, namely, that he would in wrath remember mercy, and not sweep them quite away as dung from the face of the earth. Vers. 20. And the Lord said, I have pardoned according to thy word.] That is, I will not destroy them all as one man, I will not cut off the whole nation as at first I threatned, but will onely punish these rebells, and leave their posterity to in∣herit the land,
Vers. 21. But as truly as I live all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord.] This some understand of the glory which the Lord would get to himself by the just punishment that he would inflict upon this unbelieving and rebellious people, for their refusing to enter into that good land whereunto he had brought them; others agin understand it of the glory he would get by the miraculous and glorious thing that he would do for his people in carrying them into the land of Canaan: but I conceive that both may be best included: Moses had pleaded with God, that if he utterly destroyed this people, the nations would say that he was not able to bring them into the lan. To this therefore the Lord answers, that he would not destroy them▪ but would carry their posterity into the land which he had pro∣mised them, and that with working so many strange wonders, that all the nations of the earth that should hear of them should in every place, to the great glory of God, talk with admiration of the mighty power of God manifested in his doing such things, and of the great love that he bears to that people; and yet withall he would magnifie his justice and severity against their sinne too, in cutting off all those that had now murmured against him before ever their posterity came to inherit the land: yea this last according to our translation seems chiefly intended, because this par∣ticle But, seems to oppose this sentence to that which went before, concerning his pardoning them, The Lord said, I have pardoned according to thy word. But as truly as I live all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord. Vers. 22. And have tempted me now these ten times.] That is, not once nor twice, but many times, as Gen. 31. 7. And changed my wages ten times: and Job 19. 3. These ten times have ye reproched me. It may also be taken properly, for now they had rebelled ten times: First at the red sea, Exod. 14. 11, 12. Secondly, in Marah, Exod. 15. 23, 24. Thirdly, in the wildernesse of Sinne, where manna and quails were given when they murmured for want of bread, Exod. 16. 2. Fourthly, when at the same time they kept of the manna till the morning, Exod. 16. 20. Fifthly, when they went out to gather manna on the Sabbath, Exod. 16. 27, 28. Sixthly, at Rephidim, Exod. 17. 1. Seventhly, by the calf at Horeb▪ Exod. 32. Eighthly, at Taberah, Numb. 11. 1. Ninthly, at Kibroth Httaavah, chap. 11. 4. And now the tenth time upon the searching the land. Vers. 24. But my ser vant Caleb, because he had another spirit with him. &c.] The Lord having threatned in the former verses that none of the Israelites that had een his wonders in Egypt, &c. should ever see the land of Canaan, he now excepts Caleb, and promiseth that he should go into the land▪ whereinto he went to search it, and that his seed should possesse it, to wit, Hebron and the land adjoyning. Josh. 14. 9. and that because he had another spirit with him, that is, he was courageous and bold, and was not of such a base cowardly spirit as the others were of, and fol∣lowed the Lord fully to do that which God required. But why is not Joshua also named, seeing he also followed the Lord fully? I answer▪ the former judgement was pronounced onely against the people that were in their tents, amongst whom Caleb was, and therefore he was excepted: but there was no need to except Joshua, because he was not amongst the people▪ but attended on Moses. Ves. 25. Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites dwelt in the valley.] That
is added, both to shew the mischief their sine had done them, for which they must now return when they were come to the very borders of the land, ready to enter in∣to it; as also to shew how necessary it was that they should presently be gone, now God had resolved not to carry them in, because they lay so near to the enemy: for the Amalekites and Cananites dwelt, or, sat, i the valley, that is, the valley be∣yond the mountain, at the foot whereof the Israelites now lay, see vers. 40, &c. where by this word dwelt may be meant▪ either that they had their continuall abode there, or rather that there they had gathered forces, and lay in wait for them: for so sometimes this word is used, for lying in wait, Josh. 8. 9. To morrow turn you, and get you into the wildernesse by the way of the red sea.] In this they obeyed not neither, and being thereupon discomfited, stayed after this at Kadesh many dayes, Deut. 1. 46. and that as it is likely for the gathering up of their broken troups. Vers. 18. As ye have spoken in mine ears so will I do to you.] That is, that which you wished to your selves shall now betide you: wherein he alludes to that which they had spoken, vers. 3. Would God we had dyed in this wildernesse. Vers. 33. And your children shall wander in the wildernesse fourty years, and bear your whoredomes, &c.] That is, till they have made up the years of their wan∣dring in the wildernesse from their coming out of Egypt full fourty years, so that in these fourty years the time past already since they came out of Egypt is included; for one whole year and part of the second were past already, Deut. 2. 14. And the space in which we came from Kadesh-Barnea, untill we were come over the brook Sered, was thirty and eight years. Now in this the Lord saith their children should bear their whoredomes, because it was their fathers whoredomes, that is, their for∣saking of God, that did bring this punishment upon their children. Vers. 34. And ye shall know my breach of promise.] That is, you shall know to your cost what it is to charge me with breach of promise, as you have done by suspecting that I would not give you the land whither I had brought you, but meant to give you as a prey into the hand of your enemies; you shall find to your cost that it was your infidelity, your not keeping covenant with me, and no my breach of promise with you, that hath hindered you from the present enjoying of this land whither I had brought you. Vers. 37. Even those men, that did bring up an evil report upon the land, dyed by the plague before the Lord.] That is, dyed by an extraordinary plague from the hand of God, either the pestilence threatned, vers. 12. or some other judgement, and that immediately, the cloud, the testimony of Gods presence, still remaining upon the tabernacle. And thus by the present judgement inflicted on them the peo∣ple must needs be stricken with the more fearfull apprehension of the judgement that did abide them also, and therefore it is said, vers. 39. the people mourned great∣ly, having now indeed just cause to weep, whereas before, vers. 1. they wept cause∣lessely. Vers. 41. And Moses said, Wherefore now do yo transgresse the command∣ment of the Lord, &c.] To wit, being first commanded of the Lord so to say. See Deut. 1. 42. And the Lord said unto me, Say unto them, Go not up, ne∣ther
fight, for I am not among you, lest ye be smitten bfore your enemies. Vers. 43. For the Amalekites and the Canaanites are there before you.] That is, on the top of the hill lying in readinesse to set upon you, and therefore are said to come down, vers. 45. Vers. 44. Neverthelesse the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and Moses depart∣d not out of the camp.] The ark removed not but at the removall of the cloud, Numb. 9. 15. which God not taking up now he shewed thereby his dislike of their enterprise. Moses therefore obeying the Lord would notgo with them; so they went without the Lord, without the signes ofhis grace, and company of his mi∣nisters. Vers. 45. Thn the Amalekites came down, and the Canaanites which dwelt in that hill, and smote them, and discomfited them even unto Hormah.] That is, the Amorites, the posterity of Canaan, Deut. 1. 44. And the Amorites which dwelt in that mountain came out against you, and chased you as bees do. After this dis∣comfiture the Israelites returned and wept before the Lord, but he would not hear their voice, nor give ear unto them. So they abode in Kadesh many dayes, Deut 1. 45. Now for Hormah, whither the Israelites were chased, it was a place after∣wards so called upon occasion of the Israelites destroying the Canaanites there, chap. 21. 3. CHAP. XV. Vers. 1. ANd the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, &c.] In this chapter the Lord enlargeth and explaineth some laws formerly delivered. And it is most likely that this was delivered in the order as here it is set down, within some short time after their departure back from Kadesh toward the red sea, and that purpoely to chear up the people with hope of Gods reconciliation, that he had not utterly cast them off, but would again smell the sweet savour of a sacrifice from them, and perform the promises made to them: to which end also there is a particulr mention made that they should observe these directions given them when they cme into the land of Canaan. Vers. 2. When ye be come into the land of your habitations, which I give unto you, &c.] This law is to shew what meat-offerings and drink-offerings were al∣wayes to be offered together with their sacrifices, whereof part was burnt upon the altar, as accessories and appurtenances thereto belonging; for the understanding whereof we must note, that whereas there are two sorts of these offerings by fire, mentioned vers. 3. that were to have these accessory meat-offerings and drink-offer∣ings, to wit, a burnt-offering or a sacrifice, by sacrifice there is meant onely the sa∣crifice of peace-offerings, as in many other places besides. And indeed unlesse it be i the sinn-offering that was offered at the cleansing of the Leper, Levit. 14. 10. we do not any where reade that there was any meat-offerings appointed for sinne-offerings, bt onely for burnt-offerings and peace-offerings (whence we see that these two onely are mentioned i this place) the reason whereof, I conceive, was this, because the end of the sinne-offering▪ which was to make atonement for the
humbled sinner, and the end of the meat-offering, which was to testifie the joy and gladnesse of their thankfull hearts, did not so well agree; and it would not there∣fore be so proper to joyn them together: and secondly, that there are severall quan∣tities of meat and drink-offerings here appointed: as first, for a lamb or kid, vers. 4, 5. or secondly, for a ramme, ver. 6, 7. or for a bullock, ver. 8, 9, 10. for according as the sacrifice was greater o lesse so must also the meat and drink-offering be more or lesse, so there might be a proportion betwixt them. Now concerning the measure of an hin, and other things observable concerning these meat-offerings, see what is noted before upon Exod. 9. 41, &c. Vers. 15. As ye are so shall the stranger be before the Lord.] That is, God will make no difference betwixt you and the strangers that have embraced the same re∣ligion with you: his sacrifices and yours shall be alike acceptable to God; and therefore as there is no difference in the Lords acceptation, so neither in the manner of their offering them. In civil things there was not one Law both for Israelite and stranger, but before the Lord▪ that is, when they came into Gods presence to per∣form the duties of Gods worship, as the Israelites were, so were the strangers, that is, there was one Law for them both. Vers. 20. As ye do the heave-offering of the threshing-floore, so shall ye heave it.] That is, about the same quantity that ye offer of your first corn, shall ye offer of you dough, and both shall be offered with the same ceremonies. Vers. 21. Of the first of your dough ye shall give unto the Lord an heave-offer∣ing in your generations.] That is, to the priests, as the Lords receivers: for the first-fruits were their portion, Ezek. 44. 30. And the first of all the fruits of all things, and evry oblation of all of every sort of your oblations, shall be the priests, &c. Vers. 22. And if ye have erred, and not observed all thse commandments, &c.] There is a Law given concerning the expiation of a sinne ignorantly com∣mitted by the whole congregation, Levit. 4. 13. But there is a manifest difference be∣twixt this and that: There the Law speaks of doing that which should not be done, here, of not doing all which should be done; there the sacrifice which the congre∣gation should bring is onely a bullock for a sinne-offering, here they are willed to bring a bullock for a burnt-offering, and a kid of the goats for a sinne-offering▪ And the ground of this difference I conceive is this, because that Law concerned sinnes of doing evil forbidden, this onely concerns the sinne of neglecting those ce∣remoniall duties commanded by the Law, which may be the more readily yielded if we consider the occasion of inserting this Law in this place. Having spoken of the first-fruits, of the first of their dough, he immediately added this Law, to shew what should be done in case any of those things concerning the externall worship of God, either first-fruits or any other thing that ought to be brought to the priests and to the tabernacle, were omtted either by the congregation or particular per∣sons. Vers. 25. And the priests shall make an atonement for all the congregation of the children of Israel, &c.] Or, for every congregation; whereby may be im∣plyed the severall tribes, cities, towns and synagogues.
Vers. 30. But the soul that doth ought presumptuously, &c.] This Law for the cutting off, that is, the putting to death, of those that do ought presumptuously, must be understood onely of the same offences for which the foregoing sacrifics were appointed when they were ignorantly committed, to wit, of offences com∣mitted against the worship enjoyned by the ceremoniall Law, as it is noted before upon vers. 22. In these things the soul, that is, the man, that did ought presumptu∣ously, that is, not of ignorance, inadvertencie or infirmity, but willfully and bold∣ly, purposely and openly, as in an advised contempt of Gods Law, and of those duties of his publick worship in the Law of God enjoyned, he was to be cut off, and that because he did thereby reproch the Lord, this being all one as if he should fay that God was not to be regarded, or that his judgements were not worthy his fear. Vers. 32. And while the children of Israel were in the wildernesse, they found a man that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath day, &c.] At what time in their wandring through the wildernesse this happened, which is here related, it is not ex∣pressed. But I conceive it is inserted as an instance or example how the foregoing Law was put in execution, concerning those that did presumptuously transgresse and refuse to conform themselves to the Law in the outward duties of Gods wor∣ship and service, so that his punishment was for the willfull contempt of that Law. Vers. 34. And they put him in ward, because it was not declared what should be done to him.] That the Sabbath-breaker was to die, they knew, see Exod. 31. 14. and 35. 2. but by what death he should die, or whether this gathering of sticks made him obnoxious to that sentence, that they were not fully resolved in: Evi∣dent it seems it was that he had done it presumptuously, yet it was doubtfull whe∣ther this fact were within the compasse of that Law or no. And therefore Moses inquires, not willing to take away his life without certain direction from the mouth of God. Vers. 38. Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that they make them fringes, &c.] The main end of these fringes was to put them in mind of the com∣mandments of God, as it is afterwards expressed, ver. 29. that every time they looked upon their garments, and saw those fringes, they might by the help of this memoriall remember that they were Gods peculiar people, consecrated to his ser∣vice, and bound to his Laws, and therefore might not walk, as others, after their own wayes: and therefore it was that the Pharisees, to the end they might seem religious above others, did make the fringes on their garments so very broad, Mat. 23. 5. They enlarge, saith our Saviour, the border of their garments, or, the fringes of their garments, for so the originall word may well be translated. Yea, and our Saviour himself did conform himself to this Law, as appears, Luke 8. 44. where it is said, that the woman that had the issue of bloud touched the border, or, the fringe, of his garment. And that they put upon the fringe of the borders a ribband of blue.] This heaven∣coloured ribband taught them the heavenly affection they should have to all the Law, and how holy their conversation should be. Vers. 39. And it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, &c.]
That is, this is the end of making these fringes, that ye may look upon them and remember all the commandments of the Lord, and do them, that is, that the sight of this fringe may put you in mind to keep them, and that ye seek not after your own heart, and your own eyes, after which you use to go a whoring, that is, that ye may not find out any superstitious in ventions of your own devising in my wor∣ship (which who so doth goes a whoring from God) but may content your selves with that which is prescribed by the Law. So that this was more particularly the end of these fringes, that they might be restrained from their own devices in the worship of God, and kept to the direction of his Law. CHAP. XVI. Vers. 1. NOw Korah the sonne of Izhar, the sonne of Kohath, the sonne of Levi, &c.] Moses here names the ring-leaders in a dangerous in∣surrection that was made against him and Aaron his brother. Korah is set in the first place, as the first mover of this sedition, which is therefore called the gainsay∣ing of Core, Jude 11. and ver. 23. because it was all occasioned by him▪ shall one man sinne, said Moses to the Lord, and wilt thou be wroth with all the congregati∣on? A Levite he was, and cosen-german to Moses and Aaron: for Amram the fa∣ther of Moses and Aaron, and Izhar the father of this Korah, were brothers, the sonnes of Kohath, as it is evident Exod. 6. 18. And probable enough it may seem to be which the Hebrews say, that this Korah had long since taken offence that Eli∣zaphan was by Moses preferred to be Prince of the families of the Kohathites chap. 3. 30. whereas he was of the youngest brother Uzziel, and Korah was of Izhar l∣der then he; which grudge, however it lay buried for a time, yet now it brake forth, and nothing lesse then priesthood will content him and his abetters. With Korah are joyned here Dathan and Abiram, the sonnes of Eliab, and On the sonne of Peleth, all sonnes of Reuben, who were ring-leaders of this rebellion amongst the people, as Korah was amongst the Levites: and indeed because the Reubenites encamped next to the Kohathites, both on the South-side of the tabernacl, hereby Korah had the better opportunity to perswade the Reubenites to joyn with them; and besides under a pretence of Reubens birthright they were happe'y the more ea∣sily drawn to oppose Moses, as intending to challenge that the government be∣longed to them also. Vers. 2. Two hundred and fifty princes of the assembly, famous in the congre∣gation, men of renown.] That is, they were magistrates, statesmen, famous and re∣nowned, whereby the conspiracy was the more dangerous. Vers. 3. Ye take too much upon you seeing all the congregation are holy, &c.] And therefore may approch to God, and offer their sacrifices themselves. Hereby therefore they challenge Moses of partiality, in tying the priesthood to his brother Aarons posterity. It is most probable, which is generally held by Interpreters, that the Reubenites did intend under the pretence of Reubens birthright to wrest the supreme magistracy from Moses to themselves, and therefore might here charge not Aaron onely but Moses also with taking too much upon them. But doubtlesse
for the present they made the quarrel onely about the priesthood: nor was it so much to make all the Levites equall with Aaron and his sonnes (though that hap∣pely the Levites did hope would prove the issue of it, seek ye the priesthood also? said Moses, ver. 10.) as that all the people might as priests offer their own sacrifi∣ces; and therefore all the two hundred and fifty conspiratours, who were of severall tribes, were appointed to come with their censers to burn incense before the Lord; and concerning Dathan and Abiram, who were Reubenites, it is said ver. 15. when Moses sent for them, and they refused to come to him, that Moses was very wroth with them, and said unto the Lord, Respect not thou their offerings, which must needs be meant of the incense they were to offer; yea and in the following chapter, the laying up of the rods of all the tribes before the Lord, that the Lord might shew that none but Aaron and his family might meddle with the work of the priesthood, makes it most evident that the plea of these men was, that all the tribes might offer their sacrifices unto the Lord. Wherefore then lift you up your selves above the congregation of the Lord?] Though at first they pretend nothing but an equall right to the priesthood, yet these generall words of expostulation do in a manner intimate that they meant to wrest the government from Moses also. Vers. 4. And when Moses heard it, he fell upon his face.] See chap. 14. 5. Vers. 5. Even to morrow the Lord will shew who are his, &c.] All this that here follows, which is appointed for deciding of the controversie who might med∣dle with the work of the priesthood, and who might not, Moses no doubt spake by speciall instinct of the spirit of God, who upon Moses prayer when he fell upon his face, ver. 4. had now revealed to him what he should do. Neither yet doth he pre∣sently call them to the triall, but appoints the next day for it, both that they might have time to bethink themselves, and repent of what they had done; and also that the people might e the better prepared to observe and note the judgement of God. Vers. 8. And Moses said unto Korah, Here I pray you ye sonnes of Levi, &c.] Bcause Korah Dathan and Abiram, with the rest of the conspiratours, were all together when they first began to quarrel with Moses and Aaron, as it is evi∣dent, ver. 1. 2. and yet the same day Dathan and Abiram were gone, and Moses therefore sent for them, ver. 12. therefore it may be probably thought that after the first assembly was broken up, Moses did again send for Korah and the Levites, that he might talk with them by themselves, and that then he spake that which is here set down; and so afterwards for Dathan and Abiram by themselves, as is expressed ver. 12. Vers. 11. And what is Aaron, that ye murmur against him?] That is, he is but Gods minister, he did not thrust in himself, but was called of God. So Moses had spoken formerly, Exod. 16. 7, 8. And what are we that ye murmur against us?—your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord; and so the A∣postle speaks, 1. Cor. . 5. Who then is Paul? and who is Apollo? but ministers by whom ye believe, even as the Lord gave to every man. Vers. 12. And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram, &c.] Dathan and A∣biram were with Korah when they were first gathered together against Moses and
Aaron, ver. 1, 2. Either therefore after that assembly was broken up Moses did the same day send first for Korah and the Levites, and expostulate the matter with them, as is before noted upon ver. 8. and afterwards fo Dathan and Abiram (as here is said) that he might also advise them better; or else, if all hitherto related were done at the first assembly, then had Dathan and Abiram withdrawn themselves when Moses began to speak, as disdaining to hear any thing he should say. In the beginning of this chapter there is mention made of On the sonne of Peleth, who was also one of the tribe of Reuben, and a ring-leader in this rebellion. But because he is not here named, nor any where else in the sequele of the story, there∣fore it may be thought that he gave over upon the reproof of Moses; or else it must be held, that he also is implyed amongst the rest, though not particularly named. Vers. 13 Is it a small thing that thou hast brought us up out of a land that flow∣eth with milk and hony, &c.] These men having as it seems heard what had passed betwixt Moses and the Levites, when he counselled them to desist from this wicked attempt (of which we heard before, vers. 8.) do not onely refuse to come to him, but return him a bitter and scornfull scoffing answer: for first, as by way of deriding those words of Moses, vers. 9. Seemeth it but a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel hath separated you from the congregation of Israel to bring you near to himself, &c. they retort the same words upon him, Is it a small thing that thou hast brought us up out of a land that floweth with milk and hony, &c. and secondly, they scoff at his promise of bringing them into a land flowing with milk and hony; in stead thereof, they say, he had brought them from a land that was such indeed, into a drie wildernesse. Vers. 14. Wilt thou put out the eyes of these men?] That is, canst thou hope to gull and deceive this people so, that they should not perceive the wrongs and in∣jurie thou hast done them, which is so clear and evident that unlesse thou canst put out their eyes they cannot but see it? Vers. 18. And they took every man his censer, and put fire in them, and laid incense thereon, &c.] The censers here spoken of they had either provided before, when they first combined together to thrust themselves upon the priestly office; or else they were some slight things made suddenly since. Moses the day before had appointed this for the deciding of the controversie betwixt them: The place where they burnt their incense was in the doore of the tabernacle of the congreation, as is here expressed, that is, in the doore of the priests court, whither the people used to bring their sacrifices. Indeed the place for the priests burning of incense was with∣in the tabernacle, at the altar of incense: but this was an extraordinary thing, en∣joyned for the discovery of the Lords will, whether these men or onely Aaron and his sonnes (as formerly) should enter into the tabernacle to execute the priests office, and therefore this was done at the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation. That Korah was amongst the rest with his censer, seems evident by the foregoing verse, where he is particularly appointed to be one amongst the rest, thou also and Aaron each of you his censer, &c. how therefore he came to be swallowed up afterward with Dathan, see in the note upon vers. 32. Vers. 19. And Korah gathered all the congregation against them unto the
doore of the tabernacle of the congregation.] Not onely the two hundred and fifty forementioned, but the people in generall; not as professed abetters of their at∣tempt, but as spectatours of the businesse in hand, Korah no doubt having perswa∣ded them that they should see that God would favour their attempt, and give judge∣ment on their side. And the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the congregation.] To wit, in the cloud, which usually hovered over the tabernacle, but now came down lower to the doore of the tabernacle as at other times. See chap. 14. 10. Vers. 22. O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, &c.] By all flesh is meant all mankind, as Gen. 6. 12. All flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth; and God is called the God of the spirits of all men, both because the souls of all men are im∣mediately in their first conception created by God, whence he is also called the fa∣ther of spirits, Hebr▪ 12. 9. The Lord formeth the spirit of man within him, Zach. 12. 1. and also because he seeth and knoweth the spirits and souls of men, and hath the power of ordering and governing the (which men can never have) In whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of all mankind, Job 12. 10. Now this title here Moses gives the Lord, either first by way of acknowledgement that it was in his power to save or to destroy this people; or secondly, as a forcible argument to move the Lord to have mercy on them, because they were the work of his hand, and he gave them at first their life and being, as the prophet pleads for mercy upon the same ground, Esa. 64. 8. O Lord, thou art our father, we are the clay and thou our potter, and we all are the work of thine hand; or thirdly, to inti∣mate why the Lord should not destroy all the cogregation, namely, because he knew the hearts and spirits of them, and was able therefore to distinguish betwixt those that were obstinately rebellious against the od, an those that wee onely seduced by the rebels, and drawn together onely to see wha would be done. Vers. 25. And Moses rose up▪ and went unto Dathn and Abiram, &c.▪ Here is no mention of Korah, because he was appointed vers. 16. to be with his cen∣ser amongst the other two hundred and fiftie of his conpiracy before the tabernacle of the Lord. But Dathan and Abiram (when Moses sent to call them unto him vers. 12) refused to come, and therefore now Moses, accompanied with the elders of Israel who were not of the conspiracy, goes to them, both to expostulate with them for this their rebellion, and to denounce the judgement threaned. Vers. 26. Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sinnes.] That is, remove your tents, and get farre away from them, and touch nothing of theirs, and so shew your faith and repentance, how certainly you believe that the lie under the wrath of God, how throughly you desire to clear your selves from having any hand in their wickednesse, by refusing to touch any thing of theirs, as judging all they have un∣clean, execrable, and therefore to perish with them. Vers. 27. So they gat up from the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, & Abiram, on every side.] The tabernacle of Korah, who was of the Levites, was not in the same place with Dathan and Abirams: whereby it seems probable that the earth opened in severall places, which indeed must needs make the judgement of God the more evident▪
And Dathan and Abiram came out, &c.] This is added as an expression of their impudent madnesse, when they saw the people lie from their tabernacles, they come forth boldly, and stand in the doores of their tabernacles, as out-facing Moses, and scorning the judgement which he had seemed to threaten. Vers. 28. And Moses said, Hereby ye shall know that the Lord hath sent me to do all these works.] That is, both the former, in undertaking the government of the people, in conferring the priesthood upon Aaron and his sonnes, &c. and the latter, appointing Korah and his company to bring censers with incense, &c. Vers. 3. And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up.] That is▪ Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, the ring-leaders of the rebellion. Many Expositours do rather think that Korah was consumed with those two hundred and fiftie men by fire that came out from the Lord. vers. 35. But because the people fled from Korahs tabernacle▪ vers. 7. and because it is here evident that Korahs tabernacle with all that appertaid o him was swallowed up in the earth, but especially because chap. 26. 10. it i sid expressely that the earth swallowed up Dathan & Abiram together with Korah▪ I make no question but he was swallowed up in the earth. It is true that Moes had inted him, vers. 26. to be with his censer amongst the two hun∣dred and fifty. But having assembled them before the tabernacle, and perceiving Moses and the Elders to go to Dathan and Abiram, it seems he left the two hundred and fifty before the tabernacle, and went also to his consederates to encou∣rage and assist them in their confronting of Moses, and so either with them, or in his own tent, was swallowed up. And all the men that appertained unto Korah▪ and their goods.] That is, all that were of his family who were at that tie in his tae nacle; for some of his sonnes died not in this destruction, chap. 26. 11. Notwithstanding the children of Korah died not, either because they joyned not i their fathers sinne, or because they repented and gave over, or because they were not present in Korahs taber∣nacle. Vers. 37. Speak unto Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the priest, that he take up the censers out of the burning, &c.] These mutiners had sought to wrest the priest∣hood from the posterity of Aaron: Eleazar therefore, whose cause God had pleaded, is imployed in making the censers a memoriall of Gods judgement on them. And scatter thou the fire yonder.] That is, without the court of the tabernacle, both because happely it was strange fire, and that this casting away of the fire might be an expression of Gods rejecting their service, and abhorring their sa∣crifice. For they are hallowed.] To wit, because they had been offered before the Lord, as is expressed in the following verse. Things consecrated to God might not be turned to any other use in the time of the law, God therein magnifying the holinesse of that place wherein were the visible signes of his presence; yet it follows not hence, that where things are given to superstitious use, but intentionally to God, it shall be unlawfull for any authority to divert thse things to civil uses, no more then it follows that because under the law if any man did change the tithe of the heard or of the flock, both it and the change thereof were holy to the Lord,
Levit. 27. 32. therefore now where tithes, either by custome or law are made due to the minister, if any man should fraudulently change the true tenth, therefore both it and the change should be the ministers. Vers. 38. The censers of these sinners against their own suls, let them make them broad plates for a covering of the altar.] This altar must needs be the altar of burnt-offerings, and yet this was covered with plates of brasse before, Exod. 27. 2. so that it is very questionable how the censers beaten into broad plates were a covering for this altar. Some hold that it was before made with a frame like a table, and boarded now about like a chest, which boards were now covered with these plates: others hold that it was onely overlayed with brasse before half way, down from the top even to the grate within where the fire lay, and now that the other parts were also plated with brasse: others hold that these plates were fastened upon the other, and that the lesse necessity there was of them, the fitter they were to be memorials of their sinne. But withall it is like they were so ordered, that they were both a further ornament and defence to the wood against the fire; yea why may not this also be meant of a covering for the top of the altar when it was remo∣ved? But the text resolves us not. Vers. 41. But on the morrow all the congregation of the children of Israel mur∣mured against Moses, &c.] The very men, whose lives Moses had saved the day before by praying to the Lord for them, do now murmur against him; and it is ex∣presly noted that this they did on the morrow after they had seen that fearfull judge∣ment that fell upon Korah, Dathan and Abiram, with all the men of their conspi∣racy, thereby to intimate their horrible wickednesse, that after the sight of so strange and fearfull a judgement they durst so immediately again make an insurrection against Moses, charging him with the death of those rebells, and that under the name of the people of the Lord (ye have killed, say they, the people of the Lord) when it was so evident that they were destroyed by the immediate hand of God, as wretches not worthy to be numbred amongst Gods people. Vers. 42. And▪ it came to passe, when the congregation was gathered against Moses and against Aaron, that they looked toward the tabernacle of the congre∣gation.] That is, Moses and Aaron looked to God, as having now no other refuge or shelter to fly to. And behold the cloud covered it, and the glory of the Lord appeared.] This signe of Gods having somewhat to say to them (for at such times the cloud descen∣ded) stayed the rage of the people, and saved Moses and Aaron. Vers. 46. Take a censer and put fire therein from off the altar, &c.] No doubt the same spirit of God that informed him the plague was begun, directed him to this course of offering incense, which otherwise might onely be offered in the taber∣nacle, for the staying of it; yea and happely that Aarons offering incense might put the people in mind to pray unto the Lord, whereof the incense was a signe. Vers. 48. And he stood between the dead and the living, and the plague was stared.] That is, as a mediatour be interposed himself by his intercession to stay the plague from passing any further, and to save those from death that were not yet struck with this judgement of God: yet it may be probably thought, that this plague
did not scatter it self through the whole congregation, but beginning in one place did like a fire runne along upon those still that were next adjoyning; and if it were thus, even literally we may understand this place, that Aaron set himself in that place, where he was betwixt the dead and those that were not yet smitten, as it were exposing himself to the wrath of God in the peoples behalf: whereby it must needs be the more evident, that those who were preserved were preserved by virtue of that atonement which he now made for them. And herein was Aaron a type of Christ our Mediatour, who made intercession for transgressours: See Esa. 53. 12. And he bare the sinnes of many, and made intercession for the transgressours. Luke 23. 34. Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. Vers. 49. Now they that dyed in the plague were fourteen thousand and seven hundred, &c.] What the plague was is not expressed; but to this some apply that of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. 10. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmur∣ed, and were destroyed of the destroyer. Vers. 50. And Aaron returned unto Moses unto the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation.] Both to acquaint Moses how he had sped, and to return thanks unto the Lord who had so graciously accepted the work of his hands. CHAP. XVII. Vers. 2. Speak unto the children of Israel, and take of every one of them a rod, &c.] No doubt the Lord saw that notwithstanding his severe proceed∣ing against those that mutined against Aaron, yet the hearts of many amongst them were not sufficiently wrought upon, but were still rising against this dignity of Aaron; and therefore the Lord in wonderfull mercy by this ensuing miracle labours to overcome their rebellious hearts. Now to this end he enjoyns Moses to take of each Prince of the tribes a rod or staff, such as men did use ordinarily to carry in their hands (as we reade of such a rod that Moses used to go with, Exod. 4. 2. And the Lord said unto him, What is that in thine hand? And he said, A rod) or rather such as the Princes did use to carry in their hands as the signe of their dig∣nity, Numb. 21. 18. The Princes digged the well, the nobles of the people digged t, by the direction of the law-giver, with their staves; for a rod or staff in the hand of governours was a signe of their power and authority from God. See Psal. 110. 2. The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion, rule thou in the midst of thine enemies; and Jer. 48. 16, 17. The calamity of Moab is near to come, and his affliction hasteth fast. All ye that are about him bemoan him, and all ye that know his name say, How is the strong staff broken and the beautifull rod? and thus the very signe of their authority becomes a signe and witnesse against them that the priesthood beloged not to them, but to Aaron onely. Vers. 2. Of all their Princes, according to the house of their fathers, twelve rods.] There were twelve severall tribes, and twelve Princes, of each tribe a Prince, and every Prince brought a rod with his name upon it: whence to me it seems evi∣dent that there were twelve rods besides Aarons, as is more fully expressed, vers. 6. Write thou every mans name upon his rod.] Not the name of the Patriarhs,
Reuben, Simeon, &c. (for we see that not Levies but Aarons name was written on his rod) but the name of every Prince, who was at present head of the tribe, upon his own staff: whence also it appears that there were twelve rods besides Aarons; else if there were but one rod for the two tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, which of those two Princes names were written on their rod? Vers. 3. For one rod shall be for the head of the house of their fathers.] That is, though I have distinguisht the tribe of Levi into two parts, that of the priests, the posterity of Aaron, and that of the other Levites; yet as in the other tribes there is but one rod for a tribe, so must it be for the tribe of Levi: and as the head or chief of every tribe hath his name written upon the rod of that tribe, so shall Aarons name be written upon the rod of Levi, whom I have set in the chief place, that here∣by my choice of him to serve in the priesthood may be fully made known. Vers. 4. And thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of the congregation be∣fore the testimony, &c.] That is, before the ark, which is called the testimony, be∣cause therein were kept the tables of the law, called the testimony Exod. 25. 26. Either therefore they were to lay these rods in the holy place before the vail where the ark stood within behind the vail, or else in the most holy place before the ark: for upon such extraordinary occasions we need not doubt but Moses used to go in∣to the most holy place; and evident it is, that after they were broght forth again, and Aarons rod was found to flourish, the rest continuing dry sticks or staves as they were before, that was carryed into the most holy place (and therefore the Apostle Heb. 9. 4. mentions Aarons rod that budded amongst those things that were within the vail) and yet it is said to be returned to the place where they were all laid be∣fore, vers. 10. Bring Aarons rod again before the testimony. However this laying of these rods up before the Lord was to signifie, that it was referred to him to de∣termine this controversie concerning the priesthood. Vers. 5. And I will make to cease from me the murmuring of the children of Israel.] That is, in this particular concerning Aarons priesthood. Vers. 6. And the rod of Aaron was among their rods.] That is▪ there being twelve rods brought for the twelve Princes of the twelve tribes (which were it seems according to the custome of those times, made of the almond tree, for such Aarons was, vers. 8. that bloomed blossomes and yielded almonds) they were all laid together, and Aarons was put also amongst the other twelve. Vers. 8. And behold the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi budded &c.] Here∣by the Lord did discover miraculously that he had chosen Aarons and his posterity to be the onely priests that should serve at his altar: and withall the flourishing of this rod signified, first, the budding of Aarons posterity▪ together with the flourishing glory and fruitfulnesse of the priesthood which continued in his posterity; secondly, the miraculous flourishing glory of Christs priesthood (of which Aarons was a type) to wit, how he, that rod out of the stemme of Jesse, and branch that grew out of his root, Esa. 11. 1. though at first he was as a dry and withered sick, so that there was no beauty nor comlinesse in him, Esa. 53. 2. and especially in his death and burall, when he was indeed withered in the eye of reason without hope of recovery and dryed up like a potsheard, Psal. 22. 15. should yet suddenly sprout
forth again, to wit, in his resurrection, and so his priesthood should become an eter∣nall priesthood, and le Aarons budding & fruitbearing rod should bring forth fruit to man believing on him remission of sinnes, righteousnesse and eternall lie, and by the preaching of the Gospel, that flourishing rod or sceptre of righteousnesse, should become glorious all the world over, to the great joy of all those that have interest in him; and thirdly, that all those, that in the dayes of the Gospel were truly set apart to teach the people as Aaron was, though in themselves but dry and withered sticks, yet by the speciall grace of God should bear and bring forth buds and fruit, and that their fruit should remain, John 15. 16. Vers. 12. And the children of Israel spake unto Moses, saying, Behold we die, we perish, we all perish.] Being by this miracle fully convinced of their sinne, and then calling to mind how severely God had punished this their murmuring against Moses and Aaron, how some had been burnt with fire, some swallowed up into the earth alive, some consumed with the plague, they are stricken with an apprehension of the like danger (the first step to repentance) and therefore cry out as men that might justly expect to be every one of them destroyed, as they were indeed in danger to be presently taken away by some judgement, had not the Lord been the more mercifull to them. Vers. 13. Whosoever cometh any thing near unto the tabernacle of the Lord shall die.] This is an amplification of their wofull condition, to wit, that though God should spare them now, yet they should alwayes be in danger, if they did ne∣ver so little presse beyond the limits allowed them, whosoever (say they) cometh any thing near, that is, nearer then they should, and keep not off at their full distance (wherein we may easily transgresse) we see God will not spare them; yea happely (as men terrified are indeed wont to conceive their danger greater then it is) they complain as if it would be perilous to come near the tabernacle at all. Shall we be consumed with dying?] This may be a deprecation, Shall we be con∣sumed, that is, of thy mercie let us not be consumed: for so questions are often used in earnest deprecations, as Psal. 85. 6. Wilt thou not revive us again, that thy peo∣ple may rejoyce in thee? and Esa. 64. 12. Wilt thou refrain thy self from these things, O Lord? wilt thou hold thy peace and afflict us very sore? But I rather take it as a bemoaning of their condition. CHAP▪ XVIII. Vers. 1. THou and thy sonnes and thy fathers house with thee shall bear the iniquity of the Sanctuary.] Because of the peoples astonishment, chap. 17. vers. 12. Behold we die, we perish, we all perish, the Lord here tells Aaron, that he, the priests and Levites, must bear the iniquity of the Sanctuary, that is, that if any pollution came to it by the people they should answer for it, and therefore it must be their charge to watch over it. Thus the Lord shews himself reconci∣led, and makes the priests watch a ground of appeasing the peoples both fear and envy. And thou and thy sonnes with thee shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood.]
That is, shall be punished if the priesthood be polluted either by your selves or the Levites intruding upon it, which your watch should prevent. Vers. 3. Onely they shall not come nigh the vessels of the Sanctuary and the al∣tar, that neither they, nor you also die.] To wit, for not preventing the errour of your brethren the Levites by your care. Vers. 7. Therefore thou and thy sonnes with thee shall keep your priests office for every thing of the altar and within the vail.] That is, for all things that con∣cern the altar of burnt-offerings, and for all things that are to be done within the vail, that is, within the outer vail, either in the holy or most holy place. Vers. 8. Unto thee have I given them, by reason of the anointing, &c.] That is, for the office sake whereunto thou art anointed; because I have separated thee from worldly employments to attend upon mine holy things, therefore thou shalt have mine holy things to live upon. Vers. 9. Every oblation of theirs, every meat-offering of theirs, &c.] The particu∣lars are here mentioned of the most holy things reserved from the fire, that is, the sa∣crifices whereof part was burnt upon the altar, which were allotted to be the priests portion for their maintenance, to wit, oblations meat-offerings sin-offerings & tres∣passe-offerings; and this last is expressed thus, every trespasse-offering of theirs which they shall render unto me, because trespasse-offerings were brought as by way of re∣compence for some trespasse committed against the Lord. The greatest difficulty in thesewords is, what is meant by the first clause, every oblation of theirs. But the most of Expositours agree, that this is mentioned as a generall comprehending all those particulars after mentioned, as if it had been thus expressed, every oblation of theirs shall be thine, that is, every meat-offering, every sinne-offering, and every trespasse∣offering of theirs; and indeed I see not of what particular sort of sacrifice it can be meant, because they are all besides expressed by name. Vers. 10. In the most holy place thou shalt eat it.] That is, in the court of the tabernacle (or the tents or houses round about it) which is called here the most holy place, to wit, in respect to the camp of Israel, and afterwards the citie Jerusa∣lem, which were holy places for the like holy things (as they were called) to be eaten in the Passeover, peace-offerings, &c. yea and in respect to the great court for the people, which was without the priests court, mentioned 2. Chron. 4. 9. and called therefore the outer court, Ezek. 42. 14. Vers. 11. And this is thine, the heave-offering of their gift, with all the wave-offerings, &c.] That is, the right shoulder and the wave-breast of their peace-of∣ferings, with all other gifts that they were heaved and waved, no part thereof being burnt upon the altar. Vers. 12. All the best of the oyl, and all the best of the wine, and of the wheat, the first-fruits of them, &c.] These things here mentioned were allotted for the priests sustenance. Some of the first-fruits of their land were brought to the Lord at their three great feasts, as a sheaf of their barley, at the feast of Passeover or un∣leavened bread, chap. 23. 10. and two loaves of their new wheat, at the feast of Pentecost, ver. 17. and the first of their wine and oyl at the feast of tabernacles. But these were brought in the name of all the inhabitants of the land in generall.
Besides these thereore, particular men were of their own corn and fruits to bring the first-fruits unto the Lord, as is enjoyned in severall places, Exod. 22. 29. and 23. 19. &c. concerning which there is no other direction given but that thy should be of the first, and of the best (as is here expressed) the quantity being left to the free bounty of the owner, according as he had found the blessing of God up∣on his grounds, and of these first-fruits is this place to be understood. Some indeed make a difference betwixt the first-fruits mentioned here, ver. 12. and the first ripe mentioned in the following verse, What soever is first ripe in the land, which they shall bring unto the Lord, shall be thine, which they say is meant onely of those first ripe fruits, which the people were to bring to the priests, concerning which the Law speaks, Deut. 26. 2. But whether there can be any such difference gathered from the Scripture, is very questionable. Vers. 16. And those that are to be redemed from a maneth old shalt thou re∣deem, &c.] That is, the first-born of men: for though in the foregoing verse there is mention made of the redemption of the first-born, both of man and beast, Ne∣verthelesse, the first-born of man shalt thou surely redeem, and the firstling of un∣clean beasts shalt thou redeem; yet this hath reference onely to the first-born of men, as is evident, 1. because it is said here they were to redeem them at a moneth old, which was indeed the time for the redemption of the first-born of men, but the firstlings of beasts were to be given to the Lord at eight dayes old, Levit. 22. 27. and therefore it seems were at that age to be redeemed; and secondly, because the estimation or price with the priest is here appointed to set upon the first-born that were to be redeemed, is five shekels, which was indeed the price for the redemption of the first-born of men, Numb. 3. 46, 47. and Levit. 27. 6. But it is no way pro∣bable that the same price of redemption was set upon the first-born of men and the firstlings of unclean beasts: of the firstling of an  we reade expressely that it was to be redeemed with a lambe, Exod. 13. 13. and therefore the like may be con∣ceived of the firstling of other beasts, or else that they were reasonably rated by the prist accoding to their value. Vers. 17. But the firstling of a cow, or the firstling of a sheep, or the firstling of a goat, thou shalt not redeem, they are holy.] See Deut. 15. 19. Vers. 19. It is a covnant of salt for ever, &c.] That is, in liew of your ser∣vice in the tabernacle I have allotted you this for your maintenance by a perpetuall and unchangeable covennt. Now this covenant in regard of its perpetuity is here called a covenant of salt, and so also Gods covenant with David, 2. Chron. 13. 5. either in reference to that Law, Lev. 2. 13. Every oblation of thy meat-offering shalt thou season with salt; neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy meat-offering: as if it had been said, that this covenant made with the priest for their maintenance in the particulars before mentioned should continue for ever, even as that which he had made with the Israelites, that every sacrifice should be salted with salt; or else because salt having a virtue to pre∣serve any thing from corruption, therefore by a covnant of salt is meant onely a stable firm and incorruptible covenant. Vers. 20. Thou shalt have no inheritance in their land, neither shalt thou have
any part among them.] That is, when the land shall be divided by lot, there sha ll be no lot for the Levites. Indeed they had cities to dwell in, and suburbs; but tho se also were given them from the other tribes, Numb. 35. Vers. 22. Neither must the children of Israel henceforth come nigh the taber∣nacle, &c.] To wit, as they offered to do in the rebellion of Korah. Vers. 23. But the Levites shall do the service of the tabernacle of the congre∣gation, and they hall bear their iniquity.] That is, the Levites shall bear the pu∣nishment of their own iniquity if they transgresse, yea, and of the peoples, if by their not watching over the holy things they be suffered to transgresse. Vers. 27. And this your heave-offering shall be reckoned unto you as though it were the corn of the threshing floore.] That is, this tenth of your tithes, which you shall give to the priest, the Lord will accept at your hands no lesse then if having lands you should pay tithe of the increase thereof, as the rest of the people do unto you. Vers. 32. Neither shall ye pollute the holy things of the children of Israel, lest ye die.] Which might be done by the uncleannesse of the priests, and many other wayes. CHAP. XIX. Vers. 2. SPeak unto the children of Israel that they bring thee a red hoifer, &c.] This is the Law for making the water of separation, as it is called ver. 9. that is, the water that was to be kept for the cleansing of those that were legally unclean, and for that cause were separated from the holy things of the tabernacle. When this Law was given we cannot say; but very fitly it is added here to that which went before: for as in the foregoing chapter to appease the peoples excessive fear, chap. 17. 12. the priests and Levites were appointed to do the service of the tabernacle, and to watch over the people that they might not transgresse about any of the holy things; so here also the Lord appoints a water of separation to be made, that so if any of the pople had contracted any legall uncleannesse, by the sprink∣ling of this water upon them they might be cleansed, and so might come freely a∣gain to the service of God in the tabernacle without fear of those plagues, which otherwise their pollutions might have brought upon them. The legall pollutions were to affect them with the filthinesse of their sinnes; and this water of separation was to teach them, that if they desired to be cleansed from their filthinesse, they must go out of themselves, and obtain it from God, from his Sanctuary and sacri∣fice. For the making of this water a red heifer was to be providd, and that by the common care and charge of all the children of Israel, because it was to be for the common good of them all▪ even for the cleansing of any one amongst them that was by any accident legally unclean: And indeed as all other sacrifices, so this in speciall was a notable type and figure of Christ: for first, it must be a heifer, that the imbecillity of the sex might shadow forth the mean and humble and despised condition wherein Christ should live in the world; secondly, a red heifer, either to denote the truth of his humane nature, that he was indeed the sonne of man,
who was at first called Adam, which in the Hebrew signifies red, because of the red earth of which he was made; or rather to betoken the bloudinesse of his passi∣on, (whereto the Prophet seems also, as some conceive, to allude, Esa. 63. 1, 2. Who is this that cometh from Edom with dyed garments from Bozrah?—Where∣fore art thou red in thine apparrel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the wine-presse?) and that by his bloud it is that we shall be cleansed from all our sinnes, even those sinnes that are red as crimson or scarlet, Esa. 1. 18. He hath loved us, and washed us from our sinnes in his own bloud, saith S. John, Rev. 1. 5. thirdly, it must be a heifer without spot, wherein is no blemish, to signifie the purity of his na∣ture without any blemish of sinne, and the perfection both of his righteousnesse and suffering; and fourthly, a heifer upon which never came yoke (for they used in those times to plow and to draw their carts with heifers and cows as well as with oxen, Judg. 14. 18. and 6. 7.) and that to signifie his fredome from the bondage of sinne, as also his voluntary doing of those things that were to be done for our redemption, John 10. 17, 18. I lay down my life that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of my self; and Heb. 9. 13, 14. If the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh; How much more shall the bloud of Christ, who through the eternall spirit offered him∣self without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works to serve the li∣ving God? Vers. 3. And ye shall give her unto Eleazar the priest, &c.] This heifer must be given to the priest, to signifie that our redemption and purification was the work of Christs priesthood, who was both priest and sacrifice; yet not to the high priest, but to Eleazar, because by doing this service that was now to be done he was to be unclean, ver. 7. and it was fitter that he should be defiled then Aaron; and secondly, it must be carried without the camp, as an accursed thing, figuring Christs being made a curse, and suffering without the citie, Heb. 13. 12. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctifie the people with his own bloud, suffer∣ed without the gate. Vers. 4. And sprinkle of her bloud directly before the tabernacl of the con∣gregation seven times.] Signifying that though it bore the curse, yet it was ac∣cepted of God for the cleansing of the unclean, and that by Christs bloud we are made clean in Gods sight, and have an entrance into heaven thereby. Vers. 5. And one shall burn the heifer in his sight, her skinne and her flesh, &c.] This was done to signifie the grievous suffering of Christ in the whole man, both soul and body, as also, say some, the ardent love which he bore unto his peo∣ple, in that he did offer up himself as a sacrifice to God in their behalf. Vers. 6. And the priest shall take cedar-wood, and hyssope, and scarlet, &c.] To signifie that these things should be used for a sprinkle in sprinkling the unclean with the water of separation, Lev. 14. 4. and that was by the virtue of the sacrifice that these things should be sanctified to this end, that to them might be applyed the cleansing virtue of Christs death and spirit for the purging of our sinnes. Vers. 7. The priest shall wsh his clothes &c.] The like is said of him that burnt this heifer, ver. 8. and of him tht gathered up the ashes, ver. 10. and of him
that sprinkled an unclean person with the water of separation made of these ashes, ver. 21. They that were imployed in preparing this water were defiled by that which was for the cleansing of others that were defiled. And this was first to dis∣cover thereby the abominablenesse of sin, in that the sinnes of the people being, as it were, imputed to this heifer, that she might die for them, every one that touched her was thereby polluted; secondly, to signifie that Christ, of whom this heifer was a type, by the imputation of our sinnes should be made a curse for us, and should be numbred amongst transgressours; thirdly, to teach them that it was not so much the signe, as the thing signified thereby, that had virtue in it to purifie those that were spiritually unclean, and consequently to shew the imperfection of the legall priesthood, because by preparing the means of the Churches sanctificati∣on themselves were polluted. Vers. 9. And a man that is clean shall gather up the ashes, &c.] This branch of the Law, that the ashes of the heifer must be gathered up by a man that is clean, and laid up without the camp in a clean place, was because they were now consecrated to a holy use, however the man that gathered them was thereby made unclean (as is expressed in the following verse) because they were the remainder of a heifer slain, as I may say, for the sinnes of the people: and hereby was signified that Christ our sacrifice was pure in himself, though made sinne for us; yea and some Expositours adde that this laying up of these ashes in a clean place signified that Christ should be buried in a new tombe, wherein never man before was laid, Luke 23. 53. And it shall be kept for the congregation of the children of Israel for a water of separation.] Why it is called a water of separation, see before in the note upon ver. 2. As for the place where these ashes were kept when they came into the land of Canaan, it is not expressed; yet many hold that it was dispersed into all the ci∣ties, that those that were unclean might have wherewith to purify themselves. Vers. 10. And it shall be unto the children of Israel, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among them for a statute for ever.] To wit, the making and re∣serving these ashes for a water of separation. Whether there was a new heifer burnt at every station, where the Israelites tarried any time; or whether every tribe or Is∣raelite (which I should rather think) fetched of the ashes from the place where they were laid without the camp, and so kept them for their own use when occasion ser∣ved, because it is not expressed we need not curiously enquire: Onely this we must know that as the burning, so also the ashes of this heifer, was a signe of Christs most ignominious and accursed death (for to be brought to ashes upon the earth, is noted for the extremity of Gods fierie judgments, Ezek. 28. 18.) and that the memo∣riall of Christs ignominious death is to be kept by us in the Sacrament of the Lords supper as a most glorious monument of our life, justification and sanctification through faith in his name. See 1. Cor. 11. 24, 25, 26. and Gal. 6. 14. Vers. 11. He that toucheth the dead body of any man, shall be unclean seven dayes.] He that touched a dead beast was unclean but one day onely, Lev. 11. 24. &c. Whosoever toucheth the carcase of them shall be unclean untill the even, &c. neither was he to be sprinkled with those ashes. By these legall pollutions therefore,
contracted by the touch of a dead man the Lord did undoubtedly teach his people, first, to observe Gods curse in death; secondly, to take heed of being defiled by the society of dead men, that is, wicked men, men dead in trespasses and sinnes, Eph. 2. 1. and of polluting our souls by any sinne or communion with dead works. See 2. Cor. 6. 17. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you; and 1. Tim. 5. 22. Lay hands, suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other mens sinnes. Keep thy self pure: and thirdly, that if they had defiled themselves they should seek presently to be cleansed of their uncleannesse, namely by repentance from dead works, and saith towards God, which purifieth the heart, Acts 15. 9. Vers. 12. He shall purifie himself with it on the third day, and on the sventh day he shall be clean.] The third day was mysticall, having reference to the resurrecti∣on of Christ; so was also the seventh, being a perfect number and signifying how full and perfectly we are cleansed from our sinnes by the sprinkling of the bloud and spirit of Christ. Vers. 13. And that soul shall be cut off from Israel.] That is, if he do it pre∣sumptuously; but if he have done it ignorantly he was to bring a sacrifice, Leviti∣cus 5. 3, 6. Vers. 16. And whosoever toucheth one that is slain with a sword, &c.] That is, whosoever toucheth any slain man (for though the text speaks onely of such as are slain with a sword, yet hereby all other are implyed also) or a dead body, that is, any other dead body of a man, though not slain, but dying his naturall death, yea or the bone of a man, or a grave, he shall be unclean seven dayes: and therefore it was that to avoid these pollutions they used to have their places of buriall without their cities, Luke 7. 12. Now when he came nigh to the gate of the citie, behold there was a dead man carried out. See also John 9. 41. Vers. 17. And running water shall be put theret in a vessel.] Because such water is purest. See Lev. 14. 5. This figured the spirit of God, which they that believe in Christ do receive, John 7. 38, 39. Vers. 18. And a clean person shall take hyssope, and dip it in the water, and sprinkle it about the tent, and upon all the vessels.] For though a vessel were mel∣ted, yet it was not clean till it was sprinkled with this water, Numb. 31. 23. Every thing that may abide the fire ye shall make it go through the fire, and it shall be clean; neverthelesse it shall be purified with the water of separation. Vers. 22. And what soever the unclean person toucheth shall be unclean, &c.] The unclean person here spoken of must needs be meant of the unclean person men∣tioned in the foregoing verse (as by the immediate inference of this upon that is evident) to wit, the person that was made unclean by touching the water of sepa∣ration; yet withall it may be extended to all the unclean persons mentioned be∣fore in this chapter, as those that were made unclean by the burning or touching of the red heifer, or her ashes, or by the touching of the dead body of a man, &c. and the Law here given concerning those is, that every thing should be unclean that such unclean persons touched, and that every person should be unclean that touched any thing that was defiled by the touch of an unclean man: and thus hereby was
figured the contagion of sinne, spreading from one to another, to the infection of many. CHAP. XX. Vers. 1. THen came the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, into the desert of Zin, &c.] Not the wildernesse of Sin, mentioned Exod. 16. 1. whither they came on the fifteenth day of the second moneth after their depar∣ting out of the land of Egypt; but the wildernesse of Zin, which was near to the land of Edom. The last station of the Israelites mentioned in this story was Kadesh in the wildernesse of Paran, Numb. 12. 16. and 13. 26. which is also called Kadesh-Barnea, Deut. 1. 19. and Rithmah, Numb. 33. 18. close upon the borders of Canaan (for thence they sent twelve men to search the land) But because here they mur∣mured against God for fear of the inhabitants, hence the Lord appoints them to re∣turn to the red sea: from Rithmah therefore or Kadesh-Barnea they returned (as we find it Numb. 33. 19.) to Rimmon-parez, thence to Libnah, thence to Rissah, thence to Kehelathah (where some think it was that the Israelite was stoned for ga∣thering broken wood on the Sabbath day, Exod 15. 32.) thence they went to mount Shapher, thence to Haradah, thence to Makheloth, thence to Tahath, thence to Tarah (where it is thought that insolent mutiny began of Korah, Dathan and Abi∣ram) thence they removed to Mithcah, thence to Hashmonah, thence to Moseroth, thence to Bene-jaakan, thence to Horha-gidgad, thence to Jotbathah, thence to Ebronah, thence to Ezion-gaber, which was close by the red sea (for this was a place for shipping in Edoms land, 1. King. 9. 26. And King Solomon made a navy of ships in Ezion-Geber, which is besides Eloth, on the shore on the red sea, in the land of Edom) then they turned to the North again, and pitched (as here Moses tells us) in another Kadesh which was in the desert of Zin, of which Jephthah spake, Judg. 11. 16. and this was in the first moneth, to wit, of the fourtieth year after they were come out of Egypt; for at their next station in mount Hor, whither they removed from this Kadesh, Aaron dyed, and that is noted to have been in the first day of the fifth moneth of the fourtieth year, Numb. 33. 38. So that in their travels from Kadesh-Barnea, where the spie came to Moses, to this Kadesh in the desert of Zin, there were about eight and thirty years spent, the most of their fa∣thers that were numbred at their coming out of Egypt being in that time de∣stroyed. And Miriam dyed there, and was buried there.] To wit, in Kadesh▪ She was the sister of Moses, a prophetesse, and by her also God guided the Israelites in their travels; I sent before thee Moses and Aaron and Miriam, saith the Lord to the Israelites, Mich. 6. 4. and therefore is the place and time of her death and buriall noted. This year Aaron dyed also, chap. 33. 38. and Moses, Deut 34. 7. and if this was the sister of Moses, as it is generally held, that was set to watch what would become of Moses when he was laid out in an ark of bulrushes, Exod. 2. 4. she could be little lesse then ten years old, when Moses was born, and consequently she was about a hundred and thirty years now when she dyed: for Moses (who dyed
towards the end of this year) was a hundred and twenty years old when he dyed, Det. 34. 7. Vers. 2. And there was no water for the congregation, &c.] With the same want God tryed their fathers in the first year after their going out of Egypt, Exod. 17. 4. who thereupon murmured then also, and had water out of a rock (for in many particulars these two different stories were alike, though not in all) but in this these their children were worse then their fathers, because the experience their fathers had of Gods succour in the very same extremity did no good upon them, nor could prevent these their murmurings against Moses and Aaron. Vers. 3. Would God that we had dyed when our brethren dyed before the Lord.] That is, with those whom God did suddenly destroy in the insurrection of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, chap. 16. and so also at other times. This they wished, inti∣mating that it had been easier to have been cut off so, then to pine away now for want of water; but the whilst in a desperate manner they most impudently flght that fearfull judgement of being cut off in Gods fiery indignation, as a matter of nothing. Vers. 6. And Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the assembly, &c.] Namely, for fear of the people, because of their outrage, and that they might go to the tabernacle to intercede as formerly, chap. 14. 5. for this rebellious people. And the glory of the Lord appeared unto them.] See chap. 16. 19. Vers. 8. Take the rod, and gather thou the assembly together, &c.] It is very questionable what rod it was that God here appoints Moses to take for the work∣ing of this miracle of fetching water out of the rock. Evident it is that Moses took the rod from before the Lord, vers. 9. that is out of the tabernacle; and therefore some Expositours hold, that it was Aarons rod which was budded, and was laid up before the testimony, chap. 17. 10. But more generally it is held, that it was that rod of Moses, wherewith he had wrought so many miracles in Egypt, which seems indeed the more probable, first, because it is afterwards called his rod, vers. 11. With his rod he smote the rock; and secondly, because this was fittest for this im∣ployment, the very sight of this rod wherewith God had manifested his almighty power in so many miracles, and particularly in fetching water for them out of the rock at Rephidim, being enough to make them ashamed of their present murmuring against God. And what though he took this rod from before the Lord? vers. 9. even Moses rod in memory of the great things that had been done by it (for which it is sometimes called the rod of God, as Exod. 4. 20.) might be laid up in the tabernacle as well as Aarons; yea and some conceive that Aarons rod, which budded and was laid up in the tabernacle, was the very same wherewith those miracles were wrought in the land of Egypt, the rather, because even the rod of Moses is sometimes also called Aarons rod, as Exod. 7. 12. They cast down every man his rod, and they be∣came serpents; but Aarons rod swallowed up their rods. And speak unto the rock before their eyes, &c.] Here was no command given to Moses that he should smite the rock, but onely that he should take the rod in his hand, to wit, as a signe of Gods working by him, and speak to the rock before their eyes; and therefore many hold that herein lay a part of Moses sinne, that he smote the
rock, when he should onely have spoken to it. But withall in this command of the Lord to Moses to speak to the rock, there was couched a sharp exprobration of Is∣raels hard heartednesse and infidelity: for it intimates, that the dead creatures would sooner hear and obey God, then his own people; and therefore also he was appoin∣ted to do this before the eyes of all the people, whereas the former miracle, of the like nature, at the rock of Rephidem, was onely wrought before the elders of Israel, Exod. 17. 5. Vers. 10. And Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rock, &c.] Their return to the enraged people from whom erewhile for fear they withdrew themselves, and ready undertaking what God had enjoyned, shows plainly that they did not question Gods power to fetch water out of the rock (how could they, having had experience that he had done it before, Exod. 17. 6?) nor did absolutely conclude that God would not work this miracle at this time. But why then doth the Lord tell Moses and Aaron that they believed him not, vers. 12? un∣doubtedly because there was some secret distrust and unbelief in their hearts, though it prevailed not so farre against their faith as to make them wholly refuse to do what God had enjoyned them. God that sees the heart chargeth them with infidelity, and therefore we may be sure they were herein guilty, and that happely upon this ground: Heretofore when the people murmured the Lord for the most part shewed great indignation against them, and was ready to destroy them, but that Moses by his prayer prevailed with God to spare them; Moses therefore and Aaron won∣dring that now the Lord should shew no such displeasure, but should presently send them to fetch water for them out of the rock they doubted whether God did seriously intend this supply, or did onely command it by way of upbraiding the people for forgetting what he had formerly done for them when they wanted water: and so though they came to the rock ready to do what God had commanded, yet they were perplexed and in suspence, betwixt hope and doubtings, questioning still with∣in themselves what God would do, and that, it seems, not so much out of any doubt of Gods power, as out of a distrust that such a rebellious people were not capable of such a mercie from God: and that it was this which Moses stuck at, his words seem to testifie, vers. 10. Hear now▪ ye rebels, must we fetch you water out of this rock? But if the infidelity of their hearts were all their sinne, why is it said also, vers. 12. that they did not sanctifi him in the eyes of the children of Israel? I answer, that they showed their distrust outwardly also: first, by Moses his stricking the rock, to which he should onely have spoken, vers. 11. & this tended to the obscuring of Gods glory, since his almighty power would have been more manifest if by mere speaking to the rock the water had gushed forth; scondly, by striking it twice, which might well proceed from heat of anger and distrust; thirdly by the doubtfulnesse of his words, must we fetch you water out of this rock? and fourthly, by the bitternesse of his rage against the people. Hear now, ye rebels (which happely he expressed also in many other words of discontent and anger which are not here set down; for the psalmist saith that they angered him at the waters of strife, and provoked his spirit, so that he spake unadvisedly with his lips, Psal. 10▪ 32. 33.) which as in part no doubt it proceeded from infidelity, so it must needs much obscure the riches of Gods
mercie, who was ready to shew such wonderfull favour to such a rebellious people, and argued a kind of unwillingnesse that God should be honoured by this miracle, which he had determined to work in the eyes of all the people. Vers. 11. And the water came out abundantly, and the congregation drank.] This was also spirituall drink, flowing from the rock Christ (1. Cor. 10. 4. And did all drink the same spirituall drink; for they drank of that spirituall rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ) being smitten for our transgressions, Esa 5. 3, 4. by the rod of the law; from him proceedeth that living water where∣with Gods Israel may quench their thirst for ever, But whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst: but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water, springing up into everlasting life, John 4. 14. Ho, every one that thirsteth come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come, and buy wine and milk without money, and without price. And their beasts also.] Thus those elements, which are signes and seals of Gods grace unto those to whom they are sanctified of God for that purpose, out of that use are no other but common, and have no inherent holinesse in them. Vers. 12. Because ye believed me not to sanctifie me in the eyes of the children of Israel.] That is, to glorifie me, by discovering that you did not question mine almighty power, my faithfulnesse and free grace even to those that do not deserve it: for as the believer doth greatly honour God by resting upon his mercie and power and faithfulnesse, so he that questions the accomplishment of any mercie, which God hath promised his people, doth exceedingly dishonour him: and there∣fore it is said, chap. 27. 14. that Moses and Aaron did herein ebell against Gods commandments. See the former note upon vers. 10. Therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have given them.] How grievous this chastisement was unto Moses, we see, Deut. 3. 23, 24▪ 25, 26. But withall herein a mystery was implyed. Neither Moses, the minister of the law, nor Aaron, the priest, could bring them into Canaan, but this must be the work of Jesus or Joshua his successour; so neither the law, nor the legall priest∣hood, can bring us into heaven, but onely faith in Jesus Christ, Gal. 2. 16. Vers. 13. This is the water of Meribah, &c.] So was the former place also cal∣led in Rephidim, Exod. 17. 7. To distinguish them the Scripture calleth this Meri∣bah of Kadesh, Deut. 2. 1, 2, 3. And he was sanctified in them.] That is, amongst the Israelites by giving them water, and thereby manifesting his power truth and compassion; or in them, that is, Moses and Aaron, by punishing their rebellion: for hereby God is sanctified, Ezek. 38. 16. I will bring thee against my land, that the heathen may know me when I shall be sanctified in thee, O God, before their eyes. Vers. 14. And Moses sent messengers from Kadesh unto the King of Edom, &c.] To wit, by Gods direction, Deut. 2. 1, 2, 3. Thou knowest all the travell that hath befallen us.] That is, our grievous and wearisome afflictions and troubles have been so famous, that they cannot be un∣known to thee.
Vers. 16. And when we cried unto the Lord, he heard our voice, and sent an angel, &c.] This was Christ, who appeared to Moses in the burning bush, and sent Moses to fetch the Israelites out of Egypt, and afterwards led them in their way in a pillar of cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night. See the note upon Exod. 3. 2. And behold we are in Kadesh a city in the uttermost of thy border.] Or, by Kadesh, to wit, in the wildernesse lying near, and having the name of Kadesh the citi, Numb. 33. 36. Vers. 17. Let us passe, I pray thee, through thy countrey.] That being now their nearest way, and most convenient for their passage in to Canaan. We will not passe through the fields, or through the vineyards, neither will we drink of the water of the wels.] Meaning that they would not turn aside into their fields or vineyards to do them any damage, and that either they would not drink without paying for it, as vers. 19. or else that they would onely drink of the rivers which were common, not meddling with their wells, digged for their private uses, which were very precious in those hot and dry countreys. Vers. 18. And Edom said unto him, Thou shalt not passe by me, &c.] Fearing questionlesse that an army of six hundred thousand would not be so easily gotten out of his countrey again, if they were once suffered to come in. Vers. 19. And the children of Israel said unto him, We will go by the high way.] This is either the reply of the first messengers, or a second embassy upon the answer brought back by the first messengers. Vers. 21. Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border.] Not∣withstanding, as they went along their coasts, the Edomites suffered them to buy victuals of them. See Deut. 2. 28, 29. Wherefore Israel turned away from him.] Fetching a compasse through the wil∣dernesse about the land of Edom. The Lord had charged them that they should not meddle with the sonnes of Esau or their possession, Deut. 2. 4, 5. Ye are to passe through the coasts of your brethren, the children of Esau—Meddc not with them, for I will not give you of their land, no not so much as a footbreadth, so they went about, though the way through the wildernesse was very troublesome, Numb. 21. 4. The soul of the people was much discouraged because of the way. Vers. 22. And came unto mount Hor.] From which some think the people that were driven out of this countrey by Esau were called Horims, Dent. 2. 12. The Ho∣rims also dwelt in Seir beforetime, but the children of Esau succeeded them when they had destroyed them, &c. and Esau is called the Horite, Gen. 36. 20. Vers. 24. Aaron shall be gathered unt his people, &c.] See the note upon Gen. 25. 8. This prediction of Aarons death was to make it manifest to the people, that he was by death kept from entring Canaan for his sinne, else the death of so aged a man would have been little regarded. Vers. 25. Take Aaron and Eleazar his sonne, and bring them up into mount Hor.] These reasons may be probably given why this is appointed to be done in the mount: 1. That it might be a signe that this was done by Gods appointment, their going up into the mount being as it were a presenting of themselves before Gods tribunal, that by his will they mght be ordered in this great businesse. 2. That
it might raise up the peoples expectation to observe what was done, whence it is said, vers. 27. that they went up in the sight of all the congregation. 3. That it might be a signe of Aarons ascending by death to heaven. Vers. 28. And Moses stripped Aaron of his garments, and put them upon E∣leazar his sonne.] The priests used not to wear their holy garments out of the taber∣nacle: But this was done by speciall command of God. Aaron therefore going up to mount Hor in all the high priests attire that he might die there, Moses stripped him there of all those holy garments, not so much that they might not be defiled by Aarons dead body, as that they might be put upon Eleazar his sonne, to signifie that God had appointed him to suceed in his fathers office. And indeed this done thus (once for all) was sufficient to shew that God had established this order, that the high priests eldest sonne, or the next heir of the family (unlesse he were uncapable of it, because of some blemish) was still to succeed in that place and office: and withall it must needs be a great comfort to Aaron, that before he died he saw his sonne set∣tled in his room, and might in his sonne, so clothed, behold as in a type his Media∣tour, the salvation of God, Luk. 2. 29. But yet in the dayes of the Judges we find that the high priesthood was removed from Eleazars to Ithamars posterity, for Eli was of the stock of Ithamar. And Aaron died there in the top of the mount.] This was in the first day of the fifth moneth in the fourtieth year after their coming out of Egypt, Aaron then being an hundred and twenty three years old, chap. 33. 38, 39. and an evident demonstra∣tion this was of the insufficiency of the legal priesthood, Hebr. 7. 23▪ 24. And they truly were many priests because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death: But this man, because he continueth ever, hath an unchangeable priesthood. Vers. 29. They mourned for Aaron thirty dayes.] This was it seems the usuall time of mourning for great men, for so long also they mourned for Moses, Deut. 34. 8. In Deut. 10. 6. it is said that Aaron died, and was buried at Mosera; but concern∣ing that difficultie, see the note upon that place. CHAP. XXI. Vers. 1. ANd when king Arad, the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south, heard tell that Israel came by the way of the spies, &c.] That is, when he understood by the spies he had sent forth to observe the course of the Isralites▪ that they were turned back again from the red sea, and marched directly upon the south of Canaan, where his countrey lay, by the way of the spies, that is, by the way where he had sent his spies to watch them, not knowing of Moses purpose to com∣passe the land of Moab he resolved that they meant to enter upon the south of Ca∣naan; and therefore judging it safer to find his eneme in his neighbours countrey then to be found by them in his own, he immediately went forth with a great army even as farre as mount Hor in the edge of the desert, where the Israelites now lay, and there fought with them, and took some of them prisoners. Many Expositours do farre otherwise conceive of that which is here said of the Israelites coming by the way of the spies; namely, that king Arad heard they came by the way where the
spies which Moses did long since send to search the land, chap. 13. 17. entred that countrey; and indeed they entred upon the south of Canaan, as is there expressely noted. But first, because the Israelites were now farre from Kadesh-Barnea, whence those spies were sent to search the land of Canaan: and secondly, because it seems apparent by the text, that those that told this king Arad of the Israelites coming, u∣sed the expession here mentioned, that they came by the way of the spies, and we no way find that either this king, or any other of the Canaanites, did ever know any thing of the Israelites spies that were sent to search the land, therefore I con∣ceive that this is meant rather, as is abovesaid, of the way where king Arad had sent spies to observe which way the Israelites would take, of whose return from the red sea he had before been informed, as is noted, chap. 33. 40. As for the battel which was here fought betwixt the Israelites and the army of this king Arad, very obser∣vable it is, first, that the Lord so disposed of it by his providence, that this one king should onely come forth against them, and that all the Canaanites in those parts did not joyn their forces together against them (for by this means the Israelites were not so daunted, but that they were willing to fight with them;) and secondly, that notwithstanding the Lord suffered them to be foyled, so that some of them were taken prisoners in this battel: for hereby he taught them at first how unable they were in themselves to conquer those nations, that so they might learn to trust in God, and not in themselves. If one king thus prevailed over them, how should they be able to destroy all the inhabitans of the land, combining themselves toge∣ther, if the Lord should not assist them? Vers. 2. And Israel vowed a vow unto the Lord, &c.] That is, the Israelites in∣tending to renew the battel, and again once more to set upon Arad and his army, called upon God for help, and vowed to devote unto him their enemies and all their cities, that is, utterly to destroy them, If thou wilt indeed deliver this people into my hand, then I will utterly destroy their cities: for when things were thus devo∣ted, the persons were killed, the cities burnt, and the goods confiscate to the Lord, so that nothing was reserved for their own private use, as is noted upon Levit. 27. 28. and this was a vow agreeable to Gods law, Exod. 23. 32. Thou shalt make no cove∣nant with them, nor with their gods. Vers. 3. And the Lord hearkened to the voice of Israel, and delivered up the Canaanites.] That is, this army of Arad, whom, in a second battel, after this vow they vanquished and destroyed. And they utterly destroyed them and their cities: and he called the name of that place Hormah.] But how could they, being so farre off in the wildernesse, de∣stroy their cities lying within Canaan? surely had Moses at this time entred Ca∣naan in the pursuit of Arad, he would not have fallen back again into the deserts. It seemeth therefore that the accomplishment of this vow was performed long after, to wit, by the men of Judah and Simeon, when they were come into the land of Ca∣naan, as is expressed, Judg. 1. 17. And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they slew the Canaanites that inhabited Zephath, and utterly destroyed it: and the name of the citie was called Hormah; so that this clause was here inserted ei∣ther by Mosesprophetically, or by some other holy man afterwards.
Vers. 4. And they journeyed from mount Hor by the way of the red sea, &c.] That is, they went from Hor Eastward, a way that led to the red sea, which lay North and South, the common rode from Gilead and Moab to Eziongaber, &c. and so crossing that way, they passed on to Zalmonah, and so (turning then North∣ward) to Punon, as is expressed, Numb. 33. 41, 42. and here it seems it was that the Israelites were punished with fiery serpents. And the soul of the people was much discouragd because of the way.] That is, because they were led a great way about through a desert, full of wants and diffi∣culties; and that the rather, because now they began to think, puffed up with their late victory, that it had been easie for them to have forced a passage the nearest way. Vers. 5. And the people spake against God, and against Moses, &c.] And so tempted Christ, 1. Cor. 10. 9. Neither let us tempt Christ as some of them also tempt∣ed, and were destroyed of serpents. Vers. 6. And the Lord sent fiery serents among the people, &c.] So called, because their venemous biting did cause a grievous burning in the bodies of the Israe∣lites. It may seem that they were a kind of serpents with wings, that so flying a∣mongst them did here and there seise upon them, and bite them, such as the prophet speaks of, Esa. 14. 29. Out of the serpents root shall come forth a cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent. The word in the originall is, Seraphin, that is, Burners, the very same name whereby the Angels are called, Esa. 6. 2. because of their burning zeal for Gods glory. The wildernesse, through which the Israelites now went, did abound with many sorts of these serpents, and therefore it is called that great and terrible wildernesse wherein were fiery serpents and scorpions, Deut. 8. 15. onely God had hitherto kept them from hurting his people, till now for their sinne he gave them power to bite and kill them: and indeed the punishment was just according to their sinne; for now God gave them just cause to complain of thirst, and with the venemous biting of fiery serpents he punished their virulent tongues, to whom that might well be applyed which the Psalmist speaks, Psal. 140. 3. They have sharpened their tongues as a serpent, adders poison is under their lips. Vers. 8. Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole, &c.] This was the way which the Lord prescribed for the curing of the Israelites, that were bitten with fiery serpents, namely, that Moses should make a fiery serpent, that is, a fi∣gure or representation of those fiery serpents wherewith they were stung, and that of brasse, as we may see in the following verse, the better to represent their fiery quality, because brasse is of a fiery colour (and therefore it is said of the Cheru∣bims that Ezekiel saw in a vision, Ezek. 1. 7. that they sparkled like the colour of burn∣ished brasse, and then set it upon a pole, to the end that it might be seen from every quarter of the camp, so that every man that was stung with the fiery serpents might look upon this brasen serpent, and thereby might be healed. Now this way of cure the Lord prescribed for two reasons: first, because this, being no naturall way of cure, did the better discover that it was of Gods mercy; and secondly, that it might be a type of Christ and our redemption by him, John 3. 14▪ 15. As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wildernesse, even so must the sonne of man be lifted up; That
whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternall life. For first, as the Israelites were bitten with fiery serpents, and that biting was mortall and dead∣ly; so was all mankind in our parents mortally stung and bitten by Satan, that old serpent, Rev. 12. 9. so that their whole nature is envenomed with sinne, as a deadly poison, and as it were set on fire of hell, as S. James speaks of the tongue in particular▪ James . 6, 8. and that so, that without some way of recovery they must needs perish everlastingly, By one man sinne entred into the world, and death by sinne, Rom. 5. 12. and, the sting of death is sinne, saith the same Apostle, 1. Cor. 15. 56. Secondly, as the brazen serpent, which Moses made for the cure of the Isra∣elites, had the outward form of those fiery serpents, yet had not the poyson of those serpents in it; so Christ came in the likenesse of sinnefull flesh, Rom. 8. 3. and yet was without sinne: Thirdly, as the brazen serpent was lifted upon a pole, that when any man was stung with the fiery serpents he might lift up his eyes, and look upon it; so Christ was lifted upon the crosse, to the end he might save death-stung sinners; or rather, so was Christ lifted up and held forth unto men in the preaching of the Gospel, that so all poore sinners might look upon him as the onely authour of eter∣nall salvation, according to that of S. Paul to the Galatians, Who hath bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set forth crucified among you? Gal. 3. 1. And fifthly, as the Israelites, that were mortally bitten by those fiery serpents, were perfectly cured onely by looking on the brazen serpent, whereof there could be no naturall reason; so are sinners per∣fectly saved from that death whereto they were liable because of sinne, onely by casting an eye of faith upon Christ, whereof no reason can be given but the will of God; and therefore is the preaching of this way of salvation called the foolishnesse of preaching, 1. Cor. 1. 21. And indeed partly because it was such a notable type of the promised Messiah, and partly that it might be a memoriall of this singular mecy which God thereby had afforded them, the Israelites carefully kept this bra∣zen serpent unto the dayes of Hezekiah; but then because the people burnt incense to it, that good King brake it in pieces, 2. Kings 18. 4. Vers. 10. And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in Oboth.] They removed not from mount Hor to Oboth, but (as is before noted upon vers. 14.) from mount Hor they removed to Zalmonah, and then to Punon, and then to O∣both, as we reade, chap. 33. 41, 42, 43. whence we may most probably conclude, that about Punon it was that the brazen serpent was made, because it is said here that they set sorward from the place where that was done, and then pitched in Oboth. Vers. 11. And they journyed from Oboth, and pitched at Ije-abarim, in the wildernesse, which is before Moab, &c.] And so were come from Edoms bor∣ders to Moabs, with whom also they might not meddle, Deut. 2. 9. And the Lord said unto me, Distresse not the Moabites, neither contend with them in battel. Vers. 12. From thence they removed and pitched in the valley of Zared.] Zared was the name both of the valley and river that ranne through that valley, Deut. 2. 13. where was it seems Dibon-gad; for chap. 33. 45. it is said that they departed from lim, and pitched in Dibon-gad.
Vers. 13. From thence they removed and pitched on the other side of Arnon, &c.] From Dibon-gad they went to Almon-diblathaim, thence to the mountains of Abarim, Num. 33. 46, 47. which it▪ seems were in this place on the other side of Arnon. For Arnon is the border of Moab between Moab and the Amorites.] Ar∣non was a river that did at this time divide the countrey of the Amorites from the land of the Moabites. Indeed the countrey beyond Arnon towards Jordan had been in the possession of Moab, but Sihon had taken it from them, ver. 16. so that now Arnon was the border between the Moabites and the Amorites; which Mo∣ses notes, to let us see how God by this means had provided this countrey for the Is∣raelites, who might not have meddled with it, if it had been still in the Moabites possession, but were now commanded to take it from the Amorites, Deut. 2. 24. Rise ye up, take your journey, and passe over the river Arnon; behold I have given into thy hand Sihon the Amorite, King of Heshbon, and his land, &c. and hence it was that the King of the Amorites and Moabites challenged this land in the dayes of Jephthah, Israel took away my land when they came up out of Egypt, from Arnon even unto Jabbok and unto Jordan; now therefore restore thoselands a∣gain peaceably. Vers. 14. Wherefore it is said in the book of the warres of the Lord, what he did in the red sea, &c.] This place is diversly translated, and therefore also divers∣ly expounded by Interpreters. According to our translation the meaning and drift of the words seems to be this, There was a book extant in Moses time, but now lost, called the book of the warres of the Lord, wherein it seems the victo∣ries which the Lord gave the Israelites over their enemies were more largely described, which are here but briefly touched: out of this book Moses cits these fol∣lowing words▪ What he did in the red sea, and in the brooks of Arnon, and at the stream of the brooks that goeth down to the dwelling of Ar, and lieth upon the border of Moab; and that partly to prove what he had said before, ver. 13. that Arnon was at present the border between the land of Moab, and the land of the A∣morites, though formerly the land beyond Arnon belonged also to the Moabites; and partly also to give a touch, that here at their entrance into the Amorites land the Lord wrought wonders for them, not inferiour to his dealing with them when he drowned the Egyptians in the red sea. Our Translatours have noted in the mar∣gin of our Bibles, that this place cited out of that book of the warres of the Lord may be read thus, Vaheb in Saphah, and in the brooks of Arnon, &c. but if it be so read it is hard to conjecture what was meant thereby, onely some Expositours hold that Vaheb was the name of that King of the Moabites, mentioned vers. 26. whom Sihon conquered; and others that it was the name of a city in Saphah: but the words cited being but an imperfect clause, taken out of a book not now extant, no wonder it is though the meaning of them cannot be found out; sufficient it is for us that they plainly enough prove that for which Moses cites them, namely that the river Arnon did divide the land of the Amorites and the land of Moab. Vers. 16. And from thence they went to Beer.] Neither this place called Beer, nor those mentioned vers. 18, 19, 20. to wit, Mattanah, Nahaliel, and Bamoth, are
named Numb. 33. and therefore it seems they were not severall stations, but onely the names of such places as they passed by when they went forward from the mountains of Abarim, which were about Arnon, to the plains of Moab, Num∣bers 33. 48. That is the well whereof the Lord spake unto Moses, Gather the people toge∣ther, and I will give them water, &c.] The meaning of these words is, that at this place, called thence Beer, which signifieth a well, the Lord did miraculously a∣gain supply them with water, and that in the sight of all the people, having ap∣pointed Moses to gather them together for this very purpose. The manner how this was done is not expressed in the story, but from the ensuing song we may probably inferre thus much, to wit, that the people being in some distresse for water in that wildernesse, mentioned ver. 13. through which they were now going, God stayed not now till they murmured again, but of his own accord did appoint Moses to gather the people together, and to set the princes of the tribes to dig with their staves, promising that a well should thereupon miraculously spring up in that dry and barren place; which was accordingly done, and so thereupon the people sung that ensuing gratulatory song, ver. 17, 18. wherin with much joy and praise to God they acknowledged the miraculous manner of that wells springing up, Spring up, O well; Sing ye unto it. The Princes digged the well, the nobles of the people digged it, by the direction of the Lawgiver, with their staves. And this, it seems, was that renowned well called Beer-elim, Esa. 15. 8. that is, the well of the mighty ones, and might have a like spirituall signification as had before those waters that came out of the rock: for as that rock was Christ, 1. Cor. 10. 4. so this well might be a figure of him, who is the fountain of the gardens, a well of living waters, Cant. 4. 15. secondly, the waters springing from thence might signifie that saving doctrine and graces of Gods spirit which from Christ are derived unto the faithfull, and are in them alwayes as a well of water springing up unto life everlasting, John 4. 14. thirdly, the Princes digging of this well with their staves might be a figure of the labour of governours to open and bring forth to the people the ordinances of God, the word, and the ministry thereof: and fourthly, the Israelites singing about this well might he a signe of that Christian joy whereof the Prophet speaks, Esa. 12. 3, 4. With joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation, and in that day shall ye say, Praise the Lord, &c. Vers. 21. And Israel sent messengers to Sihon king of the Amorites, &c.] When they were to passe over the river Arnon, mentioned vers. 13. God had told them that they should destroy Sihon, and possesse his countrey, Deut. 2. 24▪ Rise ye up, and passe over the river Arnon: Behold, I have given into thy hand Sihon the Amo∣rite, king of Heshbon, and his land, &c. yet now out of the wildernesse of Kede∣moh, Deut. 2. 26. they sent messengers to him, doubtlesse not without Gods allow∣ance, to desire a peaceable passage through his countrey, thereby to render him af∣terwards the more inexcusable when he was destroyed, both in his own conscience, and in the judgement of others that should hear of it. Vers. 22. We will not drink of the waters of the well.] See the note upon hap. 20. 17.
Vers. 24. For the border of the children of Ammon was strong.] And therefore Sihon had not encroched upon their countrey, as he had upon the Moabites, at least not beyond the river Jabbok, see Josh. 13. 25. for this is not added as a reason why the Israelites made not warre upon them, Gods command was a restraint sufficient for them, Deut. 2. 19. And when thou comest nigh over against the children of Ammon, distresse thm not, nor meddle with them, &c. Vers. 25. And Israel took all these cities, &c.] Destroying all the inhabitants, Deut. 2. 34. And we took all his cities at that time, and utterly destroyed all the men and the women, and the little ones, &c. Vers. 26. For Heshbon was the citie of Sihon the king of the Amorites, &c.] Because Heshbon and the countrey adjoyning had been the possession of the Moa∣bites, and God had charged the Israelites not to meddle with their countrey, Deut. 2. 9. therefore Moses doth largely prove from this place to the end of the 30. verse, that both Heshbon and the countrey adjoyning was the possession of Sihon when the Israelites took it, Sihon having taken it from the former king of the Moabites, that is, from him that was king before Balak, that was at present their king, chap. 22. 4. Concerning which see also what is noted before upon vers. 13. Vers. 27. Wherefore they that speak in proverbs, say, &c.] By proverbs in the Scripture are generally meant all wise and pithie sayings, especially when they are grown to be in common use amongst men, 1. Sam. 24. 13. As saith the proverb of the antients, Wickednesse proceedeth from the wicked; and secondly, more par∣ticularly those are called proverbs, first, that are expressed with figurative words, or by way of similitude, as Ezek. 18. 2. What mean ye that ye use this proverb con∣cerning the land of Israel, The fathers have aten sowre grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge? secondly, that are taken up as by-words, by way of scorning and driding men, as Deut. 28. 17. Thou shalt become an astonishment, a proverb, and a by-word among all nations, and Hab. 2. 6. Shall not all these take up a parable and a taunting proverb against him?: and so consequently by those that speak in proverbs are meant here, such as did compose or utter songs or ballads made by way of triumphing over some vanquished enemie, and that because in such songs they used to scoff at those that were so vanquished, and the severall passages of such songs were usually taken up afterwards as a proverb and by-word. Now Moses (to prove that Heshbon and the countrey adjoyning now taken by the Israelites had formerly been taken from the Moabites by Sihon) alledgeth this proverbiall song (which no doubt was first made and used by the Amorites by way of triumphing over the vanquished Moabltes) and that the rather because the Israelites now might more justly, and so happely did, insult over the Amorites with the same proverbiall taunt wherewith they had before derided the Moabites. Let the city of Sihon be built and prepared.] Implying that though Heshbon perished, vers. 30. being in Moabs hand, yet now it should be more fairly and more strongly fortfied being in Sihons hand; and so also being applyed to the Israelites victory, that though it were much defaced in Sihons hands, yet now the Israelites would build it more fairly. Vers. 28. For there is a fire gone out of Heshbon, a flame from the city of Sihon,
&c.] That is, the fury of warre, which was kindled and began in the subversion and laying waste of Heshbon, brake out from thence and consumed the countrey of the Moabites as farre as Ar, a chief city of theirs, and the Lords of the high places of Arnon, that is the princes, priests, and gods of the Moabites (for all these may be comprehended under this word Lords) even as farre as Arnon. And hence it is that the prophet, speaking of the vain confidence of the Moabites in the strength of Heshbon (for the Moabites had then recovered this countrey again, the Israelites being carryed captives into Assyria) he threatens that those cities wherein they trusted should by the Chaldeans be first destroyed, and in the words he useth doth manifestly allude to this taunting song of the Amorites when they conquered the Moabites, here cited by Moses, Jer. 48. 45. A fire shall come forth out of Heshbon, and a flame from the middest of Sihon, and shall devour the corner of Moab, and the crown of the head of the tumultuous ones, &c. Vers. 29. Wo unto thee, O Moab; thou art undone, O people of Shemosh, &c.] In this clause of their song the Amorites scoff at Shemosh, who was the god of the Moabites, 1. King. 11. 7. the Amorites had another god, to wit, Milcom, 1. King. 11. 5. & they therefore now derided the Moabites, because their God, though they had been so long his people, and had served him so carefully, was not able to help them, but had delivered them into captivity to Sihon, as it follows in the next words, He, that is, their God Shemosh, hath given his sonnes that escaped and his daughters into captivity, unto Sihonking of the Amorites. But how much more properly might the Israelites take up this proverb now against the Amorites? Vers. 30. We have shot at them.] To wit, first the Amorites, then the Israe∣lites. Vers. 32. And Moses sent to spie out Jaazer, &c.] A city also that ha been Moabs, Jer. 48. 31, 32. but now was the Amorites; a fruitfull pasture-countrey it stood in, and was given to Gad, Numb. 32. 1. Vers. 33. And they turned and went up by the way of Bashan, &c.] A rich countrey this Bashan was, famous for its huge oaks, Ezek. 27. 6. Of the oaks of Bashan have they made thine oars; also the pastures nourished strong and fat cattel, whereto the Scripture often alludeth, Deut. 32. 14. Butter of kine, and milk of sheep, with fat of lambs and rammes of the breed of Bashan, and Amos 4. 1. Hear this word ye kine of Bashan: and there were in it threescore cities with high walled gates and barres, Deut. 3. 4, 5. and indeed this which is said of their high walled cities makes it manifest, that the Israelites spyes were here amongst other places, when they searched the land of Canaan. Vers. 34. And the Lord said unto Moses, Fear him not, &c.] Og the king of Bashan was a huge gyant, Deut. 3. 11. his bedsted was a bedsted of iron, nine cu∣bits was the length thereof, and foure cubits the breadth of it; and the rather doubtlesse did the Lord encourage Moses not to fear him, because they were like enough to be scared with the very sight of him, to which end also he assures him that he should do to him as he did unto Sihon King of the Amorites, making the ex∣perience he had of Gods help against Sihon a ground of encouragement for the pre∣sent against Og, and his armie too.
CHAP. XXII. Vers. 1. ANd the children of Israel set frward, and pitched in the plains of Moab, on this side Jordan, by Jericho.] In the third chapter vers. 48. it is said that they dparted from the mountains of Abarim, and pitched in the plains of Moab, by Jordan, near Jericho, and that is the last removall of the camp of Israel there mentioned. Now they came to the mountains of Abarim at their first pas∣sing over the river Arnon, as is noted before upon vers. 13. And therefore it seems, that all those things related from the 13. verse of the former chapter to the end of the chapter, as concerning their going to Beer, vers. 16. where a well sprung up so miraculously, and concerning the conquests of Sihon and Og, were done, the camp and the tabernacle still abiding at the mountains of Abarim; and then after that the camp of Israel set forward from thence, and pitched in the plains of Moab, so called, because they had been sometime Moabs, and did border upon the land of Moab, though they were afterwards the Amorites, and now the Israelites by con∣quest. These plains reached unto Jordan right over against Jericho. And here the Israelites remained till after Moses death they passed over Jordan into the land of Canaan: in which time many notable things fell out, even all recorded from this place to the end of Deuteronomy and in the beginning of Joshua, till their entrance into Canaan. Vers. 3. And Moab was sore afraid of the people, because they were many, &c.] The Moabites had no cause at all to be afraid of the Israelites, though they were many; for the Israelites had made known to them their resolution not to meddle with them, and accordingly had peaceably passed by their countrey, yea they had, to their own trouble, fetched a great compasse about, purposely that they might not annoy them by passing through their land; and besides, in destroying the Amorites they had done them a pleasure, having thereby freed them from ill neighbours who had lately by the sword taken away a great part of their countrey from them, chap. 21. 26. But yet, being stricken with terrours from God, all this could not quit their minds: They saw they were a numerous mighty people, and that they had now already vanquished two great kings, and that they were still upon the borders of their countrey, and hereupon they were ready to conclude, that as the Amorites had lately taken away part of their countrey, so this people, that had now destroy∣ed the Amorites, would take away the rest, and so were mightily perplexed and distressed. The Lord herein making good his promise to his people, Exod. 15. 15. The mighty men of Moab trembling shall take hold upon them; all the inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away; and again Deut. 2. 25. This day will I begin to put the dread of thee, and the fear of thee upon the nations that are under the whole hea∣ven, who shall hear report of thee, and shall tremble and be in anguish because of thee. Vers. 4. And Moab said unto the Elders of Midian, &c.] That is, the Moabites being in this distresse, and considering that the onely way to secure them∣selves against the evil feaed was so strengthen themselves against the Israelites, and that hereby also they might happely regain what the Amorites had formerly taken
from them, they sent to the elders of Midian to desire them to joyn with them against the Israelites, and that because the Midianites were subject to the same king▪ or at least were neighbours confederate wih them: and so it is evident they did, though they had no cause for it: for first, they were in a manner allyed to the Is∣raelites, being the posterity of Midian, who was the sonne of Abraham by his wife Keturah, Gen. 25. 1, 2. and secondly, the Israelites had not meddled with them; and thirdly, the Israelites conquest of the Amorites was an advantage to the Midianites, who were by this means freed from Sihons tyrannous yoke: for that they were be∣fore in bondage to him appears, because the five kings of Midian that combined with Moab, and perished for the same, chap. 31. 8. are called the Dukes of Sihon, Josh. 13. 21. Some conceive that the Ammonites did also joyn with the Moabites and Midianites at this time, which they ground upon that place, Deut. 23. 3, 4. An Ammonite or a Moabiteshall not▪ enter into the congregation of the Lord; Because they met you not with bread and with water, in the way when you came forth out of Egypt, ad because they hired against thee Balaam the sonne of Beor, of Pethor, of Mesopotamia, to curse thee. But that last clause happely is meant onely of the Moabites; which indeed we may the rather think, because there is not in this story the least mention of the Ammonites. Now shall this company lick up all that are round about us, as the ox licketh up the grasse of the field.] This is the argument whereby the Moabites sought to per∣swade the Midianites to joyn with them against the Israelites, namely, because if they were let alone, they would doubtlesse devour both them and all the neighboring nations. It is all one as if they had said, By what this people have already done in the two kingdomes of Sihon and Og, you may see that they do not content them∣selves to subdue a people, and make them tributaries, but where they conquer they tterly destroy all the inhabitants; and this therefore they will do to us, because of their multitudes, if we joyn not our forces together, as easily as a company of oxen will lick up the grasse of a field they are put into, leaving the ground bare where they go, so that it is high time for us to look about us, and to bandy our selves to fight with them. And indeed however their fear were causelesse now, because the Lord had charged the Israelites not to meddle with the Moabites, as is before noted, yet in future times even this people of Moab were subdued by the Israelites, though not utterly destroyd, to wit, in the dayes of David, 1. Chron. 18. 2. Vers. 5. He sent messengers therefore unto Balaam the snne of Beor, &c.] This Balaam was a Southsayer, famous for his inchantments and divinations in those times, as is evident, Josh 1. 22. Balaam also the sonne of Beor, the South∣sarr, and Numb. 24. 1. And when Balaam saw that it pleased the Lord to blesse Israel, he went not, as at other times▪ to seek for inchantmnts; he is called a pro∣pet, 2. Pet. 2. 16. The dumb as speaking with mans voice forbad the madnesse of the prophet, not onely because he used by his divinations to foretell things to come, but also because God did at present in the passage of this story guide him to prophecy of things that were long after to come to passe; and we know the gift of prophecy is a common gift, which may be conferred upon a wicked man: and it is like Balack sent to him, as to a prophet, that had from God this gift of divining,
and that by his curses and inchantments the Israelites might be weakened, and the more easily overcome. He is here described by his parentage, that he was the sonne of Beor, who is also called Bosor, 2. Pet. 2. 15. Following the way of Balaam the sonne of Bosor; secondly, by his countrey, whither Balak sent to him, to wit, Pethor, which was a city in Mesopotamia or Aram, Deut 23. 4. Because they hired against thee Balaam the sonne of Beor, of Pethor of Mesopotamia, to curse thee; in the East countrey, Numb. 23. 7. Balak the king of Moab hath brought me from Aram, out of the mountains of the East (and the Eastern land was infamous for divina∣tions and such like arts, Esa. 2. 6. Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people, the house of Jacob: because they be replenished from the East, and are southsayers like the Philistines) and was seated nigh to the river of that land, which was Euphrates▪ for that was the great river of Mesopotamia. Behold, there is a people come out of Egypt.] That is, injuriously invading coun∣treys they have no right; unto this he seeks to perswade Balaam, by shewing him the justnesse of his cause. Behold, they cover the face of the earth, they abide over against me.] That is, in a countrey bordering upon mine. Vers. 6. Come now therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people, &c.] This he speaks, as supposing his presence necessary for the accomplishment of that great work for which he sent to him: whence is that also. ver. 41. Balak took Balaam, and brought him up into the high places of Baal, that thence he might see the ut∣most part of the people. Amongst other grounds of this conceit, one might be, that beholding the Israelites, his speech might have more vehemency of spirit and better effect, as he supposed; and indeed it is said concerning Elisha, when he cursed the children that mocked him, 2. Kings 2. 24. that he turned back and looked on them, and cursed them in the name of the Lord: how effectuall curses duly pronounced by the Prophets of God were, we may see in that, 2. Kings 2. 24. And he turned back and looked on them, and cursed them in the name of the Lord: and there came forth two she-bears out of the wood and tare fourtie and two children of them. Balak had the like conceit of this famous false prophet, and therefore desires that he would curse Israel, that is, that he would first by his inchantments procure them to be accursed of God, and then pronounce this curse against them. Vers. 8. Lodge here this night, and I will bring you word again as the Lord shall speak unto me.] It is evident that Balaam was a sorcerer, as is noted from Josh. 13. 22. and he was likewise an idolater, for we see afterwards, chap. 23. 12. that he offered sacrifices upon Baals high places; and how then doth he speak here of the Lord Jehovah, as it is in the text, I will bring you word again as the Lord, or Jehovah, shall speak unto me? I answer first, that it is most probable that some small remainders of the knowledge of the true God were still left amongst these idolatrous nations, that were the posterity of Abraham and Lot, yea and that they did make profession of worshipping the true God, though withall they worshipped other false gods too: and so I conceive it was with Balaam, and therefore, vers. 18. he calls God the Lord his God, and so though he were an idolater and a south∣sayer, yet he might pretend himself to be a Prophet of the Lord Jehovah too: and
secondly, this amongst other things was a part of the magick skill of their south∣sayers in former times, that when they were by inchantments to seek the ruine of any people, they used to deal with that God who was the defender of that people, whom they called their ttelary God: for this is clear in profane Writers, that when the Romanes intended to besiege any city, their priests were wont first to call out that God under whose tutelage or protection that city was, and to promise him more ample place and honour among them: and thus some conceive that Balaam undertook to enquire of the Lord Jehovah, whom he knew to be the God of the Hebrews, to see whether he might be taken off from defending them. But the first, I conceive, is the truest answer. However, the reason why he desired these men to stay all night was, because in the night he used to have his revelations and to pra∣ctise his inchantments. Vers. 9. And God came unto Balaam, &c.] Not by the force of Balaams in∣chantments, but of his own will doth God here come unto Balaam, as of old he hath often for his peoples sake revealed his will to wicked men, as to Pharaoh, Gen. 41. 25. and to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2. 45. Vers. 13. Get you into your land: for the Lord refuseth to give me leave to go with you.] Thus he speaks like a mercenary prophet, loth to displease, and desi∣ring the proffered gain: he onely makes known one part of Gods speech, that he was forbidden to go with them (thereby intimating that the fault was not in him, and that if God would yield him liberty to gratifie the King, he should be glad of it) whereas had he truly added the other part of Gods speech, thou shalt not curse the people, for they are blessed, this might have cut off all occasions of farther sending. Vers. 15. Balaam refuseth to come with us.] Balaam told the Elders lesse then God spake to him, and now they tell Balak lesse then Balaam told them: it was onely Balaam refuseth to come, as if God had not forbidden him; and thus occasion is given for further mischief. Vers. 18. I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord my God, to do less or more.] My God, that is, the God with whom I have to do in this businesse, or rather the God whom I serve: for hereby it seems very probable that Balaam the Syrian (& so happely the people amongst whom he lived) had some knowledge of the true God, & pretended he worshipped him, though withall he worshipped otheridol-gods. And in∣deed that other nations had some knowledge of Jehovah is manifest in Jobs history. Vers. 19. Now therefore, I pray you, tarry ye also here this night, &c.] This desire of Balaam, that these messengers would stay also one night, to see what God would yet say unto him, when God had already before peremptorily charged him that he should not go to Balak, discovered plainly that he still lingered after Ba∣laams gifts and preferments, and was sorry that he was restrained from cursing Is∣rael; and accordingly therefore God gave him an answer, as it follows, in the next verse▪ giving him liberty to go, but intending it should be to the confusion and ruine both of him and the King that had sent for him. Vers. 20. If the men come to call thee, arise up and go with them, &c.] As if the Lord had said, they importune thee, and thou me, since thou wilt needs go, o: as God sometimes in wrath gives wicked men their desires▪ so the Lord now
bad Balaam go (Psal. 81. 11, 12. My people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me; So I gave them up unto their ow hearts lust, and they walked in their own counsels) withall also intending to gloryfie himself by forcing him to blesse the Israelites. Vers. 22. And Gods anger was kindled because he went, &c.] For the Lords bidding him go in such a manner, vers. 20. was not an approbation of his journey: besides, he went no doubt with a purpose to curse them, wherewith he must needs provoke God. See Deut. 23. 5. The Lord thy God would not harken unto Ba∣laam, but the Lord thy God turned the curse into a blessing unto thee. Now he was riding upon his asse, and his two servants with him.] The rest of the company going before, his two servants attended upon him: and this, I con∣ceive, is added, as an amplification of the following miracl, that the asse saw the Angel, when neither Balaam nor his servants perceived any thing. Vers. 23. And the asse saw the Angel of the Lord standing in the way, &c.] The Angel no doubt appeared in a visible shape, and the dull asses eyes were opened to see him, and his sword drawn in his hand, a signe of Gods wrath against Ba∣laam, and the vengeance that at last befell him: and thus this wizzard, who was accustomed to visions and revelations, yet saw not now what the asse saw (God restraining his eyes and the eyes of those that were with him, as we reade the like, Dan. 10. 7. I Daniel alone saw the vision: for the men that were with me saw not th vision) and so was confounded in his wisdome by a base and contemptible creature, according to that of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 1. 19. I will destroy the wis∣dome of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. And the asse turned aside out of the way, and went into the field.] By this and the following passages the Lord by this dumb beast reproved the foolishnesse or madnesse of the Prophet, 2. Pet. 2. 16. Vers. 24. But the Angel of the Lord stood in a path of the vineyards, &c.] Thus God proceeding by degrees makes the sottishnesse of the Prophet the more e∣vident and inexcusable. Vers. 28. And the Lord opened the mouth of the asse, &c.] That is, by his al∣mighty and supernaturall power God caused the dumb and unreasonable beast to speak understandingly: the devil, when he would tempt to sinne, chose the serpent for his instrument, the most subtle beast of the field; but God to rebuke the wiz∣zard useth the asse, the most silly of all beasts: Gods infinite power is best magni∣fied by weak instruments, 1. Cor. 1. 27. But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise. Vers. 29. And Balaam said unto the asse, Because thou hast mocked me, &c.] The wroth and fury of Balaam, the blindnesse, sottishnesse, and hardnesse of heart, whereto he was given over of God, may be thought probably the cause that Ba∣laam was not terrified with this monrous accident, but replies to the asse as to a reasonable creature. But withall I conceive his being inured (as sorcerers and witches are) to hear evil spirits speak in sch bruit beasts was a great reason that he was not astonished with it, as other me would have been, and as happely his servants were, though it be not here expressed.
Vers. 32. Behold, I went out to withstand thee because thy way is pervrse before me.] That is, in desiring so earnestly to go to Balak, notwithstanding I did so abso∣lutely charge thee to the contrary, and in going now with a purpose of cursing my people, though I have told thee again and again that thou shouldst not urse them. Vers. 34. And Balaam said unto the angel of the Lord, I have sinned, &c.] That is, in smiting of the asse, as the following words seem to imply, I have sinned; for I knew not that thou stoodest in the way against me. But his covetousnesse and desire to earn the wages of unrighteousnesse by cursing Gods Israel he still cherish∣eth in his heart, as his faint proffering to turn back doth evidently shew. He could not but know that what he went about was evil and displeasing to God, wherefore else did the Angel of God oppose him in the way with a drawn sword? yet how faintly he speaks? If it please thee, I will get me back again, that is, fain he would go, but if necessity constrain him he will turn back. Vers. 35. And the Angel of the Lord said unto Balaam, Go with the mn.] That is, since nothing will restrain thee, go. See the note upon vers. 20. Vers. 36. And when Balak heard tha Balaam was come, he went out to met him.] This going forth to welcome him and entertain him with honour, as like∣wise his feasting of him, ver. 40. proceeded, first, from joy, because he made full account now that he should vanquish the Israelites; scondly, from his respect of Balaam, as false prophets are still respected of wicked rulers, because they serve their lusts; thirdly, from a desire hereby to engage Balaam to him that he might not re∣fuse to gratifie him in that about which he was sent for. Vers. 38. And Balaam said unto Balak, Lo, I am come unto thee: have I now any power at all to say any thing, &c.] This he sayes to excuse himself, and prevent the Kings displeasure, if it should fall out otherwise the he dsired. Vers. 40. And Balak offered oxen and sheep, and sent to Balaam.] For thus in those times they used to feast with part of their sacrifices. Vers. 41. And brought him up into the high plces of Baal.] As no doubt hoping in this place, consecrated to the worship of Baal, they should find their God the more propitious to them; as also because the height of the place gave advantage for the seeing of the Israelites, being it seems a good way off from them in the plains of Moab, yet not so farre but that from this high mountain they might be discerned, yea for the seeing of them all, even to the utmost part of the people; whereby it appears that the sight of them was judged necessary that his curse might be the more powerfull and effectuall. See the note above upon vers. 6. CHAP. XXIII. Vers. 1. ANd Balaam said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, &c.] In this they prepared to sacrifice to Jehovah (though they were in Baals high places) that they might obtain leave of him to curse his people; and there∣fore vers. 3. Balaam goes to see what answer the Lord, that is, Jehovah, would upon these sacrifices return him, & vers. 4. when God met him, he told him what he hd don. Nor need this seem strange: for thus idolaters, in hope to obtain their
purposes, have been usually drawn to communicate with all religions, true or false, and to make a sinnefull mixture of them, 2. Kings 17. 28, 29. Then one of the prists, whom they had carrid away from Samaria, came and dwelt in Bethel, and taught them how they should fear the Lord. Howbeit every nation made gods of their own, and put them in the houses of the high places, which the Samaritans had made. Acts 17. 23. As I passed by and beheld your devotions, I found an altar with this inscription, To the unknown God. As for the number of their altars and sacrifices, idolaters and sorcerrs have still attributed much to odde numbers, Nu∣merdus impare gadet, especially to this number, seven; but yet I make no question, but as the choice of these clean beasts, bullocks and rammes, was a remain∣der of the worship of God, which even from their ancestours, who were true wor∣shippers of the true God, was derived to them (viz. Lot, Abraham, &c.) and so still continued amongst these idolaters; so also the appointing of seven altars and twice seven sacrifices might spring at first from some tradition received from their fathers, that God was much delighted with this number, which they might inferre from such directions as was that of the Sabbath; and indeed we see this number was sanctified of God for many mysteries, yea particularly in sacrifices; Job 42. 8. Take unto you seven bullocks, and seven rammes, and go to my servant Job, and offer up for your slves a burnt-offering. 1. Chron. 15. 26. And it came to passe when God helped the Levites, that bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, that they offered seven bullocks and seven rammes. 2. Chron. 29. 21. And they brought seven bullocks and seven rammes and seven he-goats for a sinne-offering; yet herein they became vain in their imaginations, Rom. 1. 21. for holy men used still but one al∣tar, Gen. 8. 20. And Noah builded an altar unto the Lord; and multiplying al∣tars is a sinne, Hos. 8. 11. Because Ephraim hath made many altars to sinne, altars shall be unto him to sinne. Vers. 3. And Balaam said unto Balak, Stand by the burnt-offering.] This Balaam enjoyned Balak, not so much that th birds should not come at the sacri∣fices, as that standing so he might present himself before God, in hope and expecta∣tion that by the virtue of that sacrifice God would accept of him, and perform his desire against his enemies; and under this appely was implyed also, that standing so he should pray for good successe. And I will go, &c.] That is, into some solitary place in the top of that hill, there to seek for enchantments and signes of good luck, chap. 24. 1. (as sorcerers are wont to choose solitary places, wherein to excercise their feats of divination and witchcraft) and to see if the Lord would appear to him, as knowing that God did usually appear to men when they are alone. Vers. 4. And God met Balaam.] Not by the force of his enchantments, but vo∣luntarily, for the hardening of Balaam and the good of his people. And he said unto him, I have prepared seven altars, &c.] He boasts of his sa∣crifices, that God might be pleased upon this service done him to hearken to Balak. Vers. 5. And the Lord put a word in Balaams mouth, &c.] That is, he ap∣pointed him what he should say: not regarding his sacrifices, the Lord forced him to blesse the Israelites, and yet all this while his heart was the same that it was be∣fore,
he could not say as David did, Psal. 116. 10. I believed, therefore have I spoken: he did not eat Gods words, as Jeremy did, Jer. 15. 16. Thy words were found and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me th joy and rejoycing of mine heart; onely there was a word put into his mouth. Vers. 7. And he took up his parable, &c.] By a parable is usually meant a grave speech, containing excellent matter of doctrine and instruction, Job 27. 1. especi∣ally when it is delivered in a high strain of language, figurative expressions, and a certain splendour of words more then usuall, which though they carry a kind of majestie in them, and make the hearers the more attentive, even as to the oracles of God, yet they are withall dark and obscure, Ezek. 20. 49. Then said I, Ah Lord God, they say of me, Doth he not speak parables? John 16. 25. These things have I spoken unto you in provrbs, or, Parables, &c. Balak th king of Moab hath brought me from Aram, &c.] To wit, Aram Naharaiim, which was Mesopotamia, Deut. 23. 4. They hired against thee Balaam the sonne of Beor, of Pethor of Msopotamia: and thus God by Balaams own mouth taxeth Balak for sending twice so farre off for him, who now must blesse in stead of cursing. Vers. 8. How shall I curse when God hath not cursed, &c.] That is, I cannot curse: for when God restrains not men, they may curs whom God hath not cursed. Vers. 9. For from the top of the rock I see him, and from the hils I behold him.] Which is all one as if he had said, And indeed the very sight of them is full of ma∣jesty and terrour, as of a people blessed of God: for though I be farre off from them, which might make them seem little in mine eyes, yet the spirit of God hath lifted me up, that even hence I behold them, and oh how full of terrour and majesty is the sight of them! such as makes it evident that God hath blessed them, and that it is in vain for man to think of cursing them. Lo, the people shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations.] This I conceive is a prediction, first, that God would cast out the inhabitants of Canan, and plant them in their stead, and so they should dwell alone, and have the land to themselves, not living now, as formerly in Egypt, as sojourners and mixt with other nations, but as a nation and people of themselves, living in a land of their own, under the government of their own laws and Princes; and secondly, that they should live in plenty and safety, having neither need nor fear of other people: for so dwelling alone implyeth a security from evil, as in Jer. 49. 31. Arise, get you up unto the wealthy nation, that dwelleth without care, saith the Lord, which have nether gates nor barres, which dwell alone; and thirdly, that no na∣tion should be worthy to be compared with them, and that chiefly because they should be Gods peculiar people, Exod. 19. 5. and separated from other people, Levit. 20. 24. I am the Lord your God which have separated you from other nations. Vers. 10. Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel?] That is, it is not possible to count the number of this people, who are s the dust that covers the face of the earth, no not of one fourth part of them. In∣deed
this is meant principally of the uncountable number of Gods Isral heeafer, that spirituall seed of Abraham and Israel, that was to be gathered throughout the world by the preaching of the Gospel, of whom that promise made to Abraham, whereto this prophecy seems to have reference, was chiefly intended, Gen. 13. 16. I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth, so that if any man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbred. But yet it is spoken too of the wonderfull number of this people at present: for in that expression, and the number of the fourth part of Israel, there seems to be a manifest allusion to the number of the Israelites pitching their tents, who lay about the tabernacle in foure camps or squadrons. Let me die the death of the righteous, &c.] Thus he prophecyeth their happinesse also in the world to come. Vers. 13. And Balak said unto him, Come, I pray thee, with me unto another place, &c.] The reason why Balak desired Balaam to remove to another place was, first, because he conceited that another place might prove more lucky and successe∣full then the first had done, where they had offered their sacrifices: for idolatrs were alwayes wont to ascribe much to the luckinesse of times and places, and we see that therefore when he could not prevail there neither, for the cursing of the Is∣raelites, he removed yet to a third place, vers. 27. and secondly, because he hoped to place him more conveniently in regard of his seeing the Israelites, as it is evident in the following words, thou shalt see but the utmost part of them, and shalt not se them all: for either Balak suspected, that when before he saw all the army of Israel, there might be some amongst them that might not be cursed, and therefore now re∣solved to carry him where he should onely see a part of them; or else he might think that the sight of their multitudes might so dismay and damp his spirit that he was not able to curse them, which happely those former words of Balaam, vers. 10. did occasion him to think, Who can count the dust of Jacob, &c. and therefore, whereas before he was carefull to place him where he might see them all, even to the utmost part of the people, chap. 22. 41. now he carried him where he might see them, as still judging that necessary for the work in hand, but yet where he might see but the utmost part onely and not see them all. Vers. 14. And he brought him into the fild of Zophim.] That is, the field of the spies or scoutwatches, a place it seems so called, because there they kept the watch of the countrey. And built seven altars, &c.] So prosecuting their wickednesse still under colour of religion. See the note upon vers. 1. Vers. 15. Stand here by thy burnt-offering, &c See the note upon vers. 3. Vers. 16. And the Lord met Balaam and put a word in his mouth.] See the note upon vers. 4. Vers. 18. Rise up, Balak, and hear, &c.] Hearken with reverence to the message brought thee from God, as Judg. 3. 20. when Ehud told Egon that he brought him a message from God, it is said that he arose out of his seat. Vers. 21. He hath not beheld iniqurry in Jacob, neither hath he seen perverse∣nesse in Israel.] This is added as a reason why there was no hope that God should
be brought to give way that the Israelites should be cursed, to wit, because the Lord imputeth not iniquity to them, but covereth and pardoneth their sinnes, so that they are still lovely and amiable in his sight. The Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a King is among them.] That is, God reigneth as a king amongst them. Hereby also I conceive is meant the faith, joy, boldnesse and confidence of Gods people in him their king and governour, as when a king comes amongst the armies of his people, he is received with joyfull shoutings and acclamations, and when he goes forth to battel with them, he goes accompanied with the sound of trumpets and shouts of the people, fignes of their joy and courage; so it fared with the Israelites, because of Gods presence amongst them to protect and defend them, 1. Sam. 4. 5. And when the ark of the covenant of the Lord came into the camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang again. 2. Chron. 13. 12. And bhold, God himself is with us for our Captain, and his priests with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against you, O children of Israel; and indeed the expression here used may also have reference to their silver trumpets, chap. 10. 9. Vers. 22. God brought them out of Egypt.] He tells Balak this in answer to that complaint of his, chap. 22. 5. Behold, there is a people come out from Egypt, to wit, that they came not out of Egypt themselves, but God brought them up; and with∣all implyes from that former deliverance both Gods constant purpose of doing good to them, and how unable their strongest enemies should be to resist them. He hath as it were the strength of an unicorn.] That is, his strength is unresist∣able, as is that of the unicorn, Job 39. 9, 10, 12. Besides, it may have reference to that speciall virtue in the uniorns horn against poyson, because even so the virtue of Gods grace in Israel was a preservation against all enchantments and divinati∣ons, vers. 23. Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel. Vers. 23. According to this time it shall be said of Jacob, &c.] That is, from this time forward. Vers. 24. Bhold, the people shall rise up as a great lyon, &c.] This must be un∣derstood of their vanquishing both temporall and spirituall enemies. See the note upon Gen. 49. 9. Vers. 28. And Balak brought Balaam to the top of Peor, &c.] One of the high places of Baal the god of Moab, called Baal-Peor, chap. 25. 3. where he had a place called Beth-Peor, Deut. 3. 29. CHAP. XXIV. Vers. 1. ANd when Balaam saw that it pleased the Lord to blesse Israel, &c.] That is, when he saw that there was no likelyhood of getting leave of God to curse this people, he resolved not any more to seek for enchantments, but set his face towards the wildernesse, that is, towards the place where Israel lay en∣camped, with a full purpose that he would now curse them, without asking God leave to do it. Hereby it is evident that formerly when Balaam left Balak standing
by his altars, and went aside to see what God would say to him, he used by n∣chantments (that is, some of those magicall arts, which sorcerers use) to seek li∣berty to curse the Israelites, yea happely he did by these diabolicall wayes seek to obtain leave of God to do it (for it is no more strange that men should in∣quire of God by wayes abominable in Gods eyes, then that they should worship the true God with a supertitious and idolatrous worship) well, but now having by experience found that it pleased the Lord to blesse Israel, and that there was no hope to get leave to curse them, he went not as at other times to seek for inchant∣ments, saith the text: and why so? not because his wicked heart was now changed, or that he did now give over his desire or purpose of cursing the Israelites; for why then was he now come with Balak to mount-Peor to see if from thence he might curse them, as it is said in the latter end of the foregoing chapter; and why had he there erected altars, and provided sacrifices, as before? No, but perceiving that nei∣ther by his inchantments, nor by any other way, he could winne the Lord to let him curse them, he resolved now to give over that course, & would no more go aside to see what answer God would put into his mouth, but was fully determined to prevent God, and suddenly to curse the people, before he had any charge to the con∣trary. And indeed there might be a speciall aim of providence in this, that he was re∣strained from practising his inchantments at this time, when he was to deliver those glorious prophecies concerning the Messias, and concerning Gods people, which are afterwards related in the sequele of the chapter, to wit, lest those inchantments foregoing these prophecies might seem to stain or weaken the credit of them. Vers. 2. And Balaam lift up his eyes, and he saw Israel abiding in his tents according to their tribes.] And so was even by that goodly and glorious sight of their multitude and order appalled and astonished; for this is mentioned as the out∣ward means whereby God did beforehand, as it were, prepare him that he might be the fitter to blesse in stead of cursing. And the spirit of God came upon him.] That is, suddenly the spirit of God came upon him, and so by his almighty over-ruling power constrained him to blesse those whom he resolved to curse, but first it seems cast him into a trance, as we see ver. 4. and 16. Vers. 3. And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the sonne of Beor bath said.] God was herein much magnified, that he should blesse his people even by Balaam a sorcerer, a false prophet, who desired to curse them. And this circum∣stance therefore tending so much to the glory of God, Balaam himel is here forced to publish: as if he had said, He whose power to curse was so much relied on, and who bent himself herein to satisfie Balaks request, even he both must and will af∣firm it, and stand to it, that Israel shall be blessed. The man whose eyes are open hath said, &c.] If we should reade these words as most Expositours understand them in the Hebrew, and as they are therefore ndred in the margin of our Bibles, And the man who had his eyes shut hath said, either they must be meant of the closing up of his bodily eyes, to wit, in his sleep, or in the trance he fell into, when these things were revealed to him of God, which he meant now to utter; or secondly, of the blindnesse and ignorance of the eyes of
hs mind, to wit, that before God revealed these things to him, he was utterly ig∣norant of hem, and whilest he pretended himself a Prophet, yet he was indeed a blindwretch, and knew nothing to speak of; or thirdly, of his propheticall visions, to wit▪ that he was a man of a shut or hidden eye, one that had another manner of eye to see withall then other men bad, a man that could see the secret and hidden things of God. But now if we reade the words as they are in our Bibles, And the man whose eyes are open hath said, then it is plain that they are meant of that ex∣traordinary knowledge of things which by the spirit of prophecy was revealed to him, and in rgard whereof the Prophets were of old called Seers, 1. Sam. 9. 9. Thus saith the man whose eyes are open, that is, the man whose eyes God hath in a supernaturall manner opened to see things to come: and his aim in these words must needs be, to stirre them to receive what he spake as that which did certainly come from God. And so much indeed the following words in the text do, as it were by way of explanation, more clearly deliver, He hath said which heard the words of God, which saw the vision of the Almighty, falling into a trance, but having his eyes open, where also it seems evident that when at first the spirit of God came upon him, ver. 2. it cast him into a trance (thogh it were not thee expres∣sed, because it was to be expressed here) and that this was usuall with the Prophets, we may see in many places, as Gen 15. 12. Dan. 8. 17, &c. Vers. 5. How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel, &c.] This and that which followeth in the next verse, is not meant of the goodly sight which their tabernacles at present yielded, in regard of that admirable order wherein they were severally ranked under their severall ensigne nd standards, but lso that herein as in a lively figure the Lord did shew the great felicity of his Church and people, not onely in regard of tht goodly and pleasant land which the Lord had provided for their habitation but also in regard of the variety of all o∣ther good blessings, which God should conferre upon them, wherein they should be a wonder and admiration to all that took notice of it. Vers. 6. As the valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river side, &c.] The Israelites, and so consequently also the Chrch of the Gentiles, the spirituall seed of Abraham, are here compared to valleys spread forth, to signifie the large extent of the Church; and secondly, they are compared to fruitfull valleys and gardens enclosed, set with pleasant and wholsome plants, and kept alwayes fresh and fruitfull by the waring of rivers, yea even in times of scorching heat and drought, to signifie both that God would abundantly ble his people with tempo∣rall blessings, at least that they should still be preserved and upheld in times of greatest trouble, according to that, Esa. 58. 11. The Lord shall guide thee conti∣nually, and sat is fie thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones; and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not; as like∣wise that he would richly blesse them with spirituall gifts and graces, by means of the word and spirit, which as a river refresheth and comforteth his people, of which the Psalmist speaketh, Psal. 46. 4. There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God; and the prophet, Joel 3. 18. A fountain shall come forth out of the house of the Lord, and shall water the valley of Shittim. Thirdly,
they are compaed to the trees of lign-aloes which the Lord hath planted, both to signifie how wonderfully through Gods blessing they should grow and prosper (or those trees are said to be planted of the Lord which prosper above the ordinary course of nature, above that which by the skill and industry of men they were like to reach▪ Psal. 104. 16. The trees of the Lord are full of sappe, the cedars of Le∣banon which he hath planted) as also what a good fame and report the people of God should have farre and near; for the tree lign-aloes is a certain tree growing in Arabia and India, which giveth a very sweet odour, and may therefore be an embleme of the sweet fame and report which the Church should have for her graces and holy righteous life, in regard whereof the Church is also elsewhere compared to the rose and lilly, Cant. 2. 1, 2. and lastly, they are compared to cedar trees be∣side the water, which are great, tall, and very durable, and hereby therefore is sig∣nified the great growth of Gods people, together with the stable and flourishing glory of their kingdome, according to that of the Psalmist, Psal. 92. 12. 13. The righteous shall flourish like the palme tree, he shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon, &c. and that of the Prophet concerning the Assyrian, Ezek. 31. 3 Behold the Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, and with a shadowing shroud, and of an high stature,—The waters made him great, the deep set him on high, &c. How this was accomplished we see partly in the flourishing estate of the Israelites in Solomons dayes, but especially in the exceeding glory of Christs kingdome. Vers. 7. He shall poure the water out of his buckets and his seed shall be in ma∣ny waters.] This branch of Balaams prophecy is very difficult. Most Expositours understand it of the wonderfull increase of Israels posteity, and that thus. By the water poured out of his buckets they understand his children flowing out of his loyns, and that as alluding to the way of naturall generation, whence it is, they say, that the Scripture doth usually speak of the propagation of children under the imilitude of waters flowing out of fountains, cesterns, buckets, and the like, as Esa. 48. 1. Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters, that is, out of the fountain, of Judah; and again, Psal. 68. 26. Blesse ye God in the congregations, even the Lord, from the fountain of Israel, and so also Prov. 5. 15, 16, 17. where Solomon speaking of wife and children in the lawfull state of marriage, saith, Drink waters out of thine own cestern, and running waters out of thine own well. Let thy fountains be dis∣persed abroad, and rivers of water in the streets: Let them onely be thine own, &c. and so accordingly they understand the second clause, and his seed shall be in many waters, to wit, that his poserity should increase unto many people: for so they say that by many waters in the Scripture is frequently meant many people, as Revel. 17, 15. and in many other places. But this exposition seems to many some∣what hard; and indeed though that last clause be understood of the great increase of Israels posterity yet I should rather think there is an allusion therein to the great increase of seed own in well-watred grounds, to wit, that his posterity should wondrously grow up and increase, as seed sown thus in many waters. Others a∣gain understand the first clause of the streams of the word of salvation, which from
the Israelites should be poured forth amongst othr nations, according to that of the Prophet, Esa. 2. 3. Out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem; and then the second clause they understand not onely of the civil increase of his posterity, growing up as seed sown in moist grounds, but also of their flourishing in grace and growing up unto life everlasting. But in the last place there is another exposition, to wit, that this also is meant, as that which went before, either particularly of the fruitfulnesse of the land of Canaan, to wit, that they should have abundance of water, which they might as they had need poure plentifully out of their buckets (and this was no small blessing in those East∣ern countries) so that their seed sown should flourish exceedingly▪ as corn must needs do that is sown in such watry grounds; or else generally of their flourishing esate in all regards, by reason of the blessing of God upon them and their labours, which should make them as grounds that have dayly buckets of waters poured out upo them, and as corn that is sown in watry grounds, which must needs flourish and grow mightily, whence is that, Esa. 32. 20. Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters, that send forth thi her the feet of the ox and the asse. And his King shall be higher then Agag, &c.] That is, then all the Kings of the earth: for though the Kings of the Amalekites be here onely instanced in (who were called by this name Agag, as the Egyptian Kings by the name Pharah) be∣cause they were now most poent, ver. 20. Amalek was the first of the nations; yet under this all other Kings are comprehended. This was fulfilled in Saul, 1. Sam. 15. 7, 8. And Saul smte the Amalekites from Havilah untill thou comest to Shur, that is over against Egypt: And e took Agag the King of the Amalekites alive, and utterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword; and so also in the glory of Israels kingdome in David and Solomons dayes, but especially in Christ, Psal. 89. 27. Also I will make him my first-born, higher then the Kings of the earth. Vers. . God brought him forth out of Egypt, he hath as it were the strength of an unicorn.] See the note upon chap. 23. vers. 22. Vers. 9. He couched, he lay down as a lion, &c.] Which is meant of their safe and secure peace. See the note upon Gen. 49. 9. Vers. 11. I thought to promote thee unto great honour, but lo, the Lord hath kept thee back from honour.] That is, blame not me therefore for giving thee no reward for taking so long a journey, but blame thy God, &c. Vers. 12. And Balaam said unto Balak Spake I not also to thy messengers, &c.] That is, you have no cause to blame me: I could not help it▪ I told you be∣fore I durst not do it without Gods leave. Vers. 14. I will advertise thee what this people shall do to thy people in the lat∣tor dayes.] That is, many years hereafter: for though by the latter dayes in the old Testment are often meant the times of the Messiah, and much that Balaam af∣terwards saith is concerning the kingdome of the Messiah; yet this expression here must not be restrained to the times of the Mssiah, because he foretells many things that were to be partly accomplished in the dayes of David, which was about foure hundred years after this; but by the latter dayes here is onely meant that these
things he now would tell him should be done along time afer this: and this happely he said the rather, because being to tell him of the destruction of his people, the Moabites, by the Israelites, hereby he would in part decline the anger of Balak, by telling him that this should not happen in his dayes. Vers. 17. I shall see him, but not now; I shall behold him, but not nigh, &c.] This is meant of that Starre of whom he speaks in the next words, There shall come a starr out of Jacob, and a sceptre shall rise out of Israel, which is doubtlesse meant of a king of the seed and posterity of Jacob, who should shine as a starre in the firmament, in regard of the resplendent glory of his person and kingdome, and this king was David or Solomon, as types of Christ; for in their dayes the king∣dome of Israel was raised to an exceeding height of splendour and glory, and David it was that did vanquish the Moabites, 2. Sam. 8. 2. &c. as it is said in the follow∣ing words, that this king should do: and secondly, it was principally Christ him∣self, that king of glory, that enlightner, guide and comforter of his people, who saith of himself, Rev. 22. 16. I am the root and the off-spring of David, and the bright and morning starre, and of whom S. John saith, John 1. 9. That was the true light which lightneth every man that cometh into the world; who was there∣fore, as some conceive, discovered to the Wise men by a starre, Matth. 2. 2. to shew that he was that starre of whom Balaam had long since prophecyed. Now there∣fore whereas Balaam saith here of this king▪ I shall see him, but not now; I shall behold him, but not nigh, either the meaning of this is onely, that what he saith of this king should not be accomplished now in his dayes, nor in the time that was nigh approching, but long fter when he should see him, to wit, in his poterity af∣ter many generations, and then it may be meant either of David or Chrit; or if it be meant of a personall seeing this starre out of Jacob, then it can be understood onely of Christ, and of the ight which such wicked wretches, as Balaam was, shall have of him at the day of judgement: and it is as if he had said, There shall a time come, though it be not nigh at hand, when I shall see him, to wit, when every eye shall see him, Rev. 1. 7. but the wicked afarre off, as it is said, the rich man saw Abraham, Luke 16. 23. And shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Sheth.] The meaning of ths clause is, that the king that should arise out of Israel (of whom he was now speaking) should vanquish and destroy the whole kingdome and peo∣ple of the Moabites: for by smiting the corners of Moab is meant, either his de∣stroying of their Princes, who were the chief strength of their kingdome, as the cor∣ner-stones of a house are the chief strength of a building; or his smiting of the whole countrey in every quarter and corner of it; and by the second clause, and destroy all the children of Sheth, the same thing is repeated in other words, as it is usuall in these prophecies of Balam to joyn two severall expressions of one and the same thing. I know that many Expositours hold that by the children of Sheth here are mant all the sonnes of men, nd that because from Noah, who came from the stock of Sheth, Adams sonne, all nations had their originall; and so they conceive this to be a prophecie of Christ subduing the whole world unto him, and that he should destroy his enemies of all nations that should rise up against him, according
to that of David, Psal. 72. 11. All kings shall fall down before him, all nations shall serve him; and Psal. 2. 8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. But this Exposition for two reasons seems very improbable: first, because it is evident tht all the severall branches of this prophecy are literally meant of David, though spiri∣tually also of Christ, of whom David was a type. Now this clause, that he should destroy all the children of Sheth, cannot be meant of David, if by the children of Sheth be meant all the nations of the world: and secondly, because whilest Balaam is here foreelling what should befall the severall neighbouring nations, as the Moabites, the Edomites, the Amalekites, &c. t is no way likely that a clause should be here inserted concerning the destruction of all mankind. So that I make no question, but as in the following verse the subduing of the Edomites is foretold un∣der two severall expressions, Edom shall be a possession, and, Seir also shall be a pos∣session for his enemies; so here also the conquest of the Moabites is likewise ex∣pressed, first by smiting the corners of Moab, and then by destroying all the chil∣dren of Sheth, the Moabites being called the children of Sheth, either because some one of their progenitours, the sonnes of Moab, famous in his time, was called Sheth, and thence they were called the children of Sheth; or else because this people did mightily boast of the antiquity of their nation, and so did vainly style themselves the children of Sheth, and so are called by Balaam ironically, by way of deriding them for that their vain boasting, that ancient people the children of Sheth. How this prophecy was literally accomplished in David, is evident, 2. Sam. 8. 2. where it is said that he smote Moab and measured them with a line, casting them down to the ground; even with two lines measured he to put to death, and with one full line to keep alive; and so the Moabites became Davids servants. But withall it is spi∣ritually meant of Christs vanquishing them and all other his enemies, either by his word converting them, or by his power subduing them, and so agreeth with that of the Prophet, Esa. 11. 4. He shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. Vers. 18. And Edom shall be a possession, Seir also shall be a possession, &c.] That is, the Edomites that inhabit mount Seir shall also be subdued by the Israelites. This was likewise literally fulfilled in David, of whom it is said▪ 1. Chron. 18. 13. that he put garisons in Edom, and all the Edomites became Davids servants: and thereupon he sung that triumphant song, Psal. 60. 8. Moab is my washpot, over Edom will I cast out my shooe: but especially it was fulfilled in Christ, whose con∣quest over these and other his enemies the Prophet sets forth most gloriously, Esa. 6. 1, 2. &c. Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah▪ &c. Vers. 19. Out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion, and shall de∣stroy him that remaineth of the citie.] That is, of the cities of the Edomites, of whom he had spoken in the foregoing verse. The meaning is, that he should de∣stroy them all, not suffering any to escape, that even those few, that shall shut up themselves in the most fortified places▪ and remain a while safe, when others are de∣stroyed shal at length partake with the reft. But in Christ shall this be most emi∣nently
fulfilled, who having destroyed his enemies here with a great destruction, shall at his second coming destroy all that remain. Vers. 20. Amalek was the first of the nations, but his latter end shall be that he perish for ever.] That is, thou hast been reputed the first and chief of the nations, and wert indeed the first that made warre against Israel; but as glorious as thou art now, thy end shall be utter destruction: as thou wert the first-fruits of the na∣tions vanquished by the Israelites, so art thou appointed still to be destroyed, till thou be rooted fom the face of the earth. This was fulfilled in part by Sanl 1. Sam. 15. but principally by Christ. Vers. 21. And he looked on the Kenites, and took up his parable, &c.] Not the people of Canaan so called, Gn. 15. 19. for we reade not that they continued un∣destroyed till the Assyrians carryed them away to Babylon, as it is said of these Kenites, vers. 22. But by the Kenites are here meant the Midianites, one principall family or people amongst them being put for the whole nation: for such a people there was amongst the Midianites, whence Jethro Moses father in law, priest of Midian, is called the Kenite, Judg. 1. 16. and his posterity also, Judg. 4. 11. Now Heber the Kenite▪ which was of the children of Hbab the father in law of Moses, had severed himself from the Kenites; and they are next named, because they bordered upon Amalek, and dwelt many of them amongst the Amalekites, 1. Sam. 15. 6. And Saul said unto the Knites, Go, depart, get you down from among the Amalekites, &c. Strong is thy dwelling place, and thou puttest thy nest in a rock.] This he speaks as alluding to their name, for Ken signifieth a nest. Vers. 22. Neverthelesse the Kenite shall be wasted untill Asher shall carry thee away captive.] That is, they shall endure much at the hand of severall enemies (which was in part accomplished when the Midianites were vanquished by Gede∣on, Judg. 7. 2.) and shall at length be carryed away captive by the Assyrians, who together with the Jews carried all the nations away round about them, Jer. 25. 9. and particularly we reade of Kenites mentioned after the return of the people out of Babylon, 1. Chron. 2. 55. Vers. 23. And he took up his parable and said, Alas, who shall live when God doth this?] In these words are implyed how grievous calamities would in a man∣ner befall all nations when the Assyrians should make that havock, of which he had made mention in the foregoing verse, and when those troubles should happen whereof he prophecyeth in the following words. Vers. 24. And ships shall come from the coast of Chittim, &c.] Kittim or Chitim was one of Japhets posterity, who seated themselves in Macedonia, Cilicia, Cyprus, and other the Grecian Islands. By Chittim here Expositours therefore do commonly understand Macedonia and other parts of Greece, and thereto agreeth that in 1. Maccab. 1. 1. when it is said that Alexander sonne of Philip the Ma∣cedonian came out of the land of Chittim. But yet because in Dan. 11. 30. it is ge∣nerally almost held that by the ships of Chittim are meant ships that came out of Italy, therefore here also they hold that by Chittim is meant Italy: and indeed it is proble enough that though the Greek Islands, were ordinarily called Chittim,
yet the Greeks passing over from thence into Italy, and planting themselves there, even Italy was aferwards also called Chittim, and so both may be here comprehen∣ded under this word Chittim, to wit, both the Greek Islands and Italy. Now concerning these ships that should come from the coast of Chittim, Balaam prphecieth here, first, that he should afflict Ashur; secondly, that he should afflict Eber; thirdly, that he also, that is, the people of Chittim, should perish for ever: for the first, that these ships that came from the coast of Chittim, should af∣flict Ashur▪ if we understand by Chittim the Grecians, the accomplishment hereof is clear; for Alexander the great Grecian Monarch did utterly vanquish the Persian Empire, to whom the Assyrians, that came of Ashur, were in subjection, and so made great havock amongst that people; and afterwards they could not but suffer much, when the Seleucidae did continually waste and oppresse them in the trouble∣some dayes of Antigonus and Antiochus. And if we understand by Chittim Italy, even by the Romans out of Italy were the Assyrians afflicted, when they began to ruine the Grecian Empire, to whom that people were then subject; and Dio, that writes the Romane history, reports that Trajan the Emperour did in his time subdue Assyria, and make it a Province. As for the second branch of this prophecy, that he ships which should come from the coast of Chittim should afflict Eber, that is, the Hebrews or Jews, this also was partly fulfilled by the Greeks, if you under∣stand them to be the people of Chittim; for they could not but suffer much when the Grecians came to get the dominion over them, and the story of the Maccabees shews how cruelly Antiochus dealt with them; but especially by the Romanes, if we understand them to be the people of Chittim: for by the Romanes they were often sorely distressed, and at length Titus and Vespasian did utterly ruine them. As for the third branch of the prophecy, that he also, that is, the people of Chittim should perish for ever, this hath been already in part fulfilled, both in the utter overthrow of the Grecian Empire, and in the low estate whereto the Romane Empire is fallen, but shall be more fully accomplished when Rome, and her now head, that man of sinne, shall be utterly destroyed, as God hath threatned that he will consume him with the breath of his mouth. & destroy him with the brigtnesse of his coming, 2. Thess. 2. 8. Vers. 25. And Balaam rose up, and went, and returned to his place, &c.] That is, he went away homeward, though it seems he was afterward stayed amongst the Midianites; for among them he was slain, chap. 31. 8. They slew the kings of Mi∣dian; Balaam also the sonne of Beor they slew with the sword. With what shame and confusion of face they now parted asunder, we may easily conceive, being both wholly disappointed of their aims, the false prophet going away without those wages of unrighteousnesse which he had gaped after, and for which he had taken all this pains, and the king having procured nothing by all that he had done, but that the eople was blessed whom he desired his prophet to curse; which how great a mercie it was to the Israelites, we may see by the Lords putting them so often in mind of it, as Deut. 23. 4, 5. They hired against thee Balaam, the sonne of Beor, of Pe∣thor, of Mesopotamia, to curse thee: Neverthelesse the Lord thy God would not hearken unto Balaam, but the Lord thy God turned the curse into a blessing unto thee, because the Lord thy God loved thee; and again, Mich. 6. 5. O my ople,
remember now what Balak King of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the sonne of Beor answered him. But though they could not obtain to have Israel cursed, yet before Balaam parted now with Balak, he gave him that pestilent counsel, to wit, to invite the Israelites to their feasts, and so to insnare them and draw them both to whoredome and idolatry, that so the favour of their God, being turned away from them, they might then be exposed to any mischief from their enemies; which how they attempted to put in practise we reade in the following chapter. CHAP. XXV. Vers. 1. ANd Israel abode in Shittim.] This was a place in the plains of Moab, called also Abel-shittim, chap. 3. 49. where they conti∣nued till after Moses death; for from this Shittim they removed when they went to passe over Jordan into the land of Canaan: and it is the rather noted here, as an aggravation of their sinne, which in this place they fell into with the daughters of Moab, that when God had now brought them to the very borders of the promised land they should there so shamefully sinne against him. And the people began to commit wheredome with the daughters of Moab.] This is meant both of bodily and spirituall whoredome: and besides, we must note first, that though it be said generally that the people began to commit whoredome, yet the meaning is onely that some or a great number of the people did so; for all that were guilty of this wickednesse were taken away, and onely those remained alive that did constantly cleave unto the Lord, Deut. 4. 3, 4. All the men that fol∣lowed Baal Peor, the Lord thy God hath destroyed them from among you: But ye that did cleave unto the Lord your God, are alive every one of you this day; and secondly, that though the daughters of Moab be onely here mentioned, yet under these the daughters of Midian are also comprehended: for it is evident that the Is∣raelites did commit whoredome with the daughters of Midian, as we may see ver. 6. where it is said that it was a Midianitish woman, with whom Zimri committed filthinesse, and ver. 16, 17. Vex the Midanites, saith the Lord to Moses, and smite them; for they vex you with their wiles, wherewith they have beguiled you in the matter of Peor, &c. Vers. 2. And they called the people unto the sacrifices of their gods, &c.] This is added as the effect of their whoredome with the daughters of Moab, whereof he had spoken in the former verse, to wit, that they were then invited by these daugh∣ters of Moab to their idolatrous feasts, and so at length were drawn to open idola∣try. Some indeed conceive that in these words Moses sheweth how they were drawn to commit whoredome with these daughters of Moab, to wit, that first un∣der a shew of friendship they were invited by the Moabites to their idolatrous feasts, and then being there allured by the wanton provocations of their young damsels, they committed filthinesse with them, and so were insnared and drawn further afterwards to fall down and worship their gods. But the order of the words is rather this, that first they committed bodily whoredome with the daughters of Moab (for that is principally intended, vers. 1. and therefore S. Paul speaks of this
as that which was the first originall cause of all the evil that now befell them, 1. Cor. 10. 8. Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand) and then afterwards they were drawn by dgrees to the idolatry here mentioned. It seems therefore that the Moabites, under a pretence of peace and amity▪ got some opportunity to have their fair dam∣sels allure some of the Israelites to uncleannesse, and then having intangled them in this sinne, they called them unto the sacrifices of their gods, that is, to the feasts they made with their sacrifices, and so they went and did eat with them, which was of it self idolatry, they that eat of the sacrifices being partakers of the altar, 1. Cor. 10. 8. and a sinne which God had expressely given them warning of, to wit, that they should take heed lest the people sacrificing unto their god, any one should call them▪ and they should eat of his sacrifice, Exod. 34. 15. and then being thus farre fallen away, they were easily wonne to open idolatry, even to bow down to their gods and worship them. And all this the Moabites did by the counsel of Balaam, who knew there was no other way to endanger the Israelites, as it is evident chap. 31. 16. Behold, saith the Lord of the Midianitish women, these caused the children of Israel, through the counsel of Balaam, to commit a trespasse against the Lord in the matter of Peor; and Rev. 2. 14. where it is said that Balaam taught Balak to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to idols and to commit fornication. Vers. 3. And Israel joyned himself unto Baal-peor.] This Baal-peor was an idol-god of the Moabites, so called from the mountain Peor, chap. 23. 28. where this idol was worshipped. And to this idol Israel is said to have joyned himself, in reference to that spirituall adultery they committed by worshipping this idol; as for the same reason the Scripture useth a like expression, Hos. 9. 10. where it is said that the Israelites went to Baal-peor, and separated them selves unto that shame. And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel.] Herein also is implyed the effect of Gods anger, to wit, that hereupon the plague brake in upon them, Psal. 106. 29. whereby there fell in one day three and twenty thousand. Vers. 4. And the Lord said unto Moses, Take all the heads of the people, and hang them up, &c.] Some Expositours understand this thus, That the Lord here enjoyneth Moses to take all the heads of the people, that is, to gather together all the Heads and Rulers of the severall tribes, and take them as assistants to him, and then to hang them up before the Lord, that is, them of the people of whom he had spoken in the foregoing verse, that had joyned themselves to Baal-peor; and in∣deed that which followeth in the next verse doth singularly well agree with this exposition, to wit, that hereupon Moses said unto the Judges of Israel, whom he had thus assembled together, Slay you every one his man, that is, the me that are under your severall jurisdictions, that were joyned unto Baal-peor. But the most received exposition is, that the Lord here commanded Moses that he should take, that is, apprehend, all the heads of the people, to wit, that were guilty of this sinne, and hng them up before the Lord, that is, as a sacrifice to the Lord for the vindicating of his honour, and the appeasing of his wrath (as those of Sauls issue are said like∣ise to have been hanged up before the Lord, 2. Sam. 21. 6. because it was done
for diverting of the Lords wrath when there was a famine in the land) and that against the sunne, that is, openly in the sight of all men, that as they had sinned openly, so they might be punished openly, for the terrour of others. Now this ex∣position the words seem most plainly to intend, to wit, that first God commanded Moses to take all the heads of the people, that were guilty of this sinne, and hang them up before the Lord against the sunne, so appointing them to be first punished, and that with a more shamefull kind of death, because their sinne was greatest, and that then afterwards Moses gave a charge (as it follows in the next verse) to the rest of the Judges that had not defiled themselves, that they should slay amongst those that were severally under their command all those that were notoriously known to be guilty of these sinnes. Vers. 6. And behold one of the children of Israel came and brought a Mid∣anitish woman, &c.] The greatest difficulty in this passage of the story is concern∣ing the time when this Israelite, Zimri the sonne of Salu, as is afterwards expres∣sed, vers. 14. did thus impudently bring this Midianitish woman to the camp of Israel to commit filthinesse with her, and was there with her slain by Phinehas. Some conceive that this was done before Moses and the other Judges had put in execution that charge which was given them, mentioned in the two foregoing ver∣ses, for the hanging up of the heads of the people, and the slaying of those in each tribe that were found guilty of those horrible snes of fornication and idolatry with the daughters of Moab, which had provoked God to send such a plague a∣mongst the people; and the reason they give for this is, because it is hardly credible that this wretch would have dared to have done this after Moses and the Judges had already with such severity punished those that were found guilty. But yet be∣cause the plague was stayed immediately upon the killing of these wretches, vers. 8. it is most probable that those that were sain by the magistrate were slain before the plague was stayed: therefore others hold that this was done in the order as here it is recorded by Moses, and that this was one of the great aggravations of his de∣sperate im pudency, that not onely when the people were mourning because of the wrath of God against them, but also when so many had been cut off for this sinne he was not yet afraid, trusting it seems in his greatnesse, because he was a Prince of such renown in the tribe of Simeon, but did openly carry his harlot into his tent with him, as if he desired thereby to proclaim that he would not be afraid to satis∣fie his lust, though Moses and all Israel should stand by and look on. Vers. 8. And he went afer the man of Israel into the tent, &c.] The origi∣nall word, here translated the tent, is not that ordinarily used for a tent, but such as signifieth a cave or hollow place; therefore some think that hereby is meant such a tent as was made for fornication. So the plague was stayed from the children of Israel.] This plague seemeth to have been the pestilence, which God sent amongst the people, Psal. 106. 29. They provoked him to anger with their inventions: and the plague brake in upon them. Howbeit the word here in the originall is sometimes used for slaughter by the sword, as 1. Sam. 4. 17. Vers. 9. And those that died in the plague were twenty and foure thousand.]
The Apostle sayes three and twenty thousand, 1. Cor. 10. 8. It seems that one thou∣sand were hanged up and slain by the command of the civil magistrate, to appease Gods wrath, and that the other three and twenty thousand were taken away by the immediate hand of God; or one thousand of the chief hanged, the rest slain with the sword. Vers. 12. Wherefore say Behold I give unto him my covenant of peace.] That is, make this which I shall say unto thee publickly known▪ both for the encouragement of Phinehas, that he may not fear because they were such great ones whom he hath slain; and for the satisfaction of the people, that they may know he did it by the speciall motion of my spirit, because I the Lord have thus both approved and re∣warded the fact: say, that is, make it known, that behold I give unto him my co∣venant of peace, where Gods covenant with Phinehas for the settling of the priest∣hood in his posterity is called a covenant of peace, first, because they should peace∣ably enjoy it; and secondly, because the work of the priesthood was to make peace betwixt the Lord and his people. Vers. 13. And he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant of an everlasting priesthood.] That is, a priesthood that shall be continued to his seed as long as ever the Leviticall priesthood shall continue. But the dignity of being high priest should have come to him and his by descent, may some say, because he was the sonne of Eleazar Aarons eldest sonne: I answer, though he was so, yet that it should not be removed to another family for want of his issue, that was of Gods goodnesse, and is here promised as the reward of his zeal. Indeed the greatest doubt concerning this promise is, whether it were continued in his posterity or no. Con∣cerning which all that we find in the Scripture is this; first, that we find the posterity of this Phinehas recorded unto the time of the Israelites captivity in Babylon, 1. Chron. 6. 4, 15. secondly, that if it be true which some hold, that in the dayes of the Judges the high priests office was wrested from the sonnes of Phinehas, the sonne of Eleazar, and conferred upon Eli, who was of the stock of Ithamar; yet in the dayes of Solomon it was again taken from Abiathar, who was of Elies house, and settled upon Zadok, and so it came again into the line of Phinehas, and so con∣tinued unto the Babylonian captivity, 1. Kings 2. 25. and thirdly, that though it be no where expressely said of what stock the high priests were after the Israelites return out of Babylon, yet we find that Esra that great priest and scribe was of his line, Ezra 7. 1, &c. and it may be probably thought that the high priests still continued in that line, unlesse it were in those times when there was nothing amongst them but disorder and confusion. Neither indeed is there any cause why we should under∣stand this promise to be so absolute, but in case of the sinnes of his posterity they might for a time be deprived of this dignity. Vers. 14. Zimri the sonne of Salu, a prince of a chief house among the Sime∣onites.] It is particularly expressed how great a man he was whom Phinehas slew, because herein the zeal of Phinehas was notably discovered. Vers. 15. He was head over a people, and of a chief house in Midian.] He is reckoned one of the five Kings of Midian, chap. 31. 8. Vers. 17. Vex the Medianites, and smite them, &c.] These words, smite
them, imply a promise of victory. But why are they not to smite the Moabites as well as the Midianites? first, because he had already forbidden Israel to distresse the Moabites, Deut. 2. 9. And the Lord said unto me, Distresse not the Moabites, neither contend with them in battel: secondly, because the Midianites had the chief hand in the mischief, as seems probable, first, by Balaams stay amongst them, whn Balak had left him in displeasure; and secondly, by this partiular fact of Cozbi, who was a Kings daughter amongst them, &c. CHAP. XXVI. Vers. 2. TAke the summe of all the congregation of the children of Israel, &c.] Of the two first numbrings of the people, see Exod. 30. 11, 12. and Numb. 1. 1, 2. But now the reasons of this third numbring of the people, as we may gather by some passages, were these: first, because this would make way to the more equall dividing of the land (which they were presently to go about) accord∣ing as they found the tribes more or lesse in number; see vers. 53, 54. Unto these the land shall be divided for an inheritance, according to the number of names, &c. secondly, to manifest how fully that which God had threatned, chap. 14. 29. was now accomplished, vers. 64, 65. But among these there was not a man of them whom Moses and Aaron the priest numbred, when they numbred the children of Israel in the wildernesse of Sinai. For the Lord had said of them, They shall sure∣ly die in the wildernesse, &c. Happely all the old company were not dead till this last plague, wherein foure and twenty thousand were cut off; and therefore it may seem expressely noted, ver. 1. that it was after the plague, that God gave this charge to Moses and Eleazar for numbring the people, because then God had exactly brought that to passe which he had long since threatned, as they should now see in taking the number of the people: thirdly, to manifest Gods power and goodnesse in preserving unto them so many, notwithstanding they had wandred so many years through a wildernesse wherein they were encountred with so many difficulties, and had so often by their sinnes provoked God to cut off many amongst them; as also his truth and faithfulnesse, who had so wondrously increased them, as he promised their forefathers, notwithstanding they had often by their rebellion provoked him to destroy them: & the more seasonable it was to comfort them in this kind, because it was immediately after foure and twenty thousand had been taken away by the foregoing plague, chap. 25. fourthly, it was because they should hereby see Gods care over them, and love towards them; as Moses at their coming out of Egypt received Gods flock by tale, so now before his death he must deliver them up by tale again. Vers. 4. Take the summe of the people from twenty years old and upward, as the Lord commanded Moses, &c.] That is, after the same manner as he commanded Moses to number the people, when they were newly come out of Egypt, so hath he now again commanded to number them before their entring Canaan. Vers. 7. And they that were numbred of them▪ were fourtie and three thousand and seven hundred and thirty.] At their last numbring the Reubenites were fourty six thousand and five hundred, chap. 1. ver. 21. so that this tribe was decreased two
thousand seven hundred and seventy, which may in part be ascribed to the conspi∣racy wherein they joyned with Korah. Vers. 10. And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up together with Korah, &c.] This place, according to our translation, clears it beyond all exception, that Korah was swallowed up into the earth together with Dathan & Abiram, ch. 16. And they became a signe.] That is, for an example that others might take warning by them, as sea-marks are set up to give us warning of danger, 1. Cor. 10. 6. Now these things were our examples▪ to the intent we should not lust after evil things as they also lusted. Vers. 11. Notwithstanding the children of Korah died not.] To wit, Assur, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph, Exod. 6. 24. these and their posterity lived and kept their of∣fice in Israel; for their genealogie is reckoned, 1. Chron. 6. 22▪ 28. and frequent ho∣nourable mention is made of the sonnes of Korah, both in the Psalmes and else∣where. Some think they were miraculously preserved, being present among those that were swallowed up: I rather think they were not with Korah in his tent, but were happely at that time imployed in the tabernacle, and so escaped; and it may be also they consented not to their fathers rebellion, or at least repented upon the warn∣ing given by Moses, Numb. 16. 5. Vers. 12. The sonnes of Simeon after their families, of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites, &c.] These sons of Simeon are elsewhere otherwise named, as Nemuel is called also Jemuel, Gen. 46. 10. Exod. 6. 15. and Jachin is called Jarib, 1. Chron. 4. 24. and Zerah is called Zohar, Gen. 46. 10. Exod. 6. 15. Besides these there was one sonne of Simeon more, to wit, Ohad, whose family it seems was wholly extinct in the wildernesse; for though he be mentioned, Gen. 46, 10. yet not here, nor 1. Chr. 4. 24. Vers. 14. These are the families of the Simeonites, twenty and two thousand and two hundred.] None of the tribes was so abated as this of Simeon: when they went out of Egypt they were fifty nine thousand and three hundred, chap. 1. 22. now but two and twenty thousand and two hundred; so they were abated in number thirty seven thousand and one hundred, more then half of that they were when they came out of Egypt. The impudency and punishment of Zimri, chap. 25. 14. who was a Prince of this tribe, and may be probably thought to have been accompanied and abetted by many of his brethren, is conceived to be one cause of the low ebbe of this tribe, because it is like many of them perished in the last plague together with Zimri. Vers. 15. The children of Gad after their families, of Zephon the family of the Zephonites, &c.] Gad is next mustered, because he was joyned with Reuben and Simeon in the South-quarter, chap. 2. 10, 14. His sonne Zephon is elsewhere called Zephon, Gen. 46. 16. and so is Ozni, vers. 16. called Ezbon, Gen. 46. 16. and Arod, vers. 17. Arodi, Gen. 46. 16. Vers. 18. These are the families of the children of Gad, according to those that were numbred of them, fourty thousand and five hundred.] At the former mustering the Gadites were fourty five thousand six hundred and fifty, chap. 1. 25. now fourty thousand and five hundred; so they were fewer now by five thousand one hundred & fiftie: and thus all the tribes under Reubens standard being greatly diminished, there were now fourty five thousand & twenty lesse then when they were first numbred. Vers. 19. And Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan.] This is added to set
forth the power and goodnesse of God in the encrease of this tribe of Judah, not∣withstanding these two of his sonnes were cut off by the hand of God. Vers. 21. And the sonnes of Pharez, of Hesron, the familie of the Hesronites, &c.] Judah had five sonnes▪ Gen. 38. which should have been all heads of families: But two of them dying childlesse, two of his sonnes sonnes (and those of Pharez, the younger brother, but the ancestour of Christ) are taken in in their room. Vers. 22. These are the families of Judah, according to those that were numbred of them, threescore and sixteen thousand and five hundred.] At the former num∣bring, those of the tribe of Judah were but seventy foure thousand and six hundred, chap. 1. 27. now they are seventy six thousand and five hundred, and so are en∣creased nineteen hundred more; and as he, so all the tribes under his standard were nreased also, and thus Judah prevailed above all his brethren, Gen. 49. 8. Vers. 23. Of Pua, the family of the Punites, &c.] This Pua was also calle Phunah, Gen. 46. 13. and Jashub vers. 24. was also called Job, Gen. 46. 13. Vers. 25. These are the families of Issachar, according to those that were num∣bred of them, threescore and foure thousand and three hundred.] Of this tribe there were before but fifty foure thousand and foure hundred, chap. 1. 29. now there are sixty foure thousand and three hundred, so that they were now encreased nine thousand and nine hundred men of warre. Vers. 27. These are the families of the Zebulunites, according to those that were numbred of them, threescore thousand and five hundred.] Who were before but fifty seven thousand and foure hundred, chap. 1. 31. so they are encreased three thousand and a hundred men. Now adding together one thousand and nine hun∣dred, the encrease of Judahs tribe, and nine thousand nine hundred, the encrease of Issachars tribe; and three thousand and a hundred, the encrease of Zebuluns tribe, we find that Judahs camp was encreased foureteen thousand and nine hundred. Vers. 29. Of the sonnes of Manasseh, of Machir the familie of the Machi∣rites, &c.] Many Expositours hold that Machir had no other sonne but ilead, and so thereupon they say, that the same family was called promiscuously the familie of the Machirites, and, the familie of the Gileadites. But by this place it is evident that besides the posterity of Machir by his sonne Gilead, who are here called the familie of the Gileadites, he had also a posterity by other sonnes, who were called by his own name, the familie of the Machirites, as indeed we reade of children that Machir had brought up upon Josephs knees Gen. 50. 23. and 1. Chron. 7. 16. Peresh and Sheresh are said to be the sonnes of Machir by Maachah his wife. Vers. 30. Of Jeezer, the familie of the Jeezerites.] Josh. 17. 2. he is called Abiezer: even the sonnes sonnes sonnes here were heads of families. Vers. 34. These are the families of Manasseh, and those that were numbred of them, fifty and two thousand and seven hundred.] Before they were but thirty two thousand and two hundred, chap. 1. 35. now fifty two thousand and seven hun∣dred, so they were encreased twenty thousand and five hundred men of warre▪ none of the other tribes had half so much encrease. Vers. 35. Of Becher, the familie of the Bhrites▪ &c.] This, some think, is the me that is called Berod, 1. Chron. 7. 20. as he also that is called Eran, vers. 36.
in 1. Chron. 7. 20. is called Laadan, who was Ephraims sonnes sonne, but yet was head of a family. Vers. 37. These are the families of the sonnes of Ephraim, according to those that were numbred of them, thirtie and two thousand and five hundred.] He had before, chap. 1. 33. fourty thousand and five hundred; so eight thousand of this tribe were iminished. Vers. 38. Of Ashbel the father of the Ashbelites, &c.] This Ashbel is called Jediael 1. Chron. 7. 6. and Ahiram, Ehi, Gen 46. 21. and Aharah 1. Chron. 8. 1. and Shupham vers. 39. is called Shuppim, 1. Chron. 7. 12. and Muppim, Gen. 46. 21. and Hupham, Huppim, Gen 46. 21. and Ad vers. 40. is called Addar, 1. Chron. 8. 3. Vers. 41. These are the sonnes of Benjamin after their families, and they that were numbred of them were fourtie and five thousand and six hundred.] Gen. 46. 21. we find ten sonnes of Benjamin; but here are reckoned but five families of his sonnes, and two of his sonnes sonnes: he had before but thirty five thousand & foure hundred, so that now they were encreased ten thousand and two hundred, though their families were (it seems) diminished in the wildernesse: and thus though one of the tribes under Ephraims standard were fewer then before, to wit, his own tribe, yet his whole camp, by reason of the great encrease of the other two tribes joyned with him, was augmented two and twenty thousand and seven hundred. Vers. 42. Of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites.] This Shuham is called Hushim, Gen. 46. 26. These are the families of Dan after their families.] See Gen. 46. 23. Vers. 43. All the families of the Shuhamites, according to those that were numbred of them, were threescore and foure thousand and foure hundred.] At the former muster the Danites were but sixty two thousand and seven hundred▪ chap. 1. 39. but are now encreased seventeen hundred more; though there were but one familie in this tribe, yet none of all the tribes save Judah have the like multitude. Vers. 44. Of Jesui▪ the familie of the Jesuites, &c.] This Jesi is called Isu, Gen. 46. 17. Between him and Jimnah there was another called Ishuah, Gen. 46. 17. whose family, here omitted, seemeth to be perished. Vers. 46. And the name of the daughter of Asher was Sarah.] This Sarah is mentioned also Gen. 46. 17. and 1. Chron. 7. 30. as being famous it seems in her time. Vers. 47. These are the families of the sonnes of Asher according to those that were numbred of them, who were fifty and three thousand and foure hundred.] Whereas before he had but fourty one thousand and five hundred, chap. 1. 41. and so is encreased eleven thousand and nine hundred. Vers. 50. These are the families of Naphtali according to their families▪ and they that were numbred of them were fourtie and five thousand and foure hun∣dred.] At the former numbring these were fifty three thousand and foure hundred, chap. 1. 41. now but fourty five thousand and foure hundred, eight thousand fewer then before; though this tribe under Dans standard were diminished, yet was Dans whole camp encreased five thousand and six hundred men of warre.
Vers. 51. These were the numbred of the children of Israel, six hundred thou∣sand and a thousand seven hundred and thirty.] The totall some of the first num∣bring was six hundred and thee thousand five hundred and fifty, chap. 1. 46. whereas now it is but six hundred and one thousand seven hundred and thirty. So that though Judahs, Ephraims, and Dans camps were all more in number then when first they came into the wildernesse, yet by reason of the great decrease of Reubens camp, which was fourty five thousand and twenty fewer then before, the totall here is lesse then the totall there by eighteen hundred and twenty. Vers. 53. Unto these the land shall be divided for an inheritance, &c.] Gods en∣joyning them to divide the land before they had conquered it, was to assure them that it should be theirs, to teach them to live by faith, and before they had it to make as sure of it as if it were already in their possession. And may not we then be sure of heaven before we have it? Vers. 55. Notwithstanding the land shall be divided by lot.] That is, they were to divide the land into so many severall coasts or provinces, according to the number of the tribes that were to inhabit it, yet so as the certain bounds and limits of each portion were not appointed and resolved on till they knew which tribe the Lord would choose to plant there (which was determined by lots) and then they enlar∣ged or lessened the portion according to the number of the tribe that was there to be seated. Had they not been thus severally assigned by lot to that which God would have to be the place of their habitation, every one would have chosen the best, or sa∣fest, or healthfullest places of the land, whereas now all dissention was prevented, and they were taught to acknowledge God the chief Lord of the land, by whose immediate providence they were disposed of to those dwellings: on the other side, had they had the exact measure of their portions assigned them by lot, it had not been lawfull for them to alter that which God had done, as we see it was; for out of that which was at first given to Judah alone, afterwards two tribes had their lots, Josh. 19. 4.—40. to wit, Simeon and Dan. According to the names of the tribes of their fathers they shall inherit.] That is, the lots shall go under the names of the Patriarchs, one for Reuben, another for Simeon, another for Gad, &c. Vers. 56. According to the lot shall the possession thereof be divided between many and few.] That is, having by lot determined where every tribe shall have their possession, ye shall then assigne unto every tribe, in that part of the land where their lot fell, such a quantity of land as by the rules of equall proportión shll be found due to them, according as they are in number more or ewer. Vers. 57. And thse are they that were numbred of the Levites, &c.] The Le∣vites are numbred by themselves, because they were to have no share in the land, vers. 62. They were not numbred among the children of Israel, because there was no inheritance given them amongst the children of Israel. Vers. 58. These are the families of the Levites the family of the Libnites; &c.] The family of the Libnites was of Libni the sonne of Gershon, Exod. 6. 17. and so Shimi the other sonne of Gershon is not here mentioned. Thus likewise that of the Hebronites was of Hebron the sonne of Kohath, Exod▪ 6. 18. and his other brethren
are not here mentioned as heads of families (though Amram be named as the father of Moses) and those of the Mahlites and Mushites were of Mahali and Mushi the sonnes of Merari, Exod. 6. 19. and that of the Korathites of Korah, Num. 16. 1. Vers. 59. And the name of Amrams wife was Jochebed, &c.] See the note upon Exod. 2. 1. Vers. 62. And those that were numbred of them were twenty and three thousand, &c.] At the former numbring the Levites were but two and twenty thousand, chap. 3. 39. now they were a thousand more. Vers. 65. And there was not left a man of them save Caleb the sonne of Jephun∣neh, and Joshua the sonne of Nun.] That is, as God had threatned▪ so it was now found to be; of the people that were numbred at their coming out of Egypt from twenty years old and upward, there was not a man left at this time when they were numbred again▪ but onely Caleb and Joshua. So that we must observe that the Le∣vites are not here included, for of them there were left Moses, and Eleazar, and Ithamar, and perhaps many others. CHAP. XXVII. Vers. 1. THen came the daughters of Zelophehad, &c.] Because the Lord had said in the foregoing chapter, vers. 53. that the land should be divided amongst those they had now numbred from twenty years old and upward, and so Zelophehad being dead without sonnes, his children were like to have no inheritance in the land, therefore his daughters came now to Moses and Eleazar, desiring that that share of the land might be assigned to them which should have been their fathers had he been then living. Vers. 2. And they stood before Moses, and before Eleazar the priest, and be∣fore the princes, and all the congregation by the doore of the tabernacle, &c.] Whi∣ther they were it seems for this very purpose come, that they might enquire of the Lord concerning this difficult case: for I conceive they had formerly demanded an inheritance of the Judges, and were by them appointed to plead for themselves be∣fore the doore of the tabernacle, where they should have an answer from God him∣self. Vers. 3. Our father died in the wildernesse, &c.] This plea of the daughters of Zelophehad is in effect as if they had thus said, Our father was one of those whom the Lord carried out of Egypt, to go and take possession of the land of Canaan, and though he died in the wildernesse, yet he was not taken away by any speciall judgement, because he had his hand in some insurrection and rebellion, such as was that of those that gathered themselves together against the Lord in the company of Korah (and this they alledge to make their cause the more favourable, because had he been cut off in any sch insurrection, some might judge that it was no matter though his posterity were excluded from having any share in the land of Caaan) but died in his own sinne, that is, he died his naturall death when his time was come, as being by sinne liable to death as all other men are. Thus Korahs conspira∣cie is mentioned here, either by a Synecdoche, this one being put for all other the
rebellions of the Israelites▪ and so the meaning must be that their father died in no particular rebellion against the Lord; or else because whereas all the other murmu∣rings and insurrections against Moses were especially the sinne of the common sort of people. Korahs was chiefly of the princes and great men of every tribe, chap. 16. 2. and so happely because their father was one of the chief of the tribe of Manas∣seh, therefore they mention onely the rebellion of the great ones. And as for that phrase of their fathers dying in his own sinne, though some Expoitours understand it thus, that he dyed not for any speciall insurrection but onely for that sinne where∣in the whole congregation was involved as well as he; and for which the Lord threatned that they should all die in the wildernesse, to wit, for refusing to go into the land of Canaan when God had brought them thither, yet I rather think it is meant of his own private sinnes, which made him liable to death, as all other men are, for that all have inned, Rom. 5. 12. Vers. 4. Why should the name of our father be done away from among his fami∣lie because he hath no sonne?] That is, why should not he be named amongst others in the division of the land, which if it be not, his name and familie will be quite extinguished as if he had never been; and hence some Expositours conclude that as when a man dyed without issue, and his brother mrried his widow to raise up seed unto his brother, his first sonne was in their Genealogies reckoned to be the sonne of him that dyed without issue; so it was in this case, the first sonnes of those that married the daughters of Zelophehad were accounted the sonnes of Zelophe∣had; and so under his name did inherit his land. Vers. 4. Give unto us therefore a possession among the brethren of our father.] This pleading for a portion in that land, which was not yet conquered, was a true act of faith, and must needs encourage others, and help to strengthen their faith. And besides, hereby was shown, as in a type, that even women have an equall share with men in the heavenly Canaan; for all inherit through Christ, in whom there is neither male nor female, but all are one, Gal. 3. 28. Vers. 7. Thou shalt surely give them a possession of an inheritance among their fathers brethren, &c.] Thus the Lord granted these daughters of Zelophehad their desire, which how it was performed by Joshua, we may reade, Josh. 17. 4. Accor∣ding to the commandment of the Lord he gave them an inheritance among the bre∣thren of their father; yet withall there was afterwards a caution added, to wit, that they might not marry out of their own tribe, chap. 36. 6. Vers. 12. Get thee up into this mount Abarim, &c.] There was a long tract of mountains which were called the mountains of Abarim, chap. 3. 47. and into one of these was Moses now sent, to wit, that which is elsewhere called mount Nebo▪ which was in the land of Moab over against Jericho, Deut 32. 49. and Pisgah, Deut. 34. 1. Hence Moses might see the land afarre off, though he might not enter it; and so the Law did shew the Israelites heaven afarre off, but not as it is now revealed to us in the Gospel. Vers. 13. And when thou hast seen it, thou shalt be gathered unto thy people, &c.] That they should not enter the land God had threatned before, Numb. 20. 12. Se the notes upon that place.
Vers. 14. That is the water of Meribah in Kadesh in the wildernesse of Zin.] This is added to distinguish it from another Meribah, Exod. 17. 7. where water was fetched out also from the rock, but there Moses and Aaron displeased not the Lord. Vers. 16. Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the con∣gregation.] Moses at this time prayed also earnestly to the Lord, that he might go over and see the land; but God would not grant him his desire herein, Deut. 3. 23, 26. concerning this phrase▪ the God of the spirits of all flesh, see the note upon Numb. 16. 22. This title is fitly in this prayer of Moses given unto the Lord, both as imply∣ing that he was the searcher of mens spirits, and therefore knew best who was fittest for the place; and likewise as intimating that he was able to frame and fashion their spirits as he pleased, and to give them any gifts or graces requisite for the im∣ployment. Vers. 17. Which may go out before them, and which may go in before them, &c.] That is, who may guide them and govern them, both at home and abroad, in times of warre and in times of peace, and undertake the charge of defending them against their enemies: for under this phrase of going ou and coming in before them, of leading them out and bringing them in, all the offices of the supreme magistracy are comprehended; and hence Moses being ready to resigne the government useth he same expression concerning himself, Deut. 31. 2. I can no more go out and come in. The similitude is taken from a Captain that marcheth before his souldiers, and undertakes to lead them whereever they should go; or rather from shepherds, whose custome it was to go out and in before his flocks, to lead them out to their pastures, and to bring them home to their folds; and therefore in the next words Moses addes, that the congregation of the Lord be not as sheep which have no hepherd. Vers. 18. Take thee Joshua the sonne of Nun, a man in whom is the spirit.] That is, a man of eminent gifts, and therefore fit for this place and imployment: and indeed herein was Joshua a type of Christ, concerning whom the prophet fore∣told, that the spirit of the Lord should rest upon him, the spirit of wisdome and un∣derstanding, the spirit of counsell and might, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord. And lay thine hand upon him.] Or, thy hands, for so it is said, vers. 23. that Moses laid his hands upon him: and by this ceremony of the imposition of Moses hands was signified first and especially, that the supreme Magistracy should be transferred from Moses to him, as being the man now consecrated and set apart to this place and service; secondly, that the hand of God should be upon him to de∣fend him and prosper him in all his wayes; and thirdly, that God would conferre upon him a great encrease of the gifts of his spirit, answerable to the dignity where∣to he was advanced: and thus it seems upon the imposition of Moses hands was ac∣cordingly performed, as we see Deut. 34. 9. Joshua the sonne of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdome; for Moses had laid his hands upon him. The like ceremony was fterwards used in the dayes of the Gospel, when men were separated and set apart to preach the Gospel, and in a manner for the same reasons: whence is that of
the Apostle S. Paul to Timothy, 1. Tim. 4. 14. Neglect not the gift which is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of th Presbytery. Vers. 19. And set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congrega∣tion.] To wit, that he first as the chief, and the people with him, might assent to that which God had deceed. And give him a charge in their sight.] That is, openly before them all make known to him what his office is, and charge him faithfully and carefully to perform that which he undertakes; and it may well be that this was the very charge which is afterwards expressed by Moses, Deut. 31. 7, 8. at which time God himself also gave him a charge, vers. 14, 15. Vers. 20. And thou shalt put some of thine honour upon him, &c.] This may be meant of the gifts of Gods spirit, which made Moses to be so highly honoured amongst the people, as elsewhere it is said concerning the seventy Elders that were chosen to assist Moses in the government, that God would take of the spirit that was upon Moses and put it upon them, chap. 11. 17. concerning which see the note upon that place. Now Moses is commanded to put of this his honour upon Joshua, onely because at the laying of Moses hands upon him, these gifts of Gods spirit should be imparted to him: and it is not said, put thine honour upon him, but, put of thine honour upon him, or, as it is in our Bibles, thou shalt put some of thine ho∣nour upon him, because though Joshua was to have the same gifts imparted to him that Moses had, yet not in the same measure; whence it is said, Deut. 34. 10. that there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses. Or else rather by Moses honour here is meant his authority and dignity; and then it is said that he should put some of his honour upon him in relation to the present time before Moses death, to wit, that he should presently admit him into some communion of authority with him, and so cause the people to give him that honour which was due unto Moses successour, the elect Judge of Israel. Vers. 21. And he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall ask counsel for him, after the judgement of Urim. &c.] That is, upon all occasions he shall present himself before Eleazar to ask counsel of him, who shall enquire of the Lord for him after the judgement of Urim. What this Urim was, see Exod. 28. 30. what is meant by asking counsel after the judgement of Urim, is hard to say. This I con∣ceive is most probable, when any came to enquire of the Lord, the priest put on the Ephod, whereto the pectorall was fastened, in the fold whereof the Urim and Thummim was put by Moses, and so the priest in the name of the parties propoun∣ded such questions, as they desired to be satisfied in from the Lord, desiring the Lord to return them an answer (according as we find it 1. Sam. 23. 9, 10, 11, 12.) whereupon the Lord did either by the illumination of his spirit (whereof the Urim was an embleme or outward signe) reveal unto the priest what answer he should give the party enquiring▪ or else by an immediate voice from heaven; and this was called the judgement of Urim, because it pleased the Lord, upon the applying or put∣ting on of the pectorall, to give judgement in the cause enquired of by the priest.
CHAP. XXVIII. Vers. 2. COmmand the children of Israel, and say unto them, My offerings, &c.] Because they had in a great part omitted their sacrifices and solemn feasts the most part of the eight and thirty years last past by reason of their travels, wherein the Sanctuary, the altar, and other holy things were folded up and removed from lace to place, and that withall the generation that had been before mustered was now dead, chap. 26. 64. But among these there was not a man of them, whom Moses and Aaron the priest numbred when they numbred the children of Israel in the wildernesse of Sinai; therefore the Lord causeth the Law of sacrificing to be here again repeated, thereby giving them to know that when they came into the land they must not any longer neglect Gods ordinances, as they had done in the wildernesse, Deut. 12. 8. Ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day, every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes, &c. and so first he gives them charge in generall to be sure that they give him all the sacrifices and offerings that he had at severall times appointed them to offer, My offerings and my bread for my sacrifices made by fire for a sweet savour unto me shall ye ob∣serve to offer unto me in their due season: for though all the sacrifices that were burnt upon the altar are elsewhere called the Lords food, Lev. 3. 11. and his bread, Lev. 21. 6. (the reasons whereof see in the notes upon those places) yet here it seems most probable that by offerings are meant all the severall sacrifices that were to be killed and offered upon the altar, and by his bread for the sacrifices is meant the meat-offerings that were to be joyned with their sacrifices; and then secondly, he sets down particularly what they were to offer, first, for their dayly sacrifice, vers. 3. secondly, for their weekly sacrifice every Sabbath day, vers. 9. thirdly, for their monethly sacrifice every new Moon, vers. 11. and fourthly, for their yearly sacrifices at every severall feast in the year, vers. 16, &c. Vers. 3. This is the offering made by fir which ye shall offer unto the Lord, &c.] See the notes on Exod. 29, 28. Vers. 9. And on the Sabbath day two lambs of the first year without spot, &c.] The sacrifices here appointed for every Sabbath day are full double to those appointed for every day, vers. 3. and yet the daily sacrifices, the continuall burnt-offering, vers. 10. was not omitted on the Sabbath day neither. So that every Sabbath in the morning there was offered one lambe for the daily sacrifice, & then two lambs more for the Sabbath: and this was thus appointed, firt, to shew the holinesse of that day, and that God required more service from them on that day then other dayes; secondly, by way of thankfulnesse for the worlds creation; and thirdly, because it was a signe of our rest in heaven purchased for us by Christ. Vers. 11. And in the beginnings of your moneths ye shall offer a burnt-offering unto the Lord, &c.] That is, the new Moons, the first dayes of every moneth: these were appointed to be kept as solemn festivals, then did they blow with the silver trumpets in the Sanctuary, chap. 10. 10. Also in the day of your gladnesse, and in your solmn dayes, and in the beginning of your moneths, ye shall blow with th trumpets, &c. then did they repair to the prophets or other ministers of God
to hear his word, 2. Kings 4. 29. Wherefore wilt thou go to him to day (saith the Shunamites husband to her, when she would go to the Prophet Elisha) It is nei∣ther new moon, nor Sabbath; then also they kept religious feasts, 1. Sam. 5. 6. And David said unto Jonathan, Behold, to morrow is the new moon, and I should not fail to sit with the King at meat, &c. neither was it lawfull to buy or sell or do o∣ther worldly work on those dayes, Amos 8. 5. When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat▪ &c. Now these new moons were thus ordained to be solemnized, first, that they might be put in mind to be thankfull for Gods mercy in that change of times and seasons, the mediate cause of many blessings; and the remembrance of this mercy God would have kept at the new of the moon rather then at her full, when she shined in her full brightnesse, because then there was lesse danger of being taken so with the glo∣rie of that creature as not to ascend higher to the admiration of God the Creatour; whence is that expression which Job useth, chap. 31. 26, 27. If I beheld the sunne when it shined, or the moon walking in her brightnesse, and my heart hath been secretly enticed, or my mouth hath kissed my hand, &c. It was the glory of the moon shining in her brightnesse that drew the heathens to worship the moon; and to prevent this danger God would have the memoriall of his mercy in order∣ing the change of moons and seasons to be kept not at the full but at the new of the moon: secondly▪ that the renewing of the moon (which borroweth her light of the sunne) might be observed as a figure or shadow of the Churches renovation by Christ, the sunne of righteousnesse, Mal. 4. 2. whereby every true Christian doth put off the old man with his deeds, and put on th new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him, Col. 3. 9, 10. whence is that of the Apostle, Col. 2. 16, 17. Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath dayes, which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ: And thirdly, that as of every day, so of every moneth they might consecrate the first unto the Lords service. Vers. 17. And in the fifteenth day of this moneth is the feast.] To wit, of unleavened bread, Levit. 23. 6. where see all the notes on the solemnities of this feast. Vers. 24. After this manner ye shall offer daily throughout the seven dayes, &c.] That is, upon every one of the seven dayes of this feast. But besides these sa∣crifices upon the sixteenth day of the moneth, which was the next day after the first solemn day of the feast, there was also a lamb offered for a burnt-offering, to∣gether with the wave-sheaf or omer. See Levit. 23. 12. and the notes thereon. Vers. 26. Also in the day of the first-fruits, when ye bring a new meat-offering unto the Lord, after your weeks be out, &c.] Called the feast of Pentecost, Acts 2. 1. when they offered two loaves of their new corn; and it was seven weeks, or fifty dayes after the Passeover, Levit. 23. 15, 16. Vers. 27. Two young bullocks, one ramme, seven lambs of the first year.] These and the rest following are here added to the feast over and beside those seven lambs, one bullock, ad two rammes which were offered with the first-fruits, Lev. 23. 28. concerning which see the notes there.
CHAP. XXIX. Vers. 1. ANd in the seventh moneth, on the first day of the moneth, &c.] This seventh moneth was called the moneth Ethanim, 1. Kings 8. 2. it was in the end of the year, Exod. 23. 16. and the revolution of the year, Exod. 34. 22. for so the word is in the originall, because then the old year went out, and the new began, as touching Jubilees and other civil affairs, Lev. 25. 9, 10. But by rea∣son of Israels coming out of Egypt in Abib or March, that was made the first of the moneths, Exod. 12. 2. And thus numbring the moneths (for after this order the ecclesiasticall feasts were reckoned) this which had been the first moneth is here▪ as usually elsewhere, called the seventh moneth, and so became as it were the Sab∣bath moneth, and was accordingly honoured with as many feasts as were celebra∣ted in all the year besides; whereof one was this here spoken of▪ which was called the feast of trumpets, and was in the first day of this moneth, being their Newyears day for civil affairs, and so a fit day to praise God for the blessings of the yea past, and to crave his blessing on the following year. See what is noted concerning the solemnitie of this feast, Lev. 23. 24. Vers. 2. And ye shall offer a burnt-offering for a sweet savour unto the Lord, one young bullock, &c.] To wit, beside the sacrifices of the day, as it was a new Moon, chap. 28. 11. and besides the daily sacrifice, as is expressely noted, vers. 6. Vers. 7. And ye shall have on the tenth day of this seventh moneth an holy con∣vocation, &c.] See Levit. 16. 29. and the notes thereon. Vers. 11. One kid of the goats for a sinne-offering, beside the sinne-offering of onement, &c.] That is, beside that goat-buck offered on the day of atonement, whose bloud was carried by the high priest within the vail into the most holy place. See Levit 16. 9,. 29▪ 30. Vers. 12. And on the fifteenth day of the seventh moneth ye shall have an holy convocation, &c.] To wit, the seast of booths. See Levit. 23. 34, 35. and the notes thereon. Vers. 13. And ye shall offer a burnt-offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord, thirteen young bullocks, &c.] There were moe sacri∣fices offered at this then at any other feast, both because it was celebrated in remem∣brance of the mercies of many years, even all those ourty years of their travel from Egypt to Canaan▪ as also because at this time they had gathered in their corn and wine, and had seen the blessing of God on all their increase, and in all the work of their hands, Deut. 16. 13, 15. Thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven dayes after thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine: Seven dayes shalt thou keep a solemn feast unto the Lord thy God, in the place which the Lord shall chuse; because the Lord thy God shall blesse thee in all thy increase, and in all the works of thine hands, therefore thou shalt surely rejoyce. Vers. 17. And on the second day ye shall offer twelve young bullocks, &c.] In every one of the seven dayes of this feast one bullock is abated: for whereas they offered thirteen bullocks the first day, they offered but twelve on the second day, and elve on the third, &c, and herein happely was intended a representation how the
years of their pilgrimage, wherein God had appointed that they should wander up and down in booths, did by degrees wear away and grow fewer and fewer; or else by this abating of the sine-offerings (whereby atonement was made for them) the holy Ghost might teach their duty to grow in grace, that in the whole course of their pilgrimage through this world sinne should still decay and wear away; or it might signifie a diminishing or wearing away of the legall sacrifices and ceremonies. CHAP. XXX. Vers. 1. ANd Moses spake unto the heads of the tribes concerning the children of Israel, &c.] There being mention made in the latter end of the foregoing chapter vers. 39. of sacrifices due upon a vow made, which were to be carefully brought in (besides the set sacrifices which God had injoyned) upon this occasion, it seems, these precepts are in this next chapter here added concerning vows, to shew who they were that must alwayes necessarily perform their vows, and who not; and these Laws it is said that Moses made known to the heads of the tribes, because they were the men that were according to these Laws to judge, either to bind them to their vows or free them, &c. Vers. 2. If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath, &c.] That is, if a man, to wit, a man of grown years, having power over himself, shall bind his soul with a bond, whether it be onely a promise or vow that he hath solemnly made unto the Lord, or whether it be a vow strengthened with an oath, or that he hath sworn that he will do such or such a thing, he shall not break his word, but shall do according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth, that is, he must not fail to do exactly what he hath vowed and sworn to do, and that without delay (for it is also added, Deut. 23. 21. When thou shalt vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shalt not slack to pay it) to wit, if it were not an unlawfull thing he had vow∣ed or sworn: for vows for the doing of that which it is unlawfull to do are not vows binding the conscience; for how can that vow bind men to God, when they vow to do that which God forbids, and will not have done? such as was that of those fourtie men, Acts 23. 21▪ that had bound themselves with an oath that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul. Vers. 3. If a woman also vow a vow unto the Lord, and bind her self by a bond being in her fathers house, &c.] That is, under his power and command, whether in his house or no; and by the rule of analogy the same exception is to be allowed for sonnes and servants under their governours power. As for those last words, in her youth, either they are onely added, because it is for the most part in their youth that maids continue in teir fathers house (for it is not likely that they had power to vow without the consent of their fathers when they had lived unmarried till riper years, and were still under their father sjurisdiction) or else because though their fathers were dead, yet in their youth maids had no power to vow without the consent of their governours▪ whereas being of full years and at their own disposing they might vow, and were then bound to do what they had vowed.
Vers. 5. And the Lord shall forgive her, because her father▪ disallowed her.] Hereby is meant either that the Lord would forgive her rashnesse in vowing, when she was not in her own power; or rather that the Lord would not impute this as a sinne to her, seeing her father refused to let her keep it. Vers. 8. But if her husband disallowed her on the day that he heard it, &c.] This last clause, on the day that he heard it, is added, first, to shew that whenever he shall come to hear it he may make her vow void, though it were long after the vow were made; secondly, to shew that if he dissembled for a time, and afterwards shewed his dislike, though it were the next day after▪ it should be to no purpose. Vers. 9. But every vow of a widow, and of her that is divorced, wherewith they have bound their souls, shall stand against her.] If it were made in her widow∣hood, she must perform it, yea (say the Hebrews) though she be afterward marri∣ed, or be turned to her fathers house. Vers. 10. And if she vowed in her husbands house, &c.] There being o pro∣bable reason that can be given, why that which was said before concerning the hus∣bands ratifying or disannulling his wives vows, vers. 6, 7, 8. should here be re∣peated again, it is rather to be thought that there is some difference betwixt that which is said there, and that which is added here. Some hold that the Law given vers. 6, 7, 8. is concerning the woman that is onely betrothed, and that this here is concerning the woman that is married. But seeing in both places the words are concerning the woman that hath a husband, I see no warrant for this conceit. Ei∣ther therefore the first is meant of a woman married to a husband, but living still in her fathers house, and this of the wife that is gone to her husbands house, which may seem to be implyed in these words, And if she vowed in her husbands house; or ather the first Law is concerning the wives vows, that were to be performed in the time of her being under the subjection of her husband, which might be esta∣blished or made void by her husband, as he pleased. But here the Law speaks con∣cerning vows made by the wives, their husbands yet living, but to be performed after the husbands death; concerning which the Lord gives the same Law, to wit, that the husbands should have power to ratifie or disannull them. Women married might be very forward to make large vows what they would do if ever they came to be fre women again, and then being free might make light of performing their vows under a pretence that those vows were made when they were under the pow∣er of their husbands: To prevent this therefore this Law is here added, that in case a woman vowed in her husbands house, if her husband held his peace (as it fol∣lows vers. 11.) then all her vows should stand, to wit, even after her husbands death, or after she is made free by divorce; and indeed the very dependance of these words upon that which went before, vers. 9. concerning widows or wives divorced is a strong argument for this exposition. Vers. 13. Every vow, and every binding oath to afflict the soul, her husband may establish it; or her husband may make it void.] These words to afflict the soul, seem to be added to shew th full extent of the former Law, and not by way of limitation or restraint, to wit, that it is in the husbands power to establish or make void very vow of his wife; yea though it be a vow that concerns not the
goods of the husband, but onely the affliction of her own person by abstinence, fasting, &c. Vers. 15. But if he shall any wayes make them void after that he hath heard them, then he shall bear her iniquitie.] That is, though the wife hath full libety to perform her vow, if her husband heard it and did not that day contradict it; yet if afterward the husband shall violently refuse to let her perform it (which however by Gods Law he might not do) in this case the wife must not strive against her husband: and why? he shall bear her iniquity, that is▪ the sinne shall be imputed to her husband, not to her, that would have kept her promise if she might. CHAP. XXXI. Vers. 2. AVenge the children of Isrel of the Midianites: afterwards salt thou be gathered unto thy people.] Moes must not die till the Midia∣nites be spoiled: and that first, for Moses sake that he might be comforted before his death by seeing the Israelites avenged upon their enemies the Midianites, who had been the occasion of so much mischief to them, chap. 25. 1. 6. and so might be the more willing to rsigne them up chearflly into the hands of God, who had so lately given proof how tender he was over them, how severe against all those that should seek to hurt them; and secondly, for the peoples sake, because if Moses had ben newly dead, tey would not have gone forth happely with such courage against the Midianites, as also because this late experience they had of Gods helping tem against the Midianites might make them the more boldly to enter upon the conquest of Canaan ater the deah of Moses under the conduct of Joshua. Vers. 4. Of every tribe a thousand, throghout all the tribes of Israel shall ye send to the warre.] Considering the multitude of the enemie, with whom they were to encounter (which may be gathered from the riches of the prey, and the death of five kings amongst others that were slain, vers. 8.) and withall how man hundred thousand fighting men of Israel Moses might have sent forth, it would have been a strange course in Moses of his own head onely to send forth twelve thousand against such a mighty enemy. And therefore I make no question but Moses received parti∣cular diretions from God (though it be not expressed) both that he should send out but twelve thousand▪ (thereby to try the faith of the Israelites, and to make Gods hand in the victory the more evident) and that they should be equally clled out of every tribe, that one tribe might not exalt it self above another for this victo∣y, but that all the glory might be given to God. Vers. 6. And Moses sent them to the warre, a thousand of every tribe, them and Phinehas, &c.] Who was sent out as their captain to lead them in this warre against the Midianites, it is not here exprssed: most probable it is that Joshua, who was so lately appointed of God to succeed Moses in the government, was im∣ployed in this service, that so the sccesse of this enterprise might, whilest Moses yet lived, procure him the more respect and honour in the hearts of the people. And in∣deed had not Joshua been amongst these forces that went out to fight against the Midianites, why is he not mentioned amongst those that went out to meet them at
their return, as well as Moses and Eleazar, vers. 13. I know that some hold that Phinehas was their captain, but for this they have no just ground, nor do we any where reade that the priests in those times used to go out as captains in the warre: Phinehas went out onely as one of the priests to encourage the people (as justly it might be expected that he would▪ be zealous in this cause, because of the zeal he had already shown against that Midanitish harlot, chap. 25. 6.) and withall to take care of the holy things of the Sanctuary, which they carried with them to the warre, as is implyed in the following words, where it is said that Phinehas went with them to the warre with the holy instruments and trumpets to blow in his hand, where by the holy instruments are meant the ark, with the mercy-seat, and other things appertaining thereto, which they used in those times to carry with them when they went out to warre, as a comfortable signe of Gods presence amongst them. Vers. 8. And they slew the kings of Midian, &c.] These it seems were for∣merly vassals to Sihon, and therefore called Dukes of Sihon, Josh. 13. 21. but Sihon himself being now slain, they became it seems absolute kings, amongst whom was Zur the father of Cozbi whom Phinehas slew, chap. 25. 15. Balaam also the sonne of Beor they slew with the sword.] See the note upon chap. 24. 25. Vers. 10. And they burnt all their cities wherein they dwelt, &c.] To wit, lest sloath or covetousnesse should draw any of the Israelites to hide themselves in these nests, and to take up their rest in this countrey which God had not allotted them, and neglect the land of Canaan which he had given them. Vers. 13. And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and all the princes of the con∣gregation went forth to meet them without the camp.] To wit, to congratulate their victory, and withall to put them in mind of cleansing themselves before they came into the camp. Vers.  And Moses was wroth with the officrs of the host, &c.] Phinehas may be here comprehended, though not expressed; yet I rather think that Moses directs his speech to the captains, because Phinehas did chiefly attend upon the holy instruments, vers. 6. and meddled not with the ordering of the souldiers as concern∣ing the saving or not saving those they took captives. Vers. 15. And Moses said unto them, Have ye saved all the women alive?] As if he had said, Whereas ye ought to have saved none, have you saved them all? these are they that insnared the people, and therefore these above all should have been slain. Vers. 17. Now therefore kill every male among the little ones.] The generall rule and law given to the Israelites was, that they should spare all the little ones, the Canaanites onely excepted. See Deut. 20. 14. But here because they were to execute Gods vengeance upon a people that had brought a great sinne, and so conse∣uently a great plague, upon the Israel of God, Moses (no doubt by the speciall di∣ection of Gods spirit) gives charge that all the male-children should be slain: and so, the more lively thereby to expresse how detestable that fact of the Midianites was, by slaying the males h▪ doth as it were seek to root out the very memory of
them; not indeed of the whole nation of the Midianites (for in the dayes of Gedeon we reade again of this nation, Judg. 6. 1.) but of these neighbouring Midianites that had done this mischief to the Israel of God. And kill every woman that hath known man by lying with him.] The words in the following verse (where onely the women-children are appointed to be saved) shew the meaning of these words, namely that all who were of years fit for the knowledge of men were slain, and onely the women-children that were undoubted∣ly pure virgins were saved alive. Vers. 18. But all the women-children that have not known a man by lying with him keep alive for your selves.] To wit, to make them servants, or to take them for wives, as they should see cause; for being children they might bring them up in the knowledge of the true God. Vers. 19. And do ye abide without the camp seven dayes, &c.] See chap. 19. 11, 12. &c. Purifie both your selves and your captives, &c.] When the heathens were taken captives in the warres by the Israelites, and so became their lawfull possession, even they also became unclean by touching the dead, and were to be purified. Vers. 20. And purifie all your raiment, and all that is made of skinnes, &c.] To wit, of the spoils which ye have taken. Because all the garments and other spoils which they had taken had either touched dead bodies, or had been in the houses of the slain, or at least had been touched by those that were unclean by the dead there∣fore tey were all to be esteemed legally unclean, and were to be puified according to the law. See chap. 19. 14, 16, and 22. Vers. 21. This is the ordinanc of the Law which the Lord commanded Moses, &c.] We do not find all the particulars formerly expressed in those laws that were given, chap. 19. concerning the purifying of those that were unclean by the dead; and therefore the meaning of these words of Eleazar I conceive to be onely this, that God had given Moses an expresse commandment concerning these thing, which he therefore, as the Lords high priest, was to make known to them, and to see they were observed. Vers. 27. And divide the prey in two parts, &c.] This law concerning the di∣viding of the prey into two equall parts, the one for those that went out to the warre, and brought away the spoil, the other for the rest that stayed at home, was most just and equall; first, because they that stayed at home were as willing to have gone forth as those that went, and therefore it was not fit that those which were culled out for that service should therefore carry away all the prey: and secondly, because they that went forth to the warre were but twelve thousand, and so one half of the prey being divided among them, they had farre greater shares (as it was fit they should) then the other could have, who were about six hundred thousand men, and had the other half divided amongst them. Vers. 30. And of the children of Israels half thou shalt take one portion of fiftie, &c.] As there was respect had to the men that hazarded themselves in the warre in dividing the prey, their twelve thousand having full as much allotted them as the six hundred thousand had that stayed at home; so also in leavying a tribute
for the Lord: for whreas those that went forth to warre paid but one in five hun∣dred, as is noted before, vers. 28. the children of Isael that stayed behind paid one in fifty, as is here exprssed; and so accordingly the smaller leavy out of their hal that wnt to the warre was given to Eleazar, vers. 29. that is, to him and the est of the priests (who because they were so few had therein a liberall share) and the greatest leavy out of the peoples half was given to the Levites, bcause they were many: the Levites had one in fifty, the priests one in ive hundred, and so the same proportion was observed here that was observed in their tithes, to wit, that the priests had but the tenth of their tithes. Vers. 32. And the booty, being the rest of the prey which the men of warre had caught, &c.] The booty which was now to be divided is here called the rest of the prey which the men of warre had caught, either because some of the persons they had taken were slain since their coming home, to wit, all the male-children and the women, vers. 17. or ele because some of the cattel had been slain for the soul∣diers to eat in their return home; or else in respect of the gold and silver and other spoils, whereof there was no tribute leavied. Vers. 47. Even of all the children of Israels half Moses took one portion of fif∣ty, &c.] To wit, six thousand seven hundred and fifty sheep, seven hundred and wenty beeves, six hundred and tenne asses, and three hundred and twenty wo∣men-children. Vrs. 49. Thy servants have taken the summe of the men of warre which are under our charge, and there lacketh not one man of us.] Hereby God shewed, that it was his work rather then theirs, that the enemy was now vanquished; and with∣all the Israelites were encouraged to fight the residue of the Lords battels, by this evidence of Gods power and care to protect them. Vers. 50. We have therefore brought an oblation,—to make an at onement for our soul before the Lord.] That is, for our lives which God hath spared, and that there may e no plague amongst us (according to that, Exod. 0. 12. When thou takest the summe of the children of Israel after their number, then shall they give every man a ransome for his soul unto the Lord) wherein also it is likely they had respect unto their sinne in sparing the women, vers. 14, 15, 16. Vers. 53. For the men of warre had taken spoil every man for himself.] That is, besides the cattel above named, which was brought to the common stock, they had gotten every man for himself very rich spoils of jewels, bracelets, chains, &c. and of these they brought now an offering to the Lord. CHAP. XXXII. Vers. 1. WHen they saw the land of Jazer, and the land of Gilead, that be∣hold the place was a place for cattel, &c.] In these words we have the cause that moved the Reubenites and Gadites to desire that they might dwell without Jordan. Jazer was a city taken awhile before from the Amorites, chap. 21. 32. and Gilead was also a mountain of the Amorites, which had many ities, half whereof were given to the sonnes of Gad, and the other half to the sonnes
of Manasseh, see vers. 40. and Deut. 3. 12, 13. Both were full of rich pasture-grounds, and so the fitter for feeding cattel (whence it is that God promising to feed his peo∣ple Israel▪ signifieth the goodnesse of their pasture by comparing it to Bashan and Gilead, Mich. 7. 14. Feed thy people with thy rod, the stock of thine heritage▪—Let them seed in Bashan and Gilead as in the dayes of old▪ and Jer. 50. 19. I will bring Israel again to his habitation, and he shall feed on Carmel and Bashan, and his soul shall be satisfied upon mount Epraim and Gilead) and therefore these tribes desire this land for their portion, because they had by farre the most cattel. Vers. 3. Ataroth▪ and Dbon, and Jazer, and Nimrah, &c.] There was an Ataroth within the land of Canaan, Josh. 16. 2, 7. but this was without Jordan. Nimrah here mentioned is called also Bethminrah, vers. 36. and Nimrim, Esa. 15. 6. and it was afterwards given to the sonnes of Gad, Josh. 13. 27. and so also She∣bam is vers. 28. of thi chapter calld Shibmah, and Beon is called Baal-meon, and Jer. 48. 23. Bethmcon, and Josh. 13. 17. Beth-Baalmeon. Vers. 4. Even the countrey which the Lord smote before the congregation of Israel, &c.] The chief drift of these words is to perswade Moses to allot their ha∣bitation in this countrey, which they had already conquered, by alledging how convenient it would be for them in regard that they had the greatest store of cattel, and this was a countrey very fit for the keeping of cattel. But withall another thing there seems to be implyed in these words, the country which the Lord smote before the congregation of Israel, namely, that the Lord had destroyed the inhabitants of this countrey, that they might take it for a possession, and that therefore it was to be esteemed a part of the promised land, though it were not within Jordan; nor were they to be blamed for desiring to have their portion there, the land being so fit and convenient for them. And indeed even this countrey without Jordan was the possession of the Amorites; for Sihon was King of the Amorites, vers▪ 33. and the land of the Amorites was promised to Abraham, Gen. 15. 16, 21. Vers. 5. If we have found grace in thy sight, let this land be given unto thy ser∣vants for a possession, and bring us not over Jordan.] It may be that their first intention was, according as these words imply, and as Moses understood them, to desire that they might stay there where they were, though afterward upon Moses displeasure they offer more equall conditions: yet I rather think that their meaning was never other, then as afterward they explained themselves, to wit, that they de∣sired to have the land without Jordan for their inheritance, and that they might not be carried over Jordan to be seated there, but that they never meant to forsake their brethren till they had also driven out the inhabitants of Canaan; and that first, because this conceit of staying behind was so unjust, that they could not but know that it would exceedingly enrage all the other tribes against them; and secondly, because in their answer to Moses, vers. 10. they discovered so presently how farre they were from desiring to leave their brethren, and to stay behind them. Vers. 12. Save Caleb the sonne of Jephunneh the Kenezite▪ &c.] So called, be∣cause he was of the posterity of one Kenaz, of the tribe of Judah, 1. Chronicles 4. 13, 15. Vers. 16. And they came near unto him, and said▪  build sheepfolds
here for our catel, &c.] If in their first request made unto Moses their desire was that they might not go any further, but might stay where they were, it is most probable that, moved with that which Moses had said, and withall fearing let the other tribes should be enraged against them, they withdrew themselves to consult about it, and then returned to proponnd these more equall conditions to him. But because there is no mention made here of any such advising together amongst themselves, but rather the words seem to imply that they did presently addresse themselves to make this reply, we may with better ground think (as is noted before upon vers. 5.) that they never meant any such thing in their former request to Mo∣ses; and therefore perceiving how farre he had mistaken their words, they now presently replyed more fully to make known to him what it was they desired: It is true, say they, we meant to leave our cattel and our children behind us (and it will be no little ease to us in our marching forward that we are rid of so great an encum∣brance) and to that end we purpose to build sheepfolds here for our cattel, and cities for our little ones, that is, to repair and fortifie those cities of the Amorites in this countrey which lie now ruinated; but for our selves, we purpose to go along with them, and never had any thought to stay behind. Vers. 17. But we our selves will go ready armed before the children of Israel, &c.] That is, though we desire to have this land assigned to us for our portion, and intend to leave our wives, children, and cattel here behind us, yet we our selves will go ready armed along with them, yea before the children of Israel, that is, so farre we are from shrinking away from our brethren, that being rid of our cattel and carriages we shall be ready, if it be thought fit, to go in the forefront, and to ex∣pose our selves to the greatest danger. This is the full scope of this reply which the Reubenites and Gadites made to Moses. Yet withall we must note, that though they tendred themselves to go along with their brethren, yet their meaning was onely, that so many of them should go as should be thought requisite for their aid against the inhabitants of Canaan: for we cannot think but that they meant to leave gar∣risons behind them for the defence of their wives and children, and for the guard∣ing of the countrey, in case any of the neighbouring nations should invade the land when they were gone; and so we see they did, for Josh. 4. 13. it is expressely said, that there went of these tribes along over Jordan with their brethren onely about fourty thousand armed men, whereas in the tribe of Reuben alone there was above fourty thousand fighting men, chap. 26. 7. Vers. 18. We will not return unto our houses untill the children of Israel have inherited every man his inheritance.] The performance whereof, see Josh. 22. 3, 4. Vers. 19. For we will not inherit with them on yonder side Jordan, &c.] This is another condition they propound, to wit, that if this may be granted them, they will not look after any share in the land of Canaan, but rest satisfied with the por∣tion now allotted them here. Vers. 20. If ye will go armed before the Lord to warre, &c.] Here Moses, upon the conditions they had propounded, as he now understood them, grants them their desire; and to make sure that they did rightly understand one another, he repeats the conditions, If, saith he, ye will go armed before the Lord to war, that is, if you will go
armed before the ark, the signe of Gods presence, that so you may aid your brethren in their warres against the Canaanites, and will go all of you armed over Jordan be∣fore the Lord, untill he hath driven out his enemies from before him, &c. that is, if all that go over Jordan will continue with your brethren untill they have subdu∣ed the land, and driven out the Lords and their enemies, then afterwards ye shall return, and this land shall be your possession before the Lord, that is, ye may then safely come back again hither, and shall have, as ye desire, this land for your lot and portion, and that with the Lords good liking and approbation. And indeed that Moses made them not this answer without direction from the Lord, we may gather from those words of his to the Reubenites and Gadites, Deut. 3. 18. The Lord your God hath given you this land to possesse it. Vers. 29. Then ye shall give them the land of Gilead for a possession, &c.] Gile∣ad here is put for the whole countrey on that side Jordan. Vers. 33. And Moses gave unto them, even to the children of Gad, and to the children of Reuben, and unto half the tribe of Manasseh, &c.] Some Expo∣sitours hold that this half of the tribe of Manasseh did at first joyn with the chil∣dren of Reuben and Gad in suing for a portion in this land, though they were not expressed, vers. 1. But because there is no mention hitherto made of them, we may rather think that either the children of Reuben and Gad did not at first desire all the land which they had conquered on that side Jordan to be given to them, and so their request being granted them, the remainder of that land was given to half the tribe of Manasseh, who are here therefore joyned with the other two tribes; or else if at first the Reubenites and Gadites did desire the whole land, yet when Moses came to grant their request, he reserved a part of the land on that side Jordan for certain of the sons of Manasseh, and that because they by a particular expedition had vanquished that part of the land, and had driven thence the Amorites, as is expressed vers. 39. Vers. 34. And the children of Gad built Dibon, &c.] See the note upon vers. 16. Vers. 38. And Nebo, and Baal-meon, their names being changed.] That is, a∣mongst other cities they built and repaired Nebo, and Baal-meon, & when they had finished them they gave them new names; and it is not without probability thought that the reason why they gave these cities new names was, because Baal and Nebo were names of their idol-gods (Bel boweth down, Nebo stoupeth, saith the pro∣phet, Isa. 46. 1.) and happely the rather, because of that branch of Gods law, Exod. 23. 13. Make no mention of the names of other gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth. It is true indeed that these cities are after this in other places of Sci∣pture called still Nebo and Baal-meon; but we know that this is usuall to call cities, whose names are changed, sometimes by the new and sometimes by their old names. Vers. 39. And the children of Machir the sonne of Manasseh went to Gi∣lead and took it, &c.] This is here inserted, to shew the reason why Moses giveth part of this land to the tribe of Manasseh, who made no suit for it, as the Reube∣nites and Gadites did, to wit, because it did in a manner belong to them, they ha∣ving formerly wonne it with their swords. Vers. 40. And Moses gave Gilead unto Machir, and he dwelt therein,] That
is, half mount Gilead; for the other half was given to the sonnes of Reuben and Gad. Deut. 3. 12. 13. Half mount Gilead, and the cities thereof, gave I unto the Reubenites and Gadites. And the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan, being the king∣dome of Og, gave I unto the half tribe of Manasseh. Vers. 41. And Jair the sonne of Manasseh went and took the small towns there∣of, and called them Havoth-Jair.] That this Jair was of the tribe of Judah, and onely the sonne of Machir, the sonne of Manasseh, by his mother side, sems evi∣dent in 1. Chron. 2. 21. 22. And afterward Hezron went into the daughter of Ma∣chir, the fther of Gilead whom he married when he was threescore years old, and she bare him Segub. And Segub begat Jair, who had three and twenty cities in the land of Gilead: but because he joyned with those of Manasseh in taking these villages, he is rckoned here the sonne of Manasseh, as if he had been one of that tribe; yet there might be also a Jair of the tribe of Manasseh. CHAP. XXXIII. Vers. 1. THese are the journeys of the children of Israel which went forth out of the land of Egypt with their armies, &c.] Which were about six hundred thousand men, beside women and children, and much mixed people with them, Exod. 12. 37, 38. and they journeyd in severall troops and armies. Vers. 2. And Moses wrote their goings out, according to their journeys, by the commandment of the Lord.] That is, Moses by the commandment of the Lord wrote this following journall of the Israelites travels from Egypt to the land of Canaan, wherein are set down not all the severall places the Israelites came to, or all their severall removes from one place to another, but all the severall stations of their journeys, that is, the severall places where they pitched their tents and abode for some time. And this was done, first, the better thereby to assure posterity of this miraculous deliverance of their fathers out of Egypt▪ and of the Lords leading them through the wildernesse to the land of promise▪ this expresse description of the names of their severall stations being a strong evidence of the certainty of this story: and scondly, that here in a short compasse, as in a little map, by the mention of the severall places where such things were done, they might be put in mind of the rebel∣lion of their fathers, of Gods severity in chastising them for their rebellion, but e∣specially his goodnesse and faithfulnesse to the seed of Abraha, notwithstanding the many provocations wherewith they had provoked him to displeasure agains them. Vers. 3. And they departed from Rameses in the first moneth, &c.] Whither they assembled by direction of Moses from all parts of the land of Gohen. Vers. 4. For the Egyptians buried all their first-born which the Lord had smit∣ten amongst them.] This intimates the cause why the Egyptians did not at present oppose their going thence, to wit, because God had pulled down their pride by slay∣ing their first-born. Ʋpon their gods also the Lord executed judgement.] See the note upon Ex∣od. 12. 12.
Vers. 6. And they departed from Succth, and pitched in Etham.] Here the Lord began first to go before them by day in a pillar of cloud, and by night in a pillar of fire. Vers. 7. And they removed from Etham, and turned again unto Pi-hahiroth, &c.] A narrow passage between two ledges of mountains, into which being entred, Pharaoh overtook them with a mighty army, and thought they could not now have escaped him; but God divided the red sea, which the Israelites passing, the Egypti∣ans assayed to follow them, and were drowned. Vers. 8. And pitched in Marah.] Having travelled three dayes journey from the red sea through the wildernesse without any water, and finding the waters here very bitter, they began to mutiny against Moses; but God sweetned the water with a tree, Exod. 15. 23. Vers. 11. And they removed from the red sea, and encamped in the wildernesse of Sin.] So called from Sin a city in Egypt, over against which this wildernesse lay. Hither they came a just moneth after their departure from Rameses. In this wil∣dernesse they murmured grievously for want of food, and God gave them quails, and rained manna from heaven, which was still continued till they came into Canaan. Vers. 14. And they removed from Alush, and encamped at Rephidim, &c.] A place famous, first, for the mutiny of the Israelites for want of water, wherein they had almost stoned Moses; secondly, for the water fetched miraculously out of the rock in Horeb; thirdly, for the victory they had over the Amalekites, who there set upon them; fourthly, for Moses his meeting with Jethro, his wife and sonues, and the counsel he had of Jethro for the government of the people. Vers. 15. And they departed from Rephidim, and pitched in the wildernesse of Sinai.] Hither they came the beginning of the third moneth, Exod. 19. 1. and stayed there till the twentieth day of the second moneth of the second year, Numb. 10. 11, 12. Here was the Law given, and the tabernacle built, and the people pu∣nished for making and worshipping a golden calf, and Nadab and Abihu take suddenly away for offering strange fire, and the people first numbred, and then or∣dered in their severall camps, both for their encamping about the tabernacle, and their journeying with it to the land of Canaan. Vers. 16. And they removed from the desert of Sinai, and pitched at Kibroth∣hattaavah.] Here the people fell a lusting for lesh; God again sent them quails, yea for a moneth together, in great abundance, whereon they surfeted and dyed miserably with the flesh between their teeth. Vers. 17. And they departed from Kibroth-hattaavah, and encamped at Haze∣roth.] Here Miriam and Aaron murmured against Moses, and she was smitten with leprosie, Numb. 12. Vers. 18. And they departed from Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithmah.] Which was i the wildernesse of Paran, Numb. 13. 1. near Kadesh-barnea, whence spies were sent to search the land; upon whose report the people murmuring, God was wroth, and appointed Moses to return again to the red sea, as having vowed that not one of that generation should enter Canaan save Joshua and Caleb.
Vers. 20. And they departed from Rimmon-parez, and pitched in Libnah.] This some think is the same which is called Laban, Deut. 1. 1. Vers. 25. And they removed from Haradah, and pitched in Makheloth.] It is interpreted assemblies, so called as some think of the mutinous assemblies of Ko∣rah, Dathan, and Abiram there. Vers. 31. And they departed from Moseroth and pitched in Bene-jaakan, &c.] Thir Moseroth is called Moserah, and Bene-jaakan, Beroth-bene-jaakan, as like∣wise in the next verses Hor-hagidgad is called Gudgodah, and Jotbathah Jotbath, Deut. 10. 6, 7. See the note there. Vers. 35. And they departed from Ebronah, and encamped at Ezion-gaber.] A place by the red sea, where was a hatbour for shipping in Edoms land, 1. Kings 9. 26. See also 1. Kings 22. 48. Vers. 36. And they removed from Ezion-gaber and pitched in the wildernesse of Zin, which is Kadesh.] That is, at Kadesh in the wildernesse of Zin. Here Miriam dyed, the people again murmured for water, and had water out of a rock; but God was displeased with Moses and Aaron for their unbelief. Hither they came in the beginning of the fourtieth year, and hence they sent to crave a passage through Edoms land, but it was denied them. Vers. 41. And they departed from mount Her and pitched in Zalmonah.] Which may be so called of Zelem, an image: it is thought to be the place where the Israelites for their murmuring were tung with fiery serpents, and the brazen serpent was by Gods appointment erected for their help. Vers. 45. And they departed from Iim and pitched in Dibon-gad.] So called, because it was repaired and possessed by the tribe of Gad, chap. 32. 34. and to dis∣tinguish it from another Dibon, which was given to the Reubenites. See Josh. 13. 15, 17. Vers. 52. Then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land.] To wit, by destroying them, Deut. 7. 12. Vers. 54. And ye shall divide the land by lot, &c.] See the note upon chap. 26. 55. Vers. 55. Those which ye let remain of them shall be pricks in your eyes, and thorns in your sides, &c.] That is, they shall be continuall snares, seducing you out of the right way, and withall will be vexing and troubling you, and so will mischief you both in soul and body. Vers. 56. Moreover, it shall come to passe that I shall do unto you as I thought to do unto them.] That is, destroy you, and root you out of the land. CHAP. XXXIV. Vers. 3. THen your South quarter shall be from the wildernesse of Zin, &c.] God within Jordan▪ and sheweth the bounds of it on every side: first, that his people might see his bounty & providence, who had given them so large  good a land; secondly, that they might know punctually how far they were to proceed in their conquests and where to stay; thirdly, to strengthen their faith, and to assure them that God
had marked out that their dwelling for them; fourthly, that according to these bounds and limits they might now make a division of the land. In these words of the third verse, the description of Canaans bounds begins with the South quarter, and he draws along the South border from the East to the West: for the wilder∣nesse of Zin lay at the very East end of this South border, in the corner where it joyned with the East border, and so from thence it is said that though the South border went on by the coast of Edom, yet th beginning of it Eastward was in the wildernesse of Zin, right against the South end of the salt sea, that is, the lake of Sodome, called also the dead sea, because it had no fish or living thing in it (of which see the note upon Gen. 14. 3.) and going by the coast of Edom it turned from the South, vers. 4. that is, inward towards Canaan, to the ascent of Akrab∣bim or Maalchakrabbim, Josh. 15. 3. and so passed on to Zin, that is, toward the city Zin, whence the adjacent wildernesse had its name, and there turned inward again from the South to Kadesh-barnea, and so went forward again to Hazarad∣dar (which Josh. 15. 3. is reckoned as two places Hezron and Addar) and so it passed unto Azmon (yet Josh. 15. 13. there is added that it fetched a compasse to Karkaa and so passed on to Azmon) and from thence it fetched a compasse again, and went on to the river of Egypt, that is, the river called Sihor, Josh. 13. 3. and so went out at the sea, that is, the Mediterranean or Midland sea, called in the next verse, the great sea, to wit, with respect to those lakes of Sodome and Geneza∣reth in the land of Canaan, which were also called seas. And this was the West end of the South border. Vers. 6. And as for the Western border, you shall even have the great sea for a border.] Thus the borders of the land are carried about from South to North, this midland sea from the South to the North being the West border; and so again it turneth about afterwards from the West to the East, which was the North border. Vers. 7. From the great sea you shall point out for you mount Hor.] That is, it went along from the midland sea to mount Hor. Now this was not the mount Hor where Aaron dyed, which was Southward in the edge of Edoms land, chap. 33. 37, 38. but another mountain on the North side of Canaan, and it is thought by some to be the same that is elsewhere called Lebanus, and by others that which in by Josh. 13. 5. is called mount Hermon.▪ Vers. 8. From mount Hor ye shall point out your border unto the entrance of Hamath.] That is, from Hor, this your North border of the land shall strike right forward to the entrance of Hamath (a city called, A▪mos 6. 2. Hemath the great) and so forth on to Zedad, and thence to Ziphron, and so it shall end at Hazar∣enan. Vers. 10. And ye shall point out your East border from Hazarenan to Shepham, &c.] That is, your East border (which turns again from the North to the South where at first it began) shall go straight on from Hazar-enan to Shepham (called 1. Sam 30. 28. Siphmoth) and so to Riblah on the East side of Ain, and so thence it shall go along by that land that lies Eastward of the sea of Chinnereth (which is called the lake of Gennesareth, Luk. 5. 1. and the sea of Galile, or, Tiberias,
John 6. 1.) and so thence to Jordan, and so shall end at the salt or dead sea, vers. 12. Vers. 17. These are the names of the men which shall dvde the land unto you, Eleazar the priest, &c.] Eleazar amongst the rest is appointed to have a hand in this work of dividing the land, first, as a type of Christ, to shew that by him they enjoyed that promised land, but especially that by him we come to have entrance into the heavenly Canaan, he being therefore gone before that he might prepare a place for us; secondly, that if any difficulty did arise he might ask counsel for Joshua after the judgement of Urim according to that Numb. 27. 21. thirdly, because the priests and the Levites, though they had no inheritance as the other tribes, yet were they to have cities and suburbs; fourthly, because that this whole businesse might be santified to them, it was to be begun with prayer, and ended with thanksgiving, Col. 3. 17. Thus also was that prophecy fulfilled concerning the Israelites coming to Canaan in the fourth generation, Gen. 15. 16. Eleazar being indeed the fourth from Levi, who went with Jacob into Egypt. Vers. 19. Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the sonne of Jephunneh, &c.] The tribes are no where else named in the order here observed, and therefore it is most pro∣bable that God did purposely thus name them here, in the very same order as they should inherit the land, their inheritance abutting one upon another, as their names are here joyned together, to make it the more evident that they were allotted their portions by the wisdome and providence of God. CHAP. XXXV. Vers. 2. COmmand the children of Israel, that they give unto the Levites, of the inheritance of their possession, cities to dwell in, &c.] Thus that which Jacob did at first threaten as a curse against Levi, Gen. 49. 7. I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, is turned into a blessing, and their re∣proch changed into a matter of honour and dignity: for they are now dis∣persed into severall cities through the whole kingdome (where they dwelt, unlsse it were when they went in their courses to serve in the tabernacle) that they might be as Gods watchmen, standing in so many watch-towers, to look to the people, to instruct them continually in the law of God, and to keep them from being cor∣rupted either in doctrine or manners. But this and other places do almost fully sa∣tisfie that the whole cities and their suburbs, afterward set apart for their dwelling, were entirely the Levites possession, and divided amongst them, and that no man else could challenge any propriety in them, whence is that Levit. 25. 32, 33, 34. Notwithstanding the cities of the Levites, and the houses of the cities of their pos∣session, may the Levites redeem at any time. And if a man purchase of the Levites, then the house that was sold, and the citie of his possession shall go out in the year of Jubile: for the houses of the cities of the Levites are their possession among the children of Israel; yet withall I think it most probable that others dwelt with them in houses hired or bought of them (for how else could they live without the help of men of other professions, at least such as were their servants?) and that these might live, as the townsmen do in our Universities, under a civil government
amongst themselves, to which some apply that, Ezra. 2. 70. So the priests, and the Levites, and some of the people, and the singers, and the porters, and the Nethinis, dwelt in their cities, and all Israel in their cities. However clear it is that the fields and villages belonging to these cities, which were without the suburbs, be∣longed to others, as is manifest in Hebron, which was given to the priests, and yet the land without the suburbs, to wit, the houses without the walls and the fields be∣longing thereto, were given to Caleb, Josh. 21. 11, 12. And they gave them the citie of Arbah, the father of Anak, which citie is Hebron in the hill countrey of Judah with the suburbs thereof round about it. But the fields of the citie and the villages thereof gave they to Caleb the sonne of Jephunneh, for his possession. Vers. 4. And the suburbs of the cities which ye shall give unto the Levites, &c.] There seems to be a manifest contradiction betwixt that which is said in tis fourth verse, concerning the measure of the suburbs of the Levites cities, and that which is said in the following verse: for here it is plainly said that the suburbs of the cities should reach from the wall of the citie, and outward a thousand cubits round about, and then in the next verse it is said that they should measure from without the city, on each side, two thousand cubits, the citie being in the midst, and that this should be to them the suburbs of the cities. To reconcile this seeming contradiction there are severall answers given by Expositours, some holding that the suburbs were but a thousand cubits on each side of th citie, but then from the outermost part of the suburbs on one side, as one the East side, to the outermost part of the suburbs on the other side, to wit, on the West (the citie in the midst not being measured) there were two thousand cubits. Others again holding that the fourth verse speaks of the length of the suburbs from the wall to the outmost part of them, which was a thou∣sand cubits, and that the fifth verse speaks of the circumference of the suburbs in the foure quarters on each side the citle, which was in each quarter two thousand cu∣bits. But first, because it is plainly said, vers. 5. that they should measure two thousand cubis on each side, East, West, North, and South; and secondly, because the fifth verse speaks of cubits to be measured from without the citie, and the fourth verse speaks of cubits to be measured from the wall of the citie, therefore I conceive the truest answer is, that each citie of the Levites had without the walls three thou∣sand cubits, the first thousand were for houses, barns, garners, stalls for cattel, gar∣dens, &c. which is that which we usually call the suburbs of a citie, of which Moses speaks in the fourth verse; and then the other two thousand cubits, which were without these, were for pasture for their cattel, and these are meant in the fifth verse, and are reckoned as a part of their suburbs. Vers. 6. And among the cities which ye shall give unto the Levites, there shall be six cities for refuge, &c.] These cities of refuge are assigned out of the Le∣vites cities rather then out of any other, first, because the honourable esteem and respect of the Levites would cause the places to be the more inviolably observed; secondly, because it was presumed that the priests and Levites above others would be carefull not to protect wilfull offenders in places appointed to be Sanctuaries one∣ly for the innocent; thirdly, that this might be a figure of the sufficient shelter which Christs priesthood should yield unto poore sinners, that in faith should fly to
him as their Sanctuary. In Deut. 4. and Josh. 20. we may see what cities of the Le∣vites were set apart for this purpose, to wit, first, Bezer of the Reubenites, secondly, Ramoth in Gilead of the Gadites, thirdly, Golan in Basan of the Manassites (thee three Moses separated, Deut. 4. 41, 43.) fourthly, Kadesh in Galilee in mount Naphtali, fifthly, Shechem in mount Ephraim, and sixthly, Kiriath-arba (which is in Hebron) in the mount of Judah; and these Joshua separated, Josh. 20. 7. Be∣fore these cities of refuge were appointed, it seems the altar onely was a kind of Sanctuary to those that fled to it: whence is that, Exod 21. 14. But if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbour to slay him with guile, thou shalt take him from mine altar, that he may die. But afterward these cities were the chief Sanctuaries, and yet they were onely to be Sanctuaries to those that killed any man unwittingly, and therefore they were not to receive any man till he professed his innocency in this regard, Josh. 20. 4. And when he that doth flee unto one of those cities, shall stand at the entring of the gate of the citie, and shall declare his cause in the ears of the Elders of that citie; they shall take him into the citie unto them, and give him a place that he may dwell among them: and purposely they chose such cities as lay at an equall distance in the severall parts of the land, that no man driven to use them might have too farre to go, lest so happely he should be overtaken by the revenger of bloud before he could recover the Sanctuary. Vers. 12. And they shall be unto you cities for refuge from the avenger, &c.] That is, the next kinsman to the man flain, who was by the law allowed to put the murderer to death, vers. 19. but not him that killeth a man unawares; yet lest he should in his rage kill such a one, let there be cities, saith the Lord, of refuge for such. Vers. 14. Ye shall give three cities on this side Jordan, and three cities shall ye give in the land of Canaan, &c.] There was no inequality in this, because the portion of the two tribes and a half without Jordan reached as farre in length as theirs in the land of Canaan, though it were nothing so broad. And besides, it is most probable that those in the land of Canaan near Jordan might fly to the cities of refuge without Jordan, if they were nearer to them then the others, yea and if the Lord enlarged their coasts, and gave them all the land, they were to adde three cities more, Deut. 19. 8, 9. Vers. 16. And if he smite him with an instrument of iron so that he die, he is a murderer, &c.] That is, purposely and presumptuously: for otherwise if he kill∣ed a man with an instrument of iron unawares, not thinking to hit him, he was not to be slain, vers. 22, 23. for this is onely added, because a man may strike his neigh∣bour purposely with his fist, &c. of which he may die, and yet not be a murderer, because he may not happely intend his death. But lest therefore under this pretence wilfull murderers should think to escape, the Lord gives these following Laws, and this in the first place, that if it were proved that he did it willingly he must not think to escape by saying that he meant not to kill him: for if he struck him with an instrument of iron (whatever it be) or with a stone, or hand-weapon, wherewith in any probability a man may be killed, it shall be presumed that he intended hi death, &c.
Vers. 19. The revenger of bloud himself shall slay the murderer, &c.] That is, though the revenger of bloud be but a private person, yet he shall slay the murderer, that is, he may slay him, he shall have liberty to do it, and shall not be accouned guilty of murder if he doth slay him (yea some think he was bound to do it) when he meeteth him he shall slay him, that is, he shall not need to bring him before a Magistrate, &c. but he may slay him himself. And this is added to shew how ne∣cessary cities of refuge were, to wit, because the avenger of bloud having this power from God might otherwise abuse it, and in the heat of bloud fall upon a man that killed unawares, unlesse this course were taken to have the Magistrate a judge in the cause. Neither need it seem strange (as to some it doth) that private men should be allowed thus to meddle with the sword of justice: for a man being otherwise a private man, no Magistrate, being thus armed with power from God, is for the time to be eseemed as a Magistrate, more then a private man. Vers. 20. But if he thrust him of hatred, &c.] Here is another case given wherein the Magistrate should adjudge a man a murderer, yea though he struck him onely with his hand, or with some little stone, or some other thing which was no way likely to kill him: for even in this case if it be proved that he lay in wait for him, or that he did it in prepensed malice, or lived before in open enmity or hostility with him, by whatever means he kill him he shall be adjudged a wilfull murderer; for there is a difference made here betwixt enmity and sudden dis∣pleasure. Vers. 21. The revenger of bloud shall slay the murderer when he meteth him.] See the note upon vers. 19. Vers. 24. Then the congregation shall judge between the slayer, and the rvenger of bloud, &c.] That is, if a man that had killed another fly to the citie of refuge, the avenger must then go and desire justice against him, the Levites must bring him to the congregation where the man was slain, and then if he found a murderer, the congregation, that is, the Magistrates, shall give him up into the hands of the avenger; but if they found it, as we call it, chance-medly, then they sent him back to the city of refuge. Vers. 25. And he shall abide in it unto the death of the high priest, &c.] Even a man that killed another unwittingly was to live a while as a man banished from his family and friends, both to shew how hatefull the shedding of mans bloud is to the Lord, and withall to prevent further mischief, that the avenger be not urged nor provoked with the sight of him: and the period appointed for his continuance in the city of refuge was till the death of the high priest, and that doubtlesse that this re∣leasing of men exiled by the death of the high priest might be a shadow of our free∣dome and redemption by the death of Christ. Vers. 27. He shall not be guilty of bloud, &c.] The Lord here freeth the aven∣ger from punishment, if he found the man out of the city of refuge, and killed him, not as allowing his fact, but by this to make the slayer the more carefull to observe this law of keeping within his citie of refuge.
CHAP. XXXVI. Vers. 1. ANd the chief fathers of the families of the children of Glead, &c.] Because the Lord had formerly ordered that Zelophehads daughters should have that portion of the land assigned to the tribe of Manasseh which their father should have had for his share, had he lived, the children of Gilead (who were of that tribe) conidering that if they married into any other tribe, this part of their land would be quite alienated from their tribe, they came now and shewed what inconvenience might follow upon this; and because it was their tribe that was now likely to receive detriment by the alienation of Zelophehads portion, therefore they made it their suit that some order might be taken to prevent this mis∣chief. Vers. 2. The Lord commanded my lord to give the land for an inheritance by lot to the children of Israel, &c.] As if they should have said, To what purpose was this, if now our lot shall be diminished, and a part of it wholly alienated to an∣other tribe? yea by like accidents the portion of every tribe may in time be changed and disturbed, and so all at length may come to confusion, and the very end of Gods appointing every tribe to have their portion apart by themselves may be quite made void. Vers. 4. And when the Jubile of the children of Israel shall be, then shall their inheritance be put unto the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they are received, &c.] The drift of these words is to put Moses and the Princes in mind, that where∣as by the law of God at the year of Jubile (which was every fiftieth year) what∣ever land was sold away out of the tribe should return to the tribe, and that law of the Jubile seemed purposely intended to prevent the confusion of the inheritance of the tribes, the very end of this law by such marriages as these would be quite disannulled. Vers. 5. And Moses commanded the hildren of Irael▪ according to the word of the Lord, &c.] That is, having asked counsel of God, he anwered them as God had commanded him.
ANNOTATIONS On the fifth book of MOSES called DEUTERONOMIE. CHAP. I. THese be the words which Moses spake unto all Israel, on this side Jordan, &c.] Most Expositours hold that the chief drift of this first verse is to shew the places where Moses repeated and explained the law of God to the Israelites: which is in∣deed the main subject of this last book of Moses, & therefore it is called Deuteronomie, or the second declaration of the Law. The main objection against this is, that it is here said that Moses spake these words, In the plain over against the red sea, between Paran, &c. for the plain over against the red sea was farre from the plains of Moab where Moses repeated the law, and so also Paran and Hazeroth, which are both here mentioned, were places farre Southward from the place where Moses now was, through which the Israelites had long since passed, Numb. 12. 16. And indeed they that thus understand this place have no other way to avoid this objection, but by saying either that the word Zuph, which our Translatours under∣and to be the red sea, is not meant of the red sea, but of a flaggy place by the sides of Jordan towards the wildernesse, the Hebrew word Zuph signifying flagges, such as grew by the sea or rivers sides, Exod. 2. 3. or else that the plains of Moab are here called the plain over against the red sea, because they lay opposite to the red sea, though a great way off from it. Others again, and methinks very probablic, do otherwise conceive of the drift of these words, namely, that the time when and place where Moses repeated the law is set down afterwards, vers. 3, 4, 5▪ and that the drift of these two first verses is to shew, that the laws, which Moses did now re∣peat and explain to the Israelites in the plains of Moab, were no other but the ve∣ry same for substance which he had formerly given them at Sinai, or in severall places as they travelled through the wildernesse from the red sea to the land of Canaan, onely now they were collected into one body, and repeated together in the plains of Moab, because all that were of age and judgement when the law was first given were now dead, and a new generation that was now to enter Canaan was sprung up in their room: and so the plain over against the red sea, Paran, and other places are here named, either as pointing out the severall places whee in their peregrination these following Statutes had been first given them; or at least as the bounds of that huge tract of ground through which they had passed, wherein od had spoken to the Israelites that came out of Egypt these things which are now repeated together to their posterity.
Vers. 2. There are eleven dayes journey from Horeb by the way of mount Seir unto Kadesh-barnea.] If the aim of the foregoing verse were to shew the place where Moses repeated the Laws of God to the Israelites (which many Expositours conceive, as is before noted) then we may well think that the aim of these words may be to shew that it was no wonder though the plains of Moab, where the Law was repeated by Moses, be there called the plain over against the red sea, to wit, because however the Israelites, through Gods judgement upon them, were fourtie years in going from the red sea to those parts, yet the way of it self was not so long, for it was but eleven dayes journey from Horeb to Kadesh-barnea. But if the fore∣going verse be meant of the places where the Laws were first given that were now repeated by Moses, then I conceive this clause is added as a topographicall descrip∣tion of the extent of that wildernesse where these Laws were at first given; and withall to imply that it was not the length of the way, but their rebellion against God, that made them wander so long in the wildernesse, that there was now none left alive, but that younger brood that had not heard these Laws when they were first given. Vers. 3. And it came to passe in the fourtieth year, in the eleventh moneth, on the first day of the moneth, that Moses spake unto the children of Israel, &c.] To wit, a little before his death; for he died in the twelveth moneth. Vers. 4. And Og the King of Bashan which dwelt at Astaroth in Edrei.] That is, after he had in Edrei slain Og, which dwelt at Astaroth; for in Edrei he was slain, Numb. 21. 33. and they were both cities in Ogs land, Josh. 13. 31. Vers. 6. Ye have dwelt long enough in this mount.] For there they had conti∣nued well nigh a full year. See the note upon Numb. 10. 11, 12. Here the Law was given, but now they were called thence, to journey towads Canaan, the fi∣gure of their heavenly inheritance by faith in Christ; which may put us in mind that the Law is not for men to continue under but for a time, till they be fitted for Christ, Gal. 3. 16, 17, 18. Now this readinesse in God to have presently given them the possession of the land Moses doth tell them of, as a motive to make them believe the more conidently that God would now give it them, and to make them the more carefull to observe these Laws of God, which now he meant to rehearse unto them. Vers. 7. Turn you, and take your ourney, and go to the mount of the Amorites, &c.] In these following words the Lord did then set forth the bounds of the pro∣mised land which he perswaded them to enter, beginning with the mount of the Amorites in the South side or border where they were then to enter the land, and then adding the sea side, which was their West border, Numb. 4. 6. and then Le∣banon was a mount on the North part of the land; and then last of all the great river Euphrates, which was their Eastern bound in the utmost extent without Jor∣dan, and so arre Solomon reigned. See 1. Kings 4. 21. Vers. 9. And I spake unto you at that time, saying, I am not able to bear you my self alone, &c.] That is, about that time: for this motion he made by the counel of Jethro, and commandment of the Lord, before they came to Horeb, Ex∣od▪ 18▪ 14, &c▪ and here he repeats it, to let them see how tenderly carefull he al∣wayes
was of the welfare of this people, which must needs make his present coun∣sel and exhortations the more prevalent with them. Vers. 11. The Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many mo as ye are, &c.] Having professed that he was not able to bear the burthen of the government alone, because they were so many; lest they should suspect that he envied their number or did in the least degree grudge as it, he interposeth these words, The Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many moe as ye are, &c. Vers. 13. Take ye wise men and understanding, &c.] See Exod. 18. 25. Vers. 15. And officers among your tribes.] That is, under-oicers of severall sorts, such as executed the magistrates Laws. Vers. 17. For the judgement is Gods.] This is added as a reason why the Judges ought not to be respecters of persons, nor fear the face of any man whatso∣ever, because the judgement is Gods, that is, the judges represent Gods person, and sit in his seat, and God speaks and judges by them, and therefore they should judge no otherwise then God would do; and when they judge unjstly they dishonour God, and forget how able God is to defend them whoe work they do. Vers. 18. And I commanded you at that time all the things which ye should do.] He gave them all the Laws delivered here in Horeb, and taught the Judges their duty in more full manner then is here exprssed. Vers. 19. We went through all that great and terrible wildernesse, which you saw by the way of the mountain of the Amorites.] That is, the way which leadeth to the mount of the Amorites. Vers. 23. And the saying pleased me well, &c.] That is, their desire that spies might be sent before them: yet it seems he enquired whether God would have it so, who approved, or at least permitted it, Numb. 13. 1. for prudent policy (so it be not mixed with unbelief) doth well beseem Gods people. Yet it may be this re∣quest of theirs proceeded from distrustfull fears; and if so, then God gave way to them herein to harden and punish them for their unbelief. Vers. 25. And they took of the fruit of the land in their hands, &c.] As grapes, pomegranates, figs, Numb. 13. 23. And said, It is a good land which the Lord our God doth give us.] Moses ex∣presseth not here at first the discouraging words of the timerous spies, but onely that wherein they agreed with Caleb and Joshua concerning the goodnesse of the land, because this which was confessed should have been more prevalent with the people to have heartned them to go on, then their tales of the strength of the people and their cities to beat them off. Vers. 31. The Lord thy God bare thee as a man doth bear his sonne, &c.] This word implyes, first, Gods assistance in carrying them through unpassable dif∣ficulties, the way they could not in their own strength have overmastered, but God by his almighty power bare them, as when a father takes up and carries his child in his arms; secondly, it implyes his bearing with their perversnesse and rebellions: and this concerning Gods fatherly love to them, and care over them, he opposeth to that desperate speech of heirs, vers. 27. Because the Lord hated us he hath brought us forth out of the land of Egypt, &c.
Vers. 35. Surely there shall not one of these men of this evil generation see that good land, &c.] Though Moses prayed for them, Num. 14. 13.—19. and the Lord par∣doned them that they were not then destroyed, Numb. 14. 20. yet he sware that they should not come into the promised land. Vers. 36. Save Caleb the sonne of Jephunneh, he shall see it, and to him will I give the land that he hath trodden upon, &c.] See Josh. 14. 9. Vers. 37. Also the Lord was angry with me, for your sakes, &c.] For the peo∣ple provoked his spirit, whereupon he spake unadvisedly with his lippes, Psal. 106. 32, 33. So then these words are not added to justifie himself, and to cast all the blame upon them, but onely to shew how by their rebellion he also was involved in sinne, and brought to do that which was so displeasing to God. Yet there is ano∣ther exposition which may seem most probable, the Lord was angry with me for your sakes, that is, because I did that in my unbelief and impatience, which was likely to be prejudiciall unto you, as those words which God there used imply, Numb. 20. 12. because ye believed me not to sanctifie me in the eyes of the chil∣dren of Israel. And so this passage seems here inserted onely by the way, having spoken how God had sworn that they should not set foot in Canaan, he addes (as in a parenthesis) this sentence of the like natre pronounced against himself for their sakes. Vers. 39. Moreover your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, &c.] In these words thus repeated there is couched an encouragement for the Israelites to whom Moses at present spake. Vers. 44. And the Amorites which dwelt in that mountain came out against you, and chased you as bees do.] Which being angred use to come out in great swarms, and to pursue them with strange eagernesse and fury; whence is that also of the Psalmist, They compassed me about like bees, Psal. 118. 12. Vers. 46. So ye abode in Kadesh many dayes, according unto the dayes that ye abode there▪] To wit, a long time, as appears by the number of the dayes that ye abode there. Thus many Expositours conceive that this clause is to be taken as spo∣ken indefinitely, that according to the number of the dayes they abode there it is manifest they abode there many dayes. But others very probable understand it thus, that as they stayed there a long time before the return of the spies, so they stayed there again a long time after; yea some ake it more particularly, that as they stayed there fourtie dayes whilest the spies searched the land, so accordingly they stayed as many dayes more after the return of the spies: and others again conceive it is meant of the whole time of their wandring after this in the wildernesse, to wit, that in the fourtieth year they were gotten no farther then Kadesh, and so wandred up and down fourty years according to the number of fourtie dayes wherein they searched the land, and so that this alludes to that, Numb. 14. 34. CHAP. II. Vers. 3. YE have compassed this mountain long enough, turn you Northward.] Hitherto they had travelled Southward from Kadesh-barnea to the
red sea; now they were commanded to turn again Northward toward Canaan, not the way they went before by Kadesh-barnea, but between the coasts of Edom on the one hand, of Moab and Ammon on the other, so to enter into Canaan through Sihon the Amorites land. Vers. 4. Ye are to passe through the coast of your brethren the children of Esau, which dwell in Seir, and they shall be afraid of you &c.] This clause, and they shall be afraid of you, is prefixed before the following charge that they should not meddle with the Edomites, as a hint to give them warning not to encourage themselves by their fear to set upon them; and withall the charge given them that they should not meddle with the children of Esau, is limited to those children of Esau which dwell in Seir, purposely to exclude the Amalekites, whom God had commanded them to destroy, Exod. 17. 14. and yet the Amalekites were also the children of Esau, Gen. 36. 12. Vers. 6. Ye shall buy meat of them for money, &c.] Hereby it is evident that the Israelites did not eat manna onely in the wildernesse, but other meat likewise when they were where other meat could be gotten. Vers. 7. For the Lord thy God hath blessed thee, &c.] Three arguments there are couched in these words whereby Moses is to perswade the Israelites not to wrong their brethren the Edomites in the least thing whatsoever; first, because the Lord had blessed them, that is, he had prospered them so that they were able to pay for that which they had occasion to desire of them: secondly, because the Lords eye was upon them to take care of them in their travels through the wildernesse (for that is the meaning of those words, He knoweth thy walking through this great wildernesse) so that having God to watch over them, they need not seek to supply themselves in an unlawfull way: and thirdly, because they had found this true already for fourty years together, and therefore might the more securely rest upon God, These fourty years the Lord thy God hath been with thee, thou hast lacked nothing. Vers. 9. I have given Ar unto the children of Lot for a possession.] Ar was a chief mountain, and the city thereon the royall city in the Moabites land, Numb. 21. 15, 28. and so it is put here for the whole countrey. Vers. 10. The Emims dwelt therein in times past, a people great, and many, and tall as the Anakims.] By interpretation, terrible ones. Gods hand must needs be acknowledged in driving out such giants before the Moabites, which happely is alledged here, first, as an evidence that God had given them that land, which was not therefore to be taken from them by the Israelites; and secondly, as an encou∣ragement to the Israelites: for if God had done this for the Moabites, much more might they expect that he would do it for them. Vers. 20. The Ammonites call them Zamzummims.] That is, presumptuous wicked ones. See the note on verse 10. Vers. 23. And the Avims which dwelt in Hazerim, even unto Azzah, the Caphtorims, &c.] The Caphtorims here mentioned are the Philistines, or else some other people that joyned with the Philistines, and drave out the Avims which dwelt in Hazerim, that is, the land of the Philistines, and possessed their countrey▪ See Amos 9. 7. and Jer. 47. 4. and Gen. 10. 13, 14. Vers. 26. And I sent messengers out of the wildernesse of Kedemoh, &.] There
was a city of that name in Sihons countrey, Josh. 13. 18. and chap. 21. 37. near to which lay this wildernesse where Israel now was when they sent this ambassage to Sihon with words of peace, which was according to the Law after given, Deut. 20. 10. and was done now to make the destruction of the Amorites the more just and inexcusable. See the note upon Numb. 21. 21, 22. Vers. 28. Onely I will passe through on my feet.] We will ask nothing of thee gratis, but onely this, that we may passe through thy countrey. Vers. 29. As the children of Esau which dwell in Seir, and the Moabites which dwell in Ar did unto me.] For though the children of Esau denyed them a passage through their countrey, which was the nearest way, Numb. 20. 0, 21. yet when they turned aside, and went along by their coast in the outskirts of their countrey, they permitted this, and withall the people afforded them meat for their money, as is evident by this place, so it seems it was too with the Moabites. Indeed some couceive that they onely allowed them a passage through their countrey, but refused them provision, which they ground upon that place, Deut. 23. 3, 4. But I rather think the meaning of that place is, that they did not come forth to meet the Israelites with bread and water, as those use to do that wish good successe, and re∣joyce in the welfare of the people to whom they bring it; for this they might fail in, and yet the people might sell them provision as they went along: and therefore for any thing we reade elsewhere it may well be that the Moabites did also suffer the Israelites to passe through the skirts of their countrey, and did sell them meat and water for their money; though it is true indeed that afterwards, when the Is∣raelites had destroyed Sihon and Og, and their people, fearing lest they should do the same to them, because the land of the Moabites bordered upon these countreys, they together with the Midianites assayed both by open violence and secret treache∣ry to do them all the mischief they were able, Numb. 22. 1, &c. Vers. 34. And utterly destroyed the men, and the women, &c.] This doubtlesse they did by the speciall command of God; and it was much according to the Law afterwards given them, Deut. 20. 16. Vers. 36. And from the citie that is by the river.] To wit, Ar, Numb. 21. 15. Vers. 37. Onely unto the land of the children of Ammon thou camest not, nor to any place of the river Jabbock, &c.] To wit, on the outside of Jabbok, which was the border of the Ammonites, Josh. 12. 2. with whom God had charged them not to meddle, verse 19. so likewise by the cities of the mountains here are meant those cities of the Ammonites which were in that mountanous countrey which lay beyond Jabbok, of which Moses had said before, that the bordr of the children of Ammon was strong▪ Numb. 21. 24. It is ideed said, Josh. 13. 24, 25. that Moses gave unto the tribe of Gad half the land of the children of Ammon; but that is meant of the land which was now in the possession of Sihon King of the Amorites, though it had formerly belonged to the children of Ammon, till Sihon took it from them; for with the land which was in the possession of the Ammonites at this time, the Israelites did not meddle, as is here fully expressed.
CHAP. III. Vers. 2. ANd the Lord said unto me, Fear him not, &c.] Because this King was a giant of such a formidable stature, vers. 11. therefore the Lord doth particularly encourage his people not to be afraid of him. Vers. 4. Threescore cities, all the region of Argob, the kingdome of Og in Bashan.] As if it had been said, There were amongst others 60. cities which we took in the region of Argob, a province or shire in Bashan, and therefore it is cal∣led the region of Argob which is in Bashan, 1. Kings 4. 13. Vers. 5. All these cities were fenced with high walls, gates, and barres, &c.] The strength of this countrey is here thus described, both thereby the better to set forth the mighty power of God, who had subdued so strong a countrey before them; and withall to put them in mind how safely they might rely upon God still for the time to come against their strongest enemies. Vers. 9. Which Hermon the Sidomans call Sirion, &c.] Some Expositours conceive that the mount here spoken of is the same that is elsewhere called mount Gilead; and ohers, that which is elsewhere called Lbanus; however evident it is that in the Scripture it is called by five severall names, to wit, Hermon, Sirion, and Shenir here, and then Sion, Deut. 4. 48. and Hor, Numb. 34. 7. and that partly, because by divers people it was diversly named, and partly, with respect to divers parts of this mountain, which had severall names; and hence it is that, Cant. 4. 8. Shenir and Hermon are mentioned together as distinct mountains. Vers. 11. For onely Og the King of Bashan remained of the remnant of giants.] That is, there was none left of that gigntine race in the kingdome of Bashan but Og onely. That there were many other giants at this time in other places is most evident: for immediately after the Israelites ened Canaan Caleb drove out of He∣bron Sheshai and Ahiman and Talai the children of Anak, Josh. 15. 14. Yea in Davids time there were many giants, as Goliah, whom David slew, Ishbi-benob, and divers others, 2. Sam. 21. 16. &c. But this is spoken onely of the countrey of Bashan. Behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron: is it not in Rabbath of the chil∣of Ammon?] How this bedstead (which was made of iron, that it might be strong enough to bear his huge masse body) should come to be in Rabbath the chief citie of the Ammonites, being not expressed, we cannot say; sufficient it is that thither it might be conveyed by many severall means, as it might be taken in some war between the Ammonies and this King, and so kept as a glorious Trophic of their victory; or it might be given as a present to the Ammonites, and so kept as a strange memoriall of the huge stature of thi King of Bashan. Nine cubits was the length thereof, and foure cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit of a man.] That is, the common cubit of an ordinary man. Now the cubit of a man being usually a foot and half, according to this measure his bed was foure yards and a half long and two yards broad. Vers. 13. And the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan, being the kingdome of Og, gave I unto the half tribe of Manassh, &c. See Numb. 32. 39, 40.
Vers. 14. Jair the sonne of Manasseh took all the countrey of Argob, &c.] See Numb. 32. 41. Vers. 17. Chinnereth even unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, under Ashdoth Pisgah Eastward.] What the sea of Chinnereth was, which is mention∣ed here as a part of the bound of that land which was given to the Reubenites and Gadites, you may see in the note upon Numb. 34. 11, 12. As for Ashdoth Pisgah, we see vers. 27. that Pisgah was a hill, and so Ashdoth Pisgah was after the name of a citie there adjoyning in Reubens land, Josh. 13. 20. at the foot of this hill. Vers. 23. And I besought the Lord at that time, &c.] To wit, after all these things before related, when the Lord bad him go up into a mountain and see the land, Numb. 27. 12. then did Moses intreat the Lord earnestly that he might go into the land of Canaan, as knowing that his threatnings are many times conditi∣onall, and therefore it might be the Lord would be intreated by him. Vers. 24. O Lord God, thou hast begun to shew thy servant thy greatnesse, &c.] There is here an argument drawn from former mercies to move God to go on, and to perfect the mercy begun. Vers. 25. I pray thee let me go over, and see the good land that is beyond Jor∣dan, that goodly mountain, and Lebanon.] There is much arguing amongst Expo∣sitours to find out what that goodly mountain is whereof Moses here speaks, some understanding it of one mountain, some of another: but I conceive that it is the land that lay next beyond Jordan, which they might see from the place where the Israelites now were, that is here called that goodly mountain, that is, that goodly mountanous countrey; and that then he adjoyns, & Lebanon, (which was in the farther part of the land of Canaan) to imply that he desired to see the land quite through. Vers. 26. But the Lord was wroth with me for your sakes.] See the note upon chap. 1. 37. Vers. 27. Get thee up into the top of Pisgah, &c.] See the note upon Numb. 27. 12. CHAP. IV. Vers. 1. NOw therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes, &c.] They that will have a difference put betwixt the two words here used, statutes and judgements, say that by statutes or ordinances are meant those laws which taught the service of God, called by the Apostle ordinances of divine service; and by judgements those laws that concerned their duties towards men, and the punish∣ment of transgressours. As for the promise of life made here to those that kept these laws, see the note▪ upon Levit. 18. 5. Vers. 6. Keep therefore, and do them; for this is your wisdome and your under∣standing in the sight of the nations, &c.] Seeing other Nations did alwayes deride and despise the Jews way of worshipping God, and made a mock of their whole religion, it may seem strange why Moses should here say that their keeping of Gods laws should be counted their wisdome and understanding in the sight of the
nations. But for this we must theref ore know that the drift of these words is onely to shew that the laws which God had given them were so just and righteous, that all men, unlesse they should wilfully close their eyes, must needs acknowledge them to be such; and that even the very heathen, if ever they came to hear and know their laws, must needs in their consciences think so of them, and would (if ever their eyes were truly opened to judge of things) admire the wisdome and under∣standing of this people above that which was in other nations. Vers. 7. For what nation is there so great, who hath God so nigh unto them, &c.] That is, in that which onely makes a nation truly great and honourable, namely, the speciall interest they have in God, there is no nation under heaven to be compared unto ours, who have God alwayes dwelling amongst us, as is evident by the miraculous signes of his presence with us; alwayes ready at hand to hear our prayers, and so to protect and defend us from all evils, as the strange miracles and wonders he hath wrought for us these many years do evidently prove. Vers. 11. And ye came near, and stood under the mountain, and the mountain burnt with fire, &c.] All these things are here repeated, to convince and assure the people that the laws he now speaks of were given of God, and not of his devising, and therefore the more carefully to be regarded. Vers. 12. And the Lord spake unto you out of the midst of the fire, &c.] Moses here addressing his exhortation to disswade the people from idolatry, he puts them in mind how that when the Lord at Sinai gave them his law they saw no simili∣tude, onely they heard a voice, and that God spake unto them out of the midst of the fire, which was indeed purposely done thereby to signifie unto the people that the glory of God was incomprehensible, and that there was no drawing nigh unto God to behold him with bodily eyes. Vers. 14. And the Lord commanded me at that time, to teah you statutes and judgements, &c.] That is, besides the ten commandments written by the Lord him∣self, he at that time also gave me other statutes and judgements, which he comman∣ded me to teach you. Vers. 15. Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves, &c.] Lest again con∣fidence of themselves should make the Israelites slight this warning of avoiding all idolatry, in these words he implyes how prone mans nature is to this sinne, charg∣ing them to be jealous of themselves in this regard, and to watch diligently over themselves, lest they should be drawn away into this grosse and brutish finne. Vers. 19. Which the Lord thy God hath divided unto all nations under the whole heaven.] Moses speaking here against worshipping the sunne, moon, and starres, and then adding this clause, which the Lord thy God hath divided unto all nations under the whole heaven, he doth therein imply with what admirable wis∣dome God hath disposed these lights in severall parts of the heaven, whereby the sunne, moon, and starres do according to their severall stations give light sometimes to one part of the earth, sometimes to another; and some starres do onely shine in some parts of the world, and others to other parts. B withall the chief drift of this clause is, to shew what a baseness of mind it  be in Gods people to wor∣ship
such things as are given for servants unto all men, even to infidels and hea∣thens. Vers. 20. But the Lord hath taken you, and brought you forth out of the iron furnace, &c.] This is added to imply in what a speciall tie they were bound to be carefull above other people not thus to dishonour God: first, because God had re∣deemed them out of the iron furnace, that is, the furnace wherein iron is melted; and so Egypt is called, to set forth the miserable and cruell oppression which there they underwent, enough to dissolve the spirits of the stoutest, and to have wasted and consumed any people: and secondly, because having thus redeemed them out of Egypt, he had taken them to himself as a people of inheritance, that is, his own people purchased for himself, upon whom▪this blessing should remain from generation to generation. Vers. 21. Furthermore the Lord was angry with me for your sakes, &c.] This is added, first, to set forth the wondrous care that God took of them, who was an∣gry with Moses for their sakes, because he did not sanctifie the Lord in the eyes of the children of Israel, Numb. 20. 12. secondly, to manifest Gods love and mercy to them, granting them that favour which he denied his servant Moses, to wit, of carrying them into that good land of Canaan; thirdly, to give them a hint how carefull they had need to be to walk uprightly with God, who was so farre dis∣pleased with him because of his infidelity. Vers. 24. For the Lord thy God is a consuming fire, even a jealous God, &c.] The Lord is here called a consuming fire, because of his exeeding great indignation against his people when they provoke him by their rebellions, and because when he resolves to take vengeance on them, he doth many times consume and destroy thm, even as the fire burns up all that stands in its way; and again, he is called a jalous God, with respect unto the covenant which he made with his people, wherein he had taken them to be his spouse, and had engaged himself to be as a husband to them, and so was as jealous of having the worship due onely to him to be given to any creature, as husbands use to be of their wives dealing falsely with them: and Solomon, we know, saith of jealousie, that the coals thereof are coals of fire, which hath a most vehement flame, Cant. 8. 6. Vers. 25. When thou shalt beget children, and childrens children, and shalt have remained long in the land, &c.] That is, be not secure and bold to sinne, because you are therein settled; for if you do, God will soon cast you out again. Vers. 26. I call heaven and earth to witnesse against you, &c.] This obtestation of heaven and earth may be understood of God and the Angels in heaven, and men on earth. But I rather conceive it to be meant of the dead and unreasonable crea∣tures, and that hereby is implyed, first, that as surely as there was a heaven and an earth, so surely should they perish from off the land; secondly, that the bruit crea∣tures were not so stupid as they, if notwithstanding all these warnings given them they should neverthelesse go after strange gods. Vers. 34. Or hath God assayed to go and take him a nation from the midst of another nation, by temptations, &c.] The miracles and wonders which God wrought in Egypt are here called temptations, because he did thereby try both
the Egyptians, to see whether they would be wonne to yield to him, and let the people of Israel go; and the Israelites, to see whether they would be wonne to ear the Lord, and to trust in him, who had done so great and wonderfull things for them. Vers. 37. And because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed af∣ter them, &c.] Not for any thing which he saw in you, or in your fathers, did he choose you to be his peculiar people, but of his own free grace and love, and from that love of his it was merely that he brought thee out of Egypt in his sight, that is, the eye of his providence being still fixed upon them, even as a father causes his child to go before him, that he may keep his eye upon him, and no suffer him to fall into any danger. Vers. 44. And this is the law which Moses set before the children of Israel, &c.] He meaneh that which hereafter followeth: this therefore is a preface to the next chapter, where the repetition of the laws beginneth. Vers. 49. And all the plain on this side Jord Eastward, even unto the sea of the plain, &c.] See chap. 3. 17. CHAP. V. Vers. 1. ANd Moses called all Israel, and said unto them, &c.] That is, all the elders and chief of the people. It was not possible that so many hundred thousands as the Israelites now were should hear Moses speaking to them: But as Exod. 12. 3. where Moses and Aaron were appoined to speak unto all the con∣gregation of Israel, vers. 21. it is said that they called for all the elders of Israel, so it was here. Vers. 3. The Lord made not this covenant with our fathers, &c.] That which Moses here speaks of is that which he made with the Israelites at Horeb, when he gave them the law, as is expressed in the former verse, The Lord, (saith he) made not this covenant with our fathers that is, with our fathers in Egypt▪ or it may be meant of the Patriarchs Abraham, and Isaack, and Jacob (even including all from Adam unto Moses, yea and all their ancesters before the giving of the law at Horeb) but with us, that is, us his people whom he brought out of Egypt, even us who are all of us here alive this day, that is, not onely with those who then were living at the giving of the Law, but since dead in the wildernesse, but even with us their posterity who are all alive this day. Now for the understanding of this we must know that though the covenant of grace, which God made with the Israelites when he brought them out of Egypt, was one and the same for substance with that whih he had made before with their fathers, and though it was much alike too in regard of the outward dispensation, both being delivered in a way suitable to the dayes of the old Tetament (which was common to both) to wit, under dark pro∣mises, types and ceremonies; yet first, because the Lord did more fully and more clearly make known unto them at Horeb the tenour of the covenant then he hd ever done unto their fathers, partly by giving them many more signes and shadows of the promised Messiah, and the good that was to be had in him, as the taberncle,
the ark, the mercy-seat, and the priesthood, &c. and partly by giving them a writ∣ten law containing a perfect summ of all that God required of them; and secondly, because he then entred into covenant with them as a body politick, a people whom he had separated from all other nations to be his peculiar people, prescribing them an outward form of government, laws and statutes, to which they consented to sub∣mit themselves therefore Moses tells them that the Lord did not make this cove∣nant with their fathers: and hence it is also that the Apostle saith the law was after the covenant in Christ, Gal. 3. 17. And of this speciall mercy afforded them above their fathers Moses puts them here in mind, to make them the more carefull to keep Gods laws. Vers. 4. The Lord talked with you face to face in the mount, &c.] To wit▪ when he gave them the ten commandments following, vers. 6. then the Lord talked with them face to face, that is immediately by himself and not by a messenger: and indeed this was not without a speciall mysterie: for the ten commandments being a renewing and repeating of the covenant of works to be performed by every man in his own person, therefore the Lord delivered these laws himself, and there was no Mediatour betwixt him and the people; whereas the other laws, which were afterwards given them, containing many shadows of Chrit, in whom God had made a covenant of grace, were therefore delivered to Moses, and by him to the people, Moses standing as a Mediatour betwixt God and them. But of this phrase of Gods speaking to them face to face, see also the note upon Exod. 33. 11. Vers. 5. I stood between the Lord and you at that time, &c.] That is, after God had out of the fire spoken the ten commandments, I was glad to stand as a Media∣tour betwixt the Lord and you. Vers. 12. Keep the Sabbath-day to sanctifie it, &c.] In Exod. 20. 8. it is Re∣member the Sabbath-day to keep it holy; so likewise some other small differences there are, which are not worthy the quetioning, the substance being exactly the same. Vers. 15. And rmember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, &c.] In this fourth commandment, as it was delivered by the Lord from mount Sinai, the worlds Creation and Gods resting on the seventh day was mentioned as a main ground of it, Exod. 20. 11. but here Moses repeating this commandment omits that, and presseth their deliverance out of Egypt as a chief reason of Gods en∣joyning them to sanctifie this day, Remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence, &c. therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath-day. And indeed though the Lords resting on the seventh day at the worlds Creation was the main grond of the sabbaths first institution, yet their deliverance out of Egypt might be the reason why th Lord did now insert this amongst other the commandments which he gave in charge to the Israelites, and that in these respets: first, because by their redemp∣tion out of Egypt they were bound to consecrae themselves wholly to Gods service as his peculiar people, whereof the holy imployment of the Sabbath might be a notable memoriall and signe; and secondly▪ because of that particular charge of suf∣fering their servants to rest on the Sabbath-day, their former bondage in Egypt be∣ing
a strong inducement to move them to take pity of their srvants, and this en∣joyned rest of their servants, being a good memoriall to put them in mind of their bondage in Egypt. Vers. 21. Neither shalt thou desire thy neighbours wife, &c.] Exod. 20. 17. God first forbids the coveting of our neighbours house, and then next the coveting of his wife; here contrarily the coveting our neighbours wie is sirst forbidden, and then afterward the coveting of his house, &c. so that they that would divide this last commandment into two, as the Papists do, cannot justly say which is the ninth commandment, and which is the tenth▪ because one branch of it is first in Exodus, and another is first here in Deuteronomie; and we cannot think that Moses would pervert the order of the ten commandments. Vers. 22. And he added no more.] That is, he spake no more unto the people but these ten commandments immediately by himself, the rest he spake unto Moses, and then Moses told it them, and that because they desired it should be so; which Moses relates largely in the remainder of the chapter, to convince them that they had no cause to give lesse regard to the other statutes, which Moses delivered them from Gods own mouth. But yet withall these words may imply the perfection of the decalogue or tenne commandments, to wit, that the Lord hath therein given us such a perfect summe of the morall Law, that there is nothing farther to be ad∣ded to it. And he wrote them in two tables of stone, &c.] See the note upon Exo∣dus 1. 18. Vers. 24. We have seen this day that God doth talk with man, and he livet, &c.] In these words they confesse that they had heard God talking with them▪ and were for all that alive; and yet in the next words in the following verse they adde, Now therefore why should we die? for this great fire will consume us; where∣as rather one would think that from their present safetie, after they had heard God talking with them, they should have encouraged themselves against all fear for the time to come. But for this I answer, that in these first words they speak of their present safety as a matter of wonder, and thence inferre, that though they had esca∣ped this danger for the present, yet the very terrour of it would kill them if God did thus still reveal his will to them, and therefore desired that Moses might receive from God what was farther to be said, and then he might deliver it to them. And indeed this is still the work of the Law, to scare men, and drive them to seek for a Mediatour betwixt God and them. Vers. 26. For who is there of all lesh that hath heard the voice of the living God?] That is, what man is there that ever heard God speaking out of the midst of the fire (as we have done) and yet lived? Moses useth here the word flesh, speaking of men, because that implyes the frailtie of mans condition, which is the cause why men are not able to endure to heare God speaking to them in such ma∣jesty and glory.
CHAP. VI. Vers. 1. NOw these are the commandments, the statutes, and the judgements, &c.] Here Moses entreth upon the explanation of the first command∣ment of the tenne before rehearsed, chap. 5. Vers. 6. And these words which I command thee this day shall be in thine heart.] That is, they shall be imprinted in thy mind, thou shalt acquaint thy self with them, and lay them up in thy memory and mind, as travellers do the directi∣ons that are given them for the finding of their way, that so upon all occasions thou maist know what thou art to do, and maist not be to seek. Vers. 8. And thou shalt bind them for a signe upon thine hand, &c.] See the note upon Exod. 13. 16. Vers. 13. Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shalt swear by his name, &c.] That is, when thou hast a calling to swear, thou shalt swear by the name of God, and not by any creature whatsoever it be. Vers. 15. For the Lord thy God is a jealous God among you.] There are two arguments included in these words, whereby Moses disswades them from going a∣whoring after other Gods: first, because their God was jealous of having this ho∣nour given to any but himself, concerning which see the note upon chap. 4. 24. and secondly, because their God was ever amongst them (as being every where present) observing all their wayes, and therefore their idolatries could not be hidden from him. Vers. 16. Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God as ye tempted him in Massah.] Men are said to tempt God, when they will not rest in that truth concerning God revealed in his word, but will needlessely make experiments whether he be so just, wise, faithfull, &c. as in his word he is said to be: which may be done, first, by wilfull sinning, as it were trying whether he be omniscient, &c. Act. 5. 3. second∣ly, by needlesse rushing upon any danger without a calling, Mat. 4. 6, 7. thirdly, by requiring a signe needlessely, and out of a false dissembling heart, onely to see whe∣ther such a miracle can be wrought or no, Mat. 16. 1. Luke 11. 16. fourthly, by prescribing God when and how he shall perform his promises, which limiting of God proceeds from infidelity; and thus they tempted God in Massah. See Psalm. 78. 41. Vers. 25. And it shall be our righteousnesse, if we observe to do all these com∣mandments, &c.] Thus the Law requires the righteousnesse which is by works, but the Gospel speaks otherwise, Rom. 10. 5, 6. Neither yet is it the purpose of Moses that the Israelites should look to be exactly righteous by the exact fulfilling of the Law; but the Law is onely here used as a school-master to bring them unto Christ, Gal. 3. 24. Moses propounding to them this righteousnesse of the Law, that they, finding how impossible it was for them to attain this righteousnesse of the Law, might thereby be brought to seek after that righteousnesse which is by faith; and withall to let them know that though the Lord was pleased to make a covenant of grace with them, and to receive them as justified in and through the righteousnesse of a Mediatour, yet there was also a personall inherent righteousnesse required of
them as the necessary effect of the righteousnesse of faith, which consisted in the sincere and carefull observation of all these Laws, which however it must needs be weak and imperfect, yet in and through their Mediatour God would acept it. CHAP. VII. Vers. 1. WHen the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land whither thou goest to possesse it, and hath cast out many nations before thee, the Hittites, &c.] In Gen. 15. 19. there are ten nations mentioned whose land God there promised to Abrahams posterity; and here Moses speaks but of se∣ven nations, and one of these too, to wit, the Hivites, are not reckoned there: so that there are foure nations named there of whom there is no mention here, to wit, the Kenites, the Kenizites, the Kadmonites, and the Rephaims. But at this diffe∣rence we need not stumble; for it was now many hundred years since that promise made to Abraham, in which time there might be great alterations amongst the na∣tions that inhabited this land, and so happely those nations mentioned there and not here were at this time united in one with some of these seven nations, and be∣sides happely the nations mentioned there and not here are those which in Davids and Solomons time became tributaries to the crown of Israel, and so included in that promise made to Abraham; which yet were never cast out before the Israelites, and therefore not named here by Moses. Vers. 3. Neither shalt thou make marriages with them, &c.] Under this pro∣hibition by necessary consequence marrying with all other idolatrous nations is likewise forbidden them; and therefore we see that Ezra bewailed the marriages which the people of God had made with other idolatrous nations as well as thes here mentioned, to wit, the Ammonites, Moabites, and Egyptians, Ezra. 9. 1, 2. Vers. 5. Ye shall destroy their altars, and break down their images, and cut down their groves, &c.] Chap. 12. 3. there is also expresse mention made of brn∣ing their groves too. Vers. 10. And repayeth them that hate him to their face, to destroy them, &c.] This phrase implyes that God would as openly, as manifstly oppose and fight against those that hate him for their destruction, as they did impudently and openly oppose God: impudent sinners do as it were seek to outface God, Psal. 73. 9. and God is said to repay them to their face, when he sets himself against them in this their impudency, and confounds them so that themselves shall plainly see that the Lord hath set himself to oppose and confound them. Also hereby may be implyed that God should confound them in this life, even whilest they were oppo∣sing and outfacing the Lord, whence the second clause may seem to be added by way of explaining the first, he will not be slack to him that hateth him, he will repay him to his face. Vers. 15. And will put none of the evil diseases of Egypt (which thou knowest) upon thee.] That is, the Lord will not lay upon you any of those dangerous and noisome diseases wherewith it is well known to you that he punished the Egypti∣ans for your sakes, such as were those boyls mentioned Exod. 9. 10. and the pesti∣lence,
vers. 15; or wherewith you know the inhabitants of that countrey were usually troubled, such as that called the botch of Egypt, Deut. 28. 27. See also the note upon Exod. 15. 26. Vers. 16. Neither shalt thou serve their Gods, for that will be a snare unto thee, &c.] That is, a cause of thy-ruine, it will bring judgements upon thee from which thou wilt no way be able to free hy self. Vers. 20. Moreover the Lord thy God will send the hornet among them, &c.] Against whom the strength and multitude of these nations shall be no defence. See the note upon Exod. 23. 28. Vers. 24 There shall no man be able to stand before thee, untill thou have de∣stroyed them.] All this is promised upon condition of their obedience to God; for when they obeyed not Gods command, we reade afterwards of many of these na∣tions that were too strong for them. Se Josh. 15. 63. and 17. 12. and Judg. 1. 34. Vers. 25. Thou shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on them, &c.] This may be meant either of the plates of silver and gold wherewith their idols of wood and brasse were usually covered over; or else of the chains, bracelet, jewels, garments of silver or gold wherewith they were wont to deck and trimme up their idols, Esa. 0. 32. yea and under this all other ornaments of their idols, though not of gold and silver, are comprehended. Because the Israelites might out of cove∣tousnesse think that so they destroyed the idols themselves, they might reserve the gold and silver that was about them, and yet be blamelesse, the Lord, the better to shew how he detests idolatry, forbids them here the reserving of any of the gold and silver that was upon the idols of the land, and to that end chargeth them not to meddle with it, no not to desire it, but utterly to consume that together with the idols themselves▪ lest, saith e, thou be snared therein, that is, les by doing other∣wise thou becomest guilty before God, and so shouldst draw down judgement up∣on thy self. Vers. 26. Neither shalt thou bring an abomination into thy house, lest thou be a cursed thing like it, &c.] That is, devoted to destruction as that was▪ to wit, for reserving a polluted and accursed thing which should have been destroyed. For it is a cursed thing.] That is, a thing separated from mens use, and devo∣ted either to destruction, as the idols and ornaments thereof here mentioned; or at the Lords appointment to be carried into his treasurie, as some conceive the gods of Jericho were, because it is said, Josh. 6. 19, 24. that the silver and gold which was in that city was brought into the Lords treasury. CHAP. VIII. Vers. 2. ANd thou shalt remember all the ay which the Lord thy God led thee, &c.] To make the Israelites the more carefull to obey the command∣ments of God, Moses wills them here to remember all the way which the Lord their God had led them these fourty years in the wildernesse, that is, all that befell them in that way, to wit, both their affliction wants and troubles on the one side, and their comforts blessings and deliverances on the other, adding withall that thus
the Lord had carried them through many troubles, though not intending to cast them off, that he might thereby humble them, and prove them whether they would keep his commandments or no; and so to know what was in their heart, that is, by this trying of them to discover what was in their hearts, to wit, the infidelity, and incostancy, and stubbornnesse of their hearts: for indeed as the fire will try gold from brasse, so will afflictions discover whose hearts are upright towards God, and who are false-hearted▪ and not such as in prosperity they seemed to be, and much vild corruption will shew it self in troubles which before did never appear. Vers. 3. That he might make thee know that man doth not live by bread onely, &c.] The meaning of this is, that God brought them to want bread, and then supplyed that want with manna from heaven, that he might thereby teach them, that though God had appointed bread and such like food to be the ordinary means of sustaining mans life, yet it was not that alone that did sustain men, but the word, that is, the decree and command of God: in so much that as bread cannot nourish us except God commands a blessing on it, so on the other side he can command any thing else to nourish us as well as bread, as they had seen in the manna where∣with God had sed them many years; yea he can keep men alive without food a long time together, as he did Moses, Elijah, and our Saviour Christ, whereupon he retorted this place of Scripure upon the devil, when he tempted him to turn stones into bread, Mat. 4. 4. Vers. 4. Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell these fourty years.] These are two other miraculous effects of Gods provident care over them, by the mention whereof Moses stirres them up to the obeying of Gods Laws. The first is, that their garments were not the worse for wearing, at least they grew not threadbare or torn in fourty years wearing, concerning which this is also par∣ticularly added, Deut. 29. 5. that their shoes (which were most likely to wear out with their continuall travelling) did not wax old upon their feet. To make this good there are some Expositours do adde concerning those that were young when they came out of Egypt, that their garments did miraculously grow as ir bodies grew. But there is no necessity of forging thus more miracles then are expressed, and that because those that out-grew their garments might be supplyed with the garments of such as died in the wildernesse, and then the garments they left off might serve those that grew to their stature. The second is, that their feet did not swell, notwithstanding their continuall travels, & that because their sho es waxt not old▪ under which also some think is included the health of their bodies in generall (unlesse in case when they were extraordinarily stricken with sicknesse because of some rebellion against God) to which they apply that of the Psalmist, there was not one feeble person among their tribes, Psal. 105. 37. Vers. 5. Thou shalt also consider in thine heart, that as a man chasteneth his sonne, so the Lord thy God chasteneth thee.] That is, out of love, with a gentle hand, and with a purpose to do thee good thereby; and this Moses adviseth the Is∣raelites to consider in their hearts, first, because unlesse this be well thought upon, afflictions would overwhelm the heart with sorrow; and secondly, because the se∣rious consideration both of Gods severity in correcting his own dear children, and
his compassion in doing it in a fatherly manner might well work in them a filiall fear and endeavour to obey God in all things whatsoever, whence it is that he addes those words in the next verse, Therefore thou shalt keep the commandments of the Lord thy God, &c. Vers. 9. A land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou mayest dig brasse, &c.] That is, a land wherein their is abundance of mines, iron mingled with the stones, or as plentifull as stones, and brasse to be digged almost out of e∣very hill. Vers. 14. Which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.] This concerning their deliverance out of Egypt is here inserted, first, that by putting them in mind of their poore originall, when they were bondslaves, he might prevent their pride, whereof he had given them warning in the foregoing words; and secondly, that by the remembrance of so great a mercy they might be rendred the more carefull to observe his commandents. Vers. 15. Who led thee through that great and terrible wildernesse, wherein were fierie serpents, and scorpions, and drought, where there was no water.] Con∣cerning these fierie serpents, see the note upon Numb. 21. 6. That which is added here concerning the drought of those places through want of water, is either added to set forth their exceeding traits and danger in those places where there were fiery serpents and scorpions, because being bitten with those venemous creatures they became thereby extremely thirsty, and yet had no water to quench their thirst, & so consequently their miraculous preservation in those dangers; or else rather to make way to that which followeth concerning Gods fetching water for them out of the rock of flint, for it was but onely in some places of the wildernesse where they had no water. Vers. 16. Who fed thee in the wildernesse with manna, which thy fathers knew not, that he might humble thee, &c.] This last clause, that he might humble thee, &c. hath respect principally to the aflictions mentioned before, verse 15. where∣with they had been exercised in the wildernesse; yet I see not but that Gods feed∣ing them with manna, mentioned in the words immediately foregoing, might also be said to have been done for the humbling of them, because nothing is more effe∣ctuall to humble the hearts of sinnrs then the great and extraordinary mercies of God, if duly considered. And that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end.] That is, af∣terwards, at last. God doth humble and prove his children by afflictions, that after∣ward he may both bestow those blessings which they wanted upon them, to wit, when by their former want they have learnt how to prize them, and also, that he may cause them to bring forth the quiet fruit of righteousnesse. See Heb. 12. 11. CHAP. IX. Vers. 1. HEare, O Israel, thou art to passe over Jordan this day, &c.] Three things must be noted for the understanding of these words: first, that by this day here is not meant the very day of their passing over Jordan, but onely
that the time was now come that ere long they were to passe over Jordan, and to enter the land of Canaan; for in the Scripture day is often used for time, as 2. Cor. 6. 2. Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation: secondly, that by possessing nations greater and mightier then themselves is meant the possessing of the land of those nations: and thirdly, Moses here puts them in mind of the won∣derfull strength of the inhabitants, purposely to prevent all thoughts of vanquish∣ing them by their own strength, and that when they had overcome them they might be sure to ascribe all the glory to God; as is evident by the inference he makes upon this, vers. 3. Understand therefore this day that the Lord thy God is he which goeth before thee as a consuming fire, that is, know therefore by this which hath been said of the exceeding strength of this people that it were not possible that you should so suddenly destroy so many potent nations, if there were not a power above that of mans imployed in the work, and that Gods hand is as evident herein as if a consuming fire should go before you to burn them up. Vers. 3. So shalt thou drive them out, and destroy them quickly.] The meaning of this is, that the nations with whom they should fight they should suddenly de∣stroy, they should not do it with much toil and labour and many battels, but they should soon make an end of them. Indeed it cannot be said that all the inhabitants of the land were quickly destroyed, for they were not driven out and consumed quickly, but by little and little, as Moses said before, Deut. 7. 22. But here he speaks onely of those with whom they should have warre immediately upon their entrance into Canaan. Vers. 6. For thou art a stiffe-necked people.] That is, a stubborn and rebellious people, that will not stoop to the obedience of Gods laws; the Metaphor is taken from unruly heifers that will not yield their necks to the yoke. Vers. 9. I abode in the mount fourty dayes and fourty nights, I neither did eat bread, nor drink water.] See the note upon Exod. 24. 18. Vers. 10. And the Lord delivered unto me two tables of stone written with the finger of God.] See the notes upon Exod 31. 18. And on them was written according to all the words which the Lord spake with you in the mount, out of the midst of fire, in the day of the assembly.] That is, on those tables of stone were written the ten commandments, word for word, as God spake them from the mount out of the midst of the fire, in the day when the people were called and assembled together at the foot of the mount to hear God speak un∣to them. Vers. 12. And the Lord said unto me, Arise, get thee down quickly, &c.] Some Expositours from this word Arise would inferre that Moses was kneeling before God to receive from him what he should give him in charge when he told him of the peoples, sinne, and willed him therefore presently to go down amongst them. They are quickly turned aside out of the way, &c.] See the note upon Exod. 32. 8. Vers. 14. Let me alone, that I may destroy them, &c.] See the nots upon Exod. 32. 10. Vers. 15. So I turned and came down from the mount.] To wit, after he had
first prayed unto God for the people that they might not be destroyed, and God had granted his deire; for so much is expressed in the story, Exod. 32. 11, 14. though it be not repeated here. Vers. 17. And I took the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, &c.] See the note upon Exod. 32. 19. Vers. 18. And I fell down before the Lord, as at the first, fourty dayes and fourty nights, &c.] To wit, when he went up again into the mount, and carried with him two new tables of stone, as God enjoyned him, Exod. 34. 1. for then also as it is noted there, vers. 9. he prayed for the people again, as being much afraid of the great anger which the Lord had conceived against them, notwithstanding the Lord had yielded to pardon them before he went down the first time from the mount, Exod. 32. 14. And indeed assurance that God hath pardoned a sinne doth not make his servants the lesse earnest still to beg the pardon of it. Vers. 21. And I took your sinne, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it with fire, &c.] See the notes upon Exod. 32. 20. Vers. 22. And at Taberah, and at Massah, and at Kibroth-hattaavah, ye pro∣voked the Lord to wrath, &c.] This is inserted as by way of parenthesis, as if he had said, Though I insist chiefly upon this sinne at Horeb, because it was a most grievous sinne, yet alas many other rebellions of yours I might reckon up, at Ta∣berah, at Massah, &c. Vers. 25. Thus I fell down before the Lord fourty dayes and fourty nights, as I fell down at the first.] The former three verses being inserted as by the way, now he returns to speak again of his interceding for them the second time, when God was so highly displeased with them for that their foul sinne in making the golden calf; for the fourtie dayes here mentioned are the same fourty dayes the second time spent with God, whereof he had spoken before, vers. 18. which was after he had broken the calf, and executed justice upon the people for their sinne, and many other passages which are largely related in the thirtie second and thirtie third chap∣ters of Exodus. CHAP. X. Vers. 1. AT that time the Lord said unto me, Hew thee two tables of stone, &c.] That is, before my going up the second time into the mount, at that time when upon your sinne and Gods displeasure I had earnestly sought unto God for you, the Lord, in testimonie that he was reconciled, gave this charge con∣cerning two new tables of stone: and indeed at that time it was that he went up with them, and stayed in the mount again the second time fourty dayes and fourty nights. Now as the breaking of the first tables might signifie, that there was no hope for mankind to be saved by the keeping of the law; so this providing of two new tables might signife, that yet notwithstanding the Lord would have the law to be in force as a rule of holinesse and righteousnesse unto his people, and that the Lord by his spirit writing his law in their hearts would enable them in some good measure to conform their lives to the obedience thereof; and besides Gods appoin∣ting
of Moses to provide these two tables might intimate to the people, that it was by his prayer and intercssion that they had this treasure again restored to them. See also the note upon Exod. 34. 1. Vers. 3. And I made an ark of shittim wood.] The ark here mentioned may be understood of an ark made onely for that purpose, to keep the tables in, till the other ark was made, whereof God had spoken to him, and for the making whereof he had given him direction in the first fourty dayes that he was with God in the mount. If so, this ark no doubt was made at the same time when he hewed the two tables of stone before he went up the second time that he abode fourtie daye, in the mount. But if we understand it of the ark of testimony, that was not made till he came down, after he had the second time abode fourtie dayes in the mount; onely it is here joyned with the hewing of the two tables, because in this also he did as God commanded him, though he did it not at the same time when he hewed the two tables of stone, but afterwards when he came down from the mount: and this I rather think is the meaning of the words, because vers. 5. he addes, and there they be as the Lord commanded me. Vers. 4. And he wrote on the tables, according to the first writing, &c.] See the note upon Exod. 34. 28. likewise the notes upon the tenth verse of the foregoing chapter. Vers. 6. And the children of Israel took their journey from Beeroth of the chil∣dren of Jaakan, to Mosera, &c.] In this and the following verse there are many difficulties, and such as indeed (the words being read as they are in our translati∣on) are almost inextricable: yet we must see what may be said for the answer∣ing of them. The first difficulty is in the connexion of these words with that which went before, to wit, how Moses, being in this chapter speaking of those things that befell them at mount Sinai, comes here to mention the journeys of the Israelites in places to which they came not a long time after they had been at mount Sinai, as is evident, Numb. 33. 31, 32. But this it is not so hard to resolve: for we must know that these two verses are not added here as in order of History, but are onely inserted by the way as in a parenthesis, so that the meaning of Moses is not that Beeroth of the children of Jaakan here mentioned was the next place where they pitched their tents after they removed from mount Sinai (for as we may see, Numb. 33. mount Sinai was but the twelveth station of the children of Israel, & Beeroth of the children of Jaakan or Bene-jaakan, as it is called, Numb. 33. 31. was the twenty eighth station) but his meaning is onely that having gon many journeys forward and backward, as the Lord commanded them, at length they went from Beeroth of the children of Jaakan to Mosera or Moseroth, as it is written, Numb. 33. 30. The second difficultie is concerning the place of Aarons death, to wit, be∣cause Numb. 33. 38. it is said Aaron died at mount Hor, and here that he dyed at Mosera, and Mosera in that 33. of Numbers is but the twenty seventh station of the Israelites, and that as they went back from Kadesh-Barnea towards the red sea, and mount Hor is their thirtie fourth station, and that as they returned again from the red sea towards the land of Canaan. But to this I answer that this Mosera or Moseroth and mount Hor were but one mountain in the root, though divided into
divers tops, as mount Sinai and Horeb were, by the West part whereof, called Moseroth, Moses encamped as he went back towards the red sea, and by the East part thereof, called mount Hor, as he returned again Northward towards the land of Canaan; and so though Aaron dyed at mount Hor, yet here it is said of Mosera that there Aaron, dyed and there he was buried, and that because Mosera and mount Hor were both one and the same mountain. The third and greatest difficul∣tie is in the seeming contradiction that is betwixt this place, and that, Numb. 33. 31. in that here it is said that the Israelites went from Bene-jaakan or Beeroth of the children of Jaakan to Mosera, & so to Gudgodah, and to Jotbath▪ & yet there, quite contrary in one particular, it is said that they went from Mosera or Moseroth to Be∣ne-jaakan, & so from thence to Gudgodah, or Horhagidgad, as it is there called, and from thence to Jotbathah, or Jotbath, as it is here written. To answer this, some Ex∣positours say that the places here named are not the same that are mentioned, Num. 33. 31. 32, 33. But because all the foure places here named together are mentioned also together there, and that with so little variation of the names as Mosera for Moseroth, and Gudgodah for Horhagidgad, and Jotbath for Jotbathah, and Be∣ne-jaakan for Beeroth or the wells of the children of Jaakan, it is very hard to think that Moses in these two places speaks not of the same journeys of the Israe∣lites. Another Expositour therefore, and that is Bonfrerius he Jesuite, answers this difficultie thus, That as they went back from Kadesh-barnea to the red sea the Is∣raelites went indeed from Moseroth (which was a part of the mountain called also mount Hor) to Bene-jaakan, as it is said, Numb. 33. 31. but as they returned again from the red sea towards the land of Canaan, in a way not farre distant from that they had gon before, then they came first to Beeroth of the children of Jaakan, or Bene-jaakan, and so from thence went to Moseroth or Mosera: and indeed this an∣swer would be very satisfactory, but that there is one objection to be made against it, which seems unanswerable, and that is, that both here and in Deut 33. it is said that after they were gone past Moseroth and Bene-jaakan, they went first to Gud∣godah, or Horhagidgad, and thence to Jotbath or Jotbathah, which cannot be, if Moses▪speaks there of the Israelites journeys from the land of Canaan towards the red sea at Ezion-gaber, and here of their going back again from the red sea towards the land of Canaan, since if after they had passed Moseroth and Bene-jaakan they came from thence to Gudgodah, and so to Jotbath, as they went from Canaan to∣wards the red sea, then as they went back again from the red sea towards Canaan they must needs come to Jotbath, and Gudgodah before they came to Bene-jaakan and Mosera. There remains therefor onely one answer more that can be given for the reconciling of this seeming contradiction, and that is, that it seems the Is∣raelites, as they travelled from Kadesh towards the red sea, went from Moseroth to Bene-jaakan, as is expressed▪ Numb. 33. 31. but then finding there some difficulty in their passing forward, they returned again from Bene-jaakan to Mosea, which is that remove that Moses here speaks of▪ but is not mentioned in Numb. 33. and so fetching a compasse about took another way, and went forward again towards the red sea, first to Gudgodah, and then to Jotbath, as is well expressed in some mappes. The last doubt that may be moved concerning these words is, What was
the aim and drift of Moses in the inserting of these two verses, as it were by the way, concerning these journeys of the Israelites, where he is relating what he did at mount Sinai. And for this we must know, that the drift of Moses herein is by the mention of these journeys of the Israelites to give a touch at those remarkable occurrents which at these places happened, that might serve to humble the people, and withall to quicken them in their care to walk uprightly with God. Thus first, the place where Aaron dyed, and Eleazar succeeded in his room, is mentioned, be∣cause the remembrance of Aarons death might humble them for the sinne of the golden calf whereby God was displeased with Aaron, and because the continance of the priesthood in his sonne was a proof of Gods being reconciled unto the peo∣ple upon the prayer and intercession of Moses, whereof before he had spoken: and so likewise their removing from Gudgodah to Jotbath is mentioned vers. 7. be∣cause that was a land of waters, as it is there expressed, because this bringing of them to such a place of waters as they travelled through the wildernesse was ano∣ther proof of Gods grace and favour towards them, and the respect he had to their infirmity, that they might not murmur against him for want of water as formerly they had done. Vers. 8. At that time the Lord separated the tribe of Lvi, &c.] This is not meant of the time when they came to Jotbath or Jotbathah, of which he had spoken in the foregoing verse; for now Moses returns to the story of those things that were done at mount Sinai (having as by the way inserted the former two verses for the reasons above mentioned) instncing in this se∣parating of the tribe of Levi (wherein not the Levites onely but the priests also are comprehended) to the spirituall imployments, here mentioned as a speci∣all signe of Gods receiving them into favour again upon his prayers and inter∣cession. Vers. 10. And I stayed in the mount, according to the first time, fourty dayes and fourti nights, &c.] This is thus again and again repeated, that they might still be put in mind of the greatenesse of their sinne, whereby they had deserved to be cut off, but that Moses interceding thus earnestly for them God was pleased to be reconciled to them. Vers. 11. Arise, take thy journey before th people, that they may go in, &c.] This also shews God was fully reconciled, and willing that presently they should have entred the land, had not they by their murmuring excluded themselves for ma∣ny years after. Vers. 14. Behold the heaven and the heaven of heavens is the Lords,] By the heaven of heavens is meant that which is by the learned called the Empyreall hea∣ven, where the Angels and the Saints departed do injoy the glorious and beatifi∣call vision of God; and it is called the heaven of heavens both because it is the highest and doth contain the other heavens within its orb, and also by way of ex∣cellency, as the most holy place in the Temple is called the holy of holies, because  farre surpasseth all the rest in splendour and glory. Vers. 16. Circumcise therefore the foreskinne of your heart, and be n more stiffe-necked.] That is▪ mortifie all your naturall luts and corruptions, rid your selves
of that blindnesse of mind, that hardnesse of heart, all that spirituall pollution where∣with you are born, and be no more stubborn and rebellious against the Lord. The first clause is meant of the mortifying of their inward lusts, and the second of the re∣forming of their outward conversation by true repentance: and because circumcisi∣on was a signe of this work of grace which God required of his people, the casting off the old man with all the lusts and pollutions thereof, therefore Moses useth this phrase of circumciing their hearts; yea by requiring this of a people amongst whom there were but few that were outwardly circumcised (for none were cir∣cumcised in their fourty years travelling through the wildernesse, Josh. 5. 5.) he taught them that he chiefly required and regarded this circumcision of the Spirit, and did not one whit esteem the other in comparison of this, according to that of the Apostle, Rom. 2. 29. He is a Jew that is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, &c. Nor doth his requiring this of them imply that they were able to work this holy change in their hearts, but onely that they were to endeavour, and to use all good means that God by his Spirit might work this in them. Vers. 17. For the Lord your God is God of gods, &c.] That is, farre above all that are called Gods; for under this word Gods may be comprehended not onely the false and idol-gods of the heathens, but also the Angels in heaven, and Magi∣strates on earth, who are often termed Gods in the Scripture, as we may see Psal. 82. 6. where that which is translated in our Bibles, Thou hast made him a little lower then the Angels, and that by warrant of the Apostles quoting this place thus. Heb. 2. 7. is in the originall, a little lower then the Gods; and so Psal. 82. 6. the Lord speaking of Kings and other Magistrates saith, I have said, Ye are Gods; whence it is also that the Apostle saith that there be Gods many and Lords many, 1. Cor. 8. 5. Now the reason why Moses doth thus set forth the majesty and glo∣rious excellency of God is, because the due consideration hereof was a good means to make the people the more to stand in aw of offending him, as the inference of these words upon that which went before doth plainly shew, Be no more stiffe∣necked: for the Lord your God is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, a mighty and a terrible, which regardeth not persons, &c. & besides in this last clause, that God regardeth not persons, there is a hint given the people to take heed of presuming to sinne because they were Gods people, in regard that they ad to deal with a God that regarded not persons, and therefore would no more spare an Is∣raelite, then he would a heathen. Vers. 18. He doth execute he judgement of the fatherlesse, &c.] Gods exam∣ple is here propounded as a pattern for his people to follow. Vers. 20. And swear by his name.] See the note upon chap. 6. 13. Vers. 21. He is thy praise, and he is thy God, &c.] That is, this shall be thy chief glory and praise amongst other nations, that this great and mighty Jehovah is thy God, and that thou art his people, and he it is that shall be the subject of thy praises and songs of thanksgiving continually.
CHAP. XI. Vers. 2. ANd know you this day: for I speak not with your children, &c.] I the first words, And know you this day, Moses wills the Israelites se∣riously to take notice of, and to lay to heart, that which he was then about to say concerning the Lords dealing with them even from the time that he brought them out of Egypt, and then in the next words, For I speak not with your children which have not known, and which have not seen the chastisement of the Lord your God, &c. he shews what great reason there was that they should be seriously affected with the recitall of these great things which God had done, namely, because they had been eye-witnesses of them (and those that have such evidence and such self-experience are usually more affected therewith, then those that are onely told of them) had he spoken to their children of these things, that were not eye-witnesses of the doing of them, it were not so mch to be wondred if the bare relation of these things did not so much affect them; but speaking to them that had known and seen all the great acts of the Lord, it could not but work upon them, to make them the more carefull to obey his commandments. Vers. 4. And how the Lord hath destroyed them unto this day.] It may be questioned concerning these words, How it is here said of the army of Egypt fourty years after it was drowned in the red sea, that the Lord had destroyed them unto that day. But for this we must know that hereby is onely meant, that the Israelites did enjoy the benefit of that destruction which then fell upon the Egyptians unto that day, namely, because unto that day they durst never after that pursue the Isra∣elites, or attempt any thing against them. Vers. 7. But your eyes have seen all the great acts of the Lord which he did.] For many of them who cae out of Egypt were yet alive▪ to wit, those that were then under twenty years of age, and so they had seen what was done in Egypt, and the rest had seen some all, some many of those glorious acts which God had done in the wildernesse, whereof Moses had also spoken in the foregoing words. Vers. 10. For the land whither thou goest in to possesse it, is not as the land of Egypt, &c.] Moses here shews the Israelites a remarkable difference betwixt the land of Canaan and the land of Egypt, and his drift theren is thereby to ove them to be the more carefull to obey the commandments of God; for the under∣standing whereof we must know, first, that in Egypt they never, or at least very seldome, had any rain, Zach. 14. 18. If the family of Egypt go not up▪ and come not, that have no rain, there shall be the plague, &c. but in sead of rain the river Nilus used once a year to oveflow all or the greatest part of that countrey, and so did mellow and soften the earth for all the year after; secondly, that therefore when there was any failing in the overflowing of this river they were forced to take a great deal of pains to water their grounds, yea those plaes, whither the overflowing of Nilus did not reach, were alwayes thus watred to the gat cost and labour of the owners, because they had no rain; thirdly, that it is id ere▪ in Egypt thou sowedst thy seed, and waterest it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs, either because they digged furrows with their feet, whereby water was conveyed
from Nilus to water their grounds; or else because they were forced to go up and down, to sech and carry water, to poure it out upon the grounds where they had sown their seed, and so watred their corn-fields as a man should water a garden of herbs; and fourthly, that from the excellency of the land of Canaan, which God had provided to be their inheritance, above that of Egypt in this particular, Moses srres them up to be the more obsequious in obeying the commandments of God. They should have a land that was continually watred with rain from heaven, and so there would be no need of that incessant labour and toil to which they were put in Egypt for the watering of their grounds: and srely Gods fatherly care in pro∣viding o well for them might justly challenge from thm their utmost endeavours to observe Gods Laws. I know there are some Expositours do otherwise conceive of the aim of these words, to wit, that Moses therein doth shew the people how wary they had need to be of keeping Gods love and favour to them, and not to provoke him by their sinnes, namely, because the fruitfulnesse of that land, which they were now to have, did wholly depend upon the Lords sending them rain from heaven, the want whereof they could not supply with digging ditches and water∣courses. as they did in Egypt, in regard the land of Canaan was a mountanous and illy countrey, to which it was not possble to convey water from rivers, as in Egypt they might. But the first exposition I conceive is most proper, and most a∣gable to the aim of Moses, in setting forth the excellency of Canaan above that of Egypt from whence he had brought them; and yet happely we may best say that both were implyed. Vers. 11. But the land whither ye go to possesse it, is a land of hils and valleys, &c.] Hereby is commended the commodious, healthfull, and pleasant situation of the land; yet withall some conceive that hereby is implyed also that because it was hils and dales, rivers could not overflow it, but it must needs be barren if it had not alwayes rain in due season. Vers. 12. A land which the Lord thy God careth for, &c.] That is, Canaan is a land which is not watred as Egypt is by the art and industry of man, but by the speciall care and providence of God, whose eyes are upon it all the year long, to send rain upon it, as he finds there is need. But, may some say, Was it not of the providence of God that Egypt was made fruitfull by the overflowing of Nilus? I answer, Yes; but yet because the fruitfulnesse of Egypt was much advanced by their watering the land as a garden of herbs, whereas Canaan was continually wa∣tred with rain from heaven, and where there is least use of mans indutry, but the blessing comes immediately from heaven, there the care and providence of God is most evidently seen, therefore is it said here of Canaan, that it was a land which the Lord their God eared for, &c. Vers. 14. I will give you the rain of your land in his due season, the first ran and the latter rain, &c.] The first, after the sowing of the seed, that it might take rooting in the earth; the latter, a little before harvest, that the eare might be full: and it is to be noted that though Moses had hitherto spoken to the people as in his own person, yet here he speaks as in the person of God, I will give you the rain of your land, and vers. 15. I will send grasse in thy fields, &c.
Vers. 21. That your dayes may be multiplyed, as the dayes of heaven upon earth.] That is, that you and your posterity may continue in the land of Canaan so long as the heavens shall continue in their place over the earth, namely, so long as the world shall last; for the like phrase we have concerning the perpetuity of Davids kingdome, which was accomplished in Christ, Psal. 89. 29. His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the dayes of heaven. And indeed had not the Jews provoked the Lord by their sinnes to cast them out of that good land, this promise should have been made good to them; yea and from this pro∣mise happely we may conceive hope that upon the repentance of the Jews, and their embracing the Lord Christ as their promised Messiah, they shall be again reesta∣blished in this land, and therein continue with great glory to the end of the world. Vers. 26. Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse.] This phrase of setting before them the blessing and the curse was purposely used, no doubt, to intimate that they might take their choice of either of these; and so to manifest that if the curse came upon them they caused it themselves, and could blame no body but themselves onely. Vers. 29. Thou shalt put the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the curse upon mount Ebal.] That is, thou shalt cause the blessings, which the Lord hath pro∣mised to them that keep his laws, to be pronounced on mount Gerizim, and the curses, which the Lord hath threatned to them that break his laws, to be pronoun∣ced on mount Ebal, and so shalt make those mountains to be as it were continuall remembrancers to the people of the blessing and the curse, that when they see mount Gerizim they may see the blessing set before them, and so likewise the curse, when they see mount Ebal. This is afterward enjoyned again, Deut. 27. 11. 12. &c. where it is also more fully expressed how it was to be done; and Josh. 8. 33. we may see how this which God here enjoyned was accordingly done. And it seems that from this very commandment given to Moses concerning mount Gerizim, the Samaritans, many ages after this, took occasion to build a temple there, as taking Gerizim to be a blessed place, because the blessings were pronounced on it: for that the Samaritans temple was built upon mount Gerizim is the common opinion of most Writers; and we may find it very probable by comparing together John 4. 3, 20. with Judg. 9. 7. since there, to wit Judg. 9. 7. it is evident that mount Gerizim was nigh unto Shechem, because from the top of mount Gerizim Jotham spake to the men of Shechem that were gathered together, and had made Abimelech their King, and by that which is said of the woman of Samaria, John 4. it is as evident that the Samaritans temple was built on a mountain nigh unto Shechem; because that Samaritan woman dwelling at Sychar, which was Shechem (as appears by the words that follow, John 4. 5. where it is noted that this Sychar was near by the parcell of ground which Jacob gave to his sonne Joseph, and that was certainly at Shechem, as is noted upon Gen. 33. 19. and 48. 22.) speaks of the Samaritans temple as of a place that was hard by▪ and perhaps in their view, John 4. 20. Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, & ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.
CHAP. XII. Vers. 2. YE shall utterly destroy all the places wherein the nations which ye shall possesse served their Gods, &c.] That is, all their tem∣ples and chappels, and whatever other places they had, wherein they served their idol-gods. And this God enjoyned them, first, to shew how he abhorred idolatry; and secondly, to prevent the Israelites being tempted to worship God in those places. Nor doth it hence follow that we may not worship God in such churches and chappels as have been polluted with idolatry but ought to pull them down, as some have thought; for this clause of this law i judiciall, pecular onely to the Jews, as being chiefly intended to prevent their worshipping God in any other place then that one which he had appointed, to which we in the dayes of the Go∣spel are not tyed. Vers. 4. Ye shall not do so unto the Lord your God.] That is, ye shall not sacri∣fice to him in severall places upon mountains and hills, &c. as the heathens serv their Gods; but all your sacrifices and offerings ye shall offer unto the Lord only in that place which he shall chuse for that service: for so it follows in the two next verses, But unt the place which the Lord your God shall chuse out of all your tribes to put his name there, even unto his habitation shall ye seek, and thither ye shall bring your burnt-offerings and your sacrifices, &c. Prayer and other spirituall du∣ties of Gods worship they might even then perform in other places, both in publick and private; and therefore the Levites were purposely dispersed here and there all the lnd over, and they had their Synagogues in severall places where they met to∣gether every Sabbath day to perform these holy duties; but their sacrifices were all to be brought unto the place which God should chuse, which is meant of those places where the tabernacle was placed for some time after they were come into the land of Canaan, such as were Shiloh, and Nob, and other places; whence is that of the Prophet, Jer. 7. 12. Go ye now into my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to it for the wickednesse of my people; but principally of the temple, which God chose to be the settled place for sacrifices, and it is called here the place which the Lord should chuse to put his name there, both because it was to be called by his name, The house of God, and to be consecrated to his worship and service, and withall to prevent that carnall conceit of Gods dwelling in temples made with hands, to wit, as essentially included therein; whence it is also that the same Santuary, which is here called the Lords habitati∣on, or, dwelling-place, is elsewhere called his footstool, Psal. 99. 5. As for the reasons why the Lord did bind his people to offer up their sacrifices in one place one∣ly which he would appoint, they were chiefly these two: first, because hereby God would teach them that there was but one onely way to obtain pardon of their sinnes, and acceptance of any service they did unto God, and that was by Christ their promised Messiah, of whom their tabernacle and temple was a type; and se∣condly because hereby they might the better be kept to one unifom way of wor∣shipping God, and corruptions in his worship might be prevented, whereinto they might easily fall had they been allowed to offer their sacrifices some in one place,
and some in another: and for this cause it was that in after-times the Kings of Juda were so often blamed, because they did not remove the high places, but uffered th people to sacrifce there. Vers. 6. And thither ye shall bring your burnt-offerings, and your sacriices, and your tithes, &c.] Here Moses reckons up all those holy things which they were to bring to the place which God should choose for those services: where first, by sacrifices are meant all other sacrifices besides burnt-offerings, as nne-offer∣ings, trespasse-offerings, &c. secondly, by tithes are meant not those ordinary tithes which were yearly paid to the Levites (for they were not brought to the temple, but were paid to the Levites in their severall habitations throughout the land) but a second tithe, the tithe of that which remained after the first tithe was paid to the Levites; for that, or the money for which they had sold it, they carryed up yearly to Jerusalem, and there with those tithes so carried in kind, or with such things as they bought with the money, they kept a holy feast before the Lord, as is largely expressed, chap. 14. 22, 27. thirdly, by the have-offerings of their hands are meant all the severall first-fruits which they brought in their hands, and heaved them before the Lord▪ and then left them to the priests for their portion; fourthly, by vows and freewill-offerings are meant all such sacrifices or offerings as they should extraordinarily bring, either upon some vow they had made, o freely and of their own accord; and lastly, the firstlings are the first of that their herds and flocks brought forth, for these also they carried up to the temple, as is evident Numb. 18. 17, 18. where it is said that their bloud was to be sprinkled upon the altar, and the fat was to be burnt for an offering made by fire, and then the lesh was given to the priests for their portion. Vers. 7. And there ye shall at before the Lord your God, and ye shall rejoyce, &c.] That is, when you carry your sacrifices and offerings and other things before mentioned to the place which the Lord shall choose, there ye shall feast with your holy things, and rejoyc together before the Lord. But here yet for the fuller un∣derstanding of this place we must note, first, that the meaning is not that they might eat of all the holy things before mentioned; for the burnt-offerings were wholly burnt upon the altar, and of some other sacrifices none but the priests might eat; but the things here intended, wherewith the people were to feat, were the tithes and the peace-offerings; secondly, that it is said that they should eat these things before the Lord their God, because they were to eat them, though not in the priests court, yet in the place where the tabernacle first and temple afterwards stood, the place of Gods speciall presence, to wit, in Jerusalem, which is therefore called the holy city, Matth. 4. 5. thirdly, that by all things they put their hand unto (Ye shall rejoyce in all that you put your hand unto) is meant all the good things they had gotten by the labour of their hands through Gods blessing, and so had in the power of their hands to use as they had occasion, and that because of all that they had they carried still something by way of tithes or sacrifices unto Jerusalem: and so this phrase is ordinarily used in the Scripture▪ as chap. 15. 10. the Lord thy God shall blesse thee in all thy works, and in all that thou puttest thine hand unto, and so in many other places; and fourthly, that the drift of this place seems to be partly
this, Having told them in the foregoing verse, that when they came to be settled in the land of Canaan they were to carry all their sacrifices and offerings, &c. to that one place in the land which the Lord their God should choose, that they might not think much of the labour and charge which this would put them to, especially those that dwelt farre off, he addes this by way of encouragement, There ye shall eat before the Lord your God, &c. as reckoning their glad enjoying of Gods pre∣sence there an abundant recompence for all their charge and labour. Vers. 8. Ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day, every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes.] That is, here we live loose and at liberty for the duties of the ceremoniall Law, to which you must be strictly tyed when you come to be at rest in Canaan; many sacrifices and rites and feasts by reason of your unsettled estate cannot here be precisely observed, and so every man doth in a manner what he lists, but when you come to be settled in the land of Canaan you must not think to do thus, &c. See vers. 9. 10. Vers. 12. And ye shall rejoyce before the Lord your God, ye, and your sonnes, and your daughters, &c.] Hereby it appears that though the males onely were bound three times a year to appear before the Lord, Exod. 23. 17. yet at those times the masters of families were wont also of their own accord to carry their wives, daughters, and maidservants with them, as Elkanah we see did, 1. Sam. 1. 4. Vers. 15. Notwithstanding, thou mayest kill, and eat flesh in all thy gates, what∣soever thy soul lustth afer, according to the blessing of the Lord, &c.] This is added to explain yet more fully what difference they were to make between the flesh they might eat of those beasts which they offered to the Lord, and that which they did eat at other times; to wit, that they might eat the flesh even of those cat∣tel which they used to sacrifice, no lesse then the roe-buck and the hart, that is no lesse then those that were not appointed for sacrifice, and that in all places where they dwelt both clean and unclean persons might eat of them, according to the blessing of the Lord, that is, according as through Gods blssig they could pro∣vide for themselves (so allowing a librall use of the creatures to the rich, but re∣straining all profuse riot, and keeping men within the limits of their abilitie) but yet hat which they offered as a holy sacrifice or offering to the Lord, that they might eat no where, but in the place which the Lord should choose. Vers. 16. Onely ye shall not eat the bloud, &c.] See the note upon Gen. 9. 4. Vers. 17. Thou mayest not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, or of thy ine, or of thy oyl, or the firstlings of thy herds, &c.] Concerning these tithes see the note upon vers. 6. The greatest difficultie in these words is concerning the firstlings here mentioned to wit, how they can be here reckoned amongst those things which the people must onely eat before the Lord in the place which he shold choose, since it is evident that the firstlings of their herds and stocks were holy to the Lod, and so that which remained of them, after the bloud was sprinkled and the fat burnt upon the altar, belonged solely to the priests, Numb. 18. 17, 18. But to this an answer may be given which may fully satisfie, to wit, that the firstlings here spoken of are not those firslings elsewhere intended, which as holy things onsecrated to God were allotted for the priests portion; but the firstlings here
mentioned were either the female firstlings (for they were onely the male first∣lings which the Lord challenged as his due, Exod, 13. 12.) or the first-born after those first which were given to the Lord, which were indeed the first that were the owners; or the chief and best of their lambes and kids and calves, called here the firstlings onely by way of excellencie. Vers. 21. If the place which the Lord hy God hath chosen to put his name there be too farre from thee, &c.] The meaning of this passage is not, that if the place chosen of God for sacrificing were near hand they must not eat of their herd or flock in their own houses, but alwayes carry them to the tabernacle or temple; for who can think that the Jews dwelling near to Jerusalem did never eat of their hrds and flocks in their own dwellings? either therefore this clause hath referee to that which follows, vers. 26. and the meaning then is onely this, That though the place which God had chosen, &c. were very farre from some of their del∣lings, and they might therefore think it too hard a task to carry their sacrifices so farre, yet so it must be, though they might kill and eat for their own reeshing whatsoever thy desired at home (as is granted again in these first words) yet their sacrifices they must carry to that holy place though never so farre from them; or else the meaning is, that when they had a purpose to offer peace-offerings, and by way of thankfulnesse for some mercy to rejoyce together, if the holy place were too farre from them, they might (having withall perhaps sent the price of redemption thither) feast tgether with their cattel kild for food, onely they must be then sure not to eat them as holy things, but even as they would eat of the roe-buck or the hart. But the first resolution of this doubt I take to be the best. Vers. 27. And the bloud of thy sacrifices shall be poured out upon the altar of the Lord thy God, and thou shalt eat the flesh.] That is, the flesh of thy peace-of∣erings; for onely the flesh of those sacrifices was eaten by the owners, Lev. 7. 15. CHAP. XIII. Vers. 1. IF there arise among you a Prophet or a dreamer of dreams, &.] Ha∣ving in the former chapter given the people warning to take heed of be∣ing seduced to idolatrie by strangers of other nations, here he gives them the like warning to take heed of being seduced by those that were their own brethren; If saith he, there arise a Prophet or a dreamer of dreams (that is, one that is, or pre∣tends himself to be such an one, that saith he is a Prophet, and that God hath ap∣peared to him in a vision or in a dream) and that among your own brethren (fr these words, among you, are added to imply that they must regard him never a whit the more because he was an Israelite since amongst them many false Prophets might and did arise, 2. Pet. 2. 1.) and, if he, giveth thee a signe or a wonder, that is, if, to make good the truth of what he saith God hath by vision or dream revealed to him, he foretells some wonderfull and supernaturall work that shall come to passe (such as was the cleaving of Jeroboams altar, which the Prophet told them of beforehand, 1. Kings 13. 3. as a sure sigue that God had sent him) and withall happely acompanieth his prediction with some outward significant action or ge∣sture
(as when that false prophet Zedekiah, 1. Kin. 22. 11. made horns of iron, and said, Thus saith the Lord, With these shalt thou push the Syrians untill thou have consu∣med them) though this signe or wonder come to passe, yet if withall he shall perswade thee to worship false Gods, or to worship the true God in a false manner (which is all one, for he that pretends to worship the true God with false worship, doth not in∣deed worship the true God, but an idol-god which he phacieth to himself) thou shalt not hearken to him, that is, thou shalt not because of his signes and wonders regard what he saith. And indeed (though a false Prophet may be known by his foretelling things which afterwards come not to passe, according to that rule, chap. 18. 22. Whou a Prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to passe, that is the thing which the Lord hath not spoken, &c. yet) the accomplishment of what a Prophet foretells is no sure signe that he is a true Prophet nor to be re∣garded if his doctrine be not according to the truth which God hath taught us. Vers. 3. For the Lord your God proveth you, &c.] These words are added as the reason why they were not to hearken to any Prophet that should perswade them to idolatry, yea though he gave them any signe or wonder which should ac∣cordingly come to passe, to wit, because hereby the Lord did prove them, to see whether they did sincerely love God or no. For the understanding whereof we must know the Lord is here said to prove them by that which the false Prophets did to seduce them to idolatry, first, because even the Lord himself may by the Spirit of prophecy reveal things to come even to wicked men and false Prophets, as he did to Balaam and Caiaphas, as knowing how thereby to bring glory to himself, though they onely intend to corrupt and seduce his people; secondly, because though these predictions given, and wonders wrought are usually either mere forgings and impostures, or else satanicall delusions, whereby men are made to think they see those things done which indeed are not done, or lastly, are such wonders as are indeed done, but by the power of the devil, yet it is of God that either men or devils are permitted to do such things, who could easily restrain them if he saw cause to do it; and thirdly, because the Lords aim, in suffering the devil and wicked men thus to abuse men, is to make tryall, that is, by this tryall to make it known, whether they love the Lord their God with all their heart and with all their soul, this being a sure rule, that those whose hearts are upright towards God will not be drawn a∣way from the truth of God by such delusions, according to that of the Apostle, 1. John 2. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us they would no doubt have continued with us. Vers. 5. And that Prophet, or that dreamer of dreams shall be put to death, &c.] Here they are enjoyned to put the false Prophet to death that shall so seduce the people: for the better understanding whereof we must note, first, that every spreading of false doctrines in matters of lesse consequence was not thus to be pu∣nished, but onely the seducing of men from the true religion to the direct worship of false Gods; and in this case, though many Expositours hold that this Law con∣cerned onely the policie of the Jews, yet I see not but that it gives the Christian Magistrate power also to provide for the securing of his people, even by the capitall punishment of those that seduce them to an apostacy of so high a nature; secondly,
that in the reason here rendred why they should put such false prophets to death, the phrase that is used, because he had spoken—to thrust thee out of the way which the Lord thy God commanded thee to walk in, is intended to imply what a dangerous and strong temptation that of pretended miracles is to seduce men from the way of truth; and therefore our Saviour also speaking of such, said, Mat. 24. 24. They shall deceive (if it were possible) the very elect: and thirdly, that the last clause, so shalt thou put the evil away from the midst of thee, is meant both of the evil men that were the seducers, and the hurt which they might have done, to wit, that by cutting off these evil men the hurt which they might do amongst the people should be prevented. Vers. 6. If thy brother, the sonne of thy mother, &c.] The drift of this place is to let them know, that not onely false prophets (of whom he had spoken in the former verses) but all others whatsoever were to be put to death that should se∣duce them to idolatry, not openly but secretly, and that they were not to spare those that were dearest to them, &c. And for the fuller clearing of this, we may note, first, that this phrase, If thy brother the sonne of thy mother, is here used, ei∣ther to distinguish true brothers from kindred, yea from all other Israelites, who are frequently in the Scripture called their brethren; or else emphatically to ex∣presse that brother that is usually most beloved, to wit, a brother both by father and mother, at least a brother by the mothers side, that lay in the same belly with them, and that because our love to such is naturally the strongest: and secondly, that in the particular mention that is here made of the daughter, as well as of the sonne, as also of the wife, there is not onely respect had to the love that men bear to them, but also to the pity that men are prone to take of that sex: men are natu∣rally enclined to take compassion of that sex; and therefore this is particularly ex∣pressed, that in case a daughter or wife seek to seduce them to idolatry, they must be put to death, and there must be no pity shown them because of their sex. In∣deed because there is no mention made here of father and mother, therefore some have thought that by this Law the child was not bound to accuse either father or mother, if they sought to seduce him to idolatry, the Lord not enjoyning this in regard it was so much against the reverence which children do naturally bear to their parents. But these build upon too weak a ground: Doubtlesse in Gods cause there is no more reason for the child to regard the parents, then for the husband to regard the wife of his bosome, and Levi in this case is commended for closing his eyes against his parents, because he said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him, chap. 33. 9. and therefore questionlesse under these that are named all other persons that are most dear to men, even parents also, are comprehended. Vers. 7. Namely of the Gods of the people which are round about you, &c.] In this clause, of the Gods of the people which are round about you, &c. there is a warning couched that they should not be moved with this argument, that the na∣tions round about them, farre and near, all over the face of the earth, went ano∣ther way in the service of God; but rather should say as S. John doth, 1. John 5. 19. We know that we are of God, and the whole world leth in wickednesse. Yet withall we may understand it as intended also to shew the extent of this Law, to wit, that
whatsoever gods they were which they were perswaded to worship, they must not consent to do it, but must onely worship the Lord their God. Vers. 9. But thou shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be first upon him, &c.] Thou shalt surely kill him, that is, thou shalt inform against him to the Magi∣strate, and so procure that justice may be executed upon him according to this Law, to wit, that he may be put to death; and therefore is that added in the next words, thine hand shall be first upon him, to wit, as being the party accusing and giving testimonie against him; for that was Gods Law that the witnesses should throw the first stones at him that was to be stoned, Deut. 17. 7. Vers. 13. Certain men, the children of Belial, are gone out from among you, &c.] That is, certain vild, wicked, and mischievous persons. Belial is by intepre∣tation without profit, or, without yoke, that is, base, lawlesse, rebellious and wic∣ked; whence this name is given to Satan, or Antichrist, opposed to Christ, 2. Co∣rinth. 6. 15. What concord hath Christ with Belial? and to men and women gi∣ven over unto wickednesse, Judg. 19. 22. The men of the citie, certain sonnes of Belial, beset the house round about, &c. and 1. Sam. 1. 16. Count not thine hand∣maid for a daughter of Belial; and 1. Sam. 25. 25. Let not my Lord—regard this man of Belial, even Nabal. As for the phrase here used of going out from among the Israelits, certain men, the children of Belial are gone out from among you, it intimates, first, their separating of themselves from Gods people in point of religi∣on, according to that of S. John, 1. John 2. 19. They went out from us but they were not of us, &c. and secondly, their bold and presumptuous carriage of them∣selves herein, in that they did it openly, as proclaiming warre against the Lord. Vers. 14. Then shalt thou enquire and make search, &c.] This is added by way of caution, in two regards▪ first, to let them know that though they did but heare some flying report of such a wickednesse, yet they might not slight such a report, but must enquire carefully whether it were so or no; and secondly, to put them in mind that on the other side yet they must not arm themselves against their brethren (as is afterwards enjoyned) merely upon uncertain reports▪ but must first make dili∣gent search and enquiry, and if they sound it evident and certain, then they should proceed against them as is here appointed. CHAP. XIV. Vers. 1. YE are the children of the Lord your God.] This is prefixed as a rea∣son why they should carefully observe, as all the commandments of God, so more especially these that are here prescribed: for being the children of God, and so consequently heirs of eternall salvation, it was fit that they should be very carefull that they did nothing that might dishonour their father, or disparage themselves; and therefore not to mourn as men without hope, nor to conform themselves to heathens, from whom God had separated them. Ye shall not cut your selves, nor make any baldnesse between your eyes for the dead.] That is, in the fore-part of your heads, just over the space that is between your eyes. See the notes upon Levit. 21. 5. and 19. 27, 28.
Vers. 3. Thou shalt not eat any abominable thing, &c.] See the notes on the 11. chapter of Leviticus. Vers. 13. And the glede, &c.] This bird is not mentioned in the 11. of Leviticus, but is comprehended under others of the same kind that are there named. Vers. 21. Thou shalt give it unto the stranger that is in thy gates, that he may eat it, &c.] Not the proselyte or stranger joyned to the Church, for such were bound to keep the whole law, and this in speciall, Levit. 17. 15. but the stranger of anothe religion, who onely sojourned amongst them. Vers. 22. Thou shalt truly tithe all the increase of thy seed, &c.] There was a tithe payed every yeare to the Levites in the severall places of their habitation, Numb. 18. 24. and there was likewise another tithe (as was noted before on chap. 12. 6.) which the owners carried yearly with them to Jerusalem, and was spent there in holy feasting before the Lord. Either therefore these words in the 22. verse, Thou shalt truly tithe all the mrase of thy seed that thy field bringeth forth year by year, are meant of the first of these tithes payed to the Levie, and then those that follow verse 23. And thou shalt eat before the Lord thy God, in the place which he shall oose to place his name there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oyl, are meant of the second tithe spent in their holy feasts; or if both veres are meant of one and the same tithe, then doubtlesse they are both meant of the second tithe: for neither vvre the first tithes carried up to Jerusalem, nor had the owners any power to eat of them. Vers. 23. And thou shalt eat before the Lord thy God in the place which he shall choose, &c.] The tithes, here appointed to be eaten by the people in the place which God should choose, cannot be meant of the tithes which were yearly paid to the Levites. Numb. 18. 24. but were a second tithe, as is shown in the foregoing note; and the like must be held concerning the firstlings of their herds and slocks here mentioned, of which see the note upon chp. 12. 17. As for the last clause of the verse, where a reason is rendered why the Lord did enjoyn them to go up to the place which he should choose, and there to feat together with these their holy things, namely, that they might learn to fear the Lord their God alwayes, the ground of this may be 1. Because the very presenting of themselves thus yearly be∣fore the Lord with their sacrifices and offerings must needs be of it self a good means to keep their hearts in a continuall aw and reverence of God; and 2. be∣cause when they went up to Gods holy place, the Priests were wont to instruct them in the law and the proises concning the Messiah (according to the dispensation of those darker times) and in their sacrifices they beheld a shadow of their re∣demption by him, all which must needs conduce much to teach them to fear the Lord their God. Vers. 24. And if the way be too long for thee, so that thou art not able to carry it, &c.] In these words there is an exception added to the former law, to wit, that in case they dwelt very farre from the house of God, and their tithes and firstlings were so much in quantitie that they could not well carry them so farre (which to imply that clause is added in the end of this verse, when the Lord thy God hath
blessed thee) then they might sell these things, and crry the money with them, and buy therewith what they were to use there. Vers. 28. At the end of three years thou shalt bring forth all the tithe of thine increase the same year, &c.] Here is expresse mention made of a third sort of tithe, different from thoe two before mentioned, vers. 22, and 23. For 1. this was onely paid every third year, to wit, each third year after the Sabbaticall year, when the land lay at rest, and so there was then no tithe paid at all, but all things were common, Exod. 23. 10, 11. And 2. this was for another service: the first of those tithes mentioned before were wholly the Levites portion, and there∣fore often called, the Lords inheritance, and the second or the price of them was carried up by the owners to the Lords dwelling place, and spent in holy feast∣ing before the Lord, but this now was laid up in some publick place in the towns and cities where they dwelt, and was not onely for the use of the Levites, but also for the stranger, the fatherlesse, and the widow, &c. as is expressed here, vers. 29. So that it seems whereas the two first years after the Sabbaticall year there were two tithes onely separated from their estates, the first for the Levites, the second to be spent in holy feasting before the Lord, on the third year they separated a third tithe, which was for the poore in the places where they dwelt; and so again the two next years they separated onely the two first tithes, and then on the third year three tithes again, and so then the next year was again the Sabbaticall year. I know there are many Expositours hold that the tithe here mentioned, which was at the end of three years laid up for the poore, was the very same tithe which the two years before the owners spent in holy feasting: the third year, they say, this second tithe was not carried up to Jerusalem to be spent in their holy feasts there, but it was laid up at home for the use of the poore. But two arguments may be brought against this o∣pinion from a following passage concerning the third years tithes, chap. 26. 12. which cannot well be answered. The first is, that this third year is there called the year of tithing, there being no probable reason that can be given why that year should be called peculiarly the year of tithing, but onely this, because that year they sepa∣rated three tithes from their estates, one more then on other years: If the tithes on this third year laid up for the poore were the same which the two former years they had spent in holy feasting, then did they separate no more tithes this third year then on other years; and vvhy then should it be called the year of tithing? The second argument is, that on this third year every man vvas to go up to Jerusalem, and there to make a solemn proession that he had faithfully paid all his tithes; and it is no vvay probable that vvhen he vvent up to Jerusalem to make this solemn pro∣fession he should not then carry vvith him those second tithes vvhich vvere to be spent in holy seasting before the Lord, When, saith Moses, thou hast made an end of tithing all the tithes of thine increase, the third year, which is the year of ti∣thing▪ and hast given it unto the Levites, the stranger, the fatherlesse, and the wi∣dow, then thou shalt say before the Lord thy God, I have brought away the hal∣lowed things out of mine house, and also have given them unto the Levi, and unto the stranger, &c. and indeed vvhat vvere those hallowed things vvhich he had brought with him out of his house, if they vvere not that second tithe vvhich vvas
to be spent in holy feasting before the Lord? and therefore doubtlesse this third year they separated three severall tithes from their increase, the first vvhich vvas the Le∣vites yearly livelyhood, the second vvhich they carried up vvith them to Jerusalem, therewith to feast before the Lord, and the third which was laid up for the poor e. CHAP. XV. Vers. 1. AT the end of every seven years thou shalt make a release, &c.] That is, when the seventh year comes, which is the nd or last of the seven; for we see vers. 9. that the seventh year is called the year of release, Behold the se∣venth year, the year of release, is at hand; as likewise Jer. 34. 14. at the end of se∣ven years let ye go every man his brother, is explained in the next words thus, when he hath served thee six years thou shalt let him go free from thee. Now this year of release was that seventh year spoken of, Exod. 23. 11. and Levit. 25. 4. to wit, the Sabbaticall year, when the land was to keep a Sabbath of rest, there being that year neither plowing nor sowing, nor any work of husbandry used. The greatest difficulty concerning these words is, what this release was, which is expressed in the following verse thus, every creditour that lendeth ought unto his neighbour shall re∣lease it, he shall not exact it of his neighbour, or of his brother, that is, of any Israe∣lite whatsoever, because it is called the Lords release, that is, because the Lord hath ordained it to be a year of release. Some Expositours hold that the release here en∣joyned was an absolute acquitting and discharging of the debt for ever; onely they adde that they were bound thus to forgive the debts of the poore onely, and that therefore it is added, vers. 4. save when there shall be no poore among you, intima∣ting that of the rich they might require what was owing them. But on the other side many of the best Expositours hold that it is onely meant of a not exacting that year the debts that were owing them; and that because, vers. 8. the people are com∣manded to lend to their poore brethrn, notwithstanding this law, even when the year of release was near at hand; and it were strange that it should be called len∣ding when they knew that immediately at the year of release their debt should ab∣solutely be acquitted and made void. And indeed because the Hebrew word, here translated a release of debts, may be rendred a remission, or, intermission, and is the same that is elsewhere used, to wit, Exod. 23. 11. where speech is of the land that it should be let rest or intermitted from tillage, that being onely for the seventh year, it cannot be gathered from this word that they were to give an absolute re∣lease of their debts for ever, but onely that they were not to exact them this seventh year, and that because there was neither sowing nor reaping nor other works of husbandry that year, and so the poore had not such means to pay their debts as in other years. However as in regard of the Sabbath-rest of this year (of which see the note upon Exod. 23. 11.) so also in regard of this release of debts at that time, this year was a figure or type of that acceptable year of grace, which brought us a release of our sinne (which are called our debts, Matth. 6. .) by and through Christ our Saviour, and whereby we also are taught to put  e bowels of mercy, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, &c.  2, 13.
Vers. 3. Of a foreiner thou mayest exact it again.] The foreiner here intend∣ed, of whom they might exat their debts, notwithstanding the year of release, is by some thought to be every stranger of another nation, yea though he were a proselyte: but others think it is meant onely of those strangers that had not embraced the true relgion; and so indeed this law did the more fully represent that spirituall release, whereof it was intended to be a figure or type, in that none can have any share in this great priviledge of the remission of sinnes that are alien and strangers from the commonwealth of Israel, that is, none but those that are true members of the Church, and Christians indeed. Vers. 4. Save when there shall be n poore among you.] This (according to our translation) is added as an exception, that unlesse their debters were pooe they were not bound to forbear the debt. But the other translation, which is in the mar∣gin of our Bibles, seem the best, To the end that there be no poore among you; and so it is added as a reason of the former law, to wit, that there might not be through exacting of debts any man brought to extreme poverty. For the Lord shall greatly blesse thee, &c.] These words contain a reason that may induce them thus to shew mercy in not exacting their debts at the year of re∣lase, namely, because if in this and other things they were obedient to Gods laws, the Lord would so abundantly blesse them, that they shold be well able thus to forbear the exacting of their debts, and it should be no prejudice at all to thm. Vers. 12. And if thy brother, an Hebrew man or an Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, and serve thee six years, &c.] Which they usually did, unlesse the year of Jubile happened in the mean time, Levit. 25. 40, 41. concerning which see the notes upon Exod. 21. 2. for this is not here added as a priviledge of the year of re∣lease, but as another act of mercy agreable to that before enjoyned concerning the remitting of debts every Sabbaticall year: for indeed, how should the setting free of servants be made one of the great priviledges of the year of Jubile, if the like had been done every seventh year, which was the year of release? or to what purpose had it been to prescribe that no Hebrew servant should serve above six years, as is appointed Exod. 21. 2. if they could never serve six years, unless they began their service immediately after the year of release, and that because otherwise when their release came they must be set ee. Vers. 15. And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bond-man, &c.] The Is∣raelites bondage in Egypt, and the Lords delivering them, is often pressed upon them, to make them ew mercy to their servants, and to set them free at the time appointed▪ of God, both because the remembrance of our own miseries doth natu∣rally incline mans heart to take pity of those that are in the same condition, and likewise because it must needs be acknowledged fitting that men should imitate the mercy and compassion of God. But bsides▪ there is covertly a hint given of a fur∣ther matter, to wit, that s they were not sent empty away out of their bondage in Egypt▪ but came away thence with much of the riches of Egypt, so they should not send away their servants empty when they set them free, but should give them liberally of that they had, which was the thing enjoyned in the foregoing verses.
Vers. 16. And it shall be if e say unto thee, I will not go awy som thee, &c.] Se the note upon Exod. 23. 6. and Levit. 25. 40. Vers. 17. And als unto thy maid-servant thou shalt do likewise.] Because this follows so immediately upon that which went before concerning the boring of the ear of that man-servant which refused to be set free at six years end, thereore many Expositours hold (and most probbly, there being no other place of Scripture that shows the contrary) that even the ears of maid-servants were bored likewise, if they refused their freedome at the time appointed; yet the Hebrews say that this clause, And also unto thy maid-servant thou shalt do likewise, hath onely reference unto that which was said in the ormer verses concerning the setting free of their men-servants at six years nd, and the gifts they should give them when they set them free, to wit, that herein to their maid-servants they should do likewise. Vers. 18. For he hath been worth a double hired servant to thee, &c.] Not be∣cause of the hard service he hath done above the service of an hireling, as some think; for by the law Hebrew servants might not be ued like slaves, but like hired ser∣vants, Levit, 25. 39▪ 40. but because hired servants had great wges, besides meat and drink, &c. which servants that were sold had not, in regard whereof amongst us the service of an apprntice is counted more prositable then that of journeymen or hired servants; and some adde also because hired servants did usally serve for three years, which they ground upon that, Esa. 16. 14. Within three years, as the years of an hireling. Vers. 20. Thou shalt et it beore the Lord thy God year by ear, &c.] I have formerly shown upon Deut. 12. 17. that there were certain firstlings (which were not those firstling-males that did first open the matrice, and that were the Lords by that generall Law of the firs-born, Numb. 18. 15.) and that these might b brought nto the Lord as pace-offerings, and so the owners and their housholds might eat of these before the Lord; and of these therefore severall Expositours do understand this place. But yet because in the foregoing verse it is said of the first∣ling males here intended, Thou shalt do no work with the firstling of thy bullock, nor shear the firstling of thy sheep; and this seems to imply that the firstlings here meant are those firstlings which were the Lords due so soon as ever they fell by that generall Law of the first-born, and therefore the owners had not power to reap any profit by them; therefore others understand these words as spoken to the priests, Thou shalt eat it beore the Lord,—that is▪ the priest, to whom God gav all the firstlings of Isral as their potion: for as, say they, Moses spake all that went before in this chapter to the people of Isral, so here he continueth his seech in the same manner, though that he speaks were intended of the priests peculiarly, because he speaks to the whole body of Israel as one man, under whom the priests were also comprehended. Vers. 22. Thou shalt eat it within thy gates, &c.] Tt is, the priest, as a∣bove; and that as common meat in their own private dwellgs; or lse it is meant that the owner should redeem it, as any other unclean beast, ad then eat it with∣out scruple of conscience; or it is spoken of those second sot of firstlings, concern∣ing which we may see what is noted, chap. 12. 17.
CHAP. XVI. Vers. 2. THou shalt therefore sacrifice the Passeover unto the Lord thy God, of the flock and the herd, &c.] Because of the Passeover, here enjoyned to be sacrificed, it is said, that it must be of the flock and the herd, it cannot be meant of the Paschall-lamb which was killed on the fourteenth day of this moneth at even: but either by the Passeover we must here understand joyntly both the Paschal-lamb and those other sacrifices which did accompany the eating of the Paschal-lamb, which were of sheep or bullocks, as namely those enjoyned Numb. 28. 19. &c. and such other as men would voluntarily bring, an example whereof we have 2. Chron. 35. 7, 8, &c. or else by the Passeover is here meant the feast of the Passeover, and then thus the words must be understood, Thou shalt sacrifice the Passeover, that is, Thou shalt celebrate the Passeover with sacrifices of the flock and of the herd, &c. Vers. 3. Seven dayes shalt thou eat unleavened bread therewith, even the bread of affliction, &c.] That is, the bread which is a memoriall of your afflictions in Egypt (as being usually the bread of those that lived in affliction and poverty) and of your hasty coming out from thence, before your bread had time to be leavened, concerning which see the note upon Exod. 12. 15. Vers. 4. And there shall be no leavened bread seen with the in all thy coasts seven dayes.] As they might not eat any leavened bread all the time of this feast, so neither might they suffer any leaven to be in their houses, to wit, to make it the su∣rer that they might not be tempted to eat of it, or to use any leaven in the bread which they baked. Neither shall there any thing of the flesh, which thou sacrificedst the first day at even, remain all night untill the morning.] This must needs be meant of the flesh of the Paschal-lamb, which was killed at the end of the foureteenth day, and was to be eaten all of it that night following before the morning of the fifteenth day, or else the remainder of it was to be brnt in the fire; concerning which see the note upon Exod. 12. 10. For though the Paschal-lamb was not propely a sacrifice, b∣cause no part of it was offered upon the altar; yet considering that it was killed to the honour of God, and as a type of Christ, the Lamb of God that takes away the sinnes of the world, it needs not seem strange▪ that here it is said to be scrificed. Vers. 5. Thou mayest not sacrifice the Passeover within any of thy gates, &c.] That is, not in any town or city save onely in Jerusalem▪ where Christ our pschal∣lamb was sacrificed for us. And indeed, after God had cosen that to be the place of his publick worship, they did onely eat the Passeover there. See Luke 2. 41. but in any private house in Jerusalem they might both kill and eat the Passeover, Matth. 26. 18. onely their sacrifices which they offered at that est might oely be offered in the temple. Vers. 6. There thou shalt sacrifice the Passever at even, at the going down of the sunne, at the season that thou camest forth out of Egypt.▪ That is▪ the very same day of the moneth Abib when thou camest forth ou of Egypt, to wit, the oureteenth day of the moneth: or if these words, at the season that thou camest
forth out of Egypt, have reserence to that which went before, at even, at the going down of the sunne, yet it must not be taken so as if the time of sunsetting were exact∣ly the very tie when the Iraelites went out of Egypt (for it is evident, Exod. 12. 29, &c. that it was after midnight ere they had leave given them to go) but onely that the night after that evening when they first eat the Passeover they went out of Egypt, and were then indeed peparing to be gone; whence it was that they were appointed to eat the Passeover in such haste, the Lord having told them beforehand of that which shold happen▪ and had scarce leisure to make an end of celebrating that holy fast, because the Egyptans were so eager to have them pack up and be gone. Vers. 7. And thou shalt trn in the morning and go unto thy tents.] That is, the morning after the feast o unleavened bread was ended, which was kept seven dayes; so that the ext words in the ighth verse, six dayes thou shalt eat, &c. are added to shew what morning this was that is here mentioned, to wit, the morrow fter the solemn assembly on the sevnth day. Indeed some hold that the morning here mentioned must be the morning of the fifteeth day, the morning after they had eaten the Passeover, which is altogether improbable, because the fifteenth day was a solemn festivall, and therefore it is not likely that liberty of travelling and leaving Jeusalem on that day was allowed them; and because we shall still find that the people used to stay at Jerusalem all the seven dayes of this feast, which we may see, 2. Chron. 30. 21. and so in other place. Vers. 9. Begin to number the seven weeks from such time as thou beginnest to put the sicle to the corn.] Namely, to reap the wave-sheaf, the first-fruits of bar∣ley-harvest, which was on the sixteenth day of that moneth ofered unto the Lord. See the note upon Leit. 23. 10, 11. Vers. 10. And thou shalt kep the feast of weeks unto the Lord thy God with a tribute of a freewi-offring, &c.] his contribution or tribute of a eewill-offer∣ing is neither the sacrifice appointed for the feast-day, Numb. 18. 27, 31. nor the two loaves and sacrifices with them▪ commanded Levit. 23. 17, 20. for these were not voluntary offerings, but necessarily enjoyned; over and besides them God here appointeth men voluntarily to bring unto him of their fruits what they could and would. Vers. 12. And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt, &c.] This is added, fir, to shew that this was the chief end of solemnizing this feat, to cause them with themselves to remember this their deliverance; scondly, as a mo∣tive to obey willingly both this and all other the commandment of God; thirdly▪ as a motive to make them respect their servants and the poore strangers in this teir feast, as in he former verse he had appointed. Vers. 13. Thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven dayes, after tha thou hat gathered in thy corn and thy wine.] Se the note upon Exod. 3. 16. Vers. 18. Judges and officers halt thou make thee in all thy gates, &c.] To wit, judges to give judgeent, and oficers to excute the sentence of the judges: and because▪ the places of ditur were usually in the gates of their towns and cities, therefore it is said, Judges and officers shalt thou make the in all thy gates▪
Vers. 19. For a gift dth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous.] That is, it will make a wise man, that is able to judge between right and wrong, think and perswade himself that he doth right, when he doth ma∣nifest wrong, and it will make a good man pervert justic even against his consci∣ence, though in other things he makes conscience of his wayes. Vers. 21. Thou sht not plant thee a grove of any trees near unto the altar of the Lord, &c.] This Law the Isralites did afterwards many times break, as we may se, Judg. 3. 7. 1. Kings 14. 23. 16. 33. 18. 19. which was in them grosse idolatry; and yet the Patriarchs did formerly worship God in groves, and that without sinne. Se the note on Gen. 21. 33. CHAP. XVII. Vers. 1. THou shalt not sacrifice unto the Lord thy God any bullck, or sheep, wherein is blemish, &c.] See the notes upon Levit. 22. 20, 21. Vers. 2. If there be found among you within any of thy gates, &c.] The summe of the law here delivered is this, That if any amongst them were sound guilty of idolatry in that they had worshipped either the sunne, or the moon, or any of the host of heaven, or consequently any other creature (for these the most glorious of Gods creatures are onely mentioned to imply that much lesse might they worship stocks and stones, or any other creatures) they must certainly be stoned to death, whether it were man or woman (no pity must be shown to them for the weaknesse of their sex) and the reason is implyed in this verse, because they had wrought wickednesse in the sigh of the Lord, in transgressing his covenant: where we must note that idolatry is termed a transgressing of Gods covenant, not onely because it was (as all other sinnes are) contrary to Gods law, which they had covenanted to obseve and keep; but also because therein men did openly as it were renounce God and th true religion, and chuse themselves other gods whom they would serve, and therefore this was in a more speciall and minent manner a transgressing of the covenant. Vers. 4. And it be told thee, and thou hast heard of it, and enquired dligently, and behold, it be true, &c.] This is added both lest in favour of any man thy should slight a report brought unto them, and not carefully enquire of it; and als lest they should be too hasty to punish men upon uncertain reports. Vers. 7. The hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterward the hands of all the people.] The witnesses were to throw the first stones at them that were condemned to be stoned, which was t make men the more afraid to bear false witnesse, and that because it was supposed that men would be afraid after good deliberation to have a hand in killing an innocent man, though in their wrath and fury they might speak that which might tend to the losse of his lise. But then afterwards all the people assembled were to have a hand in the ex∣cution of him▪ thereby to inure them to be servent and zealous in Gods cause against all those that should despise and disrgard his laws. Vers. 8. If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgement, between bloud
and blod, &c.] Herhe Iralites were taught what they were to do  question did arie concerning any cause that was brought before their Juges and Magisrates, in their severall towns and cities, which the magistrtes re sond so hard that they made a doubt, or were of different jdgement amongst tmselves, what to determine in it, as between bloud and bloud, that is, in cae of bloudshed, whether it were to be judged wilfull murder, or▪ as we call i, chance▪medley, and so in any other questionable cause, either concerning any plea about their estes▪ or concerning any stroke given, or any other thing of the like nture▪ o wit, that in this case they were to go up to the place which God should cse (which was Je∣rusalem in after-ages) and there resort to the priss, as expounders of the law, and to the judge, that is, the jge▪ the civil Magitrates, who were judicially to give sentnce according to the ists poition of the law, that so by them the matter in question might be dcd: and o this I conceive that is meant, 2. Chron. 19. 8, 9, 10. Moreover in Jrusalem di Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of the priests, and of the chief of the fathers of Israel▪ for the jugement of the Lord, and for controversies, when they returned to Jerusalem▪ &c. and that they were ap∣pointed to go up unto Jerusalem with all such caus of great diicultie, not becaus the supreme Magistrate▪ the Judge or King of Istal, did alway reside there▪ but either because this is meant of the Sanhedrim, which was their supreme Senate or Councel, consisting partly of prists and partly o civil Magisrates, to whom all appeals were made, and did therefore alwayes abide at Jerslem; or else becaue, if need so required, the high prist was to enquire of the Lord, and to answer them after the judgemen of rim before the Lord, Numb. 27. 21. and therefore it is said here, vers. 9. that they should go uno the priests, &c. and enquire, which may be mant of the high ists enquiring for them of the Lord; a priviledge which the Bishop of Rome cannot challenge for the bringing of all appel to be sinally de∣termined by him. Vers. 10. And thou shalt do according to the sentence which they of that plac (which the Lord shall choose) sh ew thee▪ &c.] Namely, becuse their sen∣tence was to be according to the La o God vers. 11. and in ce of great difficul∣ty to be proved so to be by quiring of the Lord: for we must not think the peo∣ple were bound to rest in their sence, if it were clearly contrary to the law of God. Vers. 11. Acoring to the sentene of the Law which they shall teach thee, &c.] Here is methinks a maniset dieence betwixt that which the prist was to do, and that which the Judge was to do: the priests office being man by tach∣ing the sentence of the Law, that is, giving the interpretation of it; and the Jdg by telling them the judgement, that is, giving judgemnt accordig to that which the priest had delivered to be the meaning of the Law. Vers. 12. And the man that will do psmptuusly, and wll not earn unto the priest,—or unto the judge, even that man shall die, &c.] Death is appointed to be inflicted upon him that would not heken to the piest, expounding the Law, or the judge, passing sentence accordingly, to wit, if he pesuously and stubbornly opposed their judgement, though they proved it never so clarly ot of the Law, or especially if the priest had nquird of the Lord,
Vers. 14. When thou art come unto the land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee,—and shalt say, I will set a King over me, &c.] This is said, not as in al∣lowance of their changing the government by judges, which he had erected a∣mongst them, especially upon this ground, because they would be like other nations; but onely foretelling what they would do, and thereupon prescribing certain Laws to prevent greater mischiefs in erecting of a Monarchy amongst them. Vers. 15. Thou shalt in any wise set him King over thee whom the Lord thy God shall choose, &c.] The Lord here gives them two rules, to which they should be bound when ever they should desire to have a King to reigne over them: The first is, That they should onely make such a one king as God should choose; which was accordingly observed partly in Saul, but fully in David, and in his progeny too, in that it was of Gods ordaining that his posterity should successively inhe∣rit the kingdome: and this was thus appointed, because the Kings of Judah were to be types of Christ; who was chosen of God to be the great King of Israel, Psal. 2. 6. I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion. The second is, That they might onely choose one from amongst their brethren to be their King: and this was, first, because such a one was likeliest to love them, and to be beloved by them, and to rule over them with the more equity and gentlenesse; and secondly, lest a stranger of another nation should bring in strange Laws and customes, yea and corrupt their religion too; and thirdly, to signifie that their promised Messiah, the Lords An∣ointed, was to be the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, even one of their own nation. Vers. 16. But he shall not multiply horses to himself, &c.] That is, excessively, even beyond that which reasonably the state of a King may require: and this the Lord gives in charge concerning the Kings of Israel, first, to teach both the King and the people to put their sole trust and confidence in God, and not to rely on any outward strength of horses and chariots, which men having abundance of such mi∣litary forces are prone to do; secondly, that they might not hereby be exalted and puffed up in their minds, even to the despising and perhaps the oppressing of their brethren; and thirdly, that they might not, to maintain the excessive charge hereof, be burdensome to their subjects: & herein therefore we may well think that Solo∣mon did not keep so close to the rule of Gods word as he ought to have done, in that he had fourty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, 1. Kings. 4. 26. as likewise in that he fetcht his horses out of Egypt, 2. Chron 1. 16. which is expressely also forbidden here, He shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt to the end that he should multi∣ply horses; and that not onely because Egypt of all the neighbouring countreys was most famous for horses, whence is that, Esa. 31. 3. The Egyptians are men and not God, and their horses flesh and not spirit, but a so to imply that one reason why the Lord forbad their having so many horses was, lest they should go down into Egypt to procure themselves horses. For as much as the Lord hath said unto you, Ye shall henceforth return no more that way.] That is, ye shall no more return to Egypt: for it was not their return∣ing to Egypt by the same way they came from thence that was forbidden them,
but generally all going back to Egypt; yea, though they wnt thither, not to dwell and sojourn there, but onely for trade and merchandise; for so much this place seems to imply. The reason of this law seems to have been, first, that hereby they might be kept from being corrupted there by their idolatry and other foul sinnes, and from making any wicked leage or confedracy with them; and secondly, that hereby they might be taght with such thankfulnesse to remmber their former de∣lverance from the bondage they endured in that land, as to abhorre the very thought of their going thither again, lest that should seem a contempt of their for∣mer escape thence, & an unthankfull forgetting that gloriou deliverance. The great∣est▪ difficultie in these words is, what prohibition this is, and when given, whereof Moses here speaks, The Lord hath said unto you, Ye shall henceforth no more re∣turn that way. But for this we must know, first, that though this charge wre no where formerly given in expresse words, yet it was sufficiently implied, in that God had told them often that he had brought them out of Egypt to plant & setle them in the land of Canaan▪ and that he had so sharply rebuked them when ever they had made any mention of going back into Egypt; and secondly, that these words may be understood of this charge now at present given them. The Lord hath said unto you, Ye shall henceforth return no more that way, that is, the Lord hath commanded me now to say this unto you, &c. Vers. 17. Neither sall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not away.] By this God allows not Princes to have more wives then one▪ so they took not too too many; no more then the forbidding of perjury allows all swear∣ing when that is true which we swear: onely God pitcheth upon the greatest sinne, and that whereto kings were usually enclined, who were wont to abuse their power in marrying all that pleased them, though never so many; and a reason is added why the King might not marry so many wives, to wit, that his heart turn not a∣way, namely, from the Lord unto the pleasures of life, or unto other Gods (in case he should amongst others marry any idolatrous wives) as it fared with Solomon, 1. Kings 11. 4. This as the chief reason is expressed in the law, yet withall we may well conceive that God had respect also herein to the ease of the people, that the Kings having so many wives and children by them, who must be kept after the state of Queens and Princes, might not increase the burden of their taxes and im∣positions. Neither shall h greatly multiply to himself silver and gold.] That is, too too excessively. Princes above all men have need of a full treasure, and therefore the Kings of Israel are here allowed a moderate care herein: But withall the Lord forbids them a boundlesse desire and endeavour to heap up riches, and that lest such an excessive greedinesse after riches should make them either oppresse the people, and heap up gold and silver by rapine and unjust exactions, or be exalted in their minds because of their great wealth, as indeed it is usually with men that have such a mighty masse of riches, Give me not riches (saith Agur, Prov. 30. 8, 9.) lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? Vers. 18. He shall write him a copie of this law in a book, out of that which is before the priests, the Levites.] The originall book of the law was kept in the
Sanctuary▪ Deut. 31. 26. Take this book of the Law, and put it in the side of the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God, that it may be there for a witnesse against thee, 2. Kin. 22 . And Hilkiah the high priest said unto Shaphan the scribe, I have found the book of the Law, in the house of the Lord. Here therefore God appoints that the King must not onely have a copie of this book, but also that he must either write it himself, or cause it to be purposely written for him out of the originall co∣pie, both that it might be perfect, and also that receiving it immediately from the Priests and Levites, he might take it, as it were, out of Gods hand, and might be the more carefull to observe and obey it in every particular, both for the ordering of his own life, and for the government of the people. CHAP. XVIII. Vers. 3. ANd this hall be the priests due from the people, from thm that offer a sacriice, &c.] Besides all other things, which being the Lords right by his Law he hath given to the priests and Levites. They shall give unto the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the maw.] The wave-breast, mentioned elsewhere, is here left out, and that, as I conceive, because it is comprehended under the shoulder, to which it is joyned in the sheep, both being parts of the fore-quarter. But withall the maw and the two heeks, added here, are no where else mentioned; the reason whereof may well be con∣ceived to be this, because elsewhere the Lord onely prescribes what part the priests should have of the sacrifice, and the two cheeks and maw were no pat of the sacri∣fice, or holy things, but cut off before and given to the priests, and not so much as waved or heaved before the Lord. Vers. 5▪ For the Lord thy God hath chosen him out of all thy tribes, to sta to minister in the name of the Lord▪ &c.] It is said of the piests here that they did minister in the name of the Lord, either because they performed the service of the priesthood by command and athority received from the Lord▪ or rather be∣cause they performed it to the Lord, as the duties of his worship and service which he required of them. Vers. 6. And if a Lvit e come from any of thy gates out of all Israel▪ &c.] The summe of this Law is this that wenever any of the tribe of Levihad a de∣sire to come and serve in the tabenacle or temple, they should be admitted to live of the holy things there▪ vn s the rest that did at times serve in that place. The priests and Levites, we know, had severall cities given them throughout the land of Israel▪ where thy had ir constant abode, and did there instruct the people▪ and performed such other duties as belonged to their places; and so the service of the tabernacle and temple was performed by those that from thir ssverall cities went up in their tuns to do the service of that place (for from the first I conceive there was some order observed for thi, though by David afterward this was mor xactly cotrived, when they were divided into foure and twenty courses, 1. Chron. 23.) Now therefore here order is taken that if any of that tribe, whether priest or ordinary Levite, had a desire to go p and serve in the house of God voluntarily,
when it wa not his course, or happely to spend the whole remainder of his life in that service,  should then be admitted to do the service of the house, and should have his share of the holy things even as other his brethren had, whose course it was at that time to attend upon that service. Vers. 8. They hall have like portions to cat, beside that which comeh of the sale of his patrimony.] That i, though he have something whereon to live which cometh in of the sale of his patrimonie, he shall for all that have a like portion to eat of the holy things as other his brethren have that do the service there in their se∣verall courses. But what is meant here by that which cometh of the sale of his pa∣trimonie? I answer, some hereby mean the money which the Israelites, which dwelt far off from the tabernacle or temple, brought with them when they came thither, and was raised of their holy thigs which they sold at home, according to that Law, Deut. 14. 4. 25. and hat it is enjoyned here, that of this these that thus went up to the tabernacle or temple should have their share as well as of other the holy things: others again hereby understand that which was raised of his portion of the tithes paid to the Levites, in the place where he had his dwelling, which they say he was to enjoy, and yet was to have no lesse share in the holy things of the temple when he went up to serve there. But neither of these I conceive can be meant here, because this place speaks not of such things as were the patrimony of the Priests and Levites in generall, but of that mans peculiar patrimony which should thus volun∣tarily go up to serve at the altar; which therefore doubtlesse was such moneys as came in of the sale either of those houses which were his portion and patrimony in the cities of the Levites, or of any other estate that was left him by his father: and so the meaning of this place is, that notwithstanding any such private estate that the Levite had, yet if he went up to serve in the temple he must live of the holy things of the temple, as others did. Indeed considering that the Levite might re∣deem his house, which he had sold, at any time, Levit. 25. 32. it was not fit that he should be disabled to do this by spending his money upon his own maintenance. But however if of singular devotion to the service of the Sanctuary he should go up extraordinarily to serve there, God would have such an one live of the altar and not be put thereby to spend his own private estate whatever it were. Vers. 10. There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his sonne, or his daughter to passe through the fire.] See the note upon Lev. 18. 21. Or that useth divination, or an observer of times, &c.] By one that useth di∣vination, is meant one that foretelleth things to come, Mich. 3. 11. The prophets thereof divine for money▪ and by an observer of times is meant such as by obser∣ving constellations, &c. id pronounce some dayes lucky and some unlucky, and undertake to tell men their fortune. The diviners were carried much by inward motions, these last by outward observations in the creatures. So also by a Necro∣mancer, vers. 11. is meant such as by raising the dead did enquire after secret things. Vers. 13. Thou shalt be perfect with the Lord thy God.] That is, tho shalt keep thy self intirely to him, and not seek unto any other for help; thou shalt in these things before spoken of, as in all other things, keep thy self exactly to what thy God hath enjoyned thee, and not defile thy self with any of these abominations practised amongst other ntions.
Vers. 15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet from the midst of thee, &c.] The heathens, that used these unlawfull arts, made account that God did by these means reveal himself to them, and deemed such high knowledge a high degree of their happinesse: lest therefore the Israelites should think much that they were debarred of this, the Lord tells them here that he would by prophets raised up to them from amongst their brethren as fully inform them concerning all things necessary for them to know, as if God should come down to them out of heaven. I doubt not indeed but this which is here spoken is meant first and principally of Christ; for the Apostle Peter saith expressely that this was fulfilled in Christ, Acts 3. 22. For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your brethren like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you; and with respect to this place that seems o have been spoken by Philip, John 1. 45. Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith unto him, We have found him of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets did write, Je∣sus of Nazareth the sonne of Joseph; and that by Christ, John 5. 46. Had ye be∣lieved Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote of me. But withall I see not how we can exclude the other Prophets between Moses and Christ, the drift of these words being manifestly this, to shew that they should have no cause to seek to enchanters and diviners, because God would still raise them up Prophets to re∣veal his will unto them: and how could this be a stay to them, if it were meant onely of Christ, who was not sent unto them above one thousand and foure hundred years after this? therefore I think it must be understood principally of Christ, as the onely Prophet of his Church, but withall indeinitely of all the Prophets as sub∣ordinate to Christ, sent from him and inspired by him. The Jews indeed understand it not commonly of the Messiah, but of another notable Prophet besides, like unto Moses, which was to be sent to them, John 1. 25. But herein they were grossely deceived: for it is evident by those places, Acts 3. 22. and 7. 37. that Christ was the Prophet here principally meant, though other Prophets are alo comprehended, as is before said. As for that clause, a Prophet like unto me, though the Prophets afterwards sent to Israel were not equall to Moses, Deut. 34. 10. And there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face; yet they were like him, men sent from God as he was, raised up from amongst their brethren as he was, and this is here chiefly intended, (see vers. 16. According to all that thou desiredst of the Lord thy God in Horeb, in the day of the assembly, saying, Let me not hear again the voice of the Lord my God, neither▪ let me see this great fire any more, that I die not) and so was Christ, a high priest taken from among men, Hebr. 5. 1. yea like him and above him: for first, as Moses was as a Mediatour betwixt God and the people, Deut. 5. 5. I stood between the Lord and you at that time, to shew you the word of the Lord; for ye were afraid by reason of the fire, and went not up into the mount; so was Christ, Heb. 8. 6. But now hath he obtained a more excellent ministrie, by how much also he is the mediatour of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises: secondly, in excellen∣y: of Moses it is said, Numb. 12. 6, 7. And he said, Hear now my words: If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known unto him in a
vision, and will speak unto him in a dream; My servant Moses is not so, who is faithfull in all mine house; and so of Christ, John 1. 17, 18. For the law was gi∣ven by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. No man hath seen God at any time, the onely begotten sonne, which is in the bosome of the Father, he hath declared him. Thirdly, in faithfulnesse: for so it is said of Christ, Heb. 3. 2. Who was faithfull to him that appointed him, as also Moses was faithfull in all his house; yea and above Moses, vers. 5, 6. And Moses verily was faithfull in all his house as a servant, but Christ as a sonne over his own house. Fourthly, in that as Moses brought them the law from God, so Christ the Gospel out of his Fa∣thers bosome. Fifthly, in signes and wonders: for Christ was a prophet mightie in deed and word, Luke 24. 19. as Moses also was; yea more mightie, John 15. 24. If I had not done among them the works which none other man did, they had not had sinne. And sixthly, as Moses carried the Israelites from their bondage in Egypt to the land of Canaan, so Christ delivered his people from their spirituall bondage, and opened heaven for them, John 6. 40. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the sonne and believeth on him, may have ever∣lasting life. Vers. 18. And will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him.] This is meant of the faithfulnesse of those Prophets which God would send unto them▪ to wit, that they should deliver whatever God gave them in chage, and nothing but that which he should put into their mouthes. But most eminently was this verified in Chrit, when he came to preach the Gospel unto men; for those words of eternall life were the words which God here saith he would put into his mouth, and which accordingly he faithfully delivered to the people, All things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you, John 15. 15. Vers. 19. Whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.] That is, I will punish him for it: and so indeed God did alwayes severely punish those that would not hear his Prophets. But principally this was fulfilled upon the Jews, who would not hearken to the words of Christ, when God destroyed the city and the Sanctuary, as was prophecyed, Dan. 9. 26. and poured upon the people his uttermost wrath, 1. Thess. 2. 16. Vers. 22. When a Prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to passe, that is the thing which the Lord hath not spoken.] That we may rightly understand the rule here given for the discovery o false pophets, we must note two things: first, that it must be understood onely of such redictions of prophets wherein they foretold some strange and miraculous thing tha should come to passe, as a proof that they were truly sent from God; for if these indeed cam not accordingly to passe, the people might be sure that they were false pro∣phets▪ and that God had no sent them. But now in other predictions, as in fore∣telling some judgement or blessing that should befall men, that which they foretold migt not come to passe, and yet they that foretold these thigs might be the true Prophets of God for ll that; for thus we know it was with the Prophet Isaiah, when he told Hezekiah that he should die of his sicksse, 2. Kings 20. 1. and with
Jonah, when he prophecyed that after fourty dayes Niniveh should be destroyed, Jonah 3. 4. and the reason of this is, because in all such predictions the people migh know, judging thereof by the known rule of Gods word, that these were conditi∣onally foretold, though the condition were not expressed, and therefore that in case they repented God would not inflict the evil denounced against them, and in case they were not obedient unto God, he would hold back the blessings promised: and secondly, that though the not accomplishing of signes foretold be made here a sure mark of false prophets, yet we must not hence inerre that on the contrary when signes foretold did accordingly come to passe, that was an infallible proof of true prophets: for if they taught any thing contrary to the written word touching mat∣ters of faith and of the worship of God, the people were to hold to the written word, and not to believe them, but to punish them as false prophets, though they did confirm their sayings, that did indeed come to passe, as they were before taught, Deut. 13. 1, 2. &c. But the prophet hath spoken it presumptuously.] To wit, because he did so boldly foretell that such a thing should come to passe having no warrant for it from God, & withall because it was indeed a high degree of arrogancie to father his fancies & lies upon the God of truth, saying that God had said that which he had not spoken. Thou shalt not be afraid of him.] That is, though he boast never so much of the certainty of that which he saith, and that indeed God hath sent him; and though he threaten in never so horrible a manner all the curses he can devise if you do not believe him, yet thou shalt not be afraid of his brags and threatnings, nor fear to put him to death, as God hath appointed. CHAP. XIX. Vers. 2. THou shalt separate three cities for thee in the midst of thy land, &c.] That is, in the heart of the land: for the land being divided into three parts, in the middest of each of these partitions was a citie of refuge chosen. Moses had himself already assigned them three cities of refuge in the land without Jordan, which they had already vanquished, Deut. 4. 21. and now he gives order that when they had possessed themselves of the land of Canaan within Jordan, they should there also set apart three cities of refuge more. Vers. 3. Thou shalt prepare thee a way, &c.] That is, thou shalt so order it, that from all parts of the countrey round about these cities of refuge, there be a direct, plain, fair high-way or causey leading to those cities, and such as either by the breadth and fairnesse of the way, or by marks set up purposely to distinguish it from others, may be known to be the wayes leading to those cities of refuge, to the end the man-slayer may not be hindered or incumbered by the uncertainty or foul∣nesse of the way, but may speedily flie thither, and so be safe. Vers. 4. Who so killeth his neighbour ignorantly, &c.] The persons here menti∣oned, that were to enjoy the priviledge of the cities ofrefuge, are onely such as killed a man unwittingly, by chance-medly, as we usually call it: but by the rule of pro∣portion we may probably conceive that the like priviledge was afforded to him that
killed a man merely in his own defence, when he had no quarrell with him, but onely sought to secure his own life. Vers. 5. As when a man goeth into the wood with his neighbour to hew wood, and his hand fetcheth a stroke, &c.] And so strikes with all his might, not fearing nor suspecting any evil that should be done thereby. Vers. 6. Lest the avenger of the bloud pursue the slayer while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is long, &c.] This last clause, because the way is long, sheweth that this verse follows as depending on the third verse (the other two being inserted as it were by way of parenthesis) and is added to shew thereason why they were appointed thus to chuse the cities of refuge in three severall divisions of the land, namely, left if the man tha killed one ignorantly had too farre to flie ere he could come to a city of refuge, the avenger, because of the length of the way, should overtake him before he could get thither. Vers. 8. And if the Lord thy God inlarge thy coast, &c.] It is questioned by Expositours of what inlarging their coasts this is meant: and because it is said, chap. 7. 22. that they should not drive out the inhabitants of the land of Canaan at once, but by little and little, therefore some understand this of their full possessing of the land of Canaan, to wit, that however they did at first onely set apart three cities of refuge in the land within Jordan, yet if afterwards they came to possesse the whole land of Canaan, they should then separate three cities of refuge more therein. But first, because they never did separate six cities of refuge more within Jordan, no not when they had the fullest possession of the land; and secondly, because those three cities that were separated within the land, to wit, Kedesh, and Shechem, and Hebron, were situated in equall divisions proportionably according to the full extent of the land of Canaan, therefore it is no way probable that God ever enjoyned them to have six cities of refuge in the land of Canaan within Jordan. Others again think that in these words, Moses speaks onely of three cities more that were to be added besides those three without Jordan, to wit, those three above mentioned which Joshua separated, Josh. 20. 7. and so conceive that no other inlarging of their coasts is here meant, but onely the adding of the land of Canaan to that they had already▪ gotten without Jordan. But because it seems evident that the charge which Mose gave before, vers. 3. and vers. 7. for separating three cities in the midst of their land, could not be meant of the three cities of refuge without Jordan, which he had already separated, chap. 4. 41. and yet now he speaks of three cities more, vers. 9. that were to be separated, if the Lord should inlarge their coast, therefore I think the meaning of this place must be, that if the Lord should inlarge their coast, to wit, by giving them the land promised, from the river of Egypt to the great river, the river Euphrates, Gen. 15. 18. that then they should separate three cities of re∣fuge more, to wit, besides those before enjoyned in the midst of the land of Canaan they were now to enter upon; and that the reason why these were never separated was, because by their sinnes they lost the benefit of this promise, the Lord never so farre inlarging their coasts. Vers. 14. Thou shalt not remove thy neighbours land-mark, &c,] It may be not improbably conceived, that this law against removing of land-mark is here inserted
together with those concerning bloudshed, because this injury of removing land∣marks was like to be a dangerous occasion of quarrels and bloudshed amongst them. Vers. 15. One witnesse shall not rise up against a man for any iniquitie, &c.] That is, the testimonie of one man, rising up as a witnesse against another, shall not be admitted as sufficient to prove the crime laid to his charge, and to cause him to be condemned for it: and indeed though two or three witnessesmay accuse a man false∣ly, yet because it is not so likely that two or three should so combine against a man, as that one alone should accuse him falsely; and withall there would be more hope of discovering the falsehood of two or three witnesses so combining together, by ex∣amining them singly apart by themselves, therefore God allowed no man to be condemned under lesse then the testimonie of two or three witnesses. Vers. 17. Then both the men between whom the controversie is shall stand be∣fore the Lord, &c.] Both the men, that is, the partie accused, and the party accu∣sing, so that here is but one witnesse mentioned, which makes some conceive the case for which direction is here given to be this, When there comes in but one wit∣nesse against a man, and takes an oath concerning some evil done by him, and the party accused denies that which is laid to his charge, and complains that he hath born false witnesse against him, what shall be done in this case? I answer, the order which the Lord gives here when the case stands thus, is this, Because it is a very hard thing to find out here whether the witnesse speak truly or falsely, therefore for his greater terrour, and to make him take heed what he sayes, the Judges were to bring him into the place which God should chuse, and to set him before the Ark or Sanctuary, and there to examine him as in Gods presence, and accordingly, to punish him if they found him false; and happely if they could not find it out by ex∣amination, the priest was then to enquire of the Lord according to that, 1. Kings 8. 31, 32. If any man trespasse against his neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him to cause him to swear, &c. But because it is expresly said before, that the testimo∣ni of one man rising up as a witnesse against another was not to be admitted in judgement, vers. 15. therefore others, and I think most probably, conceive the law ere given to be this, that in case two or more witnesses did rise up against a man, and onely one of them spake home to the proof of that the accused partie was charged with▪ if here the party accused did alledge that this man bare false witnesse against him, that then the Judges were to search out the matter in the way here enjoyned before the Lord: yet withall the like by consequence was to be done i case the party accused did accuse all the witnsses of bearing false witnesse against him. Vers. 21. Life shall go for life, eye for eye, &c.] That is, such punishment as should have been inflited on the party accused, had he been found guilty, accord∣ing to that law, Exod. 21. 23. the ame shall be inflicted on him that bare false wit∣nesse against him, to wit, by the civil Magistrate. Indeed the Pharisees in Christs time expounded this of private revenge, namely that private person might take life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, &c. and this is that which our Saviour con∣demnes, Matth. 5. 38, 3. Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for a eye, and a tooth for a tooth; But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil, &c.
CHAP. XX. Vers. 5. WHat man is there that hath built a new house, and hath not de∣dicated it.] Or initiated it, that is, that hath not taken possession of it, and begun to use it; which was wont to be done with solemnity of feasting, praying▪ and singing of Psalmes, as we may see by the title of the thirtieth Psalme. Let him go and return to his house, &c.] That is, he may be gone if he will. In this and the following cases this liberty was granted them, first, lest they should go forth to battels unwillingly and timerously, not having any courage to fight the Lords battles (see vers. 8.) and secondly, because even the light of reason teacheth men to shew compassion in this kind, and not suddenly to take off men from those comforts which they have long laboured for, just when they are at last entring upon the fruition of them, which is threatned as a curse, chap. 28. 30, Thou shalt build a house and shalt not dwell therein; and thirdly, that this priviledge might encourage men to build houses, and plant vineyards, &c. which was good and profitable for the common-wealth. Vers. 6. And what man is he that hath planted a vineyard, and hath not yet eaten of it, &c.] The Hebrew word signifieth, and hath not made it common, that is, such as himself and others might eat of it; and the ground of this expression is, because they might not in the land of Canaan eat of the fruit of any trees they had planted till they had consecrated the fourth years fruit unto the Lord. The fruit of the first three years was lost as uncircumcised, the fourth years fruit was holy and to be given to God, and then the fruit of the fifth year was fre for the owner and others to eat, concerning which see the note upon Levit. 19. 23. Vers. 8. What man is there that is fearfull and faint-hearted? let him go and return▪ &c.] By this the Lord taught his peopl how much he dislikes a timerous and cowardly spirit in those that serve him, that so they might strive to have faith in him, and in all straits to be secure and confident in his protection. Vers. 9. They shall make captains of the armies to lead the people.] That is, they shall order the battel, and appoint every captain in his place to lead the severall companies of souldiers; for we must not think that captains were now first chosen, when they were come nigh unto the battel, as it is said above vers. 2. and that they had marched so farre already without leaders. Vers. 10. When thou comest nigh unto a citie to fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it.] To wit, any citie out of the land of Canaan. Indeed the Hebrews say that they were to proffer peace even to the inhabitants of Canaan. Bt because first, they were expressely charged utterly to destroy the inhabitants of Canaan, to the end they might dwell in their room & might not be ensnared by their dwelling amongst them; and secondly, we do not reade that ever Joshua tendered peace to ny of the cities, though it be mentioned as a strange thing, and a sgne of Gods hardning their hearts, that never any of those people did of their own accord crave peace, save the Gibeonites onely, Josh. 11. 19. There was not a citie hat made peace with the children of Israel, save the Hivites, the inhabitants of Gibeon; all other they took in battel; yet we never find that there was peace proffered them,
and it seems that the Gibeonites did therefore seek it by craft, because otherwise they saw it would not be granted them; and thirdly, it is expressely noted as a fault in the Israelites, Judges 1. 28. that they put the Cananites to tribute, and did not utterly drive them out; therefore this is onely to be understood of such cities as they should besiege that were not of the cities of the land of Canaan. Vers. 13. And when the Lord thy God hath delivered it into thine hands, &c.] That is, when through Gods assistance thou hast taken it by force and assault. Vers. 15. Thus shalt thou do unto all the cities which are very farre off from thee, which are not of the cities of these nations.] But these must neither have peace offered them, nor must their women and little ones and cattel be spared when their cities are taken by force; for the following reason doth manifestly ex∣clude them from both these favours, vers. 18. That they teach you not to do after all their abominations, which they have done unto their Gods, so should you sinne against the Lord your God. Vers. 19. Thou shalt not destroy the trees thereof, &c.] That is, fruit-trees where∣with the land cannot be suddenly stored again, these might not be cut down, no not for their use in the siege. I do not think that it was unlawfull to cut down a fruit-tree when necessitie required it, onely the Lord teacheth them to take heed that in their rage they did not so waste the land as to ruine even posteritie also. Vers. 20. And thou shalt build bulwarks against the citie, &c.] That is, with such trees as are not fruit-trees. CHAP. XXI. Vers. 1. IF one be found slain in the land which the Lord thy God giveth to thee to possesse it, lying in the field, &c.] The field is onely here mentioned, because in cities and towns such murders are seldome committed so secretly but that the murderer is found out; yet when it so happened that in a town or citie a man was found murdered, and the man that did the fact could not be found, though all diligence had been used to find it out, it is most probable that the same course was taken for the expiation of the bloudshed, that is here prescribed, vers. 3. Vers. 2. Then thy Elders and Judges shall come forth, and they shall measure, &c.] That is, the Elders and the Judges of the towns or cities round about shall, for the better satisfaction of them all, come forth, and see the measure taken betwixt the dead bodie and the cities round about it, to wit, if it be doubtfull what itie is nearest; and that because the next citie was to make expiation for the murder, as it follows in the next verse. Vers. 3. The Elders of that citie shall take an heifer which hath not been wrought with, &c.] This is enjoyned for the expiation of that murder, the au∣thours whereof could not b found out, thereby to teach them how much the Lord is displeased with murder, and with the neglect of Magistrates, if they did not use all care to secure the high-wayes about them from all robberie and murder, and to search out the murderers when any man was secretly killed, that he might be pu∣ished for the bloud he had shed. The Elders of the citie next to the slain man had
this work of making an expiation imposed upon them, because there was most pro∣babilitie that some of the inhabitants there had shed this bloud; and besides, they were most culpable, for not well guarding and watching the place where the mur∣der was committed: and that which is enjoyned to be done by way of expiation for this murder thus secretly committed, is the killing of a heifer which hath not been wrought with, and which hath not drawn in the yoke; and however some hold that this heifer did represent the murderer, in whose stead it was put to death, and therefore it was an heifer that had never born the yoke, to signifie the mur∣derer to have been a wicked wretch, a sonne of Belial, that is, lawlesse and without yoke; yet it is more generally and upon better grounds held, that this heifer did signifie Christ, by whose death they were to expect that satisfaction should be made to Gods justice, that the guilt of this murder might not be laid to their charge. And indeed in that it was an heifer which had not been wrought with, and which had not drawn in the yoke, and consequently could not be slain for any thing dis∣liked in it, the fitter it was to be a lively representation of Christ, who was never under the bondage of sinne, nor never did any thing blame-worthy, but did vo∣luntarily undergo that which he did suffer for our sakes. See the note upon Numb. 19. 2. Vers. 4. And the Elders of that citie shall bring down the heifer unto a rough valley, &c.] This was done principally to strike them with the greatr horrour for the sinne committed: for the carrying of this heifer, that was to bear the punishment due to the offender, as an accursed thing, that would defile their fields, &c. into a desert place, did notably teach them that murder was an execrable sinne, and dan∣gerous. But yet withall it might also signifie that Christ, of whom this heifer was a type, was to suffer in a horrid place called Calvarie or Golgotha, Matth. 27. 33. as likewise that by this expiation the guilt of this accursed sinne was removed from them, their fields and cities. Vers. 5. And the priests, the sonnes of Levi, shall come near, &c.] The priests are here enjoyned to be present, first, to shew by their presence that this was a kind of extraordinary sacrifice; secondly, that the Elders might before them, as in Gods presence, protest their innocencie; thirdly, to see that all was done accord∣ing to the law, and to satisfie the Elders in any thing that might seem doubtfull; fourthly▪ that they might blesse them in the name of the Lord, that is, pray for them, and upon these things thus done pronounce them free from the bloudshed: all which is implyed in the following words, for them the Lord thy God hath chosen to minister unto him, and to blesse in the name of the Lord; and by their word shall every controversie, and every stroke, be tried. Vers. 6. And all the Elders of that citie that are next unto the slain man shall wash their hands over the heifer, &c.] To wit, thereby first to signifie that they were guiltlesse of the bloud of the slain man (as for the same reason, when Pilate was to condemne Christ, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the bloud of this just person, Matt. 27. 24.) secondly, to intimate their desire that the guilt of this murder might fall and lie upon this hei∣fer, over whom they washed their hands, and that so the people might be free: and
thirdly, to teach us that even those that are mot guiltlesse and innocent ought to clear themselves from the very suspicion of any evil amongst men. Vers. 7. And they shall answer and say, Our hands hav not shed this bloud, &c.] This word, answer, may seem to imply that the priests did examine the El∣ders concerning this murder, and then they answered him, as here is expressed. Vers. 10. When thou goest forth to warre against thine enemies, &c.] This Law, which implyes a liberty for men to marry women taken captives, though they had wives already, is herein like that of divorce, Deut. 24. which was onely suffered for the hardnesse of their hearts, and it is to be understood onely of the cap∣tives of forein nations, not of the Canaanies, who were to be all destroyed. Vers. 12. Then thou shalt bring her home to thine house, and she shall shav her head, and par her nails, &c.] According to the two different translations of this last clause there are two different Expositions given of it: for if we reade it, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, she shall shave her head, and suffer her nails to grow, then it seems evident that her head was shaved, her nails suffered to grow, and the servile attire of captives was put upon her, purposely that being thus defor∣med he might hereby be beaten from desiring her to be his wife. But if we reade it, as upon better grounds it is in our text, she shall shave her head, and pare her nails, and put the raiment of her captivity from off her, that is, the goodly attire which she had on when she was taken captive, then these outward signes were to teach them that if they desired to marry such a captive, she must renounce her heathen∣isme, and all the superfluous and corrupt customes and superstitions thereof, and worship God onely, as the Israelites did, living now a new and holy life, as became Gods people, into whose stock she was to be ingrafted, and to shew them in what manifest danger they would b of being defiled by such wives, if they did not re∣nounce their former religion and heathenish cusomes and course of life. I know there are some Expositours do hold that hereby also was figured, that if Gods peo∣ple would make use of the philosophy of the heathens, or any other thing which being good in it self hath been abused by them, they must be carefull to shave off and pare away whatever is superstitious and sinnefull therei. But that these rites were intended to signifie this, it is hard to say. Vers. 13. And bewail her father and her mother a full moneh.] This was enjoyned, either that the Israelite, that had taken this woman captive, might have so much time to consider of what he did beforehand, and not to do that in the heat of his lust which he should afterwards repent, but might rather be weaned from his desire of taking her to be his wife; or else this was enjoyned, as the other par∣iculars before mentioned, as an outward expression of the womans utter renoun∣cing her fathers house, that she might be ingrafted into the Israel of God: for this mourning for her parents as if they were dead was a kind of bidding farewell for ever to them, according to that of the Psalmist, Hearken (O daughter) and con∣sider, and encline thine eare; forget also thine own people, and thy fathers house, Psal. 45. 10. Vers. 14. And it shall be if thou have no delight in er, then thou shalt let her go whither she will, &c.] By way of satisfaction for the wrong he had done her,
he was freely to set her at liberty. Now this putting away f the captive woman after he had married her, upon some dislike or displeasure taken against her, was one of those things which God did never approve, but onely tolerate to the Jews for the hardnesse of their hearts. And indeed if there were danger lest the husband should kill or grievously oppresse a wife of their own nation, upon displeasure ta∣ken against her, and therefore they were permitted rather to give their wives a bill of divorce and put them away; much more would there have been great danger of the killing or extreme hard usage of a wife that had formrly been taken as a captive, and therefore the man is here allowed to put her away; but withall he is restrained from selling her under pretence that she was his captive and servant, but is appointed to set her at liberty to go whither she would. Vers. 16. He may not make the sonne of the beloved first-born before the sonne of the hated, &c.] That is, the sonne of the hated being yet living, and that because the right of the first-born by Law of nature belonged unto him. Vers. 19. Then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the Elders of his citie, &c.] Who were no doubt to examine the truth of the accusation brought against him, and accordingly to proceed. Vers. 21. And the men of his citie shall stone him with stones that he die, &c.] That is, after the accusation given in against this rebellious sonne is sufficiently pro∣ved the Elders shall condemne him, and so he shall be stoned; and thus by the se∣verity of this Law not onely children were kept in aw that they might not dae to rebell against their parents, but also parents were taught to be the more carefull of the education of their children. Vers. 23. His body shall not remain all night on the tree, but thou shalt in any wise bury him that day, &c.] To wi, whether he were hanged alive, or dead, as those Kings were, Josh. 10. 26. And afterward Joshua smote them, and slew them, and hanged them on five trees: and they were anging upon the trees untill the evening. And this they were enjoyned to do, first, lest they should by being inured to look daily on the dead carcases of men become mercilese and cruel, and make light of killing men; and secondly, that the land might not be defiled by that monument of Gods curse remaining upon it visibly. And thus were the people taught to look upon death as the wages of sinne▪ the curse of the Law. For he that is hanged is accursed of God.] Since the death of any malefactour might be a monument of Gods curse for sinne, it may be questioned why this brand is peculiarly set upon this kind of punishment, that he that is hanged is ac∣cursed of God? To which I answer, that the reason of this was, becas this was esteemed the most shamefull, the most dishonourable and infamous of all kinds of death, and was usually therefore the punishment of those that had by some notori∣ous wickednesse provoked God to poure out his wrath upon the whole land▪ and so were hanged up to appease his wrath, as we may see in the hanging of those Prin∣es that were guilty of committing whoredome with the daughters of Moab, Numb. 25. 4. and i the hanging of those sonnes of Saul in the dayes of David, when there was a famine in the land, because of Sauls perfidious oppressing of the Gibeonites, 2. Sam. 21. 6. Nor was it without cause that this kind of death was,
both by the Israelites and other nations, esteemed the most shamefull and accursed, because the very manner of the death did intimate that such men as were thus exe∣cuted were such execrable and accursed wretches, that they did defile the earth with treading on it, and would pollute the earth if they should die upon it, and there∣ore wee so trussed up in the aire as not fit to be amongst men, and that others might look upon them as men made spectacles of Gods indignation and cure be∣cause of the wickednesse they had committed, which was not done in other kinds of death: and hence it was that the Lord God would have his son, the Lord Christ, to suffer this kind of death, that even hence it might be the more evident that in his death he bare the curse due to our sinnes, according to that of the Apostle, Gal. 3. 13. Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on the tree. CHAP. XXII. Vers. 1. THou shalt not see thy brothers ox or his heep go astray and hide thy self from them, &c.] That is, thou shalt not upon any pretence withhold thine help, yea though he be thine enemy; for that is also expressed, Exod. 23. 4. If thou meet thine enemies ox or his asse going astray, thou shalt sure∣ly bring it back to him again: and hereby we are taught that much more we must perform this office of love to our brethren, even to seek the conversion of them that are out of the way▪ James 5. 19, 20. Brethren, if any of you do erre from the truth, and one convert him; Let him know that he which converteth a sinner from the crrour of his way shall save a soul from death, and hide a multitude of sinnes. Vers. 2. And if thy brother be not nigh unto thee, or if thou know him not, &c.] Here two cases are resolved that might be questioned, to wit, what they were to do in case the owners of such cattel as they found going astray did either dwell farre off from them, or were altogether unknown to them; and the answer is▪ that in such cases they were to drive the cattel home to their own houses till the owners did fetch them away: and so in case they knew the owners, it must needs also be implyed, that they were to send them word of the cattel they had taken up, though they dwelt farre off; but if they knew not the owners, then indeed they were to keep them till the owners themselves did seek out for them. Vers. 5. The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man▪ &c.] Under this all manlinesse is forbidden in women, and all effeminatenesse in men, ei∣ther in their attire, or in the ordering of their hair; of which the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 11. 4—14. or any thing of like nature▪ as that, 1. Cor. 14. 34. Let your women keep silence in the churches; for it is not permitted unto them to speak. Vers. 7. But thou shalt in any wise let the▪ damme go, and take the young to thee, &c.] The end of this law was first, to teach them alwayes in the least things to have respect to the publick good, and to preferre that before their own private satisfaction, as here they were forbidden to destroy the damme when it was breed∣ing time, because she might ere long have other young ones, and so might still con∣tinue the store of birds for the good of others; and secondly, to shew them how
well God was pleased that his people should be mercifull and pitifull, and how e aborred all cruelty and hardheartednesse, in that he would not allow them to kill the damme when they took away her egges, or her young ones, because this might seem a kind o cruelty and unmercifulnesse towards the poore creature▪ that did sufer enough already in the losse of her young ones, that were so precious to her. Vers. 8. When thou buildest a new house, then thou shalt make a battlement for thy roof.] The houses of the Israelites were alwayes built flat on the tops, and so they used to be much on the tops of their houses, both to recreate themselves there▪ and for many other occasions. Whence is that of our Saviour, Matth. 10. 27. What ye hear in the ear, that preach ye on the house tops. Here therefore they are enjoyned alwayes to make battlements round about their house tops, to prevent the casuall falling of any body from thence; and consequently also under this one par∣ticular they were enjoyned to prevent, what in them lay, all occasions of bloudshed, or of any other evil, that through their default might redound unto their bre∣thren. Vers. 9. Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with divers seeds, &c.] The main and principall end of this, and the two following laws against plowing with an ox and an asse, and against wearing garments of linsey-wolsey, was I conceive, one and the same, to wit, to teach them what exact prity and sincerity God required in them that were his peculiar people, and how hatefull to God all mixtures were in spirituall things. There was not in it self any evil at all in wearing a garment made of linen and wollen together, nor was it a matter of any great moment in it self▪ whether they sowed a field with pure wheat, or with wheat and ri mingled to∣gether, as we do now in many places. But thus was the Lord pleased, under thee outward elements, to teach them matters of greater moment: for whilest the Lord would not allow them any mixture in such slight and trivill things as these, hereby they were led, as it were by the hand, to conder how much more hatefull to God all mixures were in matters of greater moment, as in religion and in the duties of his worship, and how strictly the Lord required that they shold keep themelves to the purity and simplicity of his word, without mingling any thing of their own in∣ventions through curiosity or a perverse imitation of the strange  of oher na∣tions, which he had not enjoyned them. If they might not sow a field ith ming∣led seeds, much lesse might they teach the truth of God mixt with any errour; if they might not wear a linsey-wolsey garment, mch lesse my we think to cloth our souls in case of justification, with Chris righteousnesse and our own▪ Gl. 2. 16. yea all hypocrisy and whatever was not pure and sincere was hereby condem∣ned. And this, I say, was the main and principall drift of these laws. Now in this particular law concerning their vineyards, there are two things that are farther questionable, to wit first, what is meant here by sowing a vineyard with divers seeds; & secndly, what that reason is that is here given for this law, lest the fruit of thy seed which thou hast sown, and the fruit of thy vneyard, be desiled. And in answer hereto, for the first, we must know that by divers seds here is meant any seeds different or divers from that of the vine. I know that some Exposiors hold▪
that he sowing of mingled seeds, as of wheat and barley, in the void and empty ground betwixt the rows of the vines there planted, is onely here forbidden, and that the Israelites might lawfully sow any one sort of seed betwixt the rows of their vines, so they sowed no more. But this was sufficiently forbidden in that former law, Levit. 19. 19. Thou shalt not sow thy field with mingled seed; and besides the reason that is here given for this prohibition is not that the mngling of divers seeds might be prevented, but the mingling of the fruit of any sed with the fruit of the vine. And therefore I conceive that the sowing of any seed together with their vines is here sorbidden; and indeed because the reaon here given for this law is, that the fruit of their seed sowen and the fruit of their vines might not be mingled together, and so be defiled, it is worth our considering whether this be not meant rather of the seed of fruit-trees then of corn and herbs, the fruit whereof was not likely to be mingled with that of the vine: and thus as in that law, Levit. 19. 19. the sowing of severall kinds of grain in one field was forbidden, so here the sowing of the seed of other fruit-trees together with the vine. As for the reason here annexed to this law, lest the fruit of thy seed which thou hast sown, and the fruit of thy vineyard, be defiled, some understand it thus, lest the fruit of their seed and their vineyard be corrupred and marred, to wit, because whilest the heart of the earth is sucked away by too many things sown or planted in it, neither of them can be good and fair, as they would otherwise be, but both are spoyled and good for nothing: and thus, they say, the Israelites were taught to take heed of a covetous and greedy de∣sire to draw more from the earth then it is well able to bear. But it is better by others understood of their being defiled by being mingled together: for as that is said to be pure which is not mixed, as that we call pure wheat, which is not mixed with any other grain; so that may be said to be defiled which is mingled, especi∣ally being done contrary to Gods law, and so rendered unlawfull either in first∣fruits or otherwise to be offered to the Lord. Vers. 10. Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an asse together.] The princpall end of this law I have shown in the foregoing note upon vers. 9. But yet there might be other grounds of this law besides: for first, God might have respect here∣in to the good of thse poore creatures, that must needs both suffer by such unequall yoking, the ox, on whom the whole labour of drawing must needs lie for want of another that with equall strength should help forward the work, and the asse, by being haled on beyond that which he is able to do: and secondly, hereby might also be signified, both that men ought not to be imployed in those callings for which they are unfit, to the overburdening of others that are joyned with them in that ser∣vice, and that God will not endure the unequall yoking of his people with infidels, of which the Apostle speaks, 2. Cor. 6. 14, &c. Vers. 11. Thou shalt not wear a garment of divers sorts, as of wollen and lie, together.] See the former note upon vers. 9. Vers. 12. Thou shlt make the fringes upon the foure quarters of thy vesture, wherewith thou coverest thy self.] Concerning the principall end of these fringes, which was to put them in mind of the Lords commandments, see the note upon Numb. 15. 38. But besides, by this prescrbing them a fashion of attire, whereby
they might alwayes be known to be Israelites, they were taught not to be ashamed openly to prosesse themselves the people of God: and it might also be enjoyned, as some think, to prevent any undecency in the discovery of their naked skin; for the Israelites wore long loose garments, which being opened below, both behind, and on each side, they had foure skirts or quarters, as they are here called, and these they were that had a fringe upon them round about, by means whereof there was the lesse danger of discovering their bodyes as they went, which they say is implyed in the last words of this verse, wherewith thou coverest thy self. Vers. 15. Then shall the father of the damsel and her mother take and bring forth the tokens, &c.] This was imposed upon the parents, because the evil of which their daughter was accused, if true would be a dishonour to them, who ought to have been carefll guardians of their daughters chasity: whence it was also that if their daughter was found guilty, she was to be stoned before the doore of her fathers house, vers. 21, and if innocent, her husband was to pay her father a hundred shekels of silver, vers. 19. for the wrong which by this false slander was done to him. Vers. 19. And she shall be his wife, he may not put her away all his dayes.] Which was permitted to other men▪ Deut. 24. 1. When a man hath taken a wi, and married her, and it come to passe that she find no favour in his eyes, because he hath found some uncleannesse in her; then let him write her a bill of divorceme, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house. Vers. 20. But if this thing be true, and the tokens of virginitie be not found for the damsel.] Because in some cases it is found by experience that the tokens of a maids virginitie may fail, and so much also is acknowledged by the Hebrews themselves, therefore some hold that though the parents could not bring forth the tokens of their daughters virginitie, yet this alone was not sufficient to prove her guiltie, and make her liable to be stoned, unlesse it were by other circumstances found to be true, as by the testimonie of witnesses proving that she had no sicknesse upon her to hinder the tokens of her virginitie, or some such like evidence. But be∣cause the words here seem not to implie any such thing, I rather think that in those countreys the tokens of a maids virginitie did never fail, and so the want of them was taken for a certain proof that the accusation was true, and so the damsel was to be stoned: for though in other cases the fornication of a woman before marriage was not punishe with death, Exod. 22. 16. yet here it was: first, because of the great wrong she had done to the man that had married her, pretending to him that she was a virgin, when indeed she was not; and secondly, because by the evidence of her own words, wherein she professed her self a virgin when she promised him marriage, it must needs follow that she was desiled after she was betrothed to him, and in that case her sinne was adulterie, and to be punished with death. Vers. 27. For he found her in the field, and the betrothed damsel cried, &c.] That is, it must be presumed that she cried. Every one knows that though she were in the sield, yet she might consent to that lewdnesse; but unlesse that could be proved against her, they were bound in charitie to hope and judge the best; & so according∣ly the Scripture speaks of it, as of that they were to take for granted, the betrthed damsel cried, and there was none to help hr.
Vers. 28. If a man find a damsel that is a virgin, which is not betrothed, and lay hold on her, &c.] Some conceive that this law differeth from that, Exod. 22. 16, 17. because that was for such as consented being enticed, this supposeth violent hands laid upon the damsel; but for this see the note upon that place in Exodus. Vers. 29. Because he hath humbled her, he may not put her away all his dayes.] This libertie afforded or winked at in others, Deut. 24. 1. he must not enjoy. CHAP. XXIII. Vers. 1. HE that is wounded in the stones, &c.] By the following laws in the beginning of this chapter certain men are disabled for being admitted into the congregation of the Lord, that is, as most Expositours do most probably understand it, from being admitted into full communion with the commonwealth of Israel, at least from being capable of bearing ny office of Magistracie amongst them. We cannot with any shew of probabilitie think that all these here menti∣oned, to wit, eunuchs, vers. 1. bastards and their children unto the tenth generati∣on, vers. 2. Ammonites also and Moabites unto the tenth generation, vers. 3. yea and Edomites and Egyptians unto the third generation, vers. 7, 8. (and so conse∣quently all other nations, since no nation was like to enjoy more priviledges then the Edomites, who are called their brethren, vers. 8.) I say we cannot with any probabilitie hold that all these, though by circumcision admitted into the Church, were excluded from the holy assemblies, where they should hear the word, be in∣structed in the law, and be admitted to offer sacrifices, as the signes of their faith and hope of salvation in the promised Messiah: for there are elsewhere many ex∣presse laws, that such as were Proselytes, and had embraced the faith and religion of Israel, should have equall libertie with the Israelites to celebrate the Passeover, Exod. 12. 48, 49. When a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the Passe∣over to the Lord, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it, and he shall be as one that is born in the land, one law shall be to him that is home-born, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you; and so likewise to bring their sacrifices unto the Lord, Numb, 15. 14, 15. If a stranger sojourn with you, or whosoever be among you in your generations that will offer an offering mad by fire of a sweet savour unto the Lord, as ye do, so he shall do; one ordinance shall be both for you of the congregation, and also for the stranger, &c. either therefore by the congregation of the Lord here is meant the assembly of Judges and Magistrates so called, because the Lord is president over them, and they exercise hat power they have in his name, and by authoritie derived from him, Psal. 82. 1. God standeth in the congregation of the mighty, he judgeth among the gods; and so the meaning of this phrase, of not entring into the congregation of the Lord, is onely this, that they should not bear any publick office or place of Magistracie in the Commonwealth of Israel; or else by the congregation of the Lord is meant the people or commonwealth of Israel, and so this expression is elsewhere often used, as Numb. 16. 3. Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy eve∣r▪one of them, and the lord is among them; and again, Numb. 27. 16, 17. Let the Lord the▪ God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation, which
may go out before them, and which may go in before them,—that the congrega∣tion of the Lord be not as sheep without a shepherd, and then the meaning of this place must be, that such and such as are here named might not be admitted into full communion with the Commonwealth of Israel; though they were admitted into the Church, and so into the communion of the same faith and worship of God, yet they might not be admitted to be members of the same bodie po∣litick, and so to enjoy all the priviledges of free-born Israelites; and hereupon they stood after a sort separated srom Gods people, as the complaint of such, and the Lords comfortable answer sheweth, Isai. 56. 3. &c. Neither let the sonne of the stranger, that hath joyned himself to the Lord, speak, saying, The Lord hath ut∣terly separated me from his people; neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a drie tree, &c. they were of the Church of Israel, but yet aliens and strangers, as I may say, from the Commonwealth of Israel, not being capable of the priviledges of o∣ther Israelites, as for instance▪ of those of the year of release, and the year of Jubile, of bearing any place of Magistracie or office amongst them, or having any power to intermeddle in such affairs; yea we may adde too, of marrying a daughter of Israel (for though that cannot be meant here in this branch of the lw concerning eunuchs, yet in the rest it may be included) and some others of the like nature. And indeed thus to understand this phrase, of not entring into the congregation of the Lord, we may be the rather induced, because Nehem. 13. 1, 2, 3. it is said, that when the Jews heard this law read out of the book of Moses, that the Ammonite and the Moabite should not come into the congregation of God for ever, they separated from Israel all the mixed multitude, which seems plainly to be meant of their separating them from being numbered amongst Gods people, and from en∣joying the priviledges of freeborn Israelites, Hebrews of the Hebrews, as the Apostle speaks of himself, Phil. 3. 5. Onely some conceive that if we thus under∣stand this phrase, that which is said here, vers. 1. and 2. must onely be un∣derstood of eunuchs and bastards of other nations, because it seems hard that such being Israelites were excluded from enjoying all these priviledges of freeborn Israe∣lites. As for the reasons why here in the first place, he that is wounded in the stones, or hath his privy member cut off, is here excluded from thus entring into the congregation of the Lord, we may conceive them probably to have been these: first, that God might hereby shew his detestation of that unnaturall and barbarous custome of the heathens of making men eunuchs: secondly, because such men are usually of a base, and effeminate, and cowardly spirit, and liable to be scorned and despised by others, and therefore not fit to be in any place of authority: and thirdly, that hereby they might be taught what purity and perfection, what unblameable∣nesse and freedome from all stains and pollutions God required in his people, and particularly how pleasing a thing it is unto God to adde dayly to his Church, and to encrease the number of his people, to wit, by spirituall means, and not to be bar∣ren this way, as such eunuchs were in regard of naturall generation. Vers. 2. A bastard shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord.] What is meant by entring into the congregation of the Lord, is shown in the foregoing note. By bastards here cannot be meant the sonnes of concubines, who were in
those times counted as second wives, but either the children of such as did prostitute themselves as common whores, or rather all that were born illegitimate, whether by fornication, adultery, or incest. Now such as these the Lord forbids them to admit into the congregation of the Lord, first, hereby to teach his people what an ho∣nour it was to be of Gods peculiar people, into the number of whom a man thus ble∣mished might not be received; secondly, by laying this stain and dishonour upon the spurious issu of such unclean mixtures, to shew his people how detestable such sins were unto the Lord; and thirdly, lest such should be capable of bearing any office or Magistracy amongst the Israelites who were of base and vild conditions, as bastards indeed many times are, or at least liable to be scorned and despised for this reproch of their birth, and so might be the lesse courageous in their places lest they should be upbraided herewith. Even to his tenth generation shall he not enter into the congregation of the Lord.] That is neither the bastard nor his children unto the tenth generation. There∣fore after tenne generations this stain was to be blotted out: for that the expression of thus many generations, that should be excluded, doth imply that the eleventh generation was to be received into the congregation of the Lord, is evident, vers. 8. where it is said that the Edoites children should enter into the congregation of the Lord in their third generation. Vers. 3. Even to their tenth generation shall they not enter into the congregati∣on of the Lord for ever.] That is, neither shall the Ammonite or Moabite, that becomes a proselyte, and embraceth the religion of the Israelites, be received into full communion with the commonwealth o Israel, nor any other of their posterity unto the tenth generation; for this was not meant of th Israelites children born of Ammonitish or Moabitish mothers, converted to the Israelites faith, as the stories of Rahab and Ruth do evidently prove, but onely of the children of Ammonites and Moabites that became proselytes, who, because they were of those nations, might not be incorporated into the commonwealth of Israel unto the tenth genera∣tion. Some Expositours will have this last clause, for ever, to be added by way of explaining that which went befoe of their not being admitted into the congregati∣on of the Lord unto the tenth generation, and so that the meaning of this Law was that their posterity should never be admitted into the congregation of the Lord; and indeed where this Law is repeated, Neh. 13. 1. there is no mention made of the tenth generation; but it is said that they found written in the book of Moses that the Ammonite and the Moabite should not come into the congregation of the Lord for ever. But yet because afterwards, vers. 8. there is also mention made of some that were not to be admitted untill the third generation, even here also by the tenth generation a set number of generations is expressed that were to be excluded; and so by the addition of these words, for ever, this onely is intended, that this Law concerning the Ammonites and Moabites not entring into the congregation of the Lord unto the tenth generation, was to be for ever inviolably observed, and not to be dispensed with upon any occasion. Vers. 4. Because they met you not with bread and with water, &c.] The ra∣her did God abhorre this their disregard of the Israelites in their escape out of E∣gypt,
because the Ammonites and Moabites were the posterity of Lot, who was so near of kinne to Abraham, of whom the Israelites came. And because they hired against thee Balaam the sonne of Beor, of Mesopo∣tamia, to curse thee.] That is, the Moabites: for of this the Ammonites were not guilty, but the Moabites, as is evident in the history thereof, Numb. 22, &c. Vers. 5. Neverthelesse the Lord thy God would not hearken unto Balaam, &c.] This is added, to imply that the fault of the Moabites was never a whit the lesse, because Balaam blessed the Israelites in stead of cursing them; for they did what they could to have wonne Balaam to curse them, and Balaam also sought by all means to satisfie their desire; onely the Lord their God of his own free grace did overrule the tongue of that false prophet, and forced him to blesse them when he meant to curse them, and so turned that to good which their enemies intended for their hurt and ruine. Vers. 6. Thou shalt not seek their peace, nor their prosperity all thy dayes for ever.] The like is said of the Canaanites, Ezra 9. 12, Now therefore give not your daughters to their sonnes, neither take their daughters unto your sonnes▪ nor seck their peace, or their wealth for ever. Now this is not meant of private re∣venge in malice, which was alwayes unlawfull for the people of God; o that they should not seek the salvation of the souls of these people, For this is good and ac∣ceptable in the sight of God our Saviour, Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth, 1. Tim. 2. 3, 4. but onely of publick con∣fedracies with these people, which was likely to be for their own hurt, though for the others good. The meaning therefore of these words is onely this, that they must not make peace, nor have any thing to do with them, but rather be at perpetuall enmity with them. And herein therefore if David offended by making peace with the Ammonites, 2. Sam. 11. 1. 2. as many Expositours hold he did, no marvell though the Lord suffered his messengers to be so basely used by them. Vers. 7. Thou shalt not abhorre an Edomite; for he is thy brother.] That is, thou shalt not so abhorre and Edomite as to exclude his posterity, after he had em∣braced the faith of Israel, from being admitted into the commonwealth of Israel unto the tenth generation, as thou must exclude the Ammonites and Moabites: for that this is meant by abhorring the Edomite in this clause, and the Egyptian in the next, is evident in the eighth verse, where it is said, by way of explaining these words, The children that are begotten of them shall enter into the congregation of the Lord, in their third generation. The reason here given why the Lord would have them shew more respect herein to the Edomites then to the Ammonites and Moabites, is this, because they were their brethren, as being the posterity of Isaac by Esau, as they were by Jacob, and so indeed the nearest of kinne to Israel of all the people on the earth: Though the Edomites used them as discourteously as they passed along to go into Canaan as the Ammonites or Moabites did (for they refused to let them passe through their land, and came out armed against them, Numb. 20. 20, 21.) and the fault of the Edomite was the greater, because he was Israels brother; yet God will have them shew the Edomites more favour then other nations, be∣cause they were their brethren, the Lord hereby teaching them what love men
ought to bear to their brethren, and how we ought to bear with the injuries of brethren, because of their near relation to us, though it be a greater sault in them to be so injurious then it is in others. Thou shalt not abhorre an Egyptian, because thou wast a stranger in his land.] Though the Egyptians did most cruelly oppresse them, yet must they be favoured f te courtesie which in former times they received amongst them, God hereby teaing men rather to remember good turns then injuries. Vers. 9. When the host goeth forth against thine enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing, &c.] That is, then no lesse then at other times, yea then espe∣cially above all other times: For this charge is given them, first, to teach them that God requires that in times of warre they should be as wary to avoid all kind of wickednesse as at other times: Souldiers in the warre are wont to carry them∣selves as if they were lawlesse, and might do what they list▪ and therefore to pre∣vent this, they were told here that the Lord expects that his people should in such times of confusion keep themselves as strictly to the rule of holinesse and righteous∣nesse as at other times, according that charge given by the Baptist to souldiers, Luke 13. 14. Do violence to no man, and be content with your wages; yea second∣ly, to shew them that then they had reason to be most carefull not to provoke God by any misdemeanour, whether against the morall or ceremoniall Law (such as are those particulars mentioned in the following verses) to wit, first, because soul∣diers go out as it were to execute vengeance upon others for the evil they have done, and they are not fit to punish others that are as bad themselves; secondly because a clear conscience is one of the best means to make men trly valorous; and third∣ly, because then there is most evident need of Gods assistance, and most danger of mischief to come upon them if the Lord should leave them and give them over into the hands of their enemies, as is implyed in the reason given for this law, vers. 14. For thy Lord thy God walketh in the midst of thy camp to deliver thee,—there∣fore shall thy camp be holy, &c. Vers. 10. If there be among you any man that is not clean by reason of uncleannes that chanceth him by night, &c.] Though for the pollution here spoken of they were not to be shut out of their camps and cities, as lepers and others were, yet they were it seems to go forth voluntarily from amongst their brethren, till having washed themselves with water they returned at evening again to their tents and dwellings: and this was to teach them what exact puritie and holinesse God re∣quired in his people. Vers. 12. Thou shalt have a place also without the camp, &c.] That is, a place designed for the use by public appointment, whither they were bound to go, that so their camp might not be defiled with their excrements: and though the Lord might herein intimate their dutie in regard of civilitie, and the care men ought to take not to do any thing that might offend or annoy their brethren, yet doubtlesse the chief drift of this law was to teach them, that in regard of Gods presence amongst them, they ought to keep themselves clean from all spirituall pollutions, the out∣ward cleannesse and neatnesse here required being onely a shadow of that spirituall puritie, which even in times of warre God required in his people.
Vers. 15. Thou shalt not deliver unto his master the servant which is escaped from his master, &c.] That is, when it should be manifest that they fled to escape the  rage of cruel masters, that did causelessely oppresse them: In this case if they fled from their masters in other countreys, and sought for shelter in the land of Israel, or if they fled from any cruel maer amongst the Israelites, and sought for shelter from the Magistrate, they were not to deliver them back to the tyrannie of savage men; but in other cases, as when they led in a gadding humour from their lawfull lords, who did no wayes oppresse them, or being guiltie of some ca∣pitall offense to escape deserved punishment, we must not think God appointed his people to give harbour to such: for this were to make this law contrary to that law, Thou shal not steal: if they must be so just in all their dealings, as to restore the beast that ran astray, much more such fugitive servants as thus robbed their masters by flying from them. Vers. 17. There shall be no whre of the daughters of Israel, nor a Sodomite, &c.] Though the tolerating of whores and Sodomites that were of the sonnes and daughters of Israel be here onely expressed, yet by necessary consequence the per∣mitting of such open filthinesse by any other nations, that should live amongst them, is also forbidden; who, besides the ensnaring of Gods people to commit fil∣thinesse with them, might also corrupt them in regard of their religion too, and se∣duce them by degrees to open idolatrie. Vers. 18. Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog, into the house of the Lord, &c.] It is a great question amongst Expositours what is meant here by the price of a dog: First, some conceive that because these two are joyned thus together, the hire of a whore, and the price of a dog, this last is intended of some filthy thing as well as the first, and so they conclude that as amongst us men are wont sometimes to give money to have some goodly horse to cover their mares, so it was in those times for dogs, and this is meant here by the price of a dog: Se∣condly, others think it is meant of such men as did openly in the sight of others commit uncleannesse in a most impudent and brutish manner: Thirdly, others again think, that as in the foregoing verse, the whore and the Sodomite are joyned together, There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a Sodomite of the sonnes of Israel; so it is here likewise, and by a dog is meant a Sodomite (the word dog being used metaphorically, as it is also Rev. 22. 15. without are dogs) and by the price of a dog is meant the hire that was given to him with whom men commit that horrid and unnaturall sinne of Sodomie: And last of all, most Expositours take it according to the plain meaning of the words, for the price of a dog that is sold, which being an unclean and withall a base and contemptible creature, God would not allow them to bring the price of it into his house. Now these two last Expositions, I conceive, are most likely to be intended here, but especially the last; and that hereby God taught them to reverence his sanctuary and sacrifices, Lev. 19. 30. and not to offer him any thing that had been sinfully gotten, or to contribute basely to any holy uses, as thinking any thing good enough for his worship and service, who forbiddeth hi name to be despised, his altar and table to be thought contemptible, Mal. 1. 6, 7, 8. or his house to be made a den of thieves, Jer. 7. 11.
Vers. 19. Thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother; usury of money, usury of victualls, &c.] This last clause implyes the hainousnesse of the sinne forbidden, to wit, the exacting of usury from those that wanted meat, and for their supply were glad to borrow of their neighbours. Vers. 20. Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury, &c.] That is, a gentile, who was also an infidel: for to strangers who were brethren in the faith they might not lend upon usury, Levit. 25. 35, 3. Vers. 21. When thou shalt vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shalt not slack to pay it.] To wit, a vow which was possible and lawfull. See the note upon Numb. 30. 2. Vers. 25. When thou comest to the standing corn of thy neighbours, then thou mayest pluck the ears with thine hand, &c.] And therefore when our Saviours dis∣ciples did this, the Pharisees charged them not with taking that which was not theirs, but onely with doing that which might not be done on the Sabbath day, Matth. 12. 1, 2. CHAP. XXIV. Vers. 1. WHen a man hath taken a wife and marryed her, &c.] Two things must be known for the fuller understanding of this law concer∣ning divorces: first, that whereas it is said here, that if after a man hath marryed a wife, his wife find no favour in his eyes, because he hath found some uncleannesse in her, hereby is meant any thing whatsoever, either in her person or in her quali∣ties and manners, which being at the time of marriage unknown to him, he hath af∣terwards discovered, and for it dislikes and abhorres his wife, yea though the cause of his dislike were never so slight a matter; and therefore did the Pharisees so pro∣pound the question they made concerning this law, to wit, whether a man might put away his wife for every cause? Matth. 19. 3. and secondly, whereas it is said of such a man so disliking his wife, then let him write her a bill of divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house, the meaning is onely, that if he put her away he must write her a bill of divorcement, &c. for this was not a dispensation in regard of that first divine institution of marriage, allowing the Jews without sinne to put away their wives upon any dislike taken against them, con∣trary to that which God at first dd establish for a law to all poterity, to wit, that a man should have but one wife, and a woman but one husband▪ and they two should be one flesh (for even when Moses law was in its full force such divorcings were dis∣pleasing to God, Mal. 2. 16. The Lord the God of Israel saith that he hateth put∣ting away) no, it was onely a law made in favour of the wife so put away, that she should have in this case a bill of divorce given her, that if she were put away cause∣lesly she might have this as a testimony for her that she had not of her own accord forsaken her husband, but was put away, & that without any just cause on her part, and so was now free. It is true indeed that by this law there was implicitly granted a permission or toleration of these unjust divorces to the Israelites in those times, to wit, that they might without incurring any punishment thus put away their wives,
and this injustice in the husband did so farre break the knot of marriage, that it was lawfull for the wife so put away to marry another husband; but yet still this which was thus tolerated was sinull in the husband, and displeasing to God, and onely permitted by Moses for the hardnesse of their hearts, Matth. 19. 8. Moses be∣cause of the hardnesse of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives, that is, be∣cause they were such a perverse and hard-hearted people that had they been restrai∣ned from this, they would have been likely to have made the lives of their wives ex∣tremely miserable by all kind of savage and cruell tyrannizing ver them, and per∣haps would at last have attempted to make them away: and therefore also even this toleration of such causelesse divorces was abrogated by our Saviour, Matth. 5. 31, 32. It hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement: But I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his wife saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery; and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery. Vers. 4. Her former husband which sent her away may not take her again to b his wife, after that she is defiled.] To wit, by marrying and lying with a second husband, her first husband being still living. It seems that after a man had given his wife a bill of divorce, and sent her away, if he repented of what he had done▪ and was reconciled to his wife thus unjustly divorced, before she had taken another husband, he might with her consent cancell the bill of divorce, and receive her again as his wife; but after she had once marryed another husband, he might not take her again, no not after her second husband was dead, and that because she was de∣filed. But why is the wife here said to be defiled with lying with her second hus∣band, since by the law of God she might lawfully marry him? I answer, the most of Expositours say that it is because this her second marriage, her first husband be∣ing yet living, was against the first institution of marriage, and so sinfull, and onely tolerated for a time amongst the Jews because of the hardnesse of their hearts▪ Matth. 5. 31, 32. but yet because it is hard to say how it could be sine in her who was as it were perforce put away by her first husband, especially since the Apostle hath determined in a like case, to wit, in the case of a wilfull separation, that the in∣nocent party may marry again, 1. Cor. 7. 15. therefore others think that by being defiled here is meant onely her lying with her second husband, which in a naturall way is accounted a pollution without any intimation of the sinfulnesse thereof; or else her being defiled in regard of him, that is, one whom he might no more touch nor meddle with, it being, as it follows in the next words, an abomination before, the Lord, that a man should deliver up his wife, as it were, to another mans bed, and then take her when he pleased himself again. Thou shalt not eause the land to sinne, &c.] That is, thou shalt not cause the land to be defiled with sinne, and so to be liable to punishment, or make others to sinne by thine example. Vers. 5. When a man hath taken a new wife he shall not go out to warre, &c.] This law was for the exemption of those that had taken a new wife, that is, those that had newly marryed a wife, from being sent forth to warre, or from being charged with any businesse, to wit, any publick imployment that would necessarily▪
cause him to be absent from his wife: and the ground of this law was not so much the unfitnesse of such men for publick imployments, in regard their minds would still be so much upon their wives, as the providing for the settling of their love one to another, as is manifest by the following words, he shall be free at home one year, and shall chear up his wife which he hath taken. When a woman is newly marry∣ed, and so taken from her fathers house and family, and transplanted into a new stock, she is subject to grieve much, and hath the more need to be tendered and cherished by her husband; and besides, if the first year by living lovingly together their hearts be once throughly settled one to the other, there would be the more hope of wellknit affections for ever after; and to give a priviledge to the new-marryed man in this respect, was this law given the Israelites. Vers. 6. No man shall take the nether or the upper milstone to pledge, &c.] For one of the milstones being gone, the other is unusefull, and by consequence the taking of any thing as a pledge, that is of the like necessary use for the exercise of a mans calling, or for the sustenance of his life, is here forbidden. See Exod. 22. 26. Vers. 7. If a man be found stealing any of his brethren of the children of Israel, &c.] See the note upon Exod. 21. 16. Vers. 9. Remember what the Lord thy God did unto Miriam, &c.] This ex∣ample is added, to render them the more carefull of what he had enjoyned in the foregoing verse, to wit, that in the plague of leprosie they should observe diligently and do according to all that the priests the Levites should teach them. Remember, saith Moses, what the Lord thy God did unto Miriam, that is, remember how for her sinne and contempt of Moses the Lord struck her with leprosy, and thereby be warned to take heed of sinning against God by slighting the directions of the Le∣vites, whom God hath set over you to teach you in all things what ye should do, lest otherwise ye provoke God to punish you, and to strike you with leprosy as he did her▪ or rather, Remmber what the Lord thy God did unto Miriam, that is, re∣member how she was by Gods speciall command shut out of the camp seven dayes, untill she had been purified according to the law: If she might not be exempted, who then shall plead exemption? See that therefore ye carefully observe those laws given concerning the shutting up of the lepers, and the cleansing of them when they are healed, and whatever else from the law of God the Levites shall direct you to do. Vers. 10. When thou dost lend thy brother any thing, thou shalt not go into his house to fetch his pledge, &c.] Some conceive that the end of this law, enjoyning the pledge still to be brought to the doore, was to make men carefull so to order their expenses, that they might not be put in the sight of their neighbours to pawn their cloaths, and to curb the creditour, that he might not be too harsh and geedy in exacting a pledge. But farre more probable that is which is held by most of Expositours, namely, that God did heein provide for the poore man, both that the creditour might not pick and chuse his pledge where he pleased, though it was that which he was very unwilling to part with, but should be con∣tent wih that which should be brought out to him; as likewise becse poore men
are usually ashamed that strangers should come in and in every corner behold their penury and want. Vers. 13. In any case thou shalt deliver him the pledge again when the sunne goeth down, that he may sleep in his own raiment, and blesse thee.] Concerning this law, see the Noe upon Exod. 22. 26. As there the Lord presseth this work of mercie upon his people, by threatning that if by keeping away such a necessary pledge the poore man were provoked to crie unto him he would heare his cries, and be avenged on such a hard-hearted creditour; so here also, by promising that in case they did herein shew mercie to the poore, the poore should blesse them, that is, pray for them, and he would heare their prayers, and so by their prayers the poore should be able abundantly to require them though otherwise they were not able to do it. And it shall be righteousnesse unto thee before the Lord thy God.] That is, the Lord will accept of it as a holy and good work, and will abundantly reward it; and indeed the righteousnesse even of such works in the best of Gods servants con∣sists more in Gods acceptance of them, because he saith they shall be righteousnesse unto them, then in any perfection that is in them. CHAP. XXV. Vers. 3. FOurtie stripes he may give him, and not exceed, &c.] That is, ourtie stripes is the utmost that for any offence the Judge shall appoint the faultie person to suffer; and the reason is given, lest if he should exceed, and beat him above these with many stripes, then thy brother should seem vile unto thee, that is, if you should proceed to what extremitie you list herein, it would argue too great a contempt of such a poore wretch, who though he have offended is not∣withstanding a brother, and therefore not to be used as if there were no more regard to be had of him then of a beast. Now so superstitiously carefull were the Jews not to transgresse this law, that their custome was still to stay at 39. stripes, even when they meant to go as high as they might, and that for sear lest in giving the stripes they should have mistold one: whence was that of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 11. 24. for that I conceive was the true reason why they never gave full fourie stripes, though others hold they did it out of a foolish conceit of appearing herein merci∣full, to wit, in that they gave the malefactour one stripe lesse then by Gods Law they might have done. Vers. 4. Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he treadeth out the corn.] The Israelites used not it seems to thresh their corn with flails, but trod it out with the seet of beasts, Hos. 10. 11. Ephraim is as an heifer that is taught, and loveth to tread out the corn: yea and sometimes with cart-wheels, as we may see, Esa. 28. 27. The fetches are not threshed with a threshing instrument, neither is a cart∣wheel turned about upon the cummin, and vers. 28. Bread-corn is bruised; because he will not ever be threshing it, nor break it with the wheels of his cart, nor bruise it with his horsemen: and hence it was that God gave them this law, not to muz∣zle the mouths of their oxen, so to hinder them from eating the ears of corn when
they were thus led up and down upon the sheaves that with their hoofs they might tread it out; and herein the Lord taught them to be mercifull to th very bruit beasts they had occasion to make use of, and to take heed of all inhumanity and cruelty towards them: and secondly, by necessary consequence much more to beware of depriving their brethren of that which is due to them for the service they did them, especially so as not to let them eat the fruit of their labours. If it be un∣naturall not to let the ox eat of the corn he treadeth out, much more it is against the light of nature to deny requisite allowance to ministers that provide us the food of our souls, and to keep those that any way labour for us from having a share in the benefit that redounds to us by their means. Indeed some would have this last the onely thing intended in this Law, & that it was not at all to be understood lite∣rally of oxen▪ & that because S. Paul proving from these very words, 1. Cor. 9. 9. that it was fitting that the Preachers of the Gospel should live of their labours, he addes, Doth God take care for oxen? or saith he it altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no doubt this is writte, &c. But for this conceit there is no jut ground in the Apostles words: for he meant not those words absolutely, that God did not in his law provide for their mercifull dealing with their oxen; but onely that the principall thing in∣tended in that law was not so much to take care that the oxen might be suffered to feed as they trod out the corn, as to teach them that if it wre cruelty to deny a poore beast his food in this kind, it would be farre worse to deny their brethren, and Gods labourers, to live of the fruit of their labours. Vers. 5. If brethren live together, and one of them die and have no child, &c.] For the better understanding of this law two things must be known: first, that by brethen that dwell together are meant brethren that live in the same citie or tow, or happely in the same house, as when a mans sonnes live together in their fathers house; for this first clause is added by way of limitation, to shew that in case the brother or next kinsman of the deceased party should live afarre off in some remote place, the widow should not then be bound to seek him out, but might challenge the right of marriage from the next kinsma that lived in that place that was not yet married: and secondly, that it is meant not onely of next kinsmen▪ but also of naturall brothers, as is evident in many places of Scripture; for even in the dayes of the Patriarchs (God having then given this law to his Church, as he did many other ceremoniall precepts concerning sacrifices, &c. which afterwards he confirmed amongst the Israelites by the hand of Moses) Er the firstborn sonne of Judah died without issue, and Onan his second sonne married his widow, accord∣ing to this Law; and when Onan died also without issue, Judah advised his daugh∣ter in law to continue a widow in her fathers house till Shelh his third sonne was grown and fit for marriage, chap. 38. 8, 9, 10, 11. and so also, Ruth 1. 11, 12, 13. when Naomies daughters in law, the widows of her two sonnes that died without issue, would needs go along with her into the land of Israel, she disswaded them by this argument, that she was past hope of having sones, at least such as might be thir husbands; and the Sadduces we see propounded a question to our Saviour, Matth. 22. 24, 25. concerning seven brethren that successively married one and the ame woman, purposely to raise up seed unto their broher. But was not this incest
by the Law of nature, confirmed by Moses Law, Lev. 18. 16. Thou shalt not un∣cover the nakednesse of thy brothers wife. I answer, it was doubtlesse incest gene∣rally for any man to marry his brothers wife; but to the Israelites in this particu∣lar case it was not so, and that because this was given them as a speciall exception to that generall Law, peculiar onely to them as being ceremoniall. The first∣born were types of Christ, who is therefore called the fst-born among many bre∣thren, Rom. 8. 29. and the land was to them a type of heaven: So that he who dyed without a first-born might seem to die without interest in the first-born Christ, and the blotting out his name out of the land of Canan carried a kind of shew of being blotted out of heaven: and therefore was barrennesse counted such  heavy affliction, and the cutting of their names out of the land of Canaan reputed a most fearfull judgement, Let his posterity be cut off▪ saith David, Psal. 109. 13. and in the generation following let their name be blotted out. Now there∣fore to teach them still to fear that heaviest of judgements, their dying without inte∣rest in Christ or heaven, they were appointed by this law to see that the name of their deceased brother were not put out of Israel. Vers. 6. The first-born which she beareth shall succeed in the name of his brother▪ &c.] That is, he shall be counted the legall sonne of his brother that died without issue: and hence Obed, whom Boaz begat of Ruth, is said to be Naomies sone, Ruth 4. 17. becase he was counted the legall sonne of Elimelech, her deceased sonne, Ruths forer husband, though withall he was counted the naturall sonne of Boaz, Luke 3. 32. Vers. 9. Then all his brothers wife come unto him in the prsence of the El∣ders, and loose his shoe, &c.] Both the womans loosing of his shoe from off his foot that would not marry her, and likewise her spitting in his face, were appointed doubtlesse by way of disgracing and shaming the man that would not according as God had appointed raise up seed to his deceased brother: for though indeed in all resignations or alienations of house ad land from one man to another this ceremo∣nie was used, that he who did resigne the house or land pulled off his soe▪ and gave it to his neighbour, to whom he passed it over, Ruth 4. 7. thereby signifying that he would now be disabled from going any more upon such house or lands as any part of his estate (and so also in this case of marriage it might signifie that he re∣gned his right o marriage to any other that would marrie her) yet here I con∣ceive it was done also in a way of disgracing the man, to shew that he was unwor∣thy to marrie her, and to enter upon and possesse his brothers inheritance; and so likewise it was much more for her spitting in his face. There is nothing that is a greater shame and reproch to a man then to have any bodie spit in his face, If hr fathr had but spit on her face should she not be ashamed seven dayes? saith the Lord of Miriam, Numb. 12. 14. and so, I hid not my face from shame and spitting, saith the Prophet in the person of Christ, Isai. 50. 6. and therefore the womans spitting in the face of him that would not marrie her was in effect all one as if she had open∣ly protested him to be a man that deserved to be derested and abhorred of all men, a man that was not worthy to shew his face amongst his brethren: yea indeed so foul a disgrace this was, that it was therefore never done but when the woman did
claim and presse her right before the Elders, and the ext kinsman did still obsti∣nately refuse her; for when by a free agreement the next brother or kinsman did resigne his right to another, the widow also consenting, here this note of nfamie was never put upon him, as we may see. Ruth 4. 8. where there was no spitting on the face of the next kinsman, but onely by pulling off his shoe he resigned his right to Boaz, and so he married Ruth. So shall it be done to the man that would not build up his brothers house.] See the note upon Exod. 1. 21. Vrs. 10. And his name shall be called in Israel, The house of him that hat is shoe loosed.] That is, whenever in after-times this mans familie shall be spoken of, it shall be under the name of, The man that had his shoe loosed, this shall they say was the house of him that had his shoe loosed: and thus there was a note of infamie set both upon the man himself, and likewise upon his familie and posteritie, that men might hereby be rendred the more carefull to submit herein to the directi∣on of Gods law. Vers. 12. Then thou shalt cut off her hand, thine eye shall not pitie her.] Be∣cause much might be said for the woman that did in this case take hold of the secrets of the man that was fighting with her husband, as first, that the affection of a lo∣ving wife must needs make her passions stirre when she sees her husband beaten, and provoke her to do what she can to rescue him; secondly, that being not able to help him by strength, she sought by taking that advantage to force the man to give over smiting him, and did what she did not out of wantonnesse but merely for her husbands help; and thirdly, that a weak woman is not so well able to bridle her passions, and therefore may easily be overborn by them to do that which is not fit∣ting▪ therefore God did expressely here enjoyn that by no such arguments the Judges should be moved to take pity on the woman that had herein offended, but that they should certinly cut off her hand, hereby giving them to understand how much he abhorres all wanton, bold, impure and shamelesse behaviour in those that professe themelves to be his people. Ver. 13. Thou shalt not have in thy bagge divers weights, a great and a small, &c.] To wit, a great, to buy with, and a small, to sell with; or a greater to be kept to be shown to th Magistrate or Oficers when they come to view & try thy weights and measures, and a lesse, which notwithstanding thou usest continually in selling thy wares. Ver. 17. Remember what Amalek did unto thee by the way, when ye were come forth out f Egypt, &c.] There is an Ephais in these words, when ye were come forth out of Egypt, the noting whereof will help us much in the understand∣ing of the passage; for herein Moses implyes the reason why the Lord was so high∣ly offended against the Amalekites, above other nations, for their assaulting the Is∣raelites, that he did then passe sentence against them, that their whole nation should be utterly destroyed, and did now put them in mind to execute against them what he had decreed; and why also in the following verse he inferres from this which Amalek did▪ that he feared not God, He met tee by the way, and smote the hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble behind the, when thou wast faint and
weary, namely, becaue this circumstance, that he did this to the Israelites, when they were newly come out of Egypt did much aggravate their sinne, and their con∣tempt of God, and that in two respects: first, in regard the Israelites had already endured so much misery; for to oppresse those that had been already so grievously oppressed was an act of great inhumanity and crueltie, and a notable contempt of God, who is so constantly wont to plead the cause of those that are so barba∣rously used: and secondly, in regard of that which God had so lately done for the Israelites in Egypt; for when God had so immediately before manifested the spe∣ciall love that he bore to this people by taking such vengeance on the Egyptians for their sakes, and by those many strange signes and wonders which he had wrought amongst them, it argued a high degree of desperate boldnesse in the Ama∣lekites, that yet notwithstanding they were not afraid to fight against them, and so indeed in fighting against them to fight against God. Vers. 19. Thou shalt blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under hea∣ven.] This judgement God appointed Saul to execute, 1. Sam. 15. 2, 3. but he failed in the performance of it. Afterwards God stirred up the Simeonites in Heze∣kiahs dayes, who smote the rest of the Amalekites, 1. Chron. 4. 42, 43. And some of them, even of the sonnes of Simeon, five hundred men, went to mount Seir, ha∣ving for their captains Pelatiah, and Neariah, and Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the sonnes of Ishi. And they smote the rest of the Amalekites that wer escaped, and dwelt there unto this day: and what befell Haman and his sonnes, who were of that race, is largely related in the third chapter of Esther. CHAP. XXVI. Vers. 2. THou shalt take of the first of all the fruit of the earth.] This seem∣eth to have been done by every mn and that every year, either at the feast of Pentecost, calld also the feast of weeks, as seemeth to be implyed, Deut. 16. 10. And thou shalt keep the fest of weeks unto the Lord thy God, wth atribute of a freewill-offering of thy hand &c. or rather at the feast of taber∣nacles, which is called the feast of in-gathering at the years end, Exod. 23. 16. when they brought of the first-fruits of their fruit-trees, as the bringing of them in a bushel seems to imply. And these first-fruits they thus brought unto the Lord, first, as an acknowledgement tht it was the Lord that had freely given them this land, as he had promised to their forfathers, which is tha, vers. 3. I professe, &c. and that of him they still held it, and to him therefore, as by way of tribte due to him, the Lord in chief, they brought these first-fruits; secondly, to tesisie that the yearly fruitfulnsse of this their land was also from his blssing, &c. Vers. 3. And thou shalt go unto the priest that shall be in those dayes, &c.] To wit, as the figure of Christ, in whom onely our services become acceptable wi God, Hebr. 13. 15. By him therefore lt us offer the sacrifice of prase to God continually, that is the fruit of or lps, giving thans to his nae. The ame was likewise taught them in the etting down of this basket of first-ruits before the altar, vers. 4.
Vers. 5. A Syrian ready to perish was my father, and he went down into Egypt, &c.] That is, Jacob: for though he was born in Canaan, yet he was of the stock of Syrians; for Abram his grandfather came out of Ur of the Chaldees, the land of his nativity, Gen. 11. 28. which was a part of Syria, whence Laban▪ who lived in the same countrey, is also called a Syrian, Gen. 28. 5. Yea Jacob was not onely born of Syrian parents, and onely lived as his fathers had done before him a stran∣ger and pilgrim in the land of Canaan, but also abode a great part of his time there: for there he dwelt with Laban twenty years at least in hard service, Hos. 12. 12. And Jacob fld into the countrey of Syria, and Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep. When he returned thence into the land of Canaan, after a few years, by the extremity of famine he was constrained to remove into Egypt, to which extremity I conceive the holy Ghost hath here speciall reference, in calling him a Syrian ready to perish, though withall it▪ may have respect also to the poverty and misery he underwent in Syria, and in his going thither, whe he fled for his life because of his brother Esau. But however, this acknowledgement of the mean∣nesse of their originall was doubtlesse thereby to magniy the goodnesse of God, in raising them to such a condition as now they did enjoy. Vers. 10. And thou shalt set it before the Lord thy God, and worship bfore the Lord thy God.] It is said before, vers. 4. that the man that brought this basket of first-fruits was to deliver it into the hand of the priest; and therefore the mean∣ing of this which is said here of his setting it before the Lord, is onely this, that he should leave it there set down before the altar, to wit, by the priest, who with the rest of his brethren did afterwards eat them, all first-fruits appertaining to them, as we may see, Deut. 18. 4. As for that second clause, and worship before the Lord thy God, hereby is meant that after he had delivered his basket of first-fruits into the hands of the priest to be set down before the Lord, ad had made that thankfull and open profession of Gods great goodnesse to his people, which is expressed large∣ly in the foregoing verses, he was then to adde such other duties of Gods worship and service as were to be performed, as prayer, and offering sacrifices, and then bowing down before the Lord, to depart away. Vers. 11. And thou shalt rejoyce in every good thing which the Lord thy God hath given unto thee, &c.] Though ths may be extended to the chearull using of Gods gifts all the year after, which hey might indeed the more comfortably enjoy, when they had in this tetifyed their thankfulnesse, as he had appointed; yet I con∣ceive it is chieflly intended of their feasting together in Jerusalem, after they had done their servie, together with the Levites, and strangers, with the peace-offerings they had brought thither, even as they used to do at all other feasts, Deut. 16. 11, 15. Vers. 12. When thou hast made an end of tithing all the tithes of thine encrease, the third year, which is the year of tithing, &c.] See the note upon chap. 14. 28. Vers. 14. I have not eaten thereof in my mourning.] Tha is, even in my greatest wants and necessities, when I was put to the greatet straits, I have not ventured to supply my self from them: and indeed that which men will not do at
other times, they will make bold to do when they are in want and ditresse; and therefore were they appointd particularly to clear themselves of this: or else it may be meant of mourning for the losse of friends, I have not eatn threof in my mourning, that is, in the time of my mourning for my dead friends; for hereby these hallowed things hould have been defiled, Hos. 9. 4. Their sacrifices shall be unto thm as the bread of mourners: all that eat thereof shall be polluted; which also shews that this is meant, not of those tithes onely which were yearly paid to the Levites, whereof the owner of the land might not eat, but also of the first and se∣cond years tithes, which the owners were to eat before the Lord, Deut. 14. 22, 23. Neither have I taken away ought thereof for any unclean use.] That is, for any use besides that for which they were appointed. For any imploying these hallowed things for civill uses would have defiled them, much more if they were imployed naturally or legally to be deemed . Nor given ought thereof to the dead.] That is, yea so strictly carefull have I been not to alienate these holy things to any other use then that enjoyned by thy law, that I have not diverted them to those uses where∣in reason might sugget they might e charitably and religiously imployed, as for the burying the dead, for the buying of any thing for that service, of love to pro∣vide any thing that is to be eaten at any dead mans funerall; for indeed at funeralls the kindreds friends and neighbours used to go to eat and drink with those that had lost their friends, as by way of comforting them: whence, Jer. 16. 7. Neither shall men tear themselves for them in mourning to comfort them for the dad, nei∣ther shall men give them the cup of consolation to drink for their father or for their mother; and Ezek. 24. 17. Forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dad, bind the tire of thine head upon thee, and put on thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover not thy lips, and eat not the bread of men; and thereby both they and their meat were legally unclean by the law, Numb. 19. 14. This is the law when a man dyeth in a tent, that all that come into the tent, and all that is in the tent, shall be unclean seven dayes. Vers. 15. Look down from thy holy habitation, from heaven, and blesse thy peo∣ple, &c.] First they were to make that solemn protestation in the foregoing verses, that they had not failed in paying their tithes exactly according to Gods law, and then they were to adde this prayer, wherein they desired God to blesse his people, and the land wherein they dwelt; and hereby the people were taught to assure themselves, that if they did not strictly give God his right in this matter of tithes, they could not expect a blssing from the Lord either upon them or their land, yea that without this it would be in vain to pray for a blessing. Vers. 18. The Lord hath avoched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised thee, and that thou shouldst keep all his commandments, &c.] Which as it is a part of the covenant on Gods behalf, so is it the work of his grace in all his people, Jer. 31. 33. But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, After those dayes saith the Lord▪ I will put my law in their inward parts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people.
CHAP. XXVII. Vers. 1. KEep all the commandments that I command you this day.] Moses ha∣ving assembled the people that he might give them a charge for the building of a monument of great stones at their first entrance into Canaan, whereon the law was to be written, he first begins with this Exhortation, Keep all the com∣mandments tha I command you this day, thereby to give them a hint of the end for which this monument was to be erected, namely, that it might be a memoriall to put them in mind of keeping Gods law. Vers. 2. And it shall be on the day when you passe over Jordan, &c.] For the better understanding of the charge here given for the setting up of this monument, whereon the law was to be written, we must know first, that though it be said here that they should do this on the day they pasd over Jordan, yet thereby was not meant the very day they went over Jordan ut onely that they shuld do it at their first entrance into the land of Canaan. Day in the Scripture s ordinarily used for time, as Luke 19. 42. If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! and so it is here. The meaning is onely this, that after they were once gotten over the river Jordan▪ they should take care at their first opportunity to see that this were done: and so it is expressed, vers. 4. when ye be gone over Jordan ye shall set up these stones. And indeed in the history of Joshua we may see, chap. 8. 30. that this monument was not erected till after the taking of A: secondly, that though the text speaks only of setting p great stones▪ and plastering them with morter, yet it is most probable that thereby is meant the setting up or building of some notable monument with these stones, which should be then plastered over with plaster for the more conveniency of writing the law thereon, which could not so well have been done upon the rough stones: thirdly, that though it be not expressed what law of God it was that was to be written on this monument, and therefore some conceive that it was the ten com∣mandments, others the curses and the blessings, which were then also to be pro∣nouncd upon mount Ebal and mount Gerizzim, and others this whole book of Deuteronomie, the law which Moses had now given them, and for the proving thereof they urge much, that it is so ofen called, this law, as vers. 3. Thou shalt write upon them all the words of this law, and so again, vers. 32. it is said that he wrote there upon the stons a copie of the law of Moses, which he wrote in the presence of the children of Israel; yet it is most probable that either the cursings and blessings are here meant, or else the ten commandments, called the ten words, Exod. 34. 28. which are the summe of the whole law, and that because we cannot conceive how this whole book of Deuteronomi could be written upon this monu∣ment in such fair plain characters that every one might reade it, and yet this was expresly enjoyned them, vers. 8. And thou shalt write upon these stones all the words of this law vry plainly: and fourthly, that the end of erecting this monu∣ment whereon the law was thus written was twofold; first, that it might be a me∣moriall to put them in mind, that when God did at first bring them into the land it was upon these coditions, that they should serve him as his peculiar people, and
keep all those laws which he had given them in charge; secondly, that finding also hereby how farre they had been from doing exactly what God had required of them, and that hereby they were left under the curse, this might lead them to seek salvation in Christ, the promised Messiah. And for this very reason it was also that this monument was set up in mount Ebal, vers. 4. the mount whence the curse was denounced, vers. 13. against them that continued not n all things written in the law, to signifie that those that sought salvation in the law must needs be left under the curse; and secondly, together with this monument there was an altar built, and set up, vers. 5. whereon they offered sacrifices, vers. 6, 7. to teach them, that the righteousnesse and salvation which could not be attained by the works of the law was to be sought in Christ, of whom this altar was a type, and who is indeed the end of the law for righteousnesse to every one that believeth, Rom. 10. 4. Vers. 5. And there shalt thou uild an altar unto the Lord thy God, an altar of stones.] See the note upon Exod. 24. 4. Thou shalt not life up an iron tool upon them.] See the notes on Exod. 20. 24, 25. Vers. 9. This day art thou become the people of the Lord thy God.] To wit, be∣cause they had at this time in a solemn manner renewed their covenant with God. Vers. 12. These shall stand upon mount Gerizzim to blesse the people, &c.] Mo∣ses here enjoyns the people that when they had set up the monument of stones on mount Ebal, whereon the law was written, and the ltar, mentioned vers. 5. and had offered sacrifices thereon as God had commanded them, they should then af∣terwards in a solemn manner give their consent to the blessings and curses that should be pronounced by the priests upon those that should keep, and upon those that should break Gods laws; and the manner enjoyned for the doing hereof was this: Six of the tribes were to stand upon mount Gerizzim, to wit, Simeon and Levi, and Judah and Issachar, and Joseph and Benjamin (where by the tribe of Jo∣seph is meant the two distinct tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, the sonnes of Jo∣seph, who are here joyned together as one, because Levi is here reckoned as one of the twelve) and these were all the posteritie of Leah and Rachel; and then the six other tribes were to tand upon mount Ebal, to wit, Gad and Asher, Dan and Naphtali, who were the sonnes of the handmaids, and with them the Tribes of Reuben, who for his sinne lost his birthright, and Zebulun the youngest of Leahs sonnes: and so the tribes being thus divided, the priests came with the ark, Josh. 8. 32. into the little valley that was betwixt these two mountains, and there first they pronounced the blessings (happely turning their faces towards mount Grizzim) and then all the tribes that stood on mount Gerizzim answered Amen, and then turning again to mount Ebal they pronounced the twelve curses, that are after∣wards set down in the latter end of this chapter, and then all the tribes that stood on mount Ebal answered Amen. Indeed in Josh. 8. 33. it is not said that the tribes stood upon mount Gerizzim and upon mount Ebal, but that they stood half of them over against mount Gerizzim, and half of them over a∣gainst mount Ebal: But hereby one and the same thing is meant, onely it is so expressed in Joshua, either to intimate that th tribes stood the one com∣panie
right opposite against the other, or else rather because the people, at least their rulers and officers, stood on the first ascending of the hills, and so indeed ra∣ther over against them then upon them. Besides, though there is no mention made here of the priests pronouncing the blessings, but onely the curses, yet in Joshua 8. 33. it is expressely said that Joshua read (that is, the priests by Joshuas appoint∣ment) the blessings and the curses: and therefore doubtlesse the blessings were read by the priests as well as the curses, onely Moses passeth over the blessings, either be∣cause they might be easily enough gathered from the contrary curses which are ex∣pressed, or else (as some conceive) by this his silence in not mentioning the bles∣sings, to lead his prudent reader to look for the blessings by another, which is Christ, Acts 3. 26. God having raised up his sonne Jesus, sent him to blesse you in turning every one of you away from his iniquities: for silence in the holy storie of∣ten implieth great mysteries, as the Apostle sheweth from Moses silence concerning Melchisedecs parents, Heb. 7. 3, &c. As for the reasons why the Lord would have the people in such a solemn manner to give assent to these blessings and curses thus pronounced in their hearing, we may probably conceive it was, first, to teach them hereby that the law of God was just, the sinner himself being judge, and that he who breaks them must needs be self-condemned even by the light of a naturall con∣science; and secondly, the better to restrain them from breaking these laws, where there was no danger of being punished by the Magistrate, by putting them in mind that these sinnes would however expose them to Gods curse. And indeed the rather may we think that this God intended in this solemn service, because most of the sinnes here particularly accursed are secret sinnes, as secret idolatrie, vers. 15. the secret removing of the land-mark, vers. 17. incest, and bestialitie, and such other sinnes as men are usuall to conceal. Some adde besides, that mount Gerizzim being on the right hand of the priests, and mount Ebal on the left, hereby that day was shadowed forth, when a blessing shall be pronounced on them at the right hand, and a curse upon them at the left. But whether there was any ground for this mysterie, I question much: What is fit to be further observed concerning this pas∣sage, we may see in the foregoing note upon chap. 11. 29. Vers. 14. And the Levites shall speak and say unto all the men of Israel with a loud voice, &c.] That is, the priests, the Levites, for so it is expressed, Josh. 8. 33. and indeed the Levites in generall stood upon mount Gerizzim amongst their brethren of the other tribes, vers. 12. Vers. 15. Cursed be the man that maketh any graven or molten image, &c.] Un∣der this all sinnes against the first table are likewise accursed, and so under the following particulars all sinnes against the second table. And all the people shall answer and say, Amen.] So subscribing to the justice of Gods law, and as it were wishing that the curse might befall them, if they should in any of these things transgresse Gods commandments. Vers. 18. Cursed be he that maketh the blind to wander out of the way.] And so also much more they that mislead simple men and women into any dangerous and damnable errour, pernicious to their souls.
CHAP. XXVIII. Vers. 1. THe Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth.] That is, thou shalt excell all other nations both in rgard of temporall blessings, and especially in regard of spirituall and heavenly advance∣ments. Vers. 2. All these blesings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, &c.] They shall come upon thee unexpectedly. Vers. 3. Blessed shalt thou be in the citie, and blessed shalt thou be in the sield.] That is, in all places. Vers. 4. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, &c.] That is blessed shalt thou be in all thy possessions. Vers. 5. Bssed shall be thy basket and thy store.] That is, blessed shalt thou be in the use of all that thou hast. Vers. 6. Blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and blessed shalt thou be when thou goest out.] That is, in all thy imployments, publick or private. Vers. 9. The Lord shall establish thee an holy people unto himself, &c.] This chiefly is meant of spirituall blessings, of being Gods peculiar people, and the firm perpetuity of he covenant made with them; and it is added in the last place, as the chief iece  their happnesse. V. 0. And all the people of the earth shall see that thou art called by the nme of the Lord, &c.] That is, that thou art the peculiar people of God: for the meaning is, that all nations should plainly perceive by the singular blessings that shall be heaped upon this people, that God did indeed own them for his speciall people▪ and that they were called by his name, as sonnes are called by the name of their  and wives by the names of their husbands. V. 12. The Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven, &c.] Moss calls the heavens the Lords good treasure, because he keeps there in store those things wherewith he causeth the earth to yield abundance of increase for the enriching of those that dwell therein, as the rain to water the ground, the heat of the sunne, and the influence of the moon and starres, to make all things therein to grow and prosper, &c. Vers. 13. And the Lord shall make thee the head and not the tail, &c.] That is, thou shalt be highly esteemed above other nations, and not scorned and despised as a base and contemptible people. Vers. 15. All these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee.] That is, there shall be no avoyding these judgements: though thou triest all wayes, and with all the skill and diligence that can be used dost endeavour to escape and fly from these miseries, yet it shall not be; thou mayest sometimes think that thou art gotten out of danger, but thy hopes shall be in vain, these judgements shall still pursue thee, and at last overtake thee. Vers. 21. The Lord shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee, &c.] That s, God will send the pestilence into thy cities and towns, and you shall be no wayes able to rid your selves of it when it is among you; in vain shall any means be used
to stay the spreading of the infection, because the Lord shall command it to cleave unto you, and to continue amongst you. Vers. 23. And the heaven that is over thy head shall be brasse, and the earth that is under thee shall be iron.] It is not without cause that Moses saith not, The heavens shall be brasse, and the earth iron, but, the heaven that is over thy head shall be brasse, and the earth that is under thee shall be iron; for the Lord intended that this should give them a hint of fear, by shewing them how God had hemmed them in with judgements on every hand, if they should walk rebelliously against him. Vers. 24. The Lord shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust, &c.] That is, in stead of rain there shall fall upon thy grounds, trees, plants, &c. powder and dust, which the wind and other things raise in times of drought. Vers. 28. The Lord shall smite thee with madnesse and blindnesse, &c.] It is a spirituall madnesse and blindnesse and astonishment of heart which God here threatens, to wit, when God deprives men of the use at least of their understand∣ing, that they stand in a manner like a blind man, or one that is suddenly amazed or astonished, not knowing which way to turn themselves; or shall do such things which if they were not bewitched (as S. Paul saith of the Galatians Gal. 3. 1.) if they were not blind or drunk or mad, as we use to say, they would never. Ac∣cordingly therefore by groping at noon-day, in the following verse, all the effects are meant of this brutish stupidity and spirit of giddinesse, wherewith the Lord in his just judgement doth many times strike men, as when they shall cast themselves headlong into manifest dangers, and shall not be able to apprehend the occasions of helping themselves, or doing good to themselves, though never so clearly proffered unto them, when men shall runne on securely in those sinnes which the very light of nature must needs tell them are the high-way to hell, and when Gods an∣ger is clearly discovered by his judgements, yet they will not see it, when they shall live under plentifull means of grace, and yet shall continue ignorant, or wilfully reject both Christ and heaven: and indeed in this regard we may well say that the Jews did thus, through Gods just judgement, grope at noon-day, and so still do un∣to this houre, in that the light of the Gospel shining upon them, they would not nor will yet acknowledge Christ their promised Messiah, which makes the Apostle say, 2. Cor. 3. 14. that untill this day there is a vail over their minds in the read∣ing of the old testament, and Rom. 11. 8. God hath given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear, unto this day. Vers. 30. Thou shalt betroth a wife, and another man shall ly with her, &c.] The sting of the judgement here threatned lies in this, that their enemies should lie with those they had newly betrothed to be their wives, before themselves had en∣joyed them: and so it is likewise in the particulars following, that they should be bereaved of their new-built houses before they had dwelt a day in them, and of their vineyards before themselves had eaten of the fruit of them. Though it be mi∣sery enough at any time to have those things taken away by enemies, wherein we delight▪ yet it is a great aggravation of this misery, when after we have taken much
pains to get them, and have set our hearts upon them, and are filled with hope and expectation of enjoying the fruit of our labours, then on a sudden they should be snatched away, and so all our hope should be quite dashed, and others should enjoy all the swee we had laboured for. Vers. 32. Thy sonnes & thy daughters shall be given unto another people, & thine eyes shall look and fail with longing, &c.] The judgement here threatned is first, that they should behold with their eyes when their children were carried away captive which is a great aggravation of this calamity; for it is not so great a vexati∣on to heare of the losse of goods, or children, as to have them taken away before our eyes: and therefore also is that added, vers. 24. So that thou shalt be mad for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see, because doubtlesse the sorrow that en∣ters to the heart by the eye doth usually cut deeper then tha which enters by the eare: and secondly, that their eyes should look, and fail with longing for them, &c. whereby is meant either the failing and marring of their eyes by their extreme mourning and weeping for their children, or else (because there is mention made of longing for them) that they should expect and wait for some help for the rescu∣ing of their children (even till eyes fail with waiting) but all in vain, in that they should never be able to deliver them. Vers. 33. The fruit of thy land, and all thy labours, shall a nation which thou knowest not eat up, &c.] From whom the lesse mercy can be expected: and with∣all God implyes how vain their hope of peace should be, grounded with their friendship with all the nations about them, since he was able to bring a nation up∣on them whom they know not, and whom therefore they never feared. Vers. 36. The Lord shall bring thee and thy King, which thou shalt set over thee, &c.] Observable it is that it is so expressely noted, that not onely they, but their King also should be carried into captivity: for first, hereby is implyed the universalitie of the judgement, in that not so much as their King should be able to escape out of the hand of those over-bearing enemies; and secondly, it is a great ag∣gravation of any peoples misery when their Kings are cut off, that are the chief hope of any state: when the head is under water, the whole body must needs be in great danger, and therefore we shall find in publick judgements the people of God have still lamented above all for the losse of their prince, as Lam. 4. 20. The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord, was taken in their pit, of whom we said, Ʋnder his shadow shall we live among the heathen. And there shalt thou serve other gods, wood and stone. [To wit, either being seduced by the enticing perswasions of those idolaters, amongst whom you shall live there, or else forced to it by the tyranny of your Lors and masters. In either of these cases it was a heavy judgement to Gods people, as being an evil that en∣dangered their souls and their eternall well-being, as so it is here threatned as the most grievous of all miseries; yet withall there is couched in these words too an ex∣probration of this peoples pronenesse to idolatry, intimating that then they should ave gods enough, and b lutted with superstitious will-worship, to which they were so strongly ▪ Vers. 37. And th  come an astonishment, a proverb, and a by∣word,
word, &c.] There is much included in this threatning, as that their calami∣ties sould be so great that their very enemies should be astonished at them, and that they should be the common table-talk of those that had vanquished them. But the chief thing intended is, that they should be slouted, and scorned, and made a laughing-stock in all places whereever they came. Vers. 38. The stranger that is within thee shall get above thee very high, &c.] Moses had before threatned that the enemies of their land should prevail against them, and tyrannize over them; but now he addes, as a farther degree of misery, that the very strangers, that formerly lived amongst them onely by permission as sojourners▪ should come to lord it over them, and be in farre better condition then themselves: and indeed it doth much increase mens distresse when they come to be so farre beneath those that were formerly as farre beneath them. Vers. 45. Moreover all these curses shall come upon thee, and pursue thee, and overtake thee, &c.] See the foregoing note upon vers. 15. Vers. 48. He shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, till he have destroyed thee.] Their bondage is here compared to a yoke of iron, not onely because it should be so heavy and insupportable, by reason of the many g ievous miseris they should suffer there, but also because they should be no way able to break the yoke from off their necks, that is, to ridde themselves out of their bondage, but should continue under it, untill it had uttely cosumed them. Vers. 49. And the Lord shall bring a nation against thee from farre, from the end of the earth, as swift as the eagle flyeth.] Tht is, suddely▪ unexpectedly, and with unresistable violence. And indeed the Babylonian, the nation here inten∣ded, is described to be a lyon with eagles wings, Dan. 7. 4. and Nebuchadnezzar is likened to a great eagle with great wings, as we ay see, Ezech. 17. 3, 12. and there is ofen mention made of their swiftnesse, as Jer. 4. 13. Behold▪ he shall come upon us as clouds, and his charets shall be as a whirl wind; his horses are swifter then eagles. Lam. 4. 19. Our persecutours are swifter then the eagles of the hea∣ven, they persued us upon the mountains, &c. A nation whose tongue thou shalt not understand.] So that it shall not be possi∣ble to call for mercy at his hand. Vers. 5. And he shall besiege thee in all thy gates, untill thy high and fenced walls come down, wherein thou trustedst, &c.] This last clause, wherein thou rustedst, is added not onely to intimate that the enemie that God would bring against them would batter down their strongest walls & bulwarks, but also by way of upbrayding them▪ for putting too much confidence in such things as these, which alas should be no help at all to secure them against those enemies that God would send to destroy them. Vers. 57. And towards her young one that cometh out from between her feet.] The Hebew word signifieth her afer-birth, and implyeth that the mother should devour both that and the child with it, which much aggravates the judge∣ment. Vers. 62. And ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye were as the starres of heaven for multitude.] Which being diretly contrary to that which
God had promised, must needs be an evident signe of Gods displeasure against them. Vers. 63. The Lord will reoyce over you to destroy you, and to bring you to nought.] The drift of these words is to imply how great the indignation of the Lord against them should be, that should make him not onely destroy, but also rejoyce in destroying a nation that had formerly been so precious in his eyes, and for whom he had done such great and wonderfull tings. Nor doth this contradict what the Lord saith, Ezek. 33. 11. As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, &c. for though God doth not delight in the de∣struction of his creatures, yet as there is an execution of justice done upon wicked men that despise his mercie, the Lord is pleased with it, and rejoyceth to de∣stroy them. And ye shall be plucked from off the land whither thou goest to possesse it.] To be carried away from their native countrey is to all men a heavy judgement, but much heavier to the Jews then to any others, their land being the inheritance gi∣ven them of God; therefore their expulsion out of Canaan was a losse of the pledge of their adopton, and a signe, as it were, that their heavenly father had disinheri∣ted and cast them off. Vers. 64. And the Lord shall scatter thee among all people, &c.] That is, you shall not onely be carried away captive into a strange land, but also when you come thither you shall be dispersed and scattered abroad into severall places. A great de∣gree of their misery: when they were carried captives out of their native countrey, had they dwelt all together in the land of their captivity, it had been the lesse grie∣vous; but to be dispersed into sverall places, where they should not see the faces of their brethren, that was a ore calamity indeed. Vers. 65. And among these nations shalt thou find no ase, neither shall the sole of thy foot have rest, &c.] That i, when you are brought into a strange countrey, ye shall be there as farre from being settled as ye were before, because there ye shall be continually removed and carried abt from one place to another. And indeed it was just with God, that this people, which would not serve him in the land of his rest, Psal. 95. 11. which was to tem also a pledge of eternall rest prepared in heaven, should be driven from tence, and live for ever after in a restlsse condtion. Vers. 66. And thy life shall ang in doubt before thee, &c.] That is, thou shalt be in a continuall doubt and ear of losing thy life: for so it is explained in the fol∣lowing words, thou shalt fear day and night, and shalt have no assurance of thy life. Now this their fear was occasioned partly by the savage cruelty of their lords and masters, and partly by the guilt that lay upon their conscinces, which made them continually look that God should cut them of in his wrath and diplure. And indeed observable it is that the eathen Poet should in this regard  them by the name of Judaea tremes, that is, Judaei trementes, trembling Jews, Juven. Sat. 6. Vers. 67. And the Lord shall bring thee into Egypt again, with ships, by the way whereof I spake unto thee, thou halt see it no more again.] That is, the Lord
shall cause you to be carried again by ships into Egypt, whither he had said you shall not return no more (as is noted, chap. 17. 16. the place to which these words have reference) though there be mention both there and here of returning into Egypt by the way through which they came when they came out of Egypt, to wit, because that was the ordinary way betwixt Canaan and Egypt, yet both places are to be understood generally of any returning into Egypt, and not onely of returning by the same way. It is true indeed that when the Jews, after the destruction of Je∣rusalem, were sold for slaves by the Romans, though many of them were then car∣ried away by shipping into Egypt (and so that was then accomplished which is here threatned) yet it might be well enough said that they were brought back into Egypt y the way whereof God said, thou shalt see it no more, to wit, by the way of the wildernesse, and that because we may suppose that being brought by shipping near to the plains of Moab, they were then set on shore, and so were carried the rst of the way on foot through the wildernesse. But I say there is no necessity that we should understand this precisely of their being carried into Egypt by the way they went out from thence: That which is here threatned is onely this, that God would bring them to be slaves again in Egypt; and we need not wonder that this is threatned in the last place, as a most remarkable judgement, if we consider how terrible the very name of Egypt must needs be to them in regard of those grievous miseries their fathers had already indured there; and that Gods undoing of that which he had done, and bringing them back to that bondage from which he had rescued them, when he at first took them to be his peculiar people, was a kind of discharging them from being any longer his people, as if he had quit cast them off, and meant no more to take any care of them, or to own them for his people. And there ye shall be sold to your enemies for bond-men and bond-women, and no man shall buy you.] This last clause, and no man shall buy you, is added, to imply either that there should be so many of them to sale that there should not be buyers enough to buy them (as we reade in the Hiories of those times, that after the destuction of Jerusalem by Titus there were niny and seven thousand captives of the Jews, so that they scarce knew where to sell them) or lse that the Jews should be so vilified and despised, that no man should profer any money for them. And indeed why else should this be here added? when a man is once in bondage, the likelyhood of being passed to another master dot ra∣ther encrease his sorrow then otherwise. He knows the worst where he is; what he may suffer elsewhere, he knows not, and therfore one would think it should be a comfot to him that no one would buy him. But I say, it is the base esteem, which men o all nations should have of the Jews, which the holy Ghost here aims at, it being to all men a great vexation to be slighted and vilified, as if they were not worthy the looking after.
CHAP. XXIX. Vers. 1. THese are the words of the covenant which the Lord commanded Moses, &c.] Either this hath reference to all that went before in this book, to wit, that the law which he had repeated and explained amongst them was the covenant which the Israelites were to enter into, that is, that which they were now by covenat to bind themselves to do; or else they may have reference to that which follows after, to wit, in the sequele of the chapter, The words of the covenant which the Lord commanded Moses to make with the children of Israel, that is, the words he was to use to the people when he was now to prepare them for the solemn renewing of their covenant with God, the work which they were immediately to enter upon. Hitherto Moses had repeated the Laws of God, and now hey were to renew the covenant which God had made with their fathers in Horeb, at the first giving of the Law; and this is that for which in this chapter he now bends himself to prepare the people. Vers. 5. Your clothes are not waxed old upon you, and thy shoe is not waxed old upon thy foot.] See the note chap. 8. 4. Vers. 6. Ye have not eaten bread, neither have you drunk wine, or strong drink.] The more miraculously God had preserved them, the more evident was Gods care over them, and the more reason they had to be circumspectly carefull of yielding obedience to all his commandments; and therefore it is that Moses puts them in mind how the Lord had sustained them without bread, or wine, and strong drink, feeding them with manna from heaven in stead of bread; and doubtlesse ordinarily they had no other bread, though at sometimes they might; of which see the note, Deut. 2. 6. Vers. 12. That thou shouldst enter into covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his oath, &c.] That is, into the covenant confirmed with an oath. Vers. 15. But with him that standeth here with us this day, before the Lord thy God, and also with him that is not here with us this day, &c.] That is▪ no lesse with him that is not here with us, that is, your posteritie that is not yet born, ten with him that standeth here with us this day. Vers. 16. For ye know how we have dwelt in the land of Egypt, and how we came through the nations, &c.] This hath reference to that which went before, vers. 12. 13. where he told them that they were now met together that they might enter into covenant with the Lord their God: and the reason why this is added may be twofold: first, to shew how requisite it was that they should renew their covnant with God, because having dwelt in the land of Egypt (at least many of them in their younger years) and having gone through many idolatrous nations in their passage towards Canaan, and seen their severall idolatries and abominations, there was some cause of fear lest perhaps some of them were tainted by this means, and therefore it was fit, to prevent this, that they should all solemnly renew their cove∣nant with God, and hereto agrees that which follows▪ vers. 18. Lest there should be among you man or woman or familie whose heart turneth this day rom the Lord our God to go and serve the gods of these nations: or secondly, to perswade them
to be willing to enter into this ovenant, to wit, both from the experience they had of the grosse abominations of these idolatrous people, and the Lords severitie in punishing them, and likewise from the consideration of Gods fatherly provi∣dence in carrying them safe through so many dangers. Ves. 18. Let there should be among you a root that beareth gall and worm∣wood.] The gal and wormwood here meant, or the poysonfull herb and wormwood, as it is in the margin▪ is idolatrie, of which Moses spake in the foregoing words, or more generally all sinnes of rebellion against God, and they are so clled, either bcause they are displeasing and distastfull to God, even as gall and wormwood are to us, or because they will prove to the sinner and such as shall by him be in∣fected bitternesse in the end, yea as deadly oyson to his and their souls: and thus the Scripture speaks of sinne in other places, as Amos 5. 6, 7. Seek the Lord—ye who turn udgement to wormwood; and Heb. 12. 15. Lest an root of bitternesse springing up, trouble you, and thereby many be desied. And as sor the root that beareth gall and wormwood, thereby is meant either the evil aposatizing heart forementioned, lest there should be among you man or woman, &c. whose heart turneth away from the Lord our God▪ &c. of which also the Apstle speaks after the sme manner, Heb. 3. 12. Take heed▪ brethren, lest here be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing rom the living God: and this is called the root, that beareth this gall and wormwood, because it is hidden from men as the root is hidden under the earth, and yet is the very spring from whence idoltrie an all other sinnes do grow, so that when men give over their evil wayes▪ and yet purge not sinne ot of the heart, it is but as the cropping of weeds in a gaden, when the roots are left behind; or lse rather, the root here intended is ome close idolaters that might be amongst them, who concealing themselves from the publick view, as the root is hidden under the ground, would secretly by their example and perswa∣sions inect and poyson many, and cause their wicked practices to grow and spread amongst the people, till at length they brake forth openly to the ruine of all. And indeed the whole series of the words, both before and after, seem plainly to be spoken of some dangerous persons that might be amongst them, the mischief wheeof he desires to prevent, by causing them all to enter into a solemn covenant with God, Lest, saith Moses, there should be amongst you man or woman, or fa∣milie or tribe, whose heart turneth away this day srom the Lord our Go to go and serve the gods of these naions; lest there should be among you a root that beareth gall and wormwood. (and then mark what follows) And it come to passe when he heareth the words of this curse, &c. All the way he speaks of some false-spirited men that might be amongst them. Vers. 19. I shall ve peace though I walk in the imaginations of min hear, to adde drunkennesse to thirst.] This is the voice of the scure sinner, that despiseth the curse, and presumpously assures himself of peace and impnitie, though he doth that which he hears accursed in Gods law; I shall have peace, saith he, though I wlk in the imaginations of mine heart, that is▪ though I do what I list my self, or wht seems good in mine own eyes, to adde drunkennesse to thirst. Now men thus imboldning themselves with hope of impuniti may be said to adde drunken∣nesse
to thirst in two respects: First, because whereas naturally they thirst aster sine, but yet are restrained by the light and checks of conscience, this makes them adde sinne to sinne in abundance, to drink iniquitie like water, Job 34. 7. to work all uncleannesse with greedinesse, as the Apostle speaks, Eph. 4. 19. it makes them let looe themselves even to take their fill and glut of sinne, till they become at length, like drunken men, vod of all sense and reason and remorse of conscience, not ha∣ving any thing left in them to keep them in from the prosecuting of any villanie whatsoever: and secondly, because the longer and further men proceed to satiate themselves with sinne, the greedier they will still be upon it, this giving of them∣selves to take their ill of sinne being as sure to make their desires after sinne more eager then they were before, as drunkennesse is to encrease thirst. Vers. 20. The Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousie shall smoke against that man.] That is, it will break forth with great fu∣rie and terrour against him. Moses alludes in this Metaphor, of the smoking of Gods anger and jealousie against such men, either to the breath which will break from the nostrils of some men, especially when they are in a great chafe and furie; whence is also that expression of Davids concerning the Lords high displeasure and indignation, there went up a smoke out of his nostrils, Psal. 18. 8. or else to the terrour and violence of smoke, which will arise and break forth from any combu∣stible matter when it is first set on fire, even hiding and covering the light of the heavens with its blk clouds. Vers. 23. And that the whole land thereof is brimstone, and salt, and burning, &c.] That is, dried up, barren and good for nothing. Brimstone and salt, where∣ever they abound, will so dry up the moisture of any grounds that they will be ex∣tremely parched and barren; and hence is this expression here used, not unlike that also, Jer. 17. 6. For he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see when good cometh, but shall inhabit the parched places in the wildrnesse, in a salt land, and not inhabited. Vers. 26. For they went and served other gods, and worshipped them, gods whom they knew not, and whom he had not given unto them.] The last clause of this verse may be diversly translated: If we reade it as it is in the margin of our Bibles, Who had not given to them any portion, then it contains an exprobration of the ingratitude and folly of the Isaelites in forsaking the Lord, who had given them the land of Canaan, and many oer wayes done so much for them, to go and worship other gods, who had done, and indeed could do, nothing for them. But if we reade it, a it is in our text, And whom he had not given unto them, then it contains the reason why they did so highly provoke God by their idolatry, to wit, becuse the Lord had not appointed them any such way of worship: for we must know that the Israelites in all their idol-worship did still pretend the worshipping of the true God under those idl-gods▪ and therefore against that pretence this is opposed, that he had not given unto them any such gods, nor prescribed them any such way of worshipping him. Vers. 28. And cast them into another land, as it is this day, &c.] These are till the words of the natious that should thus in time to come talk of Gods judge∣ments
upon the Israelites after they were carried away as captives into a strange countrey. Vers. 29. The secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but those things which are revealed, &c.] The meaning of these words is plain and easie; but yet why they are inserted here, and what was Moses drift herein, is not easily dis∣cerned. Some say that this is not unfitly subjoyned to the foregoing exhortation for observing carefully the laws of God, because it discovers, and so gives us a hint to take heed of an ordinary root of disobedience, to wit, when men are ambitious to know and busily search after Gods secret counsels, which they have nothing to do with, and by that means are taken off from minding those revealed duties which do so nearly concern them. But I rather conceive that this clause is here inserted, either by way of explaining what he had formerly delivered, to wit, that he said not that they should certainly be thus destroyed, as is before mentioned; No, whether your posterity (saith he) will by their rebellion thus provoke God, and so bring this heavy indignation upon the land, that is onely known to God, nd secret things belong nto the Lord, we must not meddle with them: but that which he had said was onely this, that if they did thus provoke the Lord, then all this ruine should certainly befall them, this God had revealed, and that which God had revealed it became them and their children seriously to lay to heart: or else by way of preventing an objection; for if against all this that he had threatned they should object, that God was infinitely mercifull, and would not therefore destroy his people; to this he anwers, Secret things belong unto the Lord, how farre he will shew mercy either in forbearing you, or giving you grace to repent, that depends onely upon his secret counsel, and we cannot search into it; those things which are revealed belong unto us, and to our children for ever, and that which is revealed is, that if we rebell against him, he will poure out all these judgements upon the land, except by repentance and turning to him we prevent this ruine: which is that therefore we must look to▪ that so by avoiding the sinne we may prevent the judge∣ment. And this most probably is the full drift of this clause. And so Moes akes way likewise to those promises of mercy to the penitent, which follow immediate∣ly in the next chapter. CHAP. XXX. Vers. 1. ANd it shall come to passe when all these things are come upon th, the blessing and the curse, &c.] As if he had said, when thou hast had experience both of the one and the other, thou shalt by proof see how much be∣ter it is to serve God then to rebell against him, this will then bring thee o tur o the Lord, and the Lord will then again be favourable to thee. Vers. 3. Then the Lord thy Go will turn thy captivity, and have compssi upon thee, &c.] That is, upon their serious repentance. So that it is of Gods▪ mer∣cy and compassion rather then any thing else that those that do most seriously r∣pent find favour at his hand. Vers. 6. And the Lod thy God will circucs thin hert.] See chap. 10. 16.
Ver. 9. And th Lord thy God will mke the plenteous in very work of thine hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattel, and in the fruit of thy lan, for good.] That is, he will not bestow these outward blessings upon thee, but it shall be for thy good that thou hast them: Many are the worse for abundance of outward things; then onely are they true blssings when they are given men for their good. Vers. 11. For this commandment, which I command thee this day, it is not idden from thee, neither is it farre off.] By the commandment given them in charge, which Moses here speaks of, is not meant the law onely, but the whole doctrie of Moes, wherein he had revealed unto them the will of God concerning the way and means of salvation, to wit▪ faith in Christ, the Messiah, and new obe∣dience following thereupon: and this, e saith, they could not now neglect unde a pretence of ignorance, that they knew it not, because God had so fully and effe∣ctually made it known unto them. Thus the Apostle teacheth us under this place, Rom. 10. where he telleth us that this commandment which Moses here speaketh of is the speech of the righteousnesse which is of faith, vers. 6. But the righteous∣nesse which is of faith, speaketh on this wise, Say not in thine heart, Who shall as∣cend into heaven? and calleth it therefore the word of faith, vers. 8. And besides it is plain that Moses intended this by his own words here used: for why else doth he say that the commandment which he commanded them was plain and eaie, that they might heare it and do it, vers. 12. and that it was very nigh unto them, in their moths, and in their hearts, vers. 14. Since no perspicuity of the Law can make it easie to be done, but as it is given by the hand of a Mediatour Evangelical∣ly to be kept by us; nor is the Law written in our hearts, but as we are in covenant with God in and through Christ. That therefore which Moses saith was not hid∣den from them, the doctrine of alvation by faith in Christ, and the law as it was the rule of new obedience that ever accompanieth true faith: for though the righ∣teousnesse which is of faith was not so clearly then revealed as it is now, and in that regard comparatively is said to have been then hid, Col. 1. 26. The mystery hich hath been hid from ages, and from generations, but now is made manifest to his saints; and farre off, Heb. 11. 13. These all died in faith, not having re∣eived the promises, but having seen them afarre off, &c. yet it was not so hid that it was impossible for them to attain, and the law was plain and easie to be per∣ormed evangelically. Vers. 12. It is not in heaven▪ that thou shouldst say, Who shall go up for us to eavn?] That is, you cannot say that God hath not revealed his will nto you, that you would do it if you knew it, or that he hath given you a dark and obscure law, which you are not able to reach, Esa. 45. 19. I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth; I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain. I the Lord speak righteousnesse, I declare things that are right. How these passages are applyed by S. Paul, see Rom. 10. 6. 7. Vers. 14. But th word is very ngh unto thee in thy mouth, &c.] That is, it is so clearly reveled that thou mayest confesse it with thy mouth, and believe i with thy heart, to wit, being theeto enbled by the spirit of regeneration.
Vers. 19. I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, &c.] See Deut. 4. 26. CHAP. XXXI. Vers. 1. ANd Moses went and spake these words unto all Israel.] That is, ha∣ving caused the people to be assembled together according to the usuall manner, he then went unto the assembly, and spake unto them that which here followeth. Vers. 2. And he said unto them, I am a hundred and twentie years old this day, I can no more go out and come in.] One main reason of calling this assembly was that Moses might in a solemn manner substitute Joshua to succeed in his room: and accordingly in the first place he addresseth his speech to perswade the people not to be troubled at this change; for though the people had often murmured and rebelled against Moses, yet being at length brought by him to the borders of the land of Canaan, and having had such good experience of his faithfulnesse in governing, it could not but be an occasion of much grief and fear to be deprived now of him, to lose him just now when they were entring the land; and therefore he seeks now to comfort them and to prevent their excessive sorrow, and that first by putting them in mind of his years, not that he was already by reason of his years unfit for this weightie office, Deut. 34. 7. but that by the course of nature they might well ex∣pect he must now grow weak, and decay, and wax unfit for such great labours, though God had hitherto miraculously preserved him. As for that phrase, I can no more go out and come in, see Numb. 27. 17. Also the Lord hath said unto me, Thou shalt not go over this Jordan.] This is a second argument whereby he perswades them to be content to part with him, Also the Lord hath said unto me, Thou shalt not go over this Jordan: as if he should have said, Had I been never so young, never so able to go in and out be∣fore you, since God hath determined that I must not cry you over Jordan, but must here end my dayes, it is fit that we should all yield to his good pleasure. Vers. 3. The Lord thy God he will go over before thee, &c.] As if he had said, It was God before by whom ye prevailed against your enemies, even when I was with you, and he will not leave you but destroy your enemies as formerly, and therefore you shall have no cause to be dejected because I am taken away, for your God will still be with you. Vers. 7. And Moses called unto Joshua and said unto him in the sight of all Is∣rael, Be strong, and of a good courage, &c.] That is, be not disaid either at the strength of the enemies, against whom thou must lead this people; or at any other troubles that shall befall thee in executing this place of Magistracy whereto thou art called: and indeed Captains and Magistrates have of all other most need of courage and faith in Gods providence and assistance. Vers. 9. And Moses wrote this law, and delivered it to the priests, &c.] That is, when Moses had written this book of the law, the book of Deuteronomie, he delivered it solemnly in the sight of the people, unto the priests, and unto all the
Elders of Israel, even thereby to give them to understand that they were the men to whose charge it did especially appertain to see that this originall book of the law were safely kept, and that the laws contained therein were duly observed, both by them and by the people. The priests were to teach the people the knowledge of this law, and to them it did belong to uphold and maintain his truth and will therein revealed, that it might not be overborn or troden under soot by any possessed with a spirit of errour and profanenesse; and therefore was the law delivered to them: and the Elders, they were to assist the priests and the Levites, and to see that the people regarded them in their places, and withall to see that the judiciall laws were executed: and therefore to them also the law was delivered. As for the description of the priests, the sonnes of Levi which bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, it may also be added to imply another reason why the book of the law was given to them, namely, because they were to lay up this book in the side of the ark, vers. 26. And though the Levites did usually bear the ark, Numb. 3. 31. and 4. 15. yet sometimes, especially upon extraordinary occasions, the priests also carried it, as when they passed over Jordan, Josh. 3. 16, 17. and when they compassed Jericho, Josh. 6. 12. and they had alwayes the chief charge to look to the ark and the other holy things. And Moses commanded them, saying. At the end of every seven years, &c.] The summe of this passage is briefly this, that Moses commanded the priests to read this book of the law every seventh year, which was the year of release, amongst the people, and that upon the feast of tabernacles that year. Concerning the year of re∣lease, and the phrase here used, At the end of every seven years, see the note upon chap. 15. 1. But besides for the fuller understanding of this passage we must note, first, That the law, which the priests were here enjoyned to reade amongst the peo∣ple every seventh year on the feast of tabernacles, was the originall copie of this book of the law which Moses wrote, and which he now delivered to the priests to be kept by them. Doubtlesse some part of the book of the law was read amongst them by the Levites every Sabbath day, Acts 15. 21. For Moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day; nor can it be questioned but that the people had books of the law, in the read∣ing whereo they did dayly in private exercise themselves: if this were required of their kings, chap. 17. 18, 19. much more may we think it was required of them that were of inforiour rank. But yet once in seven years God would have this book to be read by the priests, from the beginning to the end, amongst the people, both that being read in such a solemn manner it might take the deeper impression in them, and so cause them to fear the Lord their God, and to observe to do all the words of this law, as it follows, vers. 12. and perhaps also that it might be made manifest to all Israel that those copies of the law which they had, and which were read and ex∣pounded to them every Sabbath day, did agree with this originall which Moses wrote: and secondly, that the reason why God appointed this to be done on the year of release, was not onely because that year they had most liberty of mind to intend that service, the lnd lying that year at rest, and themselves being freed from the danger of having their debts exacted of them; but also because it was a holy
year, the Sabbath of years, and so the fitter for this extraordinary duty: and third∣ly, that this was appointed to be done at the feast of tabernacles that year, because then all Israel came to appear before the Lord, as it is said, vers. 11. for though the males onely were bound to come up at the feast, Exod. 23. 17. yet they did usually carry with them their women also, and therefore it is said, vers. 12. Gather the people together, men and women and children, &c. that they may hear, and that they may learn, &c. Vers. 14. Call Joshua, and present your selves in the tabernacle of the congre∣gation, &c.] This was thus done, that the people might be fully satisfied that he was called of God to this place, and that Joshua himself might be put in mind that he was but Gods deputy, and so might still acknowledge Gods sovereignty over him, and be the more faithfull in discharging the trust which God had put in∣to his hands. Vers. 16. This people will rise up, and go a whoring after the gods of the strangers of the land whither they go to be amongst them.] The gods whom they have vanquished, as it were, that could neither preserve themselves, nor the people that served them, for the worshipping whereof the land had spewed out these her inhabitants. Vers. 17. I will forsake them, and I will hide my face from them, &c.] That is, I will cast them off, and take no more charge of them as my people: and so when all kind of miseries do then come upon them, though they seek for me to help, yet I will hide my face from them, ad will not regard them. Vers. 19. Now therefore write ye this song for you, and teach it the children of Israel, &c.] To wit, that which followeth in the following chapter, containing a prophecy of their falling away from God, and Gods just judgement upon them for this their apostacy. It was given in a song, that it might be the better remembred, and might the more work upon their affections: and the Israelites were to learn and sing it, that in time to come, when they should so provoke God by their sinnes, as is there set forth, and God should thereupon punish them with those very evils which are there foretold, this song as out of their own mouths might be a witnesse for God against them, to wit, that the evils they suffered were of Gods sending, as being the very judgements which God had long since threatned; and that God had in that song given them warning enough, and they were therefore inexcusable, because notwithstanding this warning they had brought these miseries upon them∣selves. Vers. 21. For I know their imaginations which they go about, even now.] That is, what they will do hereafter I know now, yea I see the false hypocrisie of their hearts and their pronenesse to idolatrie even at this present. This I conceive is the drift of these words: yet it might be also intended to intimate that there were some amongst them that had base apostatizing thoghts already in their hearts. Vers. 26. Take this book of the law, and put it in the side of the ark of the co∣venant, &c.] That is, not the ark (for there was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone which Moses put there in Horeb, 1. Kings 8. 9.) but on the outside of the ark, where was the pot of Manna, and Aarons rod. And this was appointed,
to signifie that it was the law of God, though written by Moses, and so the people might heare it with the more reverence and attention when it was brought forth thence and read amongst them; and withall, that God would keep and preserve it, and take vengeance on those that should disregard and dispise it. Indeed this was that very book which was found in the treasurie of the temple in Josiahs time, 2. Chron. 34. 14. and therefore it seems it was removed from the ark in af∣ter-ages, and kept in some other place of the temple, wherein seeing they trans∣gressed the directions which God here gave to the priests, no marvell though this precious treasure was for some years lost and not looked after. Vers. 28. That I may speak these words in their ears, and call heaven and earth to record against them.] See the note, chap. 4. 26. CHAP. XXXII. Vers. 1. GIve ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak, and hear, O earth, &c.] That is, the song mentioned in the former chapter, which God gave Moses, vers. 19. and commanded him to teach the people. And this Rhetoricall expression which Moses useth in the beginning of this song is to imply, first, of what great importance it was which he was about to say, that it was fit all the world should hearken to it; secondly, to imply how strangely stupid Gods own people were, that he had as much hope that the senselesse and unreasonable creatures should hearken to him as they. Vers. 2. My doctrine shall drop as the rain, &c.] That is, look as the dew, the small rain, and great showrs distilling and falling down upon the grasse and herbs, do soften the ground, and so cause the grasse & herbs & plants, &c. to sprout out and grow up sweetly, and to bring forth abundance of fruit; so shall my words prove profitable and effectuall for the good of those that heare them, soften∣ing their hearts, making all grace to grow and thrive in their souls, and causing them to be abundantly fruitfull in every good work, to wit, unlesse they fall upon hearts like stones, or sandie ground, where nothing can grow: which is much at one with that which the Lord saith of his word, Isa. 55. 10. As the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, &c. so shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth, &c. Vers. 3. Because I will publish the name of the Lord, ascribe ye greatnesse to our God.] Some Expositours by publishing the name of the Lord, understand his setting forth the excellencies of God, to wit, his infinite power, wisdome, righte∣ousnesse, &c. and by ascribing greatnesse to our God, they understand also glorify∣ing of God, and extolling his name; and so they conceive the meaning of these words to be as if Moses had said, because I intend to shew forth the glory of the Lord, the drift of this song being to praise his name by shewing his faithfull & righ∣teous dealing with Israel, and so to lay the blame of their revolt upon them, and to clear God of it, therefore let Israel ascribe greatnesse to our God, to wit, either by obeying his will, or else by justifying God and condemning themselves if they
be punished for rebelling against them. But I rather think that by publishing the name of the Lord is meant onely his speaking to them in the name of the Lord or in Gods stead, and so by ascribing greatnesse to our God is meant their regarding the words he should speak as became them that were to heare the great God of heaven and earth speaking to them; and so the sense of these words to be this, Be∣cause I will publish the name of the Lord, that is, because I shall speak to you in the name of the Lord, and what I shall deliver shall be from God, the word of God, speaking by me; ascribe ye greatnesse to our God, that is, make it manifest that you reverence the Majestie of that great God that now speaks unto you, to wit, by attending to what is spoken with all humility, by laying it to heart, and yielding obedience thereto. And indeed they that heare God reverently when he speaks, and tremble at his word, Isa. 66. 2. they that are deeply moved with what is spoken, and endeavour to obey it with all their might, their hearts are effected as they ought to be with the majesty and greatnesse of God: and on the other side, all irreverence and carelesnesse in hearing Gods word, and all slighting and disregarding of what he speaks, argues a secret vilifying of God in the heart. Vers. 4. He is the rock, his work is perfect, &c.] These two verses following contain the summe of the greatest part of the song, to wit, that God was no way to be blamed for his dealing with the Israelites, but that all the blame must rest upon them, who had causelesly revolted from him, and so had given him just cause to poure out his wrath upon them. Had God failed or come short in any thing that should have been done, had he not made good his promises, or had there been any thing to be desired that was not to be found in God, their defection from him might have been excused under that pretence. But no such thing could be said of God. No, saith Moses, He is the rock, his work is perfect, &c. first, he is the rock, that is, he is an almighty, stable▪ sure refuge and foundation to all those that fly to him, and rely upon him, If God be for us, who can be against us? Rom. 8. 31. nei∣ther indeed is there any sure shelter to be had but onely in him. In times of dan∣ger men used to fly to rocks to shelter themselves, 1. Sam. 13. 6. To shew there∣fore that in times of danger those that flie to God, and are taken into his protecti∣on, are sure and safe, and none but they, the Scripture styles him the rock: as the coney that flies to the holes in the rocks doth easily avoyd the dogges that pursue her, when the hare, that trusts to the swiftnesse of her legs, is at length overtaken and torn in pieces; so those that seek rightly to God in their distresse, and trust in nothing but his protection, do find him a sure impregnable rock of defence, where∣as they that trust in their own policy, or wealth, &c. shall at length be surprised and destroyed, and there shall be none to help them. Thus God is the rock. And again, his work is perfect; for all his wayes are judgement, &c. that is, his dealing with his people hath been exactly just and holy in the highest degree of perfection, nor hath there been any the least failing in any thing that he hath done, Jer. 2. 5. Thus saith the Lord, What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone farre from me, &c. And indeed because God is infinite in power, and wis∣dome, and goodnesse, &c. and therefore it is not possible that any thing should be
better done then as God doth it, even in those works of God that have some imper∣fection in them, as in giving children born blind, or lame, &c. yet as they are acts of providence, there is a perfection of wisdome, holinesse, and justice in them, and there is nothing at all in them for which he can be blamed. Vers. 5. They have corrupted themselves.] Having in the former verse justi∣fied God, and shown that he was not to be blamd if Israel were destroyed, here Moses begins to shew that all the blame belonged to the Israelites themselves, and that because they had corrupted themselves, that is, they had broken covenant with God; though they professed themselves his people, and called him their father, yet they were degenerated from the holy wayes of their fathers, and were become a wicked and sinfull people. Their spot is not the spot of his children.] Others translate this clause, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, that they are not his children, that is their blot, and then the meaning must needs be this, that whatever they had formerly been, yet they had now brought this stain and dishonour upon themselves that they were not in∣deed the children of God. But the translation in our Bibles doth best agree with the scope of the place, their spot is not the spot of my children, that is, their wicked∣nesse is greater then can stand with the condition of being my children. The best of Gods children have their spots and blemishes, their infirmities and corruptions: But to live in the ordinry practice of grosse sinnes, and to give themselves over to wic∣ked courses are degrees of evil which are not compatible with true grace: these spots are ot the spots of his children, who must be holy as their father in heaven is holy. And this is that which Moses here chargeth upon the Israelites, though in regard of outward profession the Lord was their father, and they his children, as himself afterwards saith, vers. 6. Is not he thy father that hath bought thee, &c. yet the wickednesse of their lives was evidence enough that they were not such in∣deed and in truth, their spot is not the spot of his children. They are a perverse and crooked generation.] Moses calls them crked, be∣cause both their hearts and wayes were so dissonant to the right rule of Gods will and Law; and perverse, because they were so untoward and untractable, that no∣thing would work upon them to mend any thing that was amisse in them; and the word generation in this clause, a perverse and crooked generation, implyes both the generality of their Apostacy, and the spring from whence their wickednesse pro∣ceeded, to wit, originall sinne, that corruption of nature, which they drew from their parents. Vers. 6. Is not he thy father that hath bought thee? hath he not made thee, and established thee?] To convince them of that grosse ingratitude, wherewith he had charged them in the foregoing words, Do ye thus requite the Lord, oh foolish people, and unwise? he puts them in mind of that which was of all other the great∣est of the mercies which he had afforded them, natuely, that he had chosen them to be his peculiar people, and so had entred into a covenant with them that he would be their father, and that they should be his sonnes and his daughters: for that he speaks of their being his children by adoption is manifest, the phrase here used, thy father that hath bought thee, implying plainly that they were not his children by
nature, but that he redeemed and bought them, and so adopted them to be his chil∣dren; and the next clause also is to the very same purpose, Hath he not made thee, and established thee? for it is not meant so much of making them men and women, as of making them his people, and by a sure covenant establishing them to be his sonnes and daughters; and so the word is elsewhere used for a degree of grace after creation, as Isa. 43. 7. where the Lord speaking of Israel saith, I have created him for my glorie, I have formed him, yea I have made him. Vers. 8. When the most high divided to the nations their inheritance, &c.] Two severall wayes this verse may be probably expounded: first thus, That when God by his providence did dispose of the severall nations, that came out of the loyns of Adam, in the severall parts of the world, allotting to one nation one countrey, and another to another, even as a man that hath some great Lordship divides it out by parcels to severall tenants (and this the Lord did in the age after the confusion of tongues at Babel; for every nation did then plant themselves, ac∣cording as God by his eternall decree had determined and set the bounds of their habitation, Acts 17. 26.) then did he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel, that is, he chose the children of Israel to be his onely peculiar inheritance, where they were there was his people, and where their bounds ended, there was an end of his people, and there the bounds of the heathen began. But secondly thus, That when God did at first divide the earth amongst the severall nations, and bring every one of them to countreys which by his eternall decree he had determined for their habitation, even then did he think of Israel be∣fore they were yet a people, and took care that they should have a competent por∣tion reserved for them, to wit, the land of Canaan, which was for their use put in∣to the hands of the Canaanites, to whom he allotted so much of the earth as he knew would serve for the Israelites, and so, as it is said here▪ he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel: and indeed this last expo∣sition doth best agree with the words of the text, and is therefore embraced by the most Expositours. Vers. 9. For the Lords portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.] That is, the Israelites are that portion of mankind whom he was pleased to redeem out of the bondage of Satan, to make them his peculiar people, and therefore it was that he took speciall care of them. They are called his portion and inheritance, first, because they were to be entirely his, they were to acknowledge no other Lord, &c. secondly, to signifie that not onely they, but their children after them, were to be the Lords successively; thirdly, to intimate the precious account the Lord made of them, that the Lord would delight in them, and would keep them, and plead for them as men do for their inheritance, as we know what Naboth said unto Ahab, 1. Kings 21. 3. The Lord forbid it me, that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto thee. Again, they are called the lot of his inheritance, or as it is in the Hebrew, the cord of his inheritance, in allusion to the custome of those times, when they used to divide land amongst men by lots, and to measure it out with a line or cord, and the rather happely because the land of Canaan was so divided amongst the Israelites. See Numb. 26. 55, 56.
Vers. 10. He found him in a desert land, and the wast howling wildernesse.] The wildernesse is called the wast howling wildernesse, because of the howling both of beasts and birds, that usually keep in such wild and desolate places; and it may be also because of the dolefull complaints of those that travelling those deserts do often perish for want of food. But why is it said that the Lord found the Israelites in a desert land, and in the wast howling wildernesse? Not because the Lord never took them to be his people till they were in the wildernesse; for they were the Lords people when they were in Egypt. I have seen, saith the Lord to Moses, the afflicti∣on of my people which are in Egypt, Exod. 3. 7. and it was the Lord that brought them thence out of the tender compassion that he had of them: but either because it was in the wildernesse, to wit at Sinal, that he first entred solemnly into a cove∣nant with them, that he would be their God, and they should be his people, and so gave them his laws to which they were bound to submit themselves; or else rather, onely to imply the desperate danger wherein the Israelites were when they were in the wildernesse, but that God came to their succour when they were ready to perish: for indeed I do not think that the drift of this word found, was to shew when God began to take pity of Israel, or when they first began to be his people; but onely to set forth how likely they were to perish there, but that God delivered them, to wit, that they were then like a poore helplesse infant laid forth in a desert, whom some man casually sinds and preserves, when before he lay ready every mo∣ment to perish. Yea beside, under this which is said concerning their outward dan∣ger in the desert, I doubt not but the spirit of God intended also to imply the de∣sperate danger of their spirituall condition, when God first set his love upon them, and chose them to be his people, to wit, that they were in the state of corruption and death, but that God received them: for thus the Lord by the prophet Ezekiel sets forth the danger of their naturall estate, by comparing them to a new-born in∣fant laid out in some desperate place, Ezek. 16. 4. As for thy nativity, in the day thou wast born, thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed with water to sup∣ple thee: thou wast not salted at all, nor swadled at all. None eye pitied thee to do any of these unto thee, to have compassion upon thee, but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the loathing of thy person, in the day that thou wast born. He led him about, he instructed him, &c.] This place may be read, he compassed him, he instructed him, &c. and then the first clause must be meant of the Lords providence, wherewith they were compassed about as with a wall, even when they were travelling towards Canaan, so that none of their enemies could come at them to hurt them. But reading it, as it is in our bibles, He led him about, he instructed him, the first clause must either be meant of that we reade, Exod. 13. 18. when it is said that God led the people about through the way of the wildernesse of the red sea, purposely to avoid a nearer way there was through the land of the Philistines, lest the people shold be discouraged, if at the very first they should be encountred with warre; or else of the whole time of their wandring about for fourty year to∣gether in the wildernesse, wherein the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, and by night in a pillar of fire, Exod. 13. 21. till he had brought them at last to the land of Canaan. As for the following words, he instructed them, either is it
meant solely of the Lords giving them the law in Sinai, or else joyntly of his in∣structing them both by his word and works, the severall dispensations of his pro∣vidence towards them in this time of their passing through the wildernesse: for all these were to instruct them; their afflictions, to teach them to fear God, Heare ye the rod, and who hath appointed it, saith the prophet, Mich. 6. 9. and the mercies God afforded them, to teach them to love God, and to delight in his service, &c. Vers. 11. As an Eagle stirreth up her nost, fluttereth over her young, &c.] The Lords dealing with the Israelites, in carrying them from Egypt to Canaan, is here compared to the Eagles dealing with her young ones, when she first carrieth them forth abroad: and therefore having told us how the Eagle stirreth up her nest, that is, her young ones in her nest, rowsing them up with the cry that she makes; how she fluttereth over them, and spreadeth abroad her wings, as it were preparing her self to flight, teaching, and provoking her young ones to do as she did, and to fly along with her; and then at last yet farther to encourage them, how she takes them, and beareth them on her wings, then in the next verse he applyes all this to the Lords carrying the Israelites towards Canaan, so, sath he, the Lord alone did lead him, that is, with such tendernesse and care did the Lord carry them to the land of promise, stirring them up and quickning them by his promises and threatnings, encouraging them with manifold mercies, defending them from all dangers, and bearing with them in their many infirmities: and at last he concludes, and there was no strange God with him, that is, no strange God had any hand in this which was done for the Israelites; and so thereby he implyes how injurious they were in giving away that glory which was due onely to the Lord to these strange gods that had done nothing for them. See also the notes upon Exod. 19. 4. Vers. 13. He made him ride on the high places of the earth.] That is, to con∣quer and subdue the mountanous places, and high-walled cities of their enemies, and to possesse a land farre excelling others for all commodities whatsoever: and by riding or treading upon the enemies high places is meant the subduing of their strong holds, as chap. 33. 29. Thine enemies shall be found lyars unto thee, and thou shalt tread upon their high places: for riding is often used for conquering and subduing, Psal. 45. 8. And in thy majesty ride prosperously, &c. Rev. 6. 2. And I saw, and behold, a white horse, and he that sate on him had a bow, and a crown was given unto him, and hewent forth conquering, and to conquer. Isa. 58. 14. I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, &c. He made him to suck hoy out of the rock, and oyl out of the flinty rock.] That is, hony of bees nestling in the holes of rocks, or trees in rocks; or hony-fruits growing on trees in rocky places. The drift of the words in doubtlesse in generall to set forth the admirable fertility of Canaan, where even the most barren places should yield such store of royall dainties. Vers. 14. With fat of lambs, and rammes of the breed of Bashan.] The choicet fatted lambs, rammes, &c. With the fat of kidneys of wheat.] That is the finest of large, plump, and full kernel of the sweetest and choicest wheat, which are like kidneys in shape. The
very word here rendred, the fat of wheat, is elsewhere translated in our Bibles, the finest of the wheat, as Psal. 81. 16. He should have fed them also with the finest wheat. And thou didst drink the pure bloud of the grape.] That is, pure wine, red like bloud. Vers. 15. But Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked.] That is Israel, Deut. 33. 5, 26. And he was King in Jesurun, when the heads of the people, and the tribes of Israel were gathered together. There is none like unto the God of Jesurun, &c. Esa. 44. 2. Fear not oh Jacob my servant, and Jesurun whom I have chosen. It is derived from Josher, an Hebrew word signifying righteousnesse, and is a name given them, to shew that by their calling they were to be a righteous people, and so had been in some measure, but is here given them by way of upbraiding them for being so unlike the people that by their calling they should have been, yea so farre degenerated from what they had been. Vers. 16. They provoked him to jealousie with strange gods.] That is, made him by their spirituall fornications exceeding angry; for jealousie is the rage of a man, Prov. 6. 34. Vers. 17. They sacrificed unto devils, not to God.] See Levit. 17. 7. To gods whom they knew not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your fa∣thers feared not.] Two circumstances are here noted in the Israelites idolatry, by way of aggravating their sinne: the first is, that they worshipped new gods that came newly up; and the strange gods of the heathens, which the Israelites worship∣ped, though they had continued in the world many hundred years, are yet term∣ed new gods, newly come up, because indeed they were no better if compared with the eternall ever-living God, who is called the ancient of dayes, Dan. 7. 9. and who is indeed onely to be worshipped; and also because this way of religious worship was but a new invention in comparison of the true worship, wherewith the true God had been worshipped in his Church from the first beginning of time, &c. That onely which is from the beginning is truly ancient, and of this therefore it is that the Prophet speaks, Jer. 6. 16. Thus saith the Lord, Stand ye in the wayes, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, &c. and what∣ever is erroneus in religion, though of never so long standing, it is but a novelty. The second is, that they were fallen to the worshipping of gods whom their fa∣thers feared not, that is, such as their fathers slighted as vanities, gods that could do neither good nor hurt, Jer. 10. 5. and were not therefore worthy their fear; and this too did make their sinne farre the worse, and that because though it be not alwayes safe for men to follow the way of their fathers in matters of religion, yet when their fathers worshipped God aright, and so they had not onely the word of God for their rule, but also the example of their fathers to encourage and lead them on, then to decline from the way of the truth, from their fathers conveyed to them, merely out of a fickle and inconstant spirit, must needs greatly aggravate their sinne. Vers. 20. And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall be.] That is, I will let them see what a miserable end they will come to
when I forsake them, Psal. 73. 17, 18. Ʋntill I went into the Sanctuary of God, then understood I their end. Surely thou didst set them in slippery places, thou cast∣edst them down into destruction. For they are a very froward generation, children in whom is no faith.] That is, no faith truly to believe any thing that God saith to them, and no faith nor fidelity in keeping stedfastly their covenant with God. Vers. 21. They have moved me to jealousie with that which is not God.] The summe of that which is here threatned is this, that since they had mobed him to jea∣lousie, that is, provoked him to displeasure, with that which was not God, that is, by giving away the worship which was due onely to him, to gods which were in∣deed no gods, so preferring mere vanities, perhaps stocks and stones, before their creatour, therefore he would move them to jealousie, that is, would vex and dis∣quiet them, with those which are not a people, even with a foolish nation, that is by preferring as it were the heathen before them that had been his peculiar people. And this the Lord did to the Israelites two severall wayes: first, when he took part with the heathens, and made them victorious over the Israelites, when the Assyri∣ans, the Babylonians and other heathen people, which were despised by the Isra∣elites as poore, blind, silly wretches, that knew nothing of God, nor had any in∣terest in God, were by the help of Gods providence crowned with one victory af∣ter another in their warres against the Israelites, and did at last make them their bondslaves, and tread them down as dirt in the streets: this must needs mightily vex and disquiet them; for why, think they, should the uncircumcised thus trample upon the Israel of God? and thus did God move them to jealousie with those which were not a people, &c. But secondly, the Lord did this most eminently when he cu off the Jews, and took the Gentiles in their stead to be his people: for herein S. Paul notes that this threatning was made good, Rom. 10. 19. And indeed if a Prince should take some base beggar to his bed and board to vex his wife, that had formerly plaid the harlot with some base unworthy groom, this could not be a greater vexation to her, then it was alwayes to the Jews to think that the Gentiles, whom they despised for their blindnesse and folly, should come to be espoused to God in Christ, and enjoy the priviledges of Gods Church and people, and they should be cast off. Even the believing Jews were not without much ado brought to yield to this truth of the Gentiles calling, Act. 11. 2, 3. and much more was it a matter of great vexation and indignation to the rest, and in∣deed so it is unto this day. See 1. Thess. 2. 15, 16. Who both killed the Lord Je∣sus, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us: and they please not God, and are contrary to all men, forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up their sinnes alway: for the wrath is come upon them to the utter∣most. Vers. 22. For a fire is kindled in mine anger and shall burn unto the lowest hell, &c.] Some Expositours understand this of the eternall torments of hell, to wit, that the Lord would in his just anger not onely poure out upon them his judge∣ments here, but also throw their souls aftewards to hell, where the unquenchable fire burns, Matt. 3. 12. But though this be a truth, that the wicked shall not one∣ly
be punished here but also eternally in hell-fire hereafter; yet it seems not so probable that this is intended here, but that all which is here threatned is this, that the judgements, which God in his anger would bring upon them, should utterly destroy the land: for the last branch of the verse, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundations of the mountains, seems to be added by way of exlaining these, and to shew us what was meant by the burning of this fire unto the lowest hell. Vers. 23. I will heap mischiefs upon them, I will spend mine arrows upon them.] That is, I will strike them with many plagues, and they shall be wounded with them as with arrows, suddenly and unexpectedly, according to that Zah. 9. 14. The Lord shall be seen over them, and his arrows shall go forth as the light∣ning, &c. Vers. 24. They shall be burnt with hunger.] That is, consumed, as with a fire, by famine, which maketh mens visages blacker then a cole. &c. Lam. 4. 8. Their visage is blacker then a cole, they are not known in the streets, their skinne clea∣veth to their bones: it is withered, it is become like a stick. And devoured with burning heat, and with bitter destruction.] By burning heat, as most Expositours conceive, is meant the burning carbuncle or plaguesore, a fiery ulcer on the body; and therefore the same word, though there translated burn∣ing coles, is joyned with the pestilence, Hab. 3. 5. Before him went the pestilence, and burning coles went forth at his feet; and so likewise by bitter destruction is meant the pest, and other terrible sicknesses, whereby God soon cutteth off the life of man with bitternesse, Psal. 91. 5, 6. Thou shalt not be afraid for the terrour by night, nor for the arrow tht flieth by day: Nor for the pestilence that walketh in darknesse, nor for the destruction that wasteth at noon-day. I will also send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the poison of serpents of the dust.] That is, that hide themselves in the dust, or that feed of the dust, implying that as the wild beasts should kill them by force, so the serpents also by secret sub∣tily. Vers. 25. The sword without and terrour within shall destroy both the young man, &c.] That is, they that are abroad shall be slain with the sword, and they that are within shall die with very terrour and fear: thus according to the very letter of the words, we may very well understand this place; but yet some by terrour un∣derstand the terrible sword. Vers. 26. I said, I would scatter them into corners, &c.] God speaketh here after the manner of men: but the generall drift of the words is this, that their wic∣kednesse provoked him almost utterly to destroy them, but that he had respect to his own glory. Vers. 27. Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversa∣ries should behave themselves strangely, &c.] Two severall wayes these words may be understood: for first, by the wrath of the enemy may be meant the exces∣sive fury and rage of those their enemies whom God should imploy in punishing the sinnes of the people; and then that which follows, lest their adversaries should behave themselves strangely, must be understood of the enemies strange and in∣humane
dealing with his people, and so that this is alledged as one reason why the Lord did not let loose the enemies to destroy his people, though their sinnes did mightily provoke him thereto, to wit, lest the enemy should in their boundlesse fu∣ry use them with such strange unheard of cruelty, as God could not, though ang∣ry, endure his people should suffer: and then the last branch contains another rea∣son, lest they should say, Our hand is high, and the Lord hath not done all this. But secondly, by the wrath of the enemy may be meant the proud insolency and madnesse of their enemies, puft up with the good successe of their warres against Gods people; and this the most of Expositours agree to. And if we understand it thus, then the words following are added by way of explaining this, lest their ad∣versaries should behave themselves strangely, to wit, in saying, our hand is high, and the Lord hath not done all this, wherein their ascribing the glory of their vi∣ctories to their own prowesse and power, and not unto God, is termed a strange behaviour, either because therein they did, as we may say, make strne of the mat∣ter, as if all those evils that had befallen the Israelites were not the effects of Gods displeasure against them, as if he had no hand at all in it, but that all was to be as∣cribed to themselves; or else, because in this their pride they did so strangely exalt themselves above that they did before, as if they were not the same men they were before, or as if they had forgotten indeed themselves to be men: and so then the drift of this verse is this, that the reason why God would not by their enemies bring his people so near to utter destruction as their sinnes deserved, was onely this, lest their enemies should hereupon exalt and advance themselves, and boast as if with∣out Gods help they had done all they had done: of which mad and strange inso∣lency it is that David speaks, Psal. 140. 8. Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the wicked; further not his wicked device, lest they exalt themselves. Vers. 28. For they are a nation void of counsel, neither was there understand∣ing in them.] Some referre this to the enemies of Gods people, of whom he had spoken in the foregoing words; but it is doubtlesse spoken of the Israelites, as is ma∣nifest in the following words, O that they were wise, &c. and it is added as a rea∣son why God was so ready to have brought such an overflowing scourge upon them, as to make the remembrance of them cease from among men, as he had said before, vers. 26. even because they were a nation void of counsel, neither was there any understanding in them, that is, they were so blinded, and hardened in their sinnes, that they could not or would not see either what was like to be for their welfare here, or eternally hereafter; when the Lord did punish them, what it was that had brought those plagues and miseries upon them. Vers. 29. Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end!] That is, oh that they would beforehand consider what the end will be of such stubborn rebellious courses, that so by true repentance they might prevent these miseries which in the end will else certainly come upon them. Vers. 30. How should one chase a thousand? &c.] That is, seeing the Lord had promised the Israelites that a hundred of them should put ten thousand of their ene∣mies to flight, Levit. 26. 8. and this they had found true in many strange victories
they had gotten, wherein a handfull of them, to speak of, had defeated whole ar∣mies of their adversaris, how should it come to passe quite contrary that one of their enemies should chase a thousand of them, and that two of their enemies should put ten thousand of them to flight, except their rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up, that is, except the Lord who is their rock, and their onely stay, strength and refuge, had delivered them up into the power and hands of their ene∣mies to be their slaves and vassals; for so this phrase of shutting up is elsewhere used, as Psal. 31. 7, 8. Thou hast known my soul in adversities, and hast not shut me up into the hand of the enemie. Now Moses useth this figurative expression, Except their rock had sold them, to implie that it was not so much from the strength and prowesse of their enemies, that the Israelites became their bondslaves, as from the Lords delivering them into their hands; and secondly, that by delivering them up thus into bondage to their enemies, the Lord did as it were renounce all interest in them, as if he meant no longer to be their Lord, but had left them to the power of other lords that should have dominion over them. Indeed elsewhere it is said that the Israelites sold themselves, Isai. 52. 3. Ye have sold your selves for nought, and ye shall be redeemed without money, to wit, because by their sinnes they brought themselves into thraldome; but here it is said that the Lord sold them, because it was the Lord that brought this judgement upon them. Vers. 31. For their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges.] That is, their gods are not as our God, and that the Heathen themselves cannot denie. He had said that a few of their enemies could not have overcome multitudes of the Israelites if God had not delivered them up into their enemies hands; and now the reason of this is given in these words, to wit, because the God of the Israelites was another manner of God then the idol-gods of the Hea∣thens: as if he had said, It is no wonder though multitudes of the Heathen should be put to flight by a few of their enemies, and that because their rock, their idol∣gods, can do nothing at all for their defence, for their rock is not as our Rock, our God is of infinite power, and therefore able to make his people victorious over all their enemies, so that it could not be that their enemies should vanquish them ex∣cept their God did withdraw his help, and give them up into the hands of their enemies. Now this, he saith, was so clear that their enemies themselves must needs consse it. I know the meaning of those words, even our enemies themselves being judges, may be this, that the destruction of the Israelites enemies in all ages, the Egyptians, Amalekites, &c. did sufficiently prove this truth, that their gods were not to be compared with the God of Israel; but I see no reason why we should not understand it of the confession of their enemies, since the marvellous works which God did for the Israelites could not but convince their idolatrous adversa∣ries, though for the most part they held the truth in unighteousnesse, as we see they did, Pharaoh and his Egyptians, Exod. 14. 25. The Egyptians said, Let us flee from the face of Israel, for the Lord fighteth for them against the Egy∣ptians. Vers. 32. For their vine is the vine of Sodome, and of the fields of Gomorrah.] That is, their lives are abominable, like those of Sodom and Gomorrah (whence
also is that of the prophet, Isai. 1. 10. and therefore no wonder though God be so highly offended with them. Their grapes are grapes of gall, &c.] Their works are here compared to gall, the poyson of dragons, and the venome of asps, vers. 23. because they were so dis∣tastfull to God, and so deadly to themselves and others that should be infected by their example; of which see the note on chap. 29. 18. but withall these expressions may have particular respect to their bitter and deadly malice against the prophets, and other the faithfull servants of God in future times, but especially against Christ and his Apostles, &c. Vers. 34. Is not this lad up in store with me, and sealed up amongst my trea∣sures?] Some understand this thus, That what he had said in the foregoing words concerning the bitter malice of the Jews against Christ their Messiah, and against the servants of Christ, was one of those secrets known now beforehand to God, to whom all future things are known, and which by the event would be found to be true, though now it would hardly be believed. But I rather conceive that this is spoken of the certain punishment that did abide this people for these their horrible sinnes; Is not this laid up in store with me, saith the Lord, and sealed up amongst my treasures? that is, though for a time I forbear to punish these cursed and bitter fruits and works of theirs, yet let them not therefore think to escape; for all their transgressions are laid up in store with me, I keep a perfect account of every one of them, and will be sure at last to bring them all forth, and charge them full heavily upon them. But what is meant by that last clause, and sealed up amongst my trea∣sures? I answer that the meaning of this is either, that a memoriall of their sinnes was kept in the unsearchable treasuries of his wisdome and knowledge, as safely and carefully as men keep their treasures, and so this place is parallel with that, Job 14. 17. My transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sewest up mine ini∣quitie; or else, that he kept remembrance of their sinnes together with those trea∣sure of wrath and vengeance which he had in store for wicked men, which there∣fore he would bring forth together with their sinnes, when the time came of cal∣ling them to an account, and so give them the just reward of their wickednesse. And indeed we reade of treasures of snow, and of hail reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of battel and warre, Job 38. 22, 23. and that they who abuse Gods forbearance, and thereby embolden themselves to sinne, do treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, Rom. 2. 5. Vers. 35. To me belongeth vengeance and recompence.] That is, the work of punishing wickednesse, and consequently the wicked wayes of this my people; and therefore as their sinnes are known to me, so they shall be undoubtedly punished by me. Their foot shall slide in due time.] That is, they shall fall into some mischief, they shall not stand stedfast in the prosperous estate which now they do enjoy. For the day of their calamitie is at hand, &c.] That is, after they once grow thus desperately wicked, it shall not be long ere this calamitie here foretold shall come upon them. Vers. 36. For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his ser∣vants.]
That is, the Lord as a judge shall punish the rebellious, and shew mercie to the good and penitent, and so will defend them against their oppessours, and take vengeance on them for the wrong they have done his people. And thus by the generalitie of this word, judge, he passeth from speaking of Gods justice in punishing his people, to speak of his mercie in taking pitie on them in the height of their miserie, and of the vengeance he would poure forth upon their enemies. When he seeth that their power is gone, and there is none shut up or left.] That is, none shut up in the enemies hand, as captives and prisoners, and noe left at li∣bertie; or none shut up in houses, towers, or cities to escape the enemie, and none left escaped from destruction: and so this phrase is elsewhere used, 1. Kings 14. 10. The meaning is, that when they are in a manner utterly overthrown and rui∣ned, then will God come to their help: for indeed such extremities are usually the best opportunities which God takes of shewing mercie to his people. See 2. Kings 14. 25, 26. Vers. 37. And he shall say, Where are their gods, their rock in whom they trusted, &c.] Some understand this of the gods of the heathen, the enemies of his people, to wit, that the Lord, by destroying those heathen people, should as it were triumph over their idol-gods, that could no way help them when God came to take vengeance on them. But it is better understood by others as spoken to his people, and that by way of upbraiding them for their follie in forsaking him, the everliving God, to follow after those idol-gods that were able to do nothing for them in the time of their danger. And he shall say, Where are their gods, &c. which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink-offerings? the mean∣ing is, that God by suffering the enemies of the Israelites to bring them to so low an ebbe, that there should be none ut up or left, as was said in the foregoing verse, the Lord would discover to them what a grosse folly it was in them to go after those idol-gods, and to give them the scrifices which they should have offered to him: for as for that phrase of their idol-gods eating the fat of their sacrifices, &c. all that is intended therein is onely that their sacrifices were offered to them as meat and drink-offerings, as in that regard the sacrifices which God required of his peo∣ple are called the food of his meat-offerings. Vers. 39. See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no God with me; I kill and I make alive, &c.] As if he had said, by the experience you now have had both of the blisse you enjoyed whilest you served me, and of the miseries I brought upon you when you fell away to idolatry, from which your idol-gods were no way able to free you, by the experience I say that you have had of these things you may plainly see that I am the onely true God, and that there is none ele can do ei∣ther good or hurt. Vers. 40. For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever.] God speaks here of himself after the manner of men, who used in swearing to lift up their hands to heaven, as a signe that they called God to witnesse the truth of what they said, Gen. 14. 22. And Abram said to the King of Sodom, I have lift up my hand unto the Lord the most high God, the possessour of heaven and earth; and
thus God confirmeth his threatnings by an oath, to shew the immutabiliy of his counsel, Heb. 6. 16, 17. For men verily swear by the greater, and an oath for co∣firmation is to them an end of all strife. Wherein God, willing more abundantly to sew unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmeth it by an oath. Now the oath which God here takes is, I live for ever, that is, as sure as I live for ever I will do that which I now say. Vers. 42. I will make my arrows drunk with bloud, and that wih the bloud of the slain, and of the captives.] That is, both with the bloud of those that are slain, and of those that are hurt in battel, and so thereupon are taken captive. From the beginning of revenges upon the enemy.] That is, from the time that I began to take vengeance upon those that are both mine and my peoples enemies; or from the time when I shall revenge upon the enemie all the wrongs which from the first beginning they have done unto my people, implying that God doth for a while suffer the enemies to runne on without controul, but at last, when he begins to punish them, he reckons with them for all the old score. Vers. 43. Rjoyce, O ye nations, with his people; for he ill avenge, &c.] Both Jews and Gentiles are here exhorted to blesse God for this his goodnesse to his peo∣ple in avenging them upon their enemies: and in this exhortation is implyed, first, that this which God should do for the Israelites should be so wonderfull even in the eyes of the Heathen that they should speak of it to the magnifying of God; and secondly, that the time should come when both Jews and Gentiles should together rejoyce in the goodnesse of God to them, his Church and people, and therefore S. Paul alledgeth this plce to prove the calling of the Gentiles, Rom. 15. 10. Vers. 44. And Moses came and spake all the words of this song in the ears of the people, he and Hoea, &c.] This was noted before, chap. 31. 30. but is here again repeated by way of transition to that which follows, and to note that Joshua their elect Judge stood by when this song was repeated by Moses, as it were to as∣sent to that which Moses said and did. CHAP. XXXIII. Vers. 1. ANd this is the blssing wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the children of Israel before his death.] In the former chapter, vers. 48. it is said tat the very same day whereon Moses repeated that sad dreadfull song, there recorded, God commanded him to go up and die at mount Nebo: but now he addes that yet before his death (and therefore happely the same day also) he pronounced these following propheticall blessings upon the severall tribes, which he left amongst them as his last will and testament, and by the sweetnesse thereof did much allay as it were the bitternesse of the former song. Indeed the tribe of Simeon is not at all here mentioned, and so all the posterity of Jacobs sonnes have their se∣verall blessings allotted them except that tribe onely. But that was because the tribe of Simon was to have their portion in the midt of the inheritance of the sonnes of
Judah, Josh. 19. 1. (whence it was that they went joyntly together to fight against the Canaanites, Judg. 1. 3.) and consequently the blessing o this tribe is implyed in Judahs, amongst whom they were to dwell, and yet withall that was confirmed which Jacob at his death foretold concerning Simeon, as the punishment of his sinne, that he should be divided in Jacob, and scattered in Israel. As for the titl which Moses here gives himself, Moses the man of God, thereby is meant the Pro∣phet of the Lord, and so he calls himself in this place purposely, thereby to assure the Israelites that what he spake in these propheticall blessings he spake by authority from God, and that therefore they were to receive them with no lesse assurance of faith, no lesse confidence and comfort, then if they had come immediately from God: upon which ground also the same title is given elsewhere both to the prophets in the old restament, and to the ministers of the Gospel in the new; for so Samuel is called, 1. Sam. 9. 6. Behold, now there is in this city a man of God, and he is an honourable man; and vers. 7. The bread is spent in th vessels, and there is not a prsent to bring to the man of God; and Timothy, 1. Tim. 6. 11. But thou, O man of God, flee these things, &c. Vers. 2. The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from mount Seir unto them; he shined forth from mount Paran.] The drift of this Preface prefixed before the blessings, which we have in this and the three following verses, is first, by rhear∣sing the former goodnesse of God to his people Israel, especially when he gave them his law by the hand of Moses, and so entred into a covenant with them that he would be the God and they should be his peculiar people, to shew the ground of these following blessings, to wit, the free grace of God and his singular love to them above all nations that were upon the face of the earth; and secondly, to inti∣mate that it was of God that he now spake to them, and that he was onely subor∣dinate to God in pronouncing these blssings, as formerly in giving them the law. As for these first words of the Preface, The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them; he shined forth from mount Parau, either they are all joynt∣ly meant of th glorious manner of Gods revealing himself unto the Israelites when he gave them the Law (onely there i mention made of Gods rising from Seir, and his shining forth from mount Paran, which were places not farre from mount Sinai, and so the glorious brightnesse wherein God appeared on Sinai did seem to shoot out and spread forth it self from all these places) or else the severall branches thereof are meant of severall manifestations of God unto this people as he con∣ducted them along from Egypt to the land of Canaan: for the better understanding whereof we must note that Moses, comparing the Lords revealing himself to Israel to the shining of the sunne upon the world (as the prophet Habakkuk also doth, Hab. . 3▪ 4. God came from Teman, and the holy one from mount Paran. Selah. His glory covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his praise, and his bright∣nesse was as the light, &c.) accordgly he alludes to the severall degrees of the sunnes appearing to men in menioning the Lords severall manifestations of himself to his peopl: first, the sunne gives forth its light to us in some smaller measure be∣fore it riseth, and to this he alludes speaking of the Lords appearing o them when he gave them the law, The Lord came from Sinai: secondly, after that, the sunne
riserh in the open sight of men, and to this he compares the Lords farther manifesta∣tion of himself at mount Seir, in that second clause, and rose up from Seir, to wit, when he commanded the brasen serpent to be set up amongst them, by looking whereon the Israelites were cured that were mortally bitten with fiery serpents, a notable type of the promised Messiah, that sunne of righteousnesse, who was to arise with healing in his wings, Mal. 4. 2. And 3. the sunne being once risen shines brighter and brighter unto perfect day, and to this he alludes in the last clause, he shined forth from mount Paran, meaning thereby the Lords repeating and explain∣ing the law to them by the ministry of Moses in the wildernesse of Paran. But doubtlesse the best Exposition of these words is, that Moses hereby meant the whole course of Gods proceeding in the glorious manifestation of himself to Israel, as they went along to Canaan, to wit, in the pillar of a cloud and fire, whereby they were led, the Manna and quails which he sent them, the giving and the repeating of the law, and all other the marvellous works which he wrought for them. And he came with ten thousands of saints.] That is, he came attended in roy∣all majesty, to wit, at the giving of the law on mount Sinai, with an infinite multi∣tude of those glorious spirits the Angels, who are here called saints, because of their purity and holinesse: and from hence it was that both S. Stephen and S. Paul said of the law that it was given by the disposition of the Angels, Acts 7. 53. and or∣dained by Angels by the hand of a Mediatour, Gal. 3. 19. and that it was the word spoken by Angels, Heb. 2. 2. From his right hand went a fiery law for them.] The law given to the Israelite from mount Sinai is called  fiery law, both because God spake it out of the midst of the fire, Deut. 5. 22. and also to imply that the work of the law is to terrify men, to humble them, and to be the ministration of death and condemnation, 2. Cor. 3. 7▪ & 9. & this expression, From his right hand went a fiery Law for them, was either onely to intimate Gods giving them his Law, or else rather to signifie that the Law was the sceptre in Gods right hand, whereby he meant to govern his people and keep them in order; as the Gospel is also called the rod of the Lords strength, whereby he rules in the midst of his enemies, Psal. 110. 2. Vers. 3. Yea he loved the people.] As this tends to the generall drift of the preface, namely, to discover the ground of the following blessings, the speciall love which God bare to the Israelites; so it hath also particular relation to that which immediately went before concerning Gods giving them his Law, as intimating that to be a singular effect of Gods speciall love unto them, From his right hand went a iery Law for them: Yea he loved the people. God doth many wayes testi∣fie his love to his people; but one of the choicest pledges of his love is, that he gives them his word, which he denies to others, Psal. 147. 19. 20. He sheweth his word o Jacob, his statutes and his judgements unto Israel. He hath not dealt so with any nation, &c. All his saints are in thy hand.] That is, all Israels saints are in thy custody and protection, O Lord. To be in Gods hand is to be under his power and custo∣dy, under his guidance care and protection, as Christ saith of his sheep, John 10. 28. I give unto them eternall life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
man pluek them out of my hand. But this priviledge Moses limits to the saints in Israel, that is, those that are Israelites indeed, as Christ said of Nathaniel, John 1. 47. a holy people, as they professe themselves to be: for such as professe themselves Israelites, but are not saints, that is, truly sanctified by the spirit of God, but live a wicked and unclean life, God will not foul his hands with them; such drosse are not worthy to be kept so charily. Thou puttest away all the wicked of the earth like drosse, saith David, Psal. 119. 119. And they sat down at thy feet, every one shall receive of thy word.] This may be added either further to illustrate the mercy of God to Israel in giving them his Law, when as his peculiar people he instructed them in those things that concerned the good of their souls, and they willingly submitted themselves to be instructed and directed by him; or else it may be added as a note of distinction whereby the saints in Israel might be known from such as were onely Israelites by outward profession, namely, that such as were saints indeed, would willingly receive and obey his word; and therefore is that clause added, every one shall receive of thy word: However that phrase, they sat down at thy feet, is certainly meant of Gods instructing them, and the peoples readinesse to receive his instruction; and either it hath reference to the abiding of the Israelites at the foot of mount Sinai to re∣ceive the Law from God, speaking from the top of the mount unto them after the manner as disciples used to sit at the feet of their master, who from some higher seat did reade unto them, whereupon it was that S. Paul said, Act. 22. 3. that he was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel; or else it may have reference to their re∣sorting to the Sanctuary to be taught: for that is called the footstool of Gods feet, Psal. 99. 5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his foot stool; and Ezek. 43. 7. The Place of my throne, and the place of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel for ever, and my holy name shall the house of Israel no more defile. Vers. 4. Moses commanded us a Law, even the inheritance of the congrega∣tion of Jacob.] This which Moses speaks concerning himself, in the name of the people, is added to maintain the credit that was due to his ministery, to shew that God had set him over them to teach and govern them, and consequently, that what he should now say, as well as what he had before, was to be received as if it had been spoken the God himself from heaven. As for those words, even the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob, the Law is so called, because God gave it them as a rare and precious treasure, not for their use onely, but for the use of their posterity after them. Vers. 5. And he was King in Jesurun, when the heads of the people and the tribes of Israel were gathered together.] By Jefurun is meant Israel, as before, chap. 32. 15. concerning which see the notes there. Now though it be said here of Moses (for this hath reference to the foregoing verse, where he spake of himself in a third person) that he was King amongst them, yet thereby is not meant that he was indeed a King, and ruled as a Monarch amongst them, but onely that when the Princes and people were assembled together he was chief amongst them, and as it were a King: He was in the supreme place of Magistracy, and did the work of a
King, he gave them a Law (though indeed that which he received from God) and their chief affairs were still ordered by his direction. And thus with this clause Moses closeth up the Preface prefixed before the blessings, wherein, by declaring the speciall love which God had alwayes shown to this people, and how God had alwayes made use of him to make known his will to them, he prepared the people to receive as from God that which in the following blessings he should say con∣cerning their severall tribes. Vers. 6. Let Reuben live and not die, and let not his men be few.] Jacob had prophecyed concerning this tribe that they should lose the dignity of the birth∣right, and should never come to any excellency amongst the tribes either for the number of the people, or any other preheminence, and that because of the incest of Reuben with his fathers concubine, Gen. 49. 4. Ʋnstable as waters, thou shalt not excell, because thou wentest up to thy fathers bed. Now therefore for the comfort of this tribe Moses pronounceth this blessing upon them, Let Reuben live and not die, that is, though Reuben by his incest brought that curse upon himself pronoun∣ced by the mouth of his father, yea though by the sinne of the Reubenites in adhe∣ring to Korah they deserved that God should utterly destroy them, yet, saith Mo∣ses, they shall live and not die, the name and tribe of Reuben shall still continue a∣mongst the people of God, and they also shall have a share in that life eternall, which by the Messiah shall be obtained for the Israel of God. And again, Let not his men be few, that is, though for his sinne he hath lost the glory of excelling the other tribes in the number of his men, which as he first-born he might otherwise have expected (for we see that in the first numbring of the people, Numb. 1. 21. they were fewer then any of the tribes, except Gad, Asher and Benjamin, and at the second they were two thousand seven hundred and seventy fewer then at the first, Numb. 26. 7.) yet shall not his men be few, though there shall not be so many in that tribe as in some others, yet shall they still continue a numerous tribe. Vers. 7. And this is the blessing of Judah.] Simeon is not here mentioned, of which the reason is shown, vers. 1. but Judah is set next after Reuben, because the honour of the birthright was partly given from Reuben to Judah, and in his tribe the regall power was afterwards settled. Heare, Lord, the voice of Judah., and bring him unto his people, &c.] This prophecie hath respect to that blessing of Jacob, Gen. 49. 8, 9. 10, 11. Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise, thy hand shall be in the neck of thine ene∣mies, &c. The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, till Shiloh come, &c. and so that which Moses here saith concerning this tribe implies these two particulars: first, That those glorious priviledges promi∣sed there to this tribe, concerning their Dignities, their successe against their ene∣mies, and the raising up of the Messiah amongst them, should not be obtained and kept without many difficulties and troubles, and that because their enemies should often prevail over them, and the regall dignitie should not be settled suddenly amongst them, and when it was settled it should be often. dangerously eclipsed, as indeed it was many times, but especially in the Babylonian captivitie, so that they should be forced to seek and pray earnestly for the accomplishment of that which
God had promised are they did obtain it: and secondly, that yet at last upon the prayers of the faithfull (Heare Lord the voice of Judah) that which God promi∣sed should truly be performed, the regall dignitie should be settled in that tribe, they should be victorious over their enemies, though their enemies did for a while triumph over them, and carrie them captives into a strange land, yet they should return again into their own land, and out of their stock the Messiah should come. All which how it was accomplished we see, first, in the exaltation of David to be their king, which cost him many prayers; secondly▪ in the many glorious victo∣ries of David, Asa, Jehoshaphat and other kings of Judah against their enemies, who having prevailed more by their prayers then by their swords returned in tri∣umph unto their people, of which many understand that clause, and bring him unto his people; thirdly, in the return of this tribe out of the Babylonian captivitie: for whereas the tribes of Israel, carried captive into Assyria, did never rurn thence, this tribe of Judah (and those of Benjamin that were united to them in the ing∣dome of Judah) upon their repentance and prayers to God, were brought back again into that land of promise, and there were settled, and so continued unto the coming of Christ; and of this doubtlesse those words are principally meant, and bring him unto his people; and fourthly, chiefly in the victorie of Christ that lion of the tribe of Judah, over our spirituall enemies, of which also, as in relation to his prayers, we see what the Apostle saith, Heb. 5. 7. That in the dayes of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, he was heard in that he feared. Let his hands be sufficient for him, and be thou an help to him, &c.] That is, he shall through thine aid be able to make good his part against his enemies without seeking any help from any bodie else. Vers. 8. Let thy thummim and thy urim be with thy holy one, whom thou didst prove at Massah, &c.] In this first branch of Levies blessing is foretold, first, that the high Priesthood (to which appertained the breastplate that had the urim and thummim in it, Exod. 28. 30.) should be continued in Aarons posteritie; and se∣condly, that God would still furnish them with those gifts and graces, that know∣ledge and pietie, requisite for their calling, and signified by the urim and thummi. As for that following clause, whom thou didst prove at Massah, and with whom thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah, for the fuller understanding thereof we must note, first, that this is meant of that storie, Numb. 20. when upon the Israelites murmuring for want of water Moses and Aaron were commanded to fetch water out of the rock, but through their indignation against the people did not glorifie God as they ought to have done, and therefore were excluded from entring into the land of Canaan: for though the place where this was done was called Meribah onely, not Massah, Numb. 20. 13. (it was the place where Moses first fetcht water out of the rock in Horeb that was called Massah and Meribah, Exod. 17. 7.) yet because the Lord did there prove Moses and Aaron, even that place is also called Massah, that is temptation or proof: secondly, that it is said that the Lord did prove Levi, that is, Moses and Aaron, at Massah, and did strive with them at the waters of Meribah, because he did there trie their faith,
and sharply reprove them for their infidelitie; and thirdly, that this is here added both by way of commending the zeal of Aaron (for zealous for God he then shew∣ed himself, though weak in faith) and also by way of magnifying Gods mercie in settling the priesthood upon his posteritie, though he at that time so greatly offended him through his unbelief. Vers. 9. Who said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him, &c.] This may have respect both to that law, Levit. 21. 11. Neither shall he go in to any dead bodie, nor defile himself for his father or mother; or else, to that notable fact of the Levites, Exod. 32. when at the commandment of Moses they slew their idolatrous brethren that had worshipped the golden calf; not sparing those that were most nearest allied to them: for therefore it is that Moses here saith of them, that he said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children, because they did execute Gods judgement upon parents brethren children no lesse then if they had been mere strangers to them. Vers. 11. Blesse, Lord, his substance, and accept the work of his hands.] That is, though the Levites have no inheritance in the land of Canaan amongst their brethren, yet the Lord will provide for them, and blesse them in their outward estates, and besides, the service they do to him and to his people the Lord will take in good part; and this we may well think is added to hearten the Levites against the discouragements they might meet with in their calling. Smite through the loyns of those that rise up against him, &c.] That is, God shall destroy their enemies: Because those that are set apart to take care of the peoples souls are usually hated and persecuted by those whose sinnes they reprove, Wo is me, my mother, that thou hast born me a man of strife, and a man of conten∣tion, to the whole earth▪ Jer. 15. 10▪ therefore is this promise made here to the Le∣vites, that God would fight against those that fight against them, and sooner or later would surely destroy them. Vers. 12. And of Benjamin he said, The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safetie by him, &c.] For the understanding of this blessing of Benjamins tribe, we must note that the main thing promised herein is, that the Temple should be built in that portion of the land which should fall to the lot of Benjamin; and in expres∣sing this Moses useth this phrase, The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safetie by him; and the Lord shall cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell between his shoulders, by way of alluding to Jacobs dealing with Benjamin, the stock from whom this tribe was descended, first, because as Jacob kept his Benjamin alwayes at home with him, he would not let him go out of his sight, so this tribe did al∣wayes enjoy the speciall presence of God in his Temple, and was as it were every day in the eye of their heavenly father: secondly, because as Jacobs keeping of Ben∣jamin alwayes at home with him was an effect of his tender love to him, he was his darling and therefore he would not part with him; so this tribes continuall en∣joying of Gods presence in his Temple was a speaking pledge of Gods singular love to them, the Lord seemed herein to make this tribe his darling, as once Benja∣min was to Jacob, and therefore this tribe is called here the beloved of the Lord▪
and thirdly, because as Jacobs keeping of Benjamin at home with him was to make sure, as▪ he could, that no evil should befall him, Gen. 42. 4. But Benjamin, Josephs brother, Jacob sent not with his brethren: for he said, Lest peradventure mischief befall him; so was the presence of God in his Temple a speciall pledge of their preservation, in regard whereof this little tribe was as it were alwayes under the wing of their heavenly father, as little Benjamin was under his father Jacobs; and therefore it is said, The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safetie by him, and the Lord shall cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell between his shoulders, in which last words there is also an allusion to the situation of the Temple, which was built near to the top of the mount Moriah. Vers. 13. And of Joseph he said, Blessed of the Lord be his land, &c.] See the note upon Gen. 49. 26. Vers. 14. And for the precious fruits brought forth by the sunne, &c.] The fruits of the earth, which are here promised to the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, are here called precious fruits brought forth by the sunne, and precious things put forth by the moon, because the sunne and moon are the mediate causes of the pro∣sperous growth of such things, the sunne by its warmth, the moon by its moisture making the earth fruitfull. Vers. 15. And for the chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the preci∣ous things of the lasting hills.] Hills are here called ancient mountains, and lasting hills, because they were from the beginning, and shall continue to the end of the world; and by the chief and precious things of these hills are meant, either the choice fruits that should grow there (and it is a signe of avery rich land when the very mountains and hills are so fruitfull) or else the mines of gold, and silver, and other metals, which are indeed usually found in hills and mountains. Vers. 16. And for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush.] That is, the po∣teritie of Joseph shall be blessed of the Lord, as in regard of outward things, so al∣so in regard of that speciall love which God should bear them as his peculiar people; for this is meant by the good will of him that dwelt in the bush; in the bush God appeared to Moses, as the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and the good will of God thus considered as a God in covenant with them, was that which made them truly happy, and is of that which the Psalmist speaks, Psal. 106. 4. Remember me, O Lord, with the favour thou bearest thy people: O visit me with thy salvation. Let the blessing come upon the head of Joseph, &c.] See Gen. 49. 26. Vers. 17. His glory is like the firstling of his bullock▪ and his horns are like the horns of Ʋnicorns.] That is, as is the beautie of a firstling bullock, such shall be the glory of Ephraims kingdome, and as is the strength of the Unicorn, such shall be their strength to withstand and beat back their enemies. With them he shall push the people together to the ends of the earth.] That is, all his enemies that shall any where rise up against him: yet some understand this of Joshua, who was of the tribe of Ephraim, who with his horns, that is, his ar∣mies of the Israelites, did drive out the inhabitants of Canaan; and so they reade this clause, with them he sha push the people together to the end of the land, that is, as was said before, the land of Canaan.
And they are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the thousands of Manasseh.] That is, these are the horns before mentioned: and hereby first, he gives us to understand, that what he had hitherto prophecyed of Joseph was to be understood jointly of the two tribes of Ephraim and Manesseh; and secondly▪ by giving to Ephraim the younger ten thousands, and to Manasseh the elder but thousands, he implies that though in the last mustering of these tribes, and so now when Moses blessed them, the men of Manasseh were many mo then the men of Ephraim, Numb. 26. 34, 37. (whereas in the first mustering there was most of Ephraims tribe, Numb. 1. 33, 35.) yet in processe of time Jacobs prophecy should be accomplished concerning Ephraims excelling his brethren in the numerousnesse of his people, Gen. 48. 19. His younger brother shall be greater then he, and his seed shall become a multitude of nations. Vers. 18. Reoyce, Zebulun, in thy going out; and Issachar, in thy tents.] Here two tribes are blessed together, Zebulun and Issachar: Of Zebulun it is pro∣phecyed that they should be happy in their going out, that is in their going forth to trade in merchandise by shipping, which agrees with that which Jacob also pro∣phecyed concerning this tribe, Gen. 49. 13. Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea, and he shall be for an haven of ships: and of Isachar, that they should be hap∣py in their tents that is, in their quiet life at hom, and in their countrey imploy∣ments of feeding cattel, and tillage. And by joyning both together, Moses gives them to understand, so to make them contented with their severall conditions, that both their severall wayes of living should yield them matter of rejoycing in the goodnesse and bounty of God to them, the tribe of Issachar should be as happy in their staying at home to follow their husbandrie as those of Zebulun to follow their merchandise; and on the other side, to the tribe of Zebulun the rockie sandie sea-shore should yield as plentifull a crop by their merchandise as the rich and at soyl of the men of Issachar should yield to them: whence also it is added, vers. 19. They shall suck of the abundance of the seas, and of treasures hid in the sands. Vers. 19. They shall call the people unto the mountain, there they shall offer sa∣crifices of righteousnesse.] This is a prophecy of their religious thankfulnesse for Gods blessings, that they should duly go to mount Sion to worship the Lord, and should invite their brethren to go along with them. But why is this noted in them as a matter remarkable and commendable, rather then in other the tribes of Israel? Surely because these tribes were seated by the sea-side, in the outmost parts of the land, and being so farre off from the temple at Jerusalem it was the clearer proof of their devotion, zeal, and love to Gods house, that they would not make that an excuse to neglect Gods worship, but would at the times appointed go up to his house, and there offer their sacrifices, sacrifices of righteousnesse, as they are here called, that is just, righteous, and acceptable sacrifices, offered in faith, and accord∣ing to Gods Law. For they shall suck of the abundance of the seas, and of treasures hid in the sands.] This is added to imply both that being inriched by God, they should be the better able to bear the charges of their journey, and of their sacrifices; and like∣wise that Gods bounty to them should inlarge their hearts with the more servent
desire of returning thanks unto him, whereas many men the more they suck in of the wealth of this world, and fill their bellies with this hid treasure, the lesse they regard Gods ordinances, the lesse they care for the breasts of the Churches consola∣tion; it should be farre otherwise with them, for the richer they grew the more zea∣lous and forward they should be in all the duties of Gods worship and service. Vers. 20. And of Gad he said, Blessed be he that enlargeth Gad.] Here Mo∣ses begins with the sonnes of the handmaids, and first with Gad, and in this first clause of Gads blessing is implyed that this tribe should have a large portion in the land, and that God should afterwards enlarge it by further conquests. He dwelleth as a lion, and teareth the arm with the crown of the head.] The arm noteth strength, as the crown of the head, principality; and so hereby is meant that as a lion teareth sometime in one place, sometime in others, so this tribe should divers wayes spoyl their enemies, and that none should be so strong or excellent but Gad should overcome them: a great blessing indeed to them who had their in∣heritance without Jordan, and bordering upon their enemies. One remarkable instance we have of their prowesse, 1. Chron. 5. 18, 19, 21, 22. Vers. 21. And he provided the first part for himself, because there in a porti∣on of the law-giver was he seated.] This first part was the countrey of Sihon, which was first conquered. It is said that the tribe of Gad provided this for them∣selves, because they desired it of Moses for their inheritance, and thereupon offered to go up armed in the forefront of the battel before their brethren, Numb. 32. 17. and yet withall it is said they were seated in a portion of the law-giver, because God by Moses the law-giver gave them this for their inheritance, Numb. 32. 33. And Moses gave unto them, even to the children of Gad▪ and to the children of Reuben, and unto half the tribe of Manasseh, the sonnes of Joseph, the kingdome of Sihon King of the Amorites, &c. And he came with the heads of the people, he executed the justice of the Lord and his judgements with Israel.] Moses speaks here prophetically of a thing to come, as if it had been done already; and his meaning is, that this tribe should with the Princes and Captains of the people go forth armed before their brethren, and execute Gods judgements upon the Canaanites. Vers. 22. Dan is a lions whelp, he shall leap from Bashan.] That is, look as a lion comes rushing suddenly out of the forrests and dennes in Bashan, and sei∣seth upon those that passe by ere they thought on any danger; so should the Danits leap unexpectedly out of their forts, and fastnesses, and secret places, where they lay in ambush, and destroy their enemies when they look not for them. It was not therefore because Bashan was a part of Dans territories that it is said here, he shall leap from Bashan (for Bashan was not Dans possession but Manassehs, Deut. 3. 1▪ 3. All Bashan, being the kingdome of Og, gave I unto the half-trib of Manasseh, saith Moses) but it was because Bashan was a place where were many lions, to whom in regard of their sudden assaults made upon their enemies the children of Dan are here compared. Vers. 23. O Naphtali, satisfied with favour, and full with the blessing of the Lord, possesse thou the West and the South.] In the first clause of this prophet∣call
blessing▪ O Naphtali, satisfied with favour, and full with the blessing of the Lord, Moses foreshews the fruitfulnesse of the soil wherein this tribe should have their dwelling: for as Jacob did in this regard compare this tribe to a hind let loose that hath a large walk, scope and libertie, and so in choice of pastures finds plenti of feeding, Gen. 49. 21. so Moses here explaining that Metaphor breaks forth in∣to an admiration at the consideration of the great plentie and abundance of good blessings which their inheritance should yield them: but withall seth such an ex∣pression to set forth this, Naphtali, satisfied with favour, and full with the blessings of the Lord, as might plainly implie, first, that their blisse should conist not so much in their having such plentie and fulnesse of those outward blessings, as in their being fully satisfied therewith; and that the thing which should yield such satisfaction to their souls was not so much the blessings themselves, as the singular love and favour of God, whereof to them these blessings were pledges. As for that second clause, possesse thou the West and the South, either thereby was signified that their lot of inheritance should fall to them in the South-west part of the land, and the sea lying on the West, this might also implie that besides the other rich commodities of their land they should also enjoy the advantage of merchandising too; or else it is onely added to signifie the large extent of their portion, which should strech it self farre out both Westward and Southward. Vers. 24. Lt Asher be blessed with children, &c.] Three things are in this verse foretold concerning this tribe: first, that they should be blessed with children, whereby may be meant not onely the multitude but also the strength, healthful∣nesse, beauty and comelinesse of their children: secondly, they should be of a meek, gentle, lovely and amiable disposition, and should accordingly be greatly beloved by all that dwelt about them, let him be acceptable to his brethren; and indeed it is God that énclines the hearts of men to love those that are most lovely: and thirdly, that their countrey should exceedingly abound with oyl and other good things, which is expressed figuratively, and let him dip his feet in oyl: much accord∣ing to that speech of Job, chap. 29. 6. When I washed my steps with butter, and the rock poured me out rivers of oyl: and indeed hereto agrees that which Jacob also foretold concerning this tribe, Gen. 49. 20. Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royall dainties. Vers. 25. Thy shees shall be iron and brasse, and as thy dayes so shall thy strength be.] In this verse two things more are foretold concerning Asher: first, that his land should be full of mines of iron and brasse and other metals▪ for that is intend∣ed in the first clause, whether we reade it, as it is in the margin, under thy shoes shall be iron and brasse, or as it is in our text, thy shoes shall be iron and brasse; secondly, that they should continue healthfull and strong even unto old age, and as thy dayes so shall thy strength be, that is, all thy dayes thy strength shall continue. Vers. 26. There is none like unto the God of Jesurun, who rideth upon the hea∣ven in thy help, &c.] Concerning this word Jesurun, see Deut. 32. 15. As before Moses blessed the severall tribes, so here he begins to set forth the happinesse of all the people, even all the tribes in generall, and that for the speciall interest that they have in God, who hath all the creatures at his command for their help: for thence
is that phrase of Gods riding upon the heavens in their help, whereby is implyed first, that look as a man turns and winds the horse he rides on which way he ple∣seth, so doth the Lord rule the heavens and all the host of them; and secondly, that when Gods people are in any distresse, and present help is necessary for them, God will come in to their aid with as much speed as the heavens move. Vers. 28. Israel shall then dwell in safety alone.] See the note on Numb. 23. 9. The fountain of Jacob shall be upon a land of corn and wine.] That is, the peo∣ple which flow out of Jacob, as out of a well or fountain, shall be seated in a fruit∣full land: so that fountain is here used for a river or stream issuing from a fountain, as Psal. 104. 10. He sendeth the springs (or fountains) which runne among the hills; and waters often signify peoples, Rev. 17. 15. The waters which thou sawest, where the where sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes of nations and tongues. And thus this phrase is used▪ Psal. 68. 26. Blesse ye God in the congregations, even the Lord from the fountain of Israel; and Isa. 48. 1. Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Ju∣dah. Indeed the Hebrew word here translated the fountain, doth sometime signify an eye, in which sense some interpret this place, that the eye of Jacob should look upon a land of corn and wine, &c. Vers. 29. And who is the sword of thy excellency.] God is here said to be the sword of Israels excellency, because it was by his fighting for them that he became famous and excellent above others for martiall exploits. And thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee.] That is, they shall pretend to be friends for fear, when thy are enemies in their hearts; or it may be meant that the boasting of their enemies in the help of their idol-gods, and their vilifying the strength of Israel, through the assistance of their God, should in the conclusion be discovered to be lies. CHAP. XXXIV. Vers. 1. ANd Moses went up from the plains of Moab unto the mountai of Nbo, &c.] Look as the labourer, when the night comes, goes to his chamber that he may lay himself down to rest; so did Moses, at the commandmen of the Lord, go up to mount Nebo to die. And the Lord shwed him all the land of Gilead unto Dan, &c.] That is, he shewed him the whole land of Canaan: for Gilead was on the outside of Jordan, and given to Reuben, Gad and Manasseh, Deut. 3. 12, 13. Dan which wa called also Leshem, Josh. 19. 47. or Laish, Judg. 18. 27, 29. was a city in the furthest part of the land Northward, where also the portion of Naphtali lay: the land of Ephraim and Manasseh was in the midst of Canaan in Samaria, the land of Judah was in the Southern part of the countrey, and the midland sea, called the utmost sea, vers. 2. was the Western coast: this view therefore which Moses had of the whole land was by the marvellous work and grace of God toward his servant, for by the ordinary power of nature it was not possible that in one place, and at one time, he should behold so large a countrey; and therefore God saith to Moses, ver. 4.
I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes. And this doubtlesse God did for him, to comfort him, and to allay the bitternesse of death, by shewing him before his death what a rich pleasant and fruitfull countrey God had provided for his af∣licted people: for though he were never like to set his foot upon it, yet it must needs do him good to think that Israel, the people whom e loved so dearly, should enjoy so fair an habitation. Vers. 5. So Moses the servant of the Lord dyed there, &c.] Though Moses brought the Israelites to the river Jordan, yet into the land of Canaan he might not carry them, that honour was reserved for Joshua or Jesus the sonne of Nun; and so it is also spiritually. The law may fit us and prepare us for Christ, but it can never bring us into possession of the heavenly Canaan, that honour is peculi∣arly reserved for our Lord Jesus Christ, who by his own bloud opened a way into that holy place, having obtained eternall redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12. and is now gone before thither to prepare a place for us. Vers. 6. And he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab, &c.] That is, Je∣hovah buried him, or Mchael, Jude 9. Now this buriall of Moses by Christ was a type of Christs abolishing the ceremoniall law given by Moses; for it is he that hath abolished the law, and the ordinances, he hath blotted out the handwriting of ordinances, that was against us which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, Coloss. 2. 14. But no man knoweth of his sepulchre unt this day.] There was never any of Gods Worthyes deserved the honour of being carryed to the grave with the solem∣nity of a mournfull funerall better then Moses did, who had brought the Israelites out of Egypt, and had fourty years together endured so much for their sakes in go∣verning them, and leading them through the wildernesse; yet lest the Israelites should in a preposterous zeal yield any superstitious honour either to his dead body, or sepulchre, the Lord would not suffer them to bury him, but miraculously con∣veyed away his dead body, and buried it, nor ever suffered them to know where he was buried. Indeed it is said, Jude 9. That Michael the Archangel contended with the devil, and disputed about the body of Moses, whereby it appears that the devil would have had the place of his buriall known, that it might have been an occasion of idolatry, but the Lord prevented this mischief. And besides, by burying the dead body of Moses in an unknown place, lest the Israelites should take up his dead body again in an unwarrantable manner, and carry it with them into the land of Canaan, the Lord Christ was pleased to signify, though more obscurely, that he hath so abolished the legall ordinances, that they must be buried in eternall oblivi∣on, and never be looked after nor minded any more. And indeed they that go about to revive any of those ceremonies of the law, their work is no other in Gods eyes then the raking up of Moses dead body, which the Lord would not have to be taken p again from the sepulchre wherein he laid it. Vers. 9. And Joshua the sonne of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdome; for Moses had laid his hands upon him.] See Numb. 27. 18. FINIS.
