J898 18367910 107389
The Jolly Welsh-Woman. Who drinking at the Sign of the Crown in London, found a Spring In her Mugg, for Joy of which hur Sung the praise of Old England, resolving never to return to Wales again. Tune of, Hey brave Popery, &c. Licensed according to Order. crown THere was an Old woman came out of North Wales, And up to fair London her merrily Sails, It was for her pleasure Cuts-plutter-a-nails, Sing O brave Welsh Woman, Jolly brave VVelsh Woman, Delicate VVelsh Woman O. As soon as hur came into fair London town, Hur went to an Ale-house the sign of the Crown, In order to tipple hur streight did sit down, Sing O brave VVelsh woman, &c. Hur being a weary and willing to rest, Hur would not be one of the worst of the Guest, But calld for a pitcher of Ale of the best, Sing O brave VVelsh woman, &c. The Tapster then giving the jugg in her hand, The Welsh woman streight on hur feet she did stand, And drank a good Health to hur King of England, Sing O brave Welsh Woman, &c. Now while her had gotten the jugg at her snout, And being both lusty, couragious and stout, Hur gave it a tug, 'till her swigg'd it half out, Sing O rare Welsh woman, &c. The Tapster he see her to be of that strain, And how she did tipple the Liquor amain, Thought he I will fill up thy pitcher again, Sing O brave Welsh Woman, Jolly brave Welsh Woman, Delicate Welsh Woman O. The jugg hur had plac'd on the Bench by her side, To which the young tapster did cunningly slide, And fill'd it as if it had been a full tide, Sing O brave Welsh Woman, Jolly brave Welsh Woman, Delicate Welsh Woman O. Now her did not know how her pitcher did fill, Therefore her did say with a merry good will, Here's Tipple and drink, and her Pitcher full still? Sing O brave England, Jolly brave England, Delicate England O. The praise of this Nation Cuts-plu her will sing, Hur never had known such a wonderful thing, The juggs in this land has a delicate spring, sing O brave England, &c. Once more she saluted the lips of her mugg, And gave it a hearty and dextrous tugg, The Tapster once more he did fill up her jugg, sing O brave England, &c. The Liquor up into her Noddle did steel, The Floor with hur feet then hur hardly could feel, So that hur began for to stagger and reel, sing O brave Welsh Woman, &c. Hur swore hur would never to Wales any more, For here hur has tasted Rich liquor good store, The like in all Wales hur had ne'er drank before, sing O brave England, &c. Hereafter hur never will honour the Leek, This was the best Nation as e're hur did seek, Here's liquor of life that will make a Cat speak, sing O brave England, &c. In praise of this liquor hur Cap up she flung, For why it Created an Eloquent Tongue, Besides it will make an Old VVoman look young, sing O brave Nappy Ale, Delicate Nappy Ale, Dainty fine Nappy Ale O. Printed for P. Brooksby, J. Deacon, J. Blare, and J. Back.
