L1275 12940453 95866
LESTRANGE'S NARRATIVE OF THE PLOT. Set Forth for the EDIFICATION Of His Majesties LIEGE-PEOPLE. LONDON, Printed by I. B. for Hen. Brome at the Gun at the West-End of S. Pauls, 1680.
L'ESTRANGE'S NARRATIVE, &c. IN This Age of Narratives, We should do with our Books, methinks, as Vittlers do with their Ord'na∣ries; every Authour hang up a Table at's Door, and say, Here you may have a very good Narrative, for Three-pence, a Groat, or Sixpence, or Hgher if you plase or we have 'em of all Sorts and Sizes: The only Danger is, the Popping of Catt and Dogs Flesh upon us, for Cony, and Venison. For take 'em one with another, at the Common rate of Narratives, there's hardly One of Five that will passe Mustr. But what is a NARRATIVE? you'l say. A Narrative is a Relation of something that may be seen, felt, heard, or understood: Or otherwise; It is a Relation of something that Cannot be either seen, felt, heard, or understood: For we have Our Narratives of things Visible and Invisible; Possible and Impossible; True and False: Our Narratives of Fact, an our Narratives of Imagination. In One word: There was neer any thing Said, Done, or Thought of, Since the Creation; nor so much as the Fansy of any thing, tho' it was ne∣ver Said, Done, or Thought of, but it will Bear a Narrative. So that the only point will be, out of This Infinite Diver∣sity of Narratives, Which is the Narrative here in qstion. NOW the Narrative here in question, is the Narra∣tive of The PLOT; but then there will arise Another Question; Of WHAT Plot? For there are as many sorts of Plots as there are of Narratives. There are Plts of Passion, and Plots of Interest; Plots General and Par∣ticuar; Publick and Private; Forreign and Domestque; Ecclesiasticall and Civill: There are Plots to Udermine Governments, and Plots to Support them; Plots Simple,
and Counter Plots; Plots to make Plots; and Plots to Spoil Plots; Plots to give Credit to Sham-Plots; and Plots again to Baffle, and Discountenance Reall Ones: Plots Jesuiticall, and Phanatique; Plots Great and Small; High and Low; In short, There is not any thing under the Sun, that may serve us either for Pleasure, or Convenience, but we have a Plot upon't: And the Master-Plot of all, is the Plot how to get the Money out of One Pocket into Another; as is well Observ'd by one of the Antients. For what is it that sets all Trades and Professions a work, Nay and all wicked∣nesse too; As Murther, Calumny, Oppression, Perjury, Sub∣ornation, Corruption, &c. But a Plot upon Mony? NOW to come to my point. This Discourse is not a Wild and Rambling Narrative of some Indefinite Plot, that no body knows what to make of, or where to find it: But it is a Narrative (by way of Excellence) of THE Plot: that is to say, the Capitall and Hellish Plot which is now in Agitation, for the Destruction of Our Prince, Re∣ligion and Government, to the Horrour and Amazement of all the Reformed Catholiques in Christendom. I call them Reformed Catholiques, rather then Protestants, because I take the Catholique to be the Antienter Family of the Two: The Denomination being used in the Primitive Church; and not only to denote a Generality, or Universality of Profes∣sion: but also to Distinguish Orthodox, and Obedient Christi∣ans, from Schismatiques, and Heretiques. 'Tis cast in my Dish I know, as a Reproach, that I will not own my self to be a Protestant. Now so far as Protestant is a Catholique, or as the Church of England is That which They call Prote∣stant, 'tis all one to me, whether I passe for a Reformed Catholique, a Church of England-man, or a Protestant. But when Heresie, and Schism comes to shelter it self under the Cover of Protestantism, (which is but too common a Case) I have no Ambition to be accounted any of those Protestants. So that my Crime is only that I am a Church-of-England-Protestant. But to return to my Theme.
LET the Reader take notice, that as these Papers are only a Narrative of that Plot which is notoriously known, and distinguished from all other Plots, by the Emphasis of THE Plot: So it is L'Estrange's Narrative of That Plot; from whom no more Light can reasonably be expected then what arises out of matters within the Compasse of His Observation. He does not pretend, either directly, or indirectly, to have been Entrusted by any of the Priests, or Jesuits; Or to have been present at any of their Bloody and Desperate Consults; or Privy to any of their Letters, Messages, or Commissions: So that We can say nothing at all to the Particulars that have been given in by the Kings Witnesses: Or if we Could, the doing of it would signify no more then the holding of a Candle to the Sun: For whoever carefully peruses Their Writings and Depositions, compares their Testimonies; and yet doubts of the Plot, is litt better, certainly, then Seal'd up under the spirit of Blindness, and Delusion. Let no body therefore expect from These Sheets, any Repetition of what the Kings Evidencs have Delivered, and Deposed with so much Solemnity all∣ready; but rather repair to the Memorialls that they have committed to the Publique, which are many, and Copious, for a Full, and Finall Satisfaction. And in the mean time I shall apply my self to the making out of the Plot here in Question, my own way, (which, in strictnesse of spea∣king is not so properly a Plot, as an Intrigue.) THE Difference betwixt a Plot, and an Intrigue, I take to be This; a Plot may be Solitary, as when a man con∣trives or casts about with himself how to get a Dinner, (for the purpose) an Office, a Pension, &c. He brings his Ends about by his Own Wits, as by Cogging, Wheedling, Hectoring, Swearing, Lying, or the like, as best makes for his purpose; but an Intrigue is alwas Social, and me∣nag'd by Intelligence and Confederacy; So that it seems to be a kinde of a Plot with Complices, and yet it is not ab∣solutely That neither. For the Critiques will have a Plot
to import only a General Resolution, or Agreement upon some Common End; and an Intrigue to signifie a Certain Artifice, or Mystery in the manner of bringing it about. Of Intrigues, some are direct Conspiracies; as where a Designe is Govern'd by the Contrivance, Advice, and Consent; and Emproved to the Common Advantage and Behoof of all the Parties therein concern'd. Of This Kinde, were the late In∣trigues of the Fanatiques against the Government; where, as they all contributed to the Ruine of the Pubique, so did they all, in some measure, Partake of the Quarry. There are Other Intrigues which are not so much a rmal Confe∣deracy as a Blinde Co-operation of sevral Part es, toward the gaining of such or such an End, by woking upon the Passions and Weaknesses of one anothe, without e∣ver Concerting the matter betwixt them▪ and This is the Quality of the Plot whereof I am now about to Treat. WE have been told abundantly of the Popish Plot, The Booksellers Ware houses are Cram'd, and there Stalls charg'd with the Memorials of it; All our Courts of Justice, and Journals of State bear witness to it. It has set all Tongus and Pens agoing; and all Christendom Rings of it; So that since nothing can be added to what is allready delivered upon This Single Subject, my business will be only to take up the Story where the great Evidences of the Truth of it have been pleased to let it fall. AFTER a Nice and Particuar Deduction of the mayn Plot, they do unanimously Close upon This Assertion; that it was a Jesuiticall Influence that Ruin'd the Late King, and Irritated the Faction: and that it is a Popish Ferment still at This day, that puts all the Schsms into motion. And for Poof thereof, Doctr Oates refers us to the In∣stance of the Four Jesuits, and the Dominican that ming∣led with the Fifth Mnarchy men, for the Burnin of Lon∣don; (Deposition 3.) And to the Care that as taken for Tampering Scotland into a Rebellion as apars in eve∣ral Other Parts of his Depositions. The Dr. having made
it out upon Oath that the Papists make use of the Fana∣tiques to compass their Own Ends upon the Government; So soon as he has done This, he gives over the poynt. It must be My part now, to Tack my own Observations to the Doctors; and, by shewing, on the Otherhand, what Advantages the Schsmatiques make likewise of the Papists, for the Compassig of Their Ends, to lay open the Effects of so dangerous a Complication. This Addition we must take for granted would have been supply'd by the Dr. himself, both as a oyall Subject to his Prince, and as a True Son of the Establisht Church, if matters of grater Moment had not taken him off at Mid-way: So that in Truth, This is rather a Continuation of the Drs. Narrative, then a Com∣position of my own. We are not to imagine that These In∣terests are Ty'd up by any Instrument of Compact, or Co∣venant; to Joyn in a League Offensive against the Govern∣ment; but our mischief arises from a Resemblance of their Principles and not from any Correspondence of Understand∣ing betwixt them. And yet while they seem to be blow∣ing up and Countermining one another, they do really de∣stroy Us; and it is the Church in the Middle that Suffers by the Distemper of the Two Extremes. NOW though I cannot allow it upon any Trms that they help one another by Consent; nothing can be plainer yet then that while they play, each of them their Own Game, the One still leads into the Others hand. If Popery Influences Schsm, That Schism Slides as naturally into Popery, as Motion from One place of Rest tends to another. There's the Principle espoused allready, and the Rest is only the Changing of the Name; The very Unfixing of a man is half the work done allready; for he is so far advanc'd up∣on his way toward a new Settlement. It is a thing worthy of Note, the different manner of dealing with the Church of Rome, betwixt the Episcopall Clergy, and the Non Con∣formist; The ormer proceed by Dint of Argument, the O∣toer only by Opprobrious Clamour, and Reviling; and or
one fair Blow at the Pope, they make a hundred Rude ones at the Bishops; and (which is yet a fouler Scandal) the most Eminent, and Venerable Champions that ever put Pen to Paper in the Defence of the Reformed Communion, have been the Persons which they have still singled out for the Subject of their Exemplary Cruelty, and Rigor. which shews that their (Pretended) Quarrell is to the Name rather then to the Opinion. I call it a Pretended one: For if they Quarrell in Earnest with the Name of Popery, they fall foul upon the Best Friend they have in the World: For it is That single Pretext that Supports their Cause. It is observable also on the Other side; that not∣withstanding all their Fierce and Virulent Exclamations a∣gainst Priests and Jesuits, the Church of Rome does not vouchsafe them so much as one syllable in Return; and the Reason is This; The Conventicles are doing the Pa∣pists business to their hands; and the Enlarging of the Schism is the readyest way imaginable for the bringing in of Pope∣ry: So that it is but Commuting a Real Service for a little Dirty Language. BUT is it True then, that the Popish Emissaryes are so busy, and bear so great a sway among Our Dissenters? Yes (says Dr. Oates in his Dedicatory to the King) They were the First Authours and Contrivers of the Late Unnatural War; and of his Late Majestyes Unspeakable Sufferings and Barba∣rous Usage. It was These (says the Dr.) that brought him to his end, &c. And again, They were in most, if not all the Councells that Contriv'd his Ruine. Two Jesuits (Simmons and Compton) were to pay the Thousand Pound promised to the Discoverer of the King after the Battle of Worcester, and Milton was a Known Frequenter of a Popish Club; Lam∣bert a Papist of above Thirty years standing. What promises (says the Dr. again) did they make to Cromwell after his Majestyes Escape, to perswade the French King for Our So∣vereigns Banishment out of France?
AND is not This now as clear an Evidence as a body would wish, to prove the Industry, the Power, and the Malice of That Restlesse Party; and to shew how they were In at all Destructive Plots and Councells? Was it not a strange zeal too, that when Cromwell was Master of the Three Kingdoms, and had so great an Interest at Stake; the King might have Scap'd yet for want of a Price upon his Head, if Father Simmons and Compton had not engaged for the Thousand pound Reward that was promised to Him that would deliver him up? Nay they were fain to Quick∣en Cromwell himself, to get the King Banisht out of France. Which shews First, that the Papists trusted more to their Power with Cromwell, though a Schismatique, then to their Power with the French King, tho' a Roman Catholique. And Secondly, That they thought the French King would do more for a Schisme, then for the Holy Church it self: Which Implies a High Degree of Mutuall Confidence be∣twixt Their Priests and Our Dissenters. IT is a Common Objection in This Case, that the Dr. is too young to speak many of these things upon Know∣ledge; and that it would have been well, if he had pro∣duced some Historicall Authority in Confirmation of the Re∣ports, that Lambert was a Papist, and Milton a Frequen∣ter of a Popish Club: And so in other like Cases. This is a doubt easily Resolved, for the thing it self being a Pri∣vacy in its own Nature, It was only Proper for the Regi∣stries of the Society, and not of a quality to be Inserted into Our Publique Annals. The Dr. tells us Further, Pag. 29.) that Father Moor and Brown were sent into Scotland, with Instructions to carry themselves like Non conformist Mini∣sters, and to Preach to the Disaffected Scots, &c. He tells us likewise (Pag. 67.) of Seditious Preachers, and Cate∣chists, set up, sent out, maintained, and directed what to Preach in their Own, or Other Private Conventices, and Field meetings, &c. Now This, I am told, is no Proof of the thing Done; but only of a Proposition and Design for
the doing of it. But yet we find in the Drs. Reflexions upon the Late Times, that the thing was there really done; and Pag. 8. that Blundel did actually teach Treason in severall places of London. NOW if it be True, (As who dares question what the D. Averrs?) that the Papists managed the Separatists in the late War; and that all Our Miseries proceeded from the Influence of Their Councells; and that they are at This day, as Active, and as Powerfull as ever: It follows, that the Dnger is as great No, as ever it was; and that there is no security for his Nation, so long as the Agents for Ppery have This Retreat. We should never have known that the Papists had had so great a hand in Our late Broils; and in the Counsell, and Execution of the Murther of the Late King▪ if Dr. Oates had not Discover'd it. For the Late King himself knew nothing of it and all the Memori∣alls we have of those Times, even rom the most Popular Writers, are wholly Silent in it, in such sort as we find it, Here to be represented. There was a Seditious Cla∣mor, I remember, against an Army of Papists, (as they call'd them.) that were on the Kings side; but not One word of a Ppst that was to be found among the Schisma∣tiqes, in their Conventicles▪ Nor should I readily believe the Story at large, as it is now Reported, if any man but Dr. Oates had said it. I have run through the List of the Reicies I have had Opportunities of knowing the Prin∣cipl men of the Party and tracing all their Committees; and I cannot say that I found any one man upon That Roll, whm I so much as suspected for a Papist. So long as the work went Smoothly on▪ they call'd themselves (I re∣member) a Covenanting, a Fasting and a Praying People: But so soon as ever the Wind Turn'd, the Godly Party was presently Transform'd; and those that I took before for Dissenting Protestants, are now made appear to have been, the greater Part of them, Priests, and Jesuits. It seems to be somewhat Unequally Divided, that the Schisma∣tiques
should have the Benefit, and the Papists Support all the Scandall of the Rebellion; Would it not be better to let them fairly share the Profit and the Losse, betwixt them? And That's the Drs. sense too; for he does not deny but that the Separatists Acted Their Parts also: tho' only as men Imposed upon, and Outwitted, and under the Guidance, and Direction of the Papists. I shall now Appeal to any man: that has either Seen, or diligently read the Transactions of Those Times, whe∣ther or no he could ever have imagined that such a world of Priests, and Papists had worm'd themselves into the Councells and Congregations of That Faction, as the Dr. now Assures us there did. And what was the business, but This? The Papists carry'd the matter so Close, and lookt so like Schismatiques, that it was morally Impossi∣ble to discern the One from the Other, Now upon the Admission of the same Mixture, and Danger, at present, and the same difficulty likewise of distinguishing a Disguised Papist from an Outlying Protestant; we are lost unless we absolutely Clear those Kennells, since there is no Pu∣ging of them. And the means of doing it, is Fair, Ho∣nest, and Obvious; and I would sa, (if I durst open my Mouth so wide) of ABSOLUTE NECESSITY too. Let but the Laws be vigorously put in Execution, and the great Work is done. We shall not need to declaim upon the Probable Inconveniences that will arise from a longer Suf∣ferance of This License: But we shall in good time shew the Approaches they have already made, toward the Go∣vernment; and that the Non-Conformists make as good use of the Papists, One way, as the Papists do of the Non-Conformists, Another. THE Encrease of the Schism is the True measure of the Churches Detriment; for the One Looses just as much as the Other Gets. But the greatest mischief of all is the Dissolu∣tion of Order; For it is not only the Double Losse and Dis∣advantage of so many Friends, degenerated into so many
Enemies; but the Loosening of the Band makes all fly to pieces; And turns That Community into a Multitude, which, ere while, was a Government. And This Dissolu∣tion does highly gratify our Adversaryes, on Both hands; for Once out of Discipline, we are as bad as out of Pro∣tection: and in the Condition of a routed Army, when Twenty men in Good Order Value a Thousand Fugitives; For Or Strength, as well as Our Reputation leaves us with our Union; and the Bulwark of the Reformation is left naked, and without either Honour, or Defence. If This should come to be the Case, what can we expect, but either to be at the Mercy of a Forreigner, or for want of a Common Enemy to become a Prey to one another? It is as natural, This, (though we know it upon Experiment too) as it is for one Grain of Sand to fall from Another, for want of a Morter, or Ciment to bind them together: Or as it is for poynt blank Contradictions to Crosse one Another. And when the day of Controversy comes, what will all the Fractions of Dissenting Protestants signify, more, then so many Loos Atoms that will need a more miraculous Con∣course of Accidents then ever the Philosopher dreamt of▪ to Jumble them into a Body. I will not deny but that they may so far Unite as to make head against a Common Danger; but they must live then like Salamanders, all∣ways in the fire; as being by their very Principles in a perpetual State of War; Impatient of one another, and consequently Encapable of any Political Establishment. He that thinks otherwise needs only look behind him to be convinc'd; where he will finde, that thorough all the late Turns and Changes of State, the Prevailing Party did still set up for it self, to the Exclusion of all Others: Endeavouring to Erect a New Government, by Order, and Restraint, out of the Ruines of the Old one, which they had destroy'd by Liberty, and Confusion. How wretch∣ed now is the Condition of those people who by dividing themselves, (upon meer Capricio's) from Regular Societys,
do in effect, cut themselves off from their Claim to the Ordinary Comforts of Providence, and Nature; turn∣ing Peace it self into a Curse, which to all men in their Right Wits is undoubtedly the greatest of Blessings. AFTER a long, and I hope not (altogether) an Im∣pertinent Preface, I shall now draw neer to my Text. The Kings Wittnesses have given Evidence of a Popish Conspi∣racy; and not only of a Conspiracy carry'd on among Themselves, but of a Practice also upon the Schismatiques, by casting of Scruples into their Heads; by Instilling dan∣gerous Positions: by Preaching, in fine, & Catechising among them in Disguises; to Embroil the Government. Now let the World bear me Witness that I have nothing at all to do with the Original Plot; or the Priests Artifices of Moulding, and Cajolling the Dissenters any further then in a resignation to Truth and Authority: My purpose being only to set forth the Emprovements that have been made, under the Cover of One Plot, toward the Advancing of Another. I shall Date This my Narrative from the Trans∣migration of the Conspiracy; and so carry it on through all the steps of its Progression; as the Manner of Representing matters, the Probable Intent, and Effect of That way of Proceeding; The Translating of a Popular Odium, from the Papists, to the Government, and so mounting by de∣grees from a Zeal against Popery, to a Sedition against the State. IT is no Lessening of This Execrable Plot, to say that Subjects ought dutyfully to acquiesce in the Resolutions of their Superiours: And that all Clamorous Appeals from the Magistrate to the Multitude are only so far pardonable, as the Abundance of Good will may help to excuse the want of Moderation and Discretion. So that a great part of those Fierce and Unmannerly Transports that have been employ'd upon This Unhappy Occasion, and without any regard, either to Quality or Sex, or, in truth, to the very Foundations of Christian Charity, might have been
much better let alone; since they serve only to enflame the Vulgar, without any sort of avail to the Cause in question. It is no better, then either a Translating of the Judicature from the King and his Courts of Justice to the Rabble; or else a Complaint to the People brought in with a side-winde, against the Government; which are two dangerous Points; striking at his Majesties Sovereignty the One way, and at his Reputation the Other: And yet all This is Tolerable, if it goes off so; and without blowing up a Passion into a Designe. But we shall better understand the Drift of it by the Sequele. If it rests Here, it is only a laudable Zeal Ill menag'd: For it is not the Cut∣ting Strictures of a sharp Tongue or a Virulent Pen, but the Sober and Impassionate Sentence of Law; that by Prisons, Axes, and Gibbets, determines These Controversies. In one word, let them vent their Indignation against the Prin∣ciples and Practices of the Church of Rome, in what Terms they please, and make Popery as Odious as they can, provided that they do not encourage Tumults; and that they contain their Passions within the Bounds of Truth and Justice. If they once passe those Limits, Knowingly, and by Consent, 'tis no longer Zeal, but Confederacy. This Caution of keeping so strictly to the Rules of Truth, and Justice, has a respect, First, to the manner of representing both Persons, and Things; and Secondly, to the matter of Fact. Now if to the Intemperance of Words there be added a Malitious Aggravation of Circumstances, with Fiction, and Imposture over and above; 'tis to be fear'd that all is not right at the bottom. I shall be here encounter'd with a Reproof, for being so Tender, forsooth, of the Reputation of the Papists; and yet any man that is not Intoxicated with Popular Fumes, or led Hood-winkt into a False Conception of things, must necessarily see, that my great Concernment is for the Honour and Dig∣nity of Christians; It being our Duty, to proceed accord∣ing to the measures of Good Faith, and Justice, even with
the worst of Infidels. But people you'l say may be mista∣ken, and give Credit to False Reports, without either Ma∣lice or Designe. This is Confest, and none of those Er∣rours shall be put to account. If you ask me, To what End? Or, What's the Benefit of Imposing these Flams upon the Nation? It is easily Answer'd, First, that the Plying of the Multitude perpetually with Allarms, and Terrors, does in a manner turn their very Brains, take away their Judgements; and render them fit Instruments for the boldest, and most Unwarrantable Undertakings. So soon as they are once touch't in the Crown with These Conceipts: 'tis but Sadling their Noses with a pair of State-Spectacles, and you may perswade them upon New-Market Heath that they are Tumbling down Dover Cliff. Secondly, the very Persos that so artificially make the People Sick, are to reap the Profit of the Cure; which is such anther kind of Remedy as if a man should beat out his Brains for fear of the Headach. Briefly, they do first make the people Md, and then by the Consent of the Madmen they themselves ar mde Governours of the Bedlam. But without any me Desanting upon the Good or the Evill the Grounds or Consquences of Mat∣ters; we shall now deliver some few Instances to our pre∣sent purpose. AT the time when Mr. Powell the Merchant was so long missing, what a Rabble of Formal Relations went about then, of his being Tepann'd a Shipboard, in what Company; what Mony in his Pocket▪ what Forebodings of his Fate: and all terminating in a peremptory Conclusi∣on that he as Murther'd by the Papists; and not so few as five and Twenty or Thirty Pamphlets Trumpetting these Tidings all over the Kingdom. And yet not one Syllable of Truth in't at last. What a Noyse was there about Sir Harry Titchbourn's House: Even to the very Catalogue of the Arms that
were There taken: as 166. Muskets, 54. Case of Pistols, 37. Saddles, 47. Daggers, 2. Barrells of Bullets, 3. Bun∣dles of Match; Letters sent expresse to Certify the Truth of the Story; and Copies of them dispersed presently at St. Albans, and elsewhere, without any Colour in the World for the Report. And so for the Herse full of Arms that was Intercepted at Banbury, the Hampers of Fire balls that were found in the Savoy, and Somerset-house; which were only certain Rockets, Serpents, and o∣ther Artificiall Fire-works which Mr. Choqueux had pub∣liquely prepar'd for the Entertainment os a Solemn Festi∣val: And yet all these Shams were blown up and down the Kingdom, by News-letters and Printed Libells, with as much Confidence as if they had been Articles of Faith; and no doubt of it, but many Thousands of his Maje∣sties good Subjects believe them to This day, for want of being better enformed. What a Bustle there was a∣bout Mr. Langhorns being Bury'd in the Temple, and what Remarks upon the Government for shewing That Countenance to Papists? And upon the persons also that Assisted at That Funeral; when all This while, there was no more in the Case then only the Body of a Gentleman that dy'd in Holburn, and was There Interr'd, upon the night to the day of Mr. Langhorns Execution. THE History of Bedingfields being privately Con∣vey'd out of the Gate house, and a Dead Body left in his place, past so Current, that Sir William Waller himself (tho' he perhaps could smell a Jesuit as far as another bo∣dy) took a long Journy into the North upon't, to catch the wrong Bedingfield. The Circumstances of that Ad∣venture would be too Comicall for This place. We could tell you the Conduct of the whole Stratagem, and what names here at London went into the Black Book for not believing it. A man would really blesse himself to see the Romances, the Glosses, and the Scurrilous Buffoneries that were published by the Ribald Scriblers here about the Town, upon This Subject.
BUT then, the landing of Forty Thousand French upon the Ile of Purbeck, shook the very Foundations of the Earth: The Factions drew presently into Cabals, upon the Tidings of it, with Horrible and Contumelious Re∣flections upon Those in Authority, as Parties to the Conspiracy. At Coventry they brake up the Market up∣on the News on't; and the Common people Immedi∣ately divided into Knots, and Consultations; some of them coming very Fayrly to This Resolution, that there was no way but cutting the Papists Throats, to hinder them from Joyning. But This Advice was soon Contradicted, and so the Mischief went no farther: Who knows what This Invention might have produc'd, if the Credit of it had continued but four and twenty Hours longer? THE most Formidable Story of All, is the Conspiracy of the Prentices: and there was such Work made with Capt. Tom, as if the Grand Seignior had been powring down Highgate Hill with a hundred and fifty thousand men at's heels. There were so many Thousands of them upon the List by Tale and most of them Papists too; An account of what Contributions to the Charge, (alas!) of a Three-penny or Groat-Clubb; whose Throats were to be Cut; and through what Constables Teritoryes they were to take their March; and This Scandal upon the Body of this Loyal, and Honourable City, exposed in Ballads and Libells by every rascally Pamphletier. And what was all This mighty matter at last, but a parcell of good Jolly Ladds that had been busy at the burning of the Pope, and prevail'd upon to set their hands to the Petition that was then afoot? These Blades, finding that the Petition had given Offence, propounded the doing something on the Other Side too, that might shew they were neither Fa∣natiques, nor Papists; and so they gave publique Notice in Thompsons Intelligence of their Intentions upon the An∣niversary of his Majestys Restauration to burn the Rump. The First time perhaps that ever a Conspiracy against
the Government was notified in a News-Book. I shall now shew you in an Instance or two, how bold they make with the Kings Wittnesses, as well as with the rest of his Majestys Subjects; and what Slurs they put upon the World (the Citizens of London Especially) under the Countenance of the Plot, and Authority of the Kings Evi∣dence. THERE'S a Pamphlet entitled, A Narrative of unheard of Popish Cruelties toward Protestants beyond Seas: Or a New Account of the Bloody Spanish Inquisition, Published as a Caveat to Protstants, by Mr. Dugdale. Printed for, &c. THIS New Account (as I am credibly Inform'd) is only an Old thing Reprinted; The Subject Suited to the Humour of the present Season, and Mr. Dugdale upon the Title-Page exhibited as the Authour of it, and Ric. Dug∣dale Subscribed to the Dedication. This was the Second Slur that past the Presse under That name. The First Im∣pression went off Clear with Mr. Richard Dugdale in the Title page, as the Composition of Mr. Dugdale the Wit∣nesse; but the Booksellers finding the businesse to be Smoakt, the Wittnesses name being taken notice of to be Stephen, and not Richard, he very prudently left out the Christen name in the Second Impression, and made it only Mr. Dug∣dale, and so it went for the Witnesses again. His work being only to find out a Witnesses Namesake, by great good Fortune he pitcht upon an Alehouse-keeper in South∣wark of That Name, to carry off his Project; and the man (as I am told) is a very Honest man. Now here are Three Abuses fobb'd upon us at once, First, an Old Book for a New one; Secondly, one that knows nothing of the matter in question, under the Semblance of one of the Kings Wittnesses. And Thirdly the Counterfeit of a False Authour. But the most remarkable piece of all is yet to come.
IT was my Hap, some three or four Months since, to cast my Eye upon a Book, Entitled, A Narrative and Impartial Discovery of the Horrid Popish Plot: carry'd on for the Burning and Destroying of the Cities of London and West∣minster, with their Suburbs, &c. And Dedicated to the Surviving Citizens of London ruin'd by Fire, &c. I came to This Pamphlet with Expectation of some Notable Dis∣covery; especially finding a Promise in the Title page of Depositions, and Informations NEVER BEFORE PRIN∣TED: But when upon the Perusal, I found the Narra∣tive part of it to be taken, Verbatim almost, out of two or three old Seditious Libells against the Government, that were printed by Stealth, some ten or a dozen years agoe, (before Mr. Bedloes time of Action) and scatter'd up and down in most of the Publique Houses upon the great Roads of England▪ by half a score sometimes in a place, according to the Ordinary Method of the Facti∣on in such Cases; I made a strict Enquiry into the mat∣ter, and this was the business. There was a Consult of three or four Booksellers over a bottle of Wine, what Subject a man might venture upon at That time, for a Selling Copy: One of the Company was of Opinion that a Book of the Fires would make a Smart Touch; and so they all agreed upon't; and propounded to get some of the Kings Wittnesses hands to't; Naming first one, and then another, they came at length to a Re∣solution; and pitch't upon Trap ad Crucem, and The Histo∣ry of the Fires; as two books that would afford matter e∣nough, if they could but get them put into a Method, and have a Certain persons hand to the Owning of hem. Hereupon they apply'd themselves to One to draw up the Story; and so it went to the Press under his hand, all but what was Printed Copy; and he made Se∣veral Alterations too in the Epistle, out of his own head, after it was composed at the Presse. So that here are a Cou∣ple of Old Libells turn'd into a New Narrative, and the
Kings Magistrates, and Officers defam'd afresh, and the menage of This Scandal committed to the hand of a Com∣mon Calumniator. As to what Concerns Mr. Bedloes Evi∣dence I have nothing to Say; nor to the Papists burning the City; nor to any one poynt in the Pamphlet which Mr. Bedloe can pretend to Speak to upon Knowledge; but This I shall Say; that there are Several Groundless and dangerous Passages in it; and that the most Inslaming and Seditious of them are only Libels of Ancient Date, Re∣printed; That it was a Contrivance Set afoot by Booksellers for Profit, drawn up according to their Order and Dire∣ction, and an Abuse in the very Original Intendment: Th Citizens and the Kings Wittnesses being only propounded as a Property toward the gaining of it some Reputation. IT is Sufficiently known, with what Greediness These, and a Thousand other Impostures, and Aggravations have been Swallow'd by the Common people; and made use of as Instances to Illustrate and Confirm the Plot. But What? you'l Say, There's a Mourneval of Booksellers up∣on a Tryal of Skill in their Own Trade: One Knave In∣vents a Story, and a Thousand Fools Believe it. How does all This amount to the Proof of a Faction? Why truly; tho' it looks very Suspiciously, considering Who they are that Advance and encourage, and the Interest that is pro∣moted by these Mistakes: Considering also with what Vi∣olence, and Industry they are carry'd on, and that the Cry too run all one way: I shall yet content my self with a Probable Surmise that there may be a Factious-Intent; as if I should See a man riding Post from Barnet towards London, I would lay ten to One that This man is going for London; and yet 'tis not Impossible neither but he may take up by the way: if I finde afterward that he went thorough, I should think it a hundred to one that his purpose was for London, when he First Set out: This is the very Case. These Practices are the High way to Sedi∣tion, and 'tis Ten to One that they'l come up to't at last:
which if they do 'tis a Hundred to One that they Design'd it, from the Beginning. IT is a very Ill Sign too, the Fiercenesse of the Abettors of these Shamelesse, and Ridiculous Forgerys ag ainst any man that has not Faith enough to believe that the Moon is made of Green Cheese: And This they call a Ridiculing of the Plot; and making Sport with Sentences of Parliament, and Judicial Proceedings. I would fain see where either the King, the Parliament, or any Court of Justice has ve∣rify'd any Single poynt that I have reflected upon: And I defy the Devil himself, in any of his Servants, to Say wherein I have not pay'd all due Respects, as well to the Persons of the Kings Witnesses, as to their Evidence. What Diminution is it to Dr. Oates his Narrative, to say that the Contrivances of the Mercenary Book-sellers, and Scriblers herein mentioned are Shams. What Contradi cti∣on or Abatement in it to the Truth, or Credit of the Popish Plot, to shew that there is a Schismatical Plot afoot too; and that One moves under the Countenance of Another: Now to Pretend a Plot, where there is None, is next door to the Denyal of it where it Is. Shall any man Ar∣gue that the Disparagement of a Juggle, weakens a Truth? Sr. Edmondbury Godfrey was never the Less Murther'd, be∣cause Mr. Powel escaped. Shall any man Infer That there were no black Bills Provided, because there were no Arms found in Sr Henry Titchburns house? Or because the Pren∣tices were but in Jeast, that therefore the Bloudy Pilgrims were not in Earnest: The Justification of Mr. Choqueux's Fireworks has no effect at all upon the Teuxbury mustard-Balls. What is my Affirming that Langhorn was not Bu∣ry'd in the Temple, to the Business of Valladolid, or Sala∣manea? The Herse of Arms was a Flam. And what Then? must the Evidence therefore of the Pistol and the Dagger be one too? And I would fain know what Relation Be∣dingfields escape out of the Gatehouse, (after he was Dead) has to the Consult at the White horse Tavern in the Strand.
As to the Popish Plot that is Sworn by the Kings Wit∣nesses, I lay my Faith at their Feet, without any further Enquiry, or Dispute. But where I finde Rank and Palpa∣ble Falshoods and Contrivances Imposed upon the World for Certain Truths, and nothing but Passion and Confi∣dence to Support them; I reckon my Self bound in Du∣ty (so far as in me lyes) to lay open the Abuse. For this way of Bruiting up a Plot where there is none, is a Design of a most dangerous Consequence, and a Snare to all Honest men. It is a kinde of Experiment upon the Hu∣mour of the Multitude, to try what they will Bear, and whether they be yet mad enough or not, to swallow Im∣postures without examining. If they finde the People in Tune for their Purpose, and Charm'd into such an aw, that at the very name of a Plot they shall Dare like Larks under the dread, even of a Painted Hobby; There's the Foundation of a Civill War, and an Arbitrary Power layd allready. They shall make what Plots, and what Plotters they please; and every man that stands in their way, shall be a Papist or a Traytor, according as they think fit to represent him to the Rabble. If this be the fruit of be∣ing given over to believe Lyes, we have great reason sure to take all possible Care that we be not deluded, and to distinguish betwixt the voyce of Authority, and That of Rumour. The Common way of Reply upon This Topique is to break out into Exclamations, and to hit a man in the Teeth with the Sham of the Meale-Tub, and Twenty Such Fooleries; as if there were no more in the bus'nesse then a Malicious Imagination; and only a more colourable Invention to discredit a Real Plot, under pretence of a Coun∣terfeit, and casting a Mist before the Peoples Eyes, that they should not know one from t'other. My Answer is Short; that we have the matter of Fact in proof Here be∣fore us: That the True Plot and the Counterfeit are in such manner Separated, that the One is not at all in dispute, and the other is Condemn'd. And we shall now shew you
what use is made by a Faction under the Disguise of pro∣secuting Papists, to Defame, and to Destroy several of his Majestys Loyall Subjects and Church of England Protestants. For let a mans Actions, his Conversation, his Religion be what they will, 'tis but besmearing him with the Scan∣dal of being Popishly-Affected, and his Work is done. There is a kinde of Spell in the Word Popery. It trans∣forms a Man into a Beast: And like the Great Medicine, it turns hatever it touches into Plot. If a man will not believe it to be Christmasse at Midsumer, he's in the Plot; If he loves his Church, his Prince, and his Country, and stands for a Burgesse or a Common Councell-man, 'tis but Saying that he's Popishly affected, and he becomes pre∣sently as an Heathen or a Publican. If he refuses to Associ∣ate, or Petition, he shall be Markt; and well too if he scape So; For we have gotten a Trick, when men will not do as we would have them, of laying them up for Treason; (no matter for Evidence) and when we have put them out of Reach of a Habeas Corpus, 'tis but shew∣ing them a Payr payr of Heels our Selves, and leaving Them to Struggle with the Law. As for Example. ON the 6th of April last, about 7. in the Morning, Ma∣jor Ovington and Mr. Thomas King were taken out of their Beds and Charged with High Treason; their Boxes and Papers Rifled, and Themselves Examin'd apart; but no∣thing of Ill appeared against them. The Magistrate began with the Major; and when he had try'd both by fair means and foul, to get him to sign such Papers and In∣formations as he himself had ready drawn; finding that he would not be wrought upon, he left the Major, and went to Mr. King, telling him how sorry he was to see him drawn into such a horrid Business: How that his Ma∣jesty had the matter before him, and that there were 6. or 7. Wittnesses that appear'd against him. Mr. King,
in great Admiration, askt what this mighty businesse might be: but he went back to the Major, without gi∣ving any Reply: and after a little while return'd to Mr. King. Major Ovington (Says he) has dealt Generously with me, and he shall fare the better for't; for I do not desire the Destruction of any man: But still professing more kind∣nesse to Mr. King, for his Fathers Sake, and looking up∣on Him as a Person only drawn in. So he prest Mr. King to a Confession, and told him, if he would but Subscribe Such a Paper as he would draw up, and knew to be True, he would not Commit him, and it should be the better for him. Mr. King askt him what he would be at, and told him that if the Major had charg'd him with any Ill thing toward the King, or the Government, he was an Unworthy man. Whereupon he went his way, and Committed the Major to the Gate-house. The Magistrate having left Mr. King at his own House, came back to him immediatly, and told him, 'tis well Mr. King (says he) that you are faln into my hands; for if I please, there's but a step betwixt You and Death; I am loth to Com∣mit you, because I know it will be your Ruine; every thing be∣ing made out so clear against you; Mr. King still urging to know what all This meant, the Magistrate went to the further end of the room, and fell to writing; Mr. King, being desirous to see what he wrote; He held the Paper in his hand and ask'd him if he did not know of a Design to Seize the Tower, and rescue the Lords; and severall o∣ther lewd Things. To which Mr. King reply'd, that it was all Villany. The Magistrate gave Mr. King a Bottle of Syder, and Treated him with an Appearance of much kindnesse. After a while, he took Mr. King in his Arms; telling him he saw he was resolv'd upon his Own Ruine. Mr. King desir'd that he might apply himself to the Secretaries of State to be Examined by Them; which the Magistrate took Ill, pretending that his Majesty had left the bus'nesse to Him. He was trying a long time to
prevail upon Mr. King to swear against Major Ovington; but not succeeding, he threaten'd to lay him in Irons; and so Committed him to the Gate-house, with Order to the Keeper, that the Gentlemen should not come toge∣ther, nor receive any Message, without having taken a∣ny Examination upon Oath, before his Commitment; neither after it, was there one word of Treason Sworn against him. He was Committed betwixt Twelve and One upon the 6th, and the Deposition against him was taken the day after he was Committed, at the Rhenish∣wine house in Channell Row, Threatning also to lay the Witnesse, in Irons, if he would not Depose what he the Magistrate had drawn up. The Coppy of the Mitti∣mus follows. WHEREAS Oath hath been made before Me, that the Per∣son I herewith send in Custody to you (Mr. Thomas King) hath Treasonably con∣trived a Rebellion, and falsly Designed the accusing severall of His Majesties Loyal Peers and Subjects of the said Treason. These are therefore to Will and require you in his Majesties Name to receive and Keep the Body of the said Thomas King in safe Custody. untill he shall be Discharged by due Course of Law. Given under my Hand and Seal the 6th Day of April. 1680.
THESE Gentlemen being brought into the Court by their Habeas Corpus the next Term, the prosecution was lookt upon to be Illegal, and Ridiculous, to the highest Degree; there appearing no colour from the Information, or Examination, either for the matter Charg'd upon them, or so much as the bare Commitment; Only it was observ'd, that beside the Injustice of a Commitment with∣out Evidence, the Crime was laid Treason, on purpose that they might not be bail'd in the Vacation. THIS I hope will not be deny'd to have been a Sham-Plot; and promoted by a Faction too: For it was the work of Twenty Libells to defend the Proceeding: The Persons accused are Gentlemen of approved Loyalty, Fair and Honourable Conversation, and men zealously affected to the Church of England. There was an attempt made by the same Magistrate at the same time upon another Gentleman in the same House, (a Cavalier of unquesti∣onable Loyalty and Honour) and upon a like pretence too; But That Trepan was let fall again. HERE'S the Fruit of taking up Plots upon Trust; and running Headlong from the Fear, nay, from the very Name of Popery, into the Thing it self. Let any man shew me a more Imperious Tyranny, if he can, or a more Implicite Faith; then for men to be worse then Spirited a∣way thus, contrary to the Law, and without Remedy; and and run down for Criminals by a Popular Consent, with∣out understanding one Syllable of the matter in question. These Practices and Excesses are the Subject of my Narra∣tive; and so far from misrepresenting the Popish Plot, that there is not any sort of Correspondence, in This Case, betwixt the One, and the Other. And I defy any man to shew, whereever I let fall so much as One word of the Popish Plot, but with a modest and due Respect to the Government. Neither, in effect, am I become the Mark of every Paultry Libeller, for reflecting upon the Reality of the One Plot; but for the exposing the Juggle
of the Other. And it is Time certainly for every man to look about him, when our Lives, Liberties, and For∣tunes lye all at mercy; and every Honest man expos'd to the Animosities of Faction, and Revenge: For we are not judg'd by what we are in Our Selves, in Our Conversati∣ons, and Opinions; but by what we are said to be. What becomes of Magna Charta, at This rate, and the Privi∣ledges of an English mans Birth right? If men shall be hurry'd into Jayls without Evidence, because they will not Subscribe either Confessions, or Accusations, touching matters which they know nothing of, and Witnesses Tamper'd afterward by Menaces, for Proofs ex post Facto, to colour such Illegal Commitments? We have had but too much of This allready; and no body knows whose Turn it may be next: Since what was the Case of these Gentle∣men, may be any mans. DOES it not behove us, now, to distinguish betwixt Reason, and Clamour; betwixt Truth, and Calumny, be∣twixt the Acts of Authority, and the License of Tumults; betwixt the Just and Temperate Deliberations and Resolu∣tions of Government, and the violent Heats and Partiali∣tyes of the Common-people? How come the Multitude to be Judges of Plots, and Popery, more than of Other Crimes and Misdemeanours? For That's the Tribunal of the Facti∣on, where every man is to be made a Traytor, or a Papist, as They think meet. And it is not enough neither to be fairly acquitted upon a Tryal before a Court of Justice; for the Bench and the Jury are presently arraign'd upon't by an Appeal to the Rabble. It is a great poynt gain'd, where a Faction has got∣ten so much the Command of the People, as to make them believe every thing that They Say, and approve of every thing that they do. There is a Plot no doubt on't; but That Plot does not yet create Another Plot, where there is no Plot at all. The Popish Plot has Bounds, and Limits; the Kings Wittnesses tell us what it is, and where
it lyes; and we have had nothing New of That Plot, now a good while. But this Imaginary Plot, is a Plot upon a Perpetual Plot, and to keep the Nation So long in Awe of the Popish Plot, till the Faction may execute Another Plot of their Own. And what is that Other Plot of their Own, but, First▪ to break in upon the Ministers and Friends of the Government; and Secondly, to undermine the very Foundations of it. This is no more Sayd, then what their Practices make good▪ and the Series of the Design hangs as Naturally, one piece to Another, as if they were but so many Links of the Same Chain. As to what Concerns the Capital Plot, in the pro∣ceedings upon the Conspirators, and the Subsequent Severityes upon the Papists; all This is an Act of the Government. But the Superfaetation of Other Plots, which neither the State, nor the Witnesses take any notice of: Plots that have no Affinity or Connexion with the Prin∣cipal; nor, in Truth, any Existency in Nature, other then in the Forge of a Phanatical, and Republican Brain. These Plots are not so Sacred, I hope, but a body may ask, Whence they Come, and Whither they Go, without any Offence, either to Authority or Good manners. Nay, what if a man should examine them, by what Commis∣sion it is, that they change their Stile, and render Pa∣pists, in the Original, into Popishly Affected, in the Tran∣slation? How it comes, of a Down right Popish-Plot, to be a Popishly-Affected-Plot? This stretch puts the Church-of-England Men into a worse Estate then the very Pa∣pists. For there are certain Known and Political Condi∣tions, whereupon a Papist may come off, by satisfying the Law; But Popishly-Affected is such a Drag Net, it sweeps All. In Other Cases, there must be Probata, as well as Allegata; but Here, the simple Allegation does a mans bus'ness; for how is it possible for any man to prove a Negative, and a Thought, which he must do, to discharge himself of being Popishly-affected?
The Common People take Popishly Affected I know, for one of the Devlishest things that can be sayd of a man; especially as it is drest up with Plots, Massacres, Conflagrations, &c. to make it the more Terrible. And therefore whensoever the Faction has a minde to expose any man to the Outrages of the Rabble, they are pleas'd to give him the Honour of This Character; which pre∣sently raises the Country upon him, as if he were a Woolf, or a Common Enemy. Now This Brand of Popishly Affect∣ed is not Set upon a man for any Correspondency of Dan∣gerous or Erroneous Principles that he has with the Church of Rome; but they make use of it as a Discrimi∣nating Mark betwixt themselves and Other men. He that will not believe all the Fooleries They tell him, nor joyn in all the Iniquityes that they propound to him: He that will not Contribute, Swear, Petition, Vote, Associate, as They would have him, That man comes Immediately to be Popishly Affected. He that peaks Reverently of the Dignity, or the Persons of Bishops; the Orthodox Clergy, the Ministers of State and Justice; the Service-book, the Rites and Appointments of the Church in opposition to the Assemblyes-Directory, with the Practices of their Slovenly and Licentions Conventioles; That man's Popishly Affected. To Preach up Obedience to Civil Magistrates; To cry down Schism; To chuse a Good Fryday rather, or an Ash-wednesday, for a Fast, then a Whitson-Tuesday; to lay more stresse upon the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, then the Solemn League and Covenant; To Advance the King above the Two Houses; To deny the Sovereignty of the People; and to maintain that God is the God of Order, and not of Confusion, All This is to be Popishly-Affected. But let us now Consider how This Calumny comes to be taken up; What's the Drift, and (if This work goes on) what will Probably be the Issue of it. It may be observed, that so long as we were upon the Scent of Priests and Jesuits; the Plot in motion; and that
every day presented Fresh Game of Papists, and Conspira∣cyes: So long, I Say the Faction joyn'd with the Govern∣ment in a Common Care, for the Peace and Safety of the Publique: Only with This Difference; that whereas the Magistrate proceeded to the Necessary Punishment of Of∣fenders, according to the Gentle, and Impartial Methods of Law and Justice: and with Humanity and Compassion for their Persons and Errours, the Faction, on the Other hand, precipitated all things with Violence, and Clamour. Not contenting themselves with the bare Oblation of so much Blood, for the Satisfaction of Publique Justice, un∣lesse they turn'd the Tragedy into a Farce too, and made Sport with the Calamityes of the Miserable. And what was All This Vehemence and Pudder, but to Elevate the Opi∣nion of their Zeal (in proportion to the Noyse they made) above all others, and Tacitly to reproach the Go∣vernment for their Candour, and Moderation. Nor did they keep themselves within the Bounds of Inferences, and Tacit Implications, long neither; But so Soon as ever any man came off, whether through the In∣sufficiency of Proofs, or the Incompetency of Witnesses, they flew open-mouth'd in the face of the Bench and Jury: and in so bold a manner too, as if the Tribunal were on∣ly to Hear the Cause, the Jury to stand with their fin∣gers in their mouths, and the Pit to Decide it? What is become of the Manhood, and Generosity of the English Nation; That we are fal'n into This Insatiate Thirst of Bloud? Where's our Respect to our Superiours; while we thus Arraign Authority? Where to our Selves, in the Seditious Usurpation of a Right that does not be∣long to us; and in Contradiction to the Duties of Alle∣geance, and Common Prudence? Where to our Fellow-Sub∣jects; in our Needlesse, and Unmannerly Importunities, for more Rigour then the very Letter of the Law will bear? Is This doing as we would be done by? Or is it doing either as we Have been done by? But I shall now come to
the Transition of the One Plot into the Other, and the turning of Papists into Popishly-affected; wherein I must distinguish betwixt the Words and Intent of Authority, and the Unwarrantable Application and Construction of the Faction. In all Changes of State the Pillars must first be re∣mov'd, before the Frame of the Government can be dis∣solv'd. And therefore 'tis discreetly done, for a Faction to begin with Persons, ere they broch their Opinions; For it would be a great Over-sight to pick a quarrel with the Administration, and at the same time to be laying of New Foundations. It is also another point of Skill, the Running of People down (as I find it in a Coffee house Au∣thour) without the Assistance of the Penal Statutes, or the Formality of trying men by their Peers. And no∣thing does That Exploit more effectually, then the De∣vice of Popishly Affected. It is a snare, that all the Pre∣caution in the world cannot avoid; and a most In∣sensible slip from Religion, to Sedition; as we find in the Progress of our present Distempers. For the bus'ness of Popery is now in a great measure laid aside; and the Dis∣senters and Republicans at work as hard as they can drive; the One to undermine the Church, and the Other the Mo∣narchy; and joyntly engaged in a Common Endeavour and Design for the Ruine of Both. So that the same Plot, in Effect, is carry'd on still, but in Other Names, and by Other hands. The Original Quarrel was to the Papists: This is to the Popishly-affected. The Church of Rome was struck at in the One, and the Church of England is struck at in the Other: And what the Jesuits began, the Schisma∣tiques are now to Finish. Let no man question the Truth of This, unlesse he will First put out his Eyes for his Cre∣dit; or bring a Certificate from the Colledge that he is Non-Compos, and does not know Chalk from Cheese. Provided allways, that These People prove not at last to be Dr. Oates's Jesuits in the shape of Schismatiques; as I
have heard of some Schismaticks too in the shape of esuits. I shall be told that This is only a Blind to cover the Popish Plot; whereas in Truth that Pretext is only a Blind, to cover the Other; and all their shifts are but so much Lime thrown in the People Eyes, to Blear, and Confound them that they may not distinguish Prelacy and Popery, Papists, and Church-Protestants, the One from the Other. AND another Trick they have got; which is, to run canting with their Appeals to the King and Parliament; as if the very Suggestion of This Plot were a Contradiction to the Evidence of the Other; and consequently to the Au∣thority, Justice, and Resolution of his Majesty and the Three Estates. Are not our Impostrs come now to a prodigious degree of Boldness, when they shall dare to Father such Shams as These upon the Supreme Authority of the Nation. But what's all This, to the old Story of Fathering Mur∣ther, Sacriledge, and Rebellion upon God Himself. 'Tis very True, that the King and Parliament have agreed upon't, and declar'd themselves fully fatisfy'd that there is a Damnable Popish Plot, but not one word of a Popish∣ly-Affected Plot; neither do I finde that our Refiners, and Improvers of Mischief have any Commission for the ex∣tending of the Popish Plot so far; and themselves at last to be the Judges of That Popish Affection: Much lesse for the turning of That Reproach upon the Church of Eng∣land, which was intended only against the Opinions, and Practices of the Church of Rome. It will be sayd that they do not blast the Church of England, but here and there a Rotten member of it, that carrys on the Popish In∣terest under That masque? 'Tis very right, that, take them in the good Humour, and they will yet allow Two Bishops of the Twenty six to be Protestants; And Four Protestant Divines in the City of London; So that here's no Formal Attaque made as yet upon the Body of the Church; Only Dr. Owen, Mr. Baxter, and two or three more of them ly Pelting at the Out-works, while the
Lay-Brothers are employ'd, some in Mining; others in Drawing here and there a Principal Stone, or Timber out of the Building; and every man, in his place, and stati∣on (according to the Covenant) contributing toward a Total Ruine: Only the work is now carry'd on by O∣ther hands; or at least under Other Appearances. The Plot in Substance seems to be much the Same, saving on∣ly the Exchange of Popery for Schisme. We shall now briefly Touch upon the Methods by which these Ends are to be brought about. BY This Invention of Popishly Affected they can Pick their Men, and cast out all that are not for their Turn; the Word being only made use of for a Distinction be∣twixt the Adherents to the Church, and the Protestant Di∣senters. Pray'e see (says the Author of Englands Great In∣terest) that you chuse Sincere Protestants, Men that do not play the Protestants in Design; and are indeed, Dis∣guised Papists; ready to pull off their Masque when time serves. [When the barefac'd Papist cannot do it, (says the Instrument of Association, Pag. 4.) the Protestant in Mas∣querade shall; the Stratagem of This very day: And above all to be watch'd against.] And in an Account from Guild-Hall, they are called Protestants in Masquerade, in good time to be taken notice of, and receive the Reward due to their Merits. [To be marked (says Another) as the worst of Papists, and so dealt with in City and Country.] Now for Variety-Sake they call them Courtiers; Pensioners, and the like; and the Clergy are Treated (as upon the late Ele∣ction of Knights of the Shire at Chelmsford in Essex (in the stile of Jesuitical, Dumb Doggs; Dark Lanthorns; Baals Priests; Damned Rogues; Jacks and Villains; The Black Guard; The Black Regiment of Hell, &c. And a General Exception made (by the Writer of the Seasona∣ble Warning) to all men in Office, Preferment, Salary, or Court-Employment. So that here's in a manner the one Half of the Kingdom (and the Legal Half too) as
much as in Them lyes) excluded from a share in the Common Interest of the Nation▪ with what Am and Intent, let the World judge. THE Popish Plot is Sworn by all the Witnesses to have been Level'd at the Life of his Sacred Majesty, the Sub∣version of the Government, and the Destruction of the Pro∣testant Religion. Now Whosoever well considers the manner of Proceedings, together with the Sile, and Do∣ctrine of the Positions that are now afoot, (though pretend∣edly upon Another Bottom) will finde many Passages that look Untowardly the Same way. First, as to the Life of the King, and the Direct Sub∣version of the Government, the Faction is not advanc'd so far yet; for That's a Villany that must be Imposed upon the People, as a thing in such and such Cases to be Law∣ful, before there can be any Thought of putting it in Practice. And herein, Our late Reformers have out∣done the Jesuits Themselves: For over and above the Ex∣posing of a Prince, on the One side, for Heresy, and, on the Other side, for not submitting to Christ on his Throne; and equally on Both sides to the Vtmost Extremities; we have got Here the start of them, in Erecting a Principle that makes the Svereign further Accountable to the People, upon a point of State; as we shall presently make appear by severall Instances. Now if it be once laid down for a Maxim, that upon such or such Conditions, the Subjects may take away the Life of their Prince if they will; 'tis Damnable Odds that upon such a Supposition, some Re∣probated wretch or other will do it if he can. I shall begin with the Acute Authour of the Weighty Considerations Consider'd. I will hope (says he) Pag. 6. there are very few in This Nation so Ill Instructed, that do not think it in the Power of the People to DEPOSE a Prince who really undertkes to Alienate his Kingdom, or to give it up into the Hands of Another Sovereign Power; or that real∣ly Acts the Destruction, or the Universal Calamity of his
People. The Authour of the Plea to the Dukes Answer says that when Kings themselves be Ill ones, God not only Approves of their Removal, but even Himself does it. The Political Catechism places the Government in the Two Houses of Parliament. The Late Letter to a Person of Honour, &c. says, there may be a Self-Deposition of a Prince actually Regnant. And again, The Weighty Considerations Consider'd, lodges the Government in the Major Part. And almost every Fresh Libeller speaks to the same Purpose. Now do but once admit, that a King May Forfeit his Royal Authority, and you shall never fail of those that will say, he Has don't; So long as there are men in the world that had rather Govern, then Obey: And the stress does not lye upon the Quality of the Kings Actions nei∣ther, but upon the Construction that shall be made of them, by any Reprobated Band of Conspirators, that shall presume to Censure them. Whatsoever the Faction shall think fit to call Mis-Government, must be so Interpreted, and Reputed: and to Them only must we repair, as to the Oracles of Law, and Conscience. The Safety of the King and Government, our Religion, Laws, and Freedoms, are only, according to This Position, dependent upon the Humour of the Multitude: So that it is but Their bare Saying, that the King has Forfeited his Cronn, the Church their Priviledges, the Nobility their Session of Peerage; the Commons their Charater of Representation; the Mer∣chants their Liberty of Trade; the Gentry▪ and Commonal∣ty their Lives, Freedoms, and Estates, and the work is done. This was the Course of all our late violent Chan∣ges of Government; and the Positions which are now e∣very day recommended to the Nation toward the Play∣ing of the same Game over again, were the Groundwork of all our Late Miseries and Confusions.
Now as to the Church: Are not the Dissenting Ministers at work again Tooth and Nayl against the Act for Uniformity; and Preaching up a Schism, under the Colour of Formalizing upon Scru∣ples? Do they not first Instigate the People (in Contempt of Law, and Order) to a Separation; and then furnish them with the best pretences they can, for their Disobedience? What will become of the Protestant Religion, when the Restraint of Ecclesiasticall Disci∣pline and Jurisdiction shall be taken away; and men left to Them∣selves to go their own ways, and chuse their own Religions at Pleasure? If This be not an attempt upon putting the Last ranch of the Po∣pish Plot in Execution by an Extirpation of the Protestant Religion; then the Church of England, (as it is legally establisht) must be confest, in Their Opinions, not to be Protestant: And consequent∣ly be call'd to an Account for That supposed Defect, as not being Comprehended within the Equity of their Good Will and rote∣ction. I could multiply These Instances without end; but here's enough said to give Evidence of a Pestilent Design. But whether it be a Design of a Popish Contrivance, tho' set a foot by the Fanatiqs; or purely a Fanaticall Design; I shall not Determine; but leave the Animadversion of it to the Consideration of Authority, and appeal to the most Partial Reader for the Truth on't; Concluding with This Observation. That there is great Malice as well as Danger in the Project: For Thorough all this Audacious License of Libelling the King himself, the Privy-Councell, the Judges, the Jury; &c. of Tearing the Church to pieces, and Treasonably undermining the very Foundations of the Government, by the Erecting of Republican Maxims wholly Inconsistent with, and utterly destructive of This Im∣periall Monarchy: I do not finde yet so much as One Dissenters Pen engag'd in the Vindication of His Majesty, or the Support of the Government, to expiate for the Numberlesse Pamphlets they have Publish'd toward the Scandal and Destruction of both; Or in Justifi∣cation of Themselves to the World, that they are as great Enemies to the Substance of the Popish Plot as they would be thought to be, and as great Friends to the King and Government. The End.
