L1379A 15620601 104222
A LETTER FROM A GENTLEMAN AT New-Market, Giving a Full and True ACCOUNT Of the Dreadful FIRE That began there on Thursday the 2d of this Instant March, about Nine of the Clock in the Evening. Entred according to ORDER. SIR, I Am very sorry that for the kind News you sent me last Week, I should make so lamentable a return, as the Relation of the Fire which happened last Night: I have endeavoured, as much as the shortness of the time would permit, to inquire into the particulars thereof; and partly by what I saw my self, and partly by what I heard from those that were concerned, I think I am able to give you a faithful and satisfactory Account of it, which take as followeth:
Last Night, about Eight of the Clock, one of the Black-Guard that lay in a Lords Stable (near that House where the Morrocco Ambassador lay when here) went to Bed, and not taking care of his Candle, it took hold of the Straw, so that about Nine of the Clock the Flames broak out and appeared abroad, and the Wind blowing very hard at South West, it burn'd so very furiously upwards in the Town, that at this present the better half of the Town is Burned down. That side of the Town where the Kings House stands, is not touch'd. Most of the cheif Inns (as the George, the Kings-Head, and the Sword and Hand, where His Majesties Guards lay) are consumed: And notwith∣standing the great endeavours that were used for the suppression of it, it is judged there are upwards of One Hundred Houses Burn'd down. Three or Four Children are missing, which are supposed to be burnt; and several Men are Killed, and many Wounded in endeavouring to put a stop to it. Many of the Hor∣ses are turn'd loose upon the Heath, and great is the confusion here upon this dismal Accident. The Gen∣tlemen Harbingers are gone to Cambridge, to provide Lodgings for the Court, which will be there this day, where His Majesty will make a short stay, till his Coaches be got in readiness, and then intends for London, where I shall be glad to see you, and tell you how much I am yours, New-Market, Friday Morning three of the Clock, 23d. of March, 1683, J. S. LONDON: Printed by J. Grantham, 1683.
