l142a 27242718 110044
THE ARRAIGNMENT OF THOMAS HOWARD Duke of NORFOLK, BEFORE THE Earl of SHREWSBURY Lord High-STEWARD of ENGLAND. ALSO, A Brief Derivation of the most Honourable Family of the HOWARDS. With an Account of what Families they are Related to by Marriages. Transcribed out of Antient Manuscripts, never before Pub∣lish'd. Printed by Nathaniel Thompson at the Entrance into Old Spring-Garden near Charing-Cross, MDCLXXXV.
To the High and Mighty PRINCE HENRY Duke of NORFOLK. Earl Marshal of ENGLAND, Earl of Arundell, Surrey, Norfolk and Norwich Baron Howard, Mowbrey, Seagrave, Brewes of Cower, Fitz-Allen, Warren, Chun, Oswalde∣stry, Maltrevers, of Cales, Graystock, Farni∣val, of Sheffield, and Howard of Castle-Rising. Constable and Governour of His Majesties Royal Castle of Windsor. Lord Warden of Windsor Forest. Lord Lieutenant of the County of Norfolk, Surry, and Berks, and of the City of Norwich, and County of the said City. And Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, &c. My Lord, AS Your Grace is the Chief of Your Illu∣strious Family, it would appear as rudely, Improper to Dedicate this Discourse to any other, as perhaps it doth an unbecoming pre∣sumption to present it to the Honour of Your hands,
and since there is no avoiding a Crime; the least must be admitted, for which I hope to obtain a Par∣don with less Difficulty, from that excessive Cood∣ness which is your Character, than I have had to Collect these scatter'd Papers (slubber'd with Anti∣quity) which were long preservd in Your Family, and hastily thrown into this posture by My Lord Your Graces Most Humble and Most Faithful Servant J. Lacy.
THE ARRAIGNMENT OF THOMAS HOWARD Duke of NORFOLK, BEFORE THE Earl of SHREWSBURY Lord High-STEWARD of ENGLAND. THe Names of the Lords Summon'd by Tho∣mas Edwards Serjeant at Arms; who being Call'd; came and sat, down in their Places appointed: They that sat on the Right-hand of the Steward, are Noted with the Letter A. and they that sat on the Left-hand, with the Letter B.
Earls Kent A. Worcester B. Sussex A. Huntington B. Warwick A. Bedford B. Pembroke A. Hartford B. Leicester A. Lords, Clinton A. Howard of Effingham B. Burghley A. Grey of Wilton B. Monjoy A. Sands B. Wentworth A. Bourghrave B. Mordant A. St. Johns B. Rich A. North B. Shandois A. St. Johns of Bostock B. Buckhurst A. De la Ware B. Then was Robert Catlin Lord Chief Justice of Eng∣land, commanded to return his Precept upon Peril; which being return'd, was read, Statute Issues, and then the Lieutenant of the Tower was call'd to return his Precept, and to bring forth his Prisoner the Duke of Norfolk: Then was the Duke brought to the Bar, between Sir Owen Hopton Lieutenant, and Sir Peter Ca∣rew; and next Sir Peter, stood one holding the Tower-Axe with the edge from the Duke. The Duke immediatly at his coming to the Bar, perused all the Lords, first on the Right-hand of the Steward, then on the Left-hand; and the Lieutenant deliver'd in his Precept, Versus Thomas Ducem Nor∣folk, &c. And then was Proclamation made, every man to keep Silence; and Mr. Sandes spoke to the Pri∣soner in this manner.
Thomas Duke of Norfolk late of Kennington in Nor∣folk, hold up thy thy Hand; which done, he read the Indictment, the effect whereof was, That He the 22th. of September Anno Dom. 1570. did Traiterously Com∣pose and Imagine to put to Death our Soveraign Lady the Queen, to raise Rebellion, to Subvert the Commonwealth, and to stir up Forreign Enemies to invade this Realm, and to Levy War against the Queen; for that he knew Mary late Queen of Scots to have claim'd the Crown of this Realm, and to have Nam'd her self Queen of Eng∣land, and bore the Arms of our Queen without difference; did the 22th. of Semptember Anno predict' before and after Compose and Imagine to deprive, destroy and put to Death our Soveraign Lady the Queen, to raise Rebellion, to subvert the Commonwealth, and to stir up Forreign Enemies to Invade this Realm, and to Levy War against the Queen; for that he knew Mary late Queen of Scots to have Claim'd the Crown of this Realm, and to have Nam'd her self Queen of England, and bore the Arms without difference, did the 22th. of September Anno predict' before and after, without the Consent of our said Queen sent divers Tokens and Letters to the said late Scottish Queen, and lent her divers Sums of Money, and received divers Tokens from her, contrary to the Com∣mands of the Queen, and contrary to his own Submission and Promise under his Hand and Seal; and that He know∣ing the late Earls of Northumberland and Westmor∣land, the Northerns Markenfield and others, which had Levyed War against the Queen the 16th. of November Anno predict' and had Assembled to them the number of 1000 persons, and then fled the 12th. of December Anno predict' into Scotland, and there were receiv'd by
the Duke of Castol, Herald Lord Hunne, and there pur∣sued by the Earl of Sussex. He, on the 7th. of August Anno predict' did send before and after Money unto them, and that he being Adherent to the Pope, the Queens Ene∣my, the 10th. of March Anno Reginae, did Consent and Consult with Robert Rodulph Merchant Stranger, and the Pope's Factor, to have Money from the Pope, and the Duke of Alva, and that they should send an Army to Invade the Realm, to deliver the said Scottish Queen. And further, whereas the said Robert Rodulph had writ∣ten in the Name of the said Duke three Letters, one to the Pope, the second to King Philip, and the third to the Duke of Alva; the said Duke sent his Servant to the Ambassador of King Philip, to desire him to Certifie the Pope, King Philip, and the Duke that he allow'd of the same Letters; and that they should be taken as sent from him, which was so agreed; but the said Robert Rodulph who deliver'd the Duke of Norfold's Cyphers, whereof he carried one Coppy to Rome; whereby each might Certifie others, and likewise requir'd of the said Duke what time the Aid should arrive, that they might be provided: And further, that the said Duke did receive Letters from the said Pope with Promise of the said Aid: And also that he did send Comfort to the Lord Ferris and other Scots the Queens Enemies, &c. Which Indictment being read, Mr. Sandes said to the Duke; How sayest thou Thomas Duke of Norfolk, art thou guilty of these Trea∣sons, or not guilty? Duke, The hearing of this Indictment gives me oc∣casion to make Request, which I did not intend to have done: Which is to have Council Assign'd me, if the Law will permit it?
Catlin, You must have none. Duke, That's very severe, I was told the Indict∣ment was only concerning matters contain'd in the Statute of the 25th Edward the III. I have had very short warning, not more than 14 hours, night and all; I am no Lawyer, and there is many circumstances in which I must submit my self to the Opinion of the Justices, I could not have Books to inform my self, and direct, but must Fight without Weapons: Yet I have heard in the Cause of Mr. Humphry Stafford in the time of Henry the VII. in a Case of Treason, had Councel Assign'd him. Dyer, The Case you speak of, was concerning the pleading of a Sanctuary by prescription. Duke, I must submit then to your Judgments, I must plead for my Life, Lands, Goods, and Children, and for that which I esteem much more Dear to me, my Honour and Honesty, my Blood will Cry aloud for Vengeance, if I am Condemned Unjustly. One Re∣quest I make to you my Judges, to tell me if the In∣dictment be perfect in all, or in part; and in what part, that thereto I may give my Answer. Catlin, The Cause being true, the Indictment is sufficient. Duke, I should know whether they are all Treasons or no? Sands, How sayest thou Thomas Duke of Norfolk, art thou Guilty of these Treasons, or not Guilty? Duke, Not Guilty? Sands, How wilt thou be Tryed? Duke, By God and my Peers; I am in a great Con∣sternation at the Treasons that's imputed against me,
but am comforted by the Justice of the Queen in gi∣ving me that Tryal which the Law alloweth me, and it is such as I require; But this Suit I make to the Lords, that I may have Justice, and not be opprest with Un-necessary Diversities; my Memory is ill of it self, and rendred much worse by evil usage, since my severe Imprisonment. I pray God I may forgive it: And concerning you my Peers, I hope I may call it my Happiness that I shall be Try'd by You, in whose Hands I must put my Life; and I think I dare into the single Hands of a great many of you, whom I know profess Religion, and I hope will not burthen your Consciences contrary to Law and Justice, depending upon the clearness of my Innocence, I would not take a needless and cowardly Flight, I have what I expect∣ed and wish'd, a Tryal; I crave it with Justice, and must confess I have neglected my Duty in matters un∣der Treason; I desire those Omissions be not imputed as Treasons. Serjeant Berham, This Indictment contains three several matters of Treason. First, It is by Deprivati∣on of the Queens Majesty. The second, Is the Relief of the Rebels in England. The third, The assistance of the Scots the Queens Enemies. To prove the first, there are two matters of Fact declar'd in the said In∣dictment. First, knowing the Scottish Queen to have claim'd the Crown, he hath attempted Marriage with her: Also, the Conspiracy to procure Forreign Power to Invade the Realm, doth prove him Guilty of the matter. Duke, The Duke interrupting him, said, Mr. Ser∣jeant, You begin, as I thought you would, in laying
the matters of the Marriage, and other things to my Charge, which are not Treason, to exasperate the matter; you may do your Duty, but yet Conscienti∣ously; and (then something smiling) I should speak one thing which I had almost forgot; A man suspected is half Condemned; I have been charged with an Oath, I protest I took the Oath, as I shall prove; I Pray let it not be laid out to my Discredit. They desir'd it. Barham, He that would marry with one that claim∣eth the Crown, hopeth to aspire to the same; This matter began at such a time as the Duke was one of the Commissioners for hearing the Cause between the late Scottish Queen and the Lords of Scotland, at which time the Duke took an Oath to deal therein directly, to weigh indifferently occasions and Answers; where∣in notwithstanding he dealt indirectly, thereby com∣mitting Perjury, and disclosing the Queens secret Councels; if you deny it, I'll prove it. Duke, This Case hath divers parts, not within the compass of Treason. Burham, I demand if you know the claim? Lord Steward, Your Grace must Answer directly. Gerrard, After (upon viewing Serjeant Burham and the Queens Attourney,) the Duke Confess'd the Claim, but not the Contrivance, &c. Burham, He shew'd the Contrivance by her Refu∣sal to acknowledge the Queens Majesty to be the Lawful Queen. Duke, I did not approve it, but I must defend her doing it, she having a Husband, did it; which at the Request of Throgmorton was left by the Queen; she hath since entred into League with
her, professing great Friendship, and has Christen'd her Child. Burham, But she has not yet renounc'd her Claim, and yet you have as far dealt with her as being the Queens Commissioner, to hear the matter open'd to her, the Accusations; You gave Instructions how she should deal that matters might not come to light; and conferr'd with the Bishop of Ross about the same.For proof whereof was shew'd the Examination of the Bishop taken the 6th. of November one thousand five hundred seventy one, declaring that the Duke disco∣cover'd to him all that he knew of that business, and promis'd what help he could, &c. But he spoke nothing of the Marriage, but referr'd all to Luddington, who had caused the Duke to stay the Conference, and shew'd unto him her good Will, and how she was set to accompany the Earl of Murray to Convey the Queen, where he shew'd that the Duke did Advertise him, that they did go about to Degrade the Scottish Queen with the People of England, that she might be the less able to attempt any thing against the Queen of England; And these matters the Duke answer'd at large, the effect was. Duke, Luddington only mov'd the Marriage to him, which He at that time refus'd: That he only told the Bishop of Ross he could not condescend to that Pro∣position; and as her Circumstances were stated, it would neither be for her Honour, nor His; He desir'd the Bishop of Ross might be sent for: Then was shew'd a Letter of the Bishops, wherein was contain'd, That it was appointed the Earl of Murray should be Mur∣thered in the North, going into Scotland; But the Duke
having Discoursed with him at Hampton-Court about the Marriage, to which he consented, the intended Murder was also stopt: There was also a Letter to the Duke shew'd, moving the Marriage at that time, and that it should be for the Advantage of his Family to Marry the Queen, who proposed her Son should also Marry the Lady Margaret Howard the Dukes Daughter, which Argument inclin'd the Duke to it: Yet when it was rumour'd that he design'd the Marriage of the Scottish Queen, he appear'd much offended, and told the Queen of it, and seem'd to dislike her for her former Marriages; And said, the whole Revenues of the Crown of Scotland, the Ordinary Charges deducted, was not so Considerable as his Estate in England; and that he thought himself as great a Prince in his Bowling-Alley at Norwich, as if he were King of Scotland; this was affirm'd by Mr. Burham, that he heard the Queens Majesty speak it, and by the Dukes own Examination taken the sixth of November prov'd plainly: It was further shew'd, that at Treachfield he had Com∣mandment not to proceed any further in that Marriage; and yet it was apparent he had treated about it, though he had declar'd to Banister an ill Opinion of the Queen, and said, he believ'd she was privy to the Murther of her Husband. Duke, These are far fetches Mr. Burham, and come short of proving a Deprivation of the Queen, and De∣struction of her Person: when the Marriage was pro∣pos'd to me, I made several Objections against it, though without any unjust or unbecoming Reflections upon that great Princess, whose Virtue is above Ca∣lumny; But my Lord Leicester, who perswaded me to
the Marriage also, told me of the Queens Consent, and advis'd me to proceed in the Treaty, and leave the Mannagement to him, who would attend an op∣portunity to Discourse it with the Queen, whom he knew he could dispose to it. Burham, To come nearer to you, it appears you have gone about to procure it by Force, and Conspir'd to have taken the Tower; which if true, you must grant the Destruction of the Queens person: For the jealousie of a Kingdom is such, that it will not admit of a Rival: Then some Letters of the Dukes were read, and several long Letters written by the Queen of Scots, from whence it is inferr'd the Duke, did not pur∣sue the Marriage for Love of the Queen of Scots, but for the Ambition of the Crown of England. Duke, Your Conclusions and Inferences are ill ap∣ply'd, 'tis true one came to me and advis'd the taking of the Tower, which I refus'd, and dislik'd. Burham, Why then did you Consult the Earl of Pembroke about the same. Duke, To tell him what had been Propos'd to me, was not to Consult him. Gerrard, You took a Knife and cut down a Green Vine with this saying, Virescit vulnere virtus. Duke, Why, what do you gather from thence? Burham, The use is not to cut Vines whilst they are Green that should grow again. It was also objected, That when the Queens Ma∣jesty had demanded of the Queen of Scots, certain Castles in her Possession, which the Rebels delivered; the Duke advis'd the contrary, and went about to pro∣cure the Queen of Scots her Liberty, and that Ross
open'd the Window; and after he had promis'd and given it under his hand never to Treat about the Mar∣riage any more, he held Correspondence with the Queen of Scots and her Friends: Then they shew'd him a Prophesy by Hiekforth, which was this, In ex∣altatione Lunae leo deprimitur, Leo Leon conjungitur & semen eorem Regnabunt; which was prov'd by the exa∣mination of Hickforth, to whom the Duke had shew'd it, terming it a Foppish Tale. Duke, By which you see I did not esteem it. Then one Candish was brought in, who was Sworn; the Substance of his Evidence was, That being at South∣hampton with the Duke, he advis'd him to endeavour to obtain the Queens Favour and Consent to the Mar∣riage; He answered, He would have her, or it should cost him his Life: And another time the Duke and the Lord Lumley being together at Howards Palace, with that the Duke turning towards him, said, Canst thou accuse me of any thing? I defie Thee and the Devil, to which he answered. Candish, I can accuse him of nothing, but the Mar∣riage: And that at Kenning-Hall he did say to him, That there was nothing to undo us, but the rising of the Northern Lords; If they should then rise, I fur∣ther ask'd, if the Queen were dead, that he may pro∣cure my Brother Candish to be of his side. Duke, All which the Duke positively deny'd, and declar'd how little Credit the same Candish was of, that he had often Reliev'd him, and given him Money, and that he was one of no Estimation, as the business between him and Mr. Christmas did sufficiently testifie.
It was also said, That the Duke sent one Travers to the Earls, desiring them not to Rise; for if they did, they were utterly undone; but this and much more was without proof: There was also a Letter produced from the Queen of Scots to the Duke, written in Cy∣phers, which was Decypher'd and read, declaring her Sorrow for his Disappointments. Duke, The Duke answered, That all these things were unlikely, nor would he have thus proceeded, if he had, (as he is charged,) Imagin'd and Contriv'd the Deprivation of the Queen; and the chiefest Evidence against him, was by Radolph and Bracton, who was not to be Credited for a Witness: He also said, that Trevers went not to the Earls with any such Message, and that he never offer'd to fly, which one Guilty would have done; nor did he ever esteem those Earls so much as to Trust them with his Life. Gerrard, Thus have you heard the attempt of the Marriage prov'd, and to prove the Deprivation of the Queen, was the dealing with the Pope, King Philip, and the Duke of Alva, for the bringing in of Foreign Power to Land here (which God hath revealed) most wonderfully, according to that saying, Nill est tam oc∣cultum quod non revelabitur: At the first opening of the business, it could not be known whom it concern'd; Then by opening of a Bag of 600 l. Seal'd with Letters in the same to Sherbury for 50 l. which was open'd by some of the Councel at London: The Queen and Coun∣cel understood the whole matter at Easter by the Letters directed to Quadrantus and Trantus, but who that signified could not be known till of late, for it ap∣pears by Quadrantus is meant the Duke, and by Tran∣tus
another Nobleman, this Secret is now found out by Cyphers hid in the Tyles, and Letters describ'd by Hickforth, commanded by the Duke to be Burnt, found under the Matts going into the Dukes Chamber; These matters are to be prov'd by those that are neither In∣dicted nor Convicted of Treason. Duke, There was not a Letter of mine that con∣tain'd a Syllable of Treason; and if the malice of ill men hath contriv'd any thing that deserves blame, 'tis fit they should bear their own burthen, and not lay Crimes upon my Shoulders to lessen their load. Gerrard, You had Conference your self with Ra∣dolph for bringing in 10000 men out of Flanders to be Landed at Berwick, whereof 3000 should be Horse∣men; For proof whereof, was read the Examination of Barker. It was further shew'd, that the Bishop of Ross and H had Conference together about these matters, and concerning Letters sent by the Duke of Norfolk to the Duke of Alva and the Pope, and King Philip, but the Duke had refus'd to Subscribe them; Then was it ad∣vis▪d by the Bishop of Ross, that he should send Bar∣ker his Man to the Spanish Ambassador to tell him, the Duke was well Contented with those Letters, and that they should be taken as his own, and that the Ambassa∣dor should certifie so much from him. Duke, My memory is too weak to answer to a heap of matters hudled up I know not how, having nothing but Truth and Ignorance to support me; and you are four of the Queens Councel, who have Notes, and the faculty of flourishing upon them; and it is hard for me to answer all of a sudden, and may (through the
defect of Memory and the surprise of an accused Inno∣cence) omit that which might be easily answer'd: It was very unlikely and extreamly untrue, that I should deal with the Pope; I had rather be drawn in pieces with wild Horses, than change from that Faith which I was brought up in from my Youth; and for Landing an Army at Harwich, it is well known how impossible it is for an Army to March in that Country, which is all Ditches, and Woods: If I had design'd such a matter, I would have made Provision of Arms and Powder; I have not bestow'd 10 l. of any Armour these ten years, except it were eight Corslets of proof; I have no Cullivers in my House, and I am sure not three Barrels of Powder; And if I had design'd any such thing, I would have been provided otherwise than I was, neither would I have sent Barker of such a Message, but rather have Trusted my Hand to the Letters, than to have put Words into his Mout  being one of no Credit with me; and if I woul  fram'd such a Message, I would sooner have  Banister than 20 Barkers. Then was shew'd a Letter from the Bishop o  to the Scottish Queen about the Marriage; there was also a Letter from the Duke to Radolph, written with Okier, since he was in the Tower, bidding him burn the Bagg of Letters which Barker had put in a certain place, and to lay up Ross's, whom the Law could not touch, because he was an Ambassador. Duke, I had heard that he had Accused divers; and when I perceiv'd there was such Searching, I gave that advice for avoiding of Trouble, though the Letters were insignificant.
There was also a Letter from the Duke, which ex∣press'd that he could not be charg'd with any Crime; and if he lov'd his Life, he should take heed whom he Accus'd. Duke, By which my Innocence appears? Brumly shew'd Letters from Radolph, sent by Bayley Ross's Servant; by which it appear'd that the Duke D' Alva lik'd the matter, and enquir'd how far Har∣wich was from London. Brumley further said, the whole Conspiracy was open'd at Antwerp to the Ambassador of a Forreign Prince; who acquainted his Master, who had written the whole Discourse to the Queen; which because it concern'd others as well as the Duke, should only be open'd to the Lords of the Privy Councel. Duke, This is a Mystery that I know not how to Re∣ply to, unless that part of it which concern'd me were discover'd. Then Mr. Milbourn made a formal Discourse for the Credit of the Depositions of the Duke and others. Duke, I know not how to come after so smooth a Tale as the Attourney of the Court of Wards has told, yet he reflects nothing, what fear and promis'd Re∣ward might prevail upon Timerous and Mercenary minds; But I refer you unto Bracton for Discrediting and disproving those Witnesses. Catlin, In such Matters and Cases of Treason, the Depositions of Strangers may be taken, and it lyes in the Breasts of the Peers to Credit the same as they shall see Cause; and to proceed to the second point of Treason specified in the Indictment, which was the Aiding the Rebels after they were fled.
Duke, There is little danger in a discern'd Enemy; yet I never reliev'd any of them. Catlin, Then for the third point of Treason con∣tain'd in the Indictment, for Assisting the Scottish Re∣bels the Queens Enemies by Letters from the Duke to Banister, and from Banister to Luddington, and from Luddington to Radolph; and by the Examination of Ba∣nister, and by the Bag of Money deliver'd to Sher∣bury with Letters in the same Bag, as it was before de∣clar'd by Mr. Gerrard. Duke, I desire the Opinion of the Judges, If the Subjects of another Prince (the Prince not being in War with the Queen, may be accounted the Queens Enemies. Catlin, That might well enough be seen, for the Queen might make War with a Duke in France, and have Peace with the French King. Shrewsbury, have you ought else to say? Duke, I depend upon Truth and Innocence, which I hope will out-weigh the Malice and Artifice of my Enemies, and I also hope my Judges will consider the Invalidity of the Evidence against me; the persons be∣ing of no Credit nor Reputation: And for the Mar∣riage I Treated in it with the Queens Consent and Appointment; and afterwards suspended it (though several Letters and Arguments were directed to me concerning it.) Shrewsbury, Lieutenant of the Tower, withdraw the Prisoner a while, then was Silence Proclaim'd. Shrewsbury, My Lords, here you have heard that Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk has been Indicted of divers points of Treason, and has Pleaded not Guilty,
and has put himself upon the Tryal of God and his Peers; You are now to Consider upon the whole Evi∣dence which you have heard, whether he be Guilty or not Guilty, and to speak your minds upon your Honours and Consciences, and so bid them withdraw together and return as soon as they could; which they did to a place for that purpose where the Chancery is now kept; and there consulted in the sight of all; Then the Lords being Return'd and sat in their places, the Earl of Shrewsbury Lord High Steward of England commanded the Duke to be plac'd further out of Hear∣ing of them; then he ask'd aloud, first to the youngest Lord, saying, what say you my Lord De la Ware, is Thomas Duke of Norfolk guilty of these Treasons; yea, or no, who standing up, answered, Guilty; then the same was ask'd of all the Barons and Earls one after another, beginning at the Youngest; and so to the Eldest in Degree; and all said Guilty. Then the Lord High Steward commanded the Prisoner should be brought to the Bar, who being plac'd, the Earl of Shrewsbury Lord High Steward said. Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, thou hast been Accused of divers Treasons, and hast Pleaded against all not Guilty; and hast put thy self upon God and this Peers, who have all declar'd thee Guilty; what can'st thou say now, that Judgment may not proceed against thee. Duke, The great God and my own Innocence be between me and my False Accusers. Then was there a profound Silence a good while; after which the Tower Axe was turn'd towards the Duke.
Burham, May it please your Lordship to understand, That Thomas Howard late Duke of Norfolk has been Indicted of several Treasons, and hath thereunto Pleaded not Guilty; and thereupon hath put himself upon the Tryal of God and his Peers; and they have found him Guilty: I am therefore to pray your Judg∣ment in the behalf of our Gracious Soveraign Lady the Queen. Shrewsbury, Thou Thamas late Duke of Norfolk hast been Indicted of several Treasons, and thereunto hast Pleaded not Guilty, and hast put thy self upon the Tryal of God and thy Peers, and hast been by them found Guilty. Therefore our Court and the Queen doth Award, That thou shalt be lead from hence to to the Tower, and thence to be drawn through the midst of London to Tybourn, and there to be Hang'd, until thou art half Dead, thy Bowels to be taken out and Burnt before thy Face, thy Head to be Cut off, and thy Body quarter'd, and thy Head and Quarters to be at the Queens Will and Pleasure, and our Lord have Mercy on thy Soul. Duke, You have said unto me as unto a Traytor, God forgive you, and wash my Innocent Blood from your Souls, that it rise not in Judgment against you: I condemn not you, and yours; I die no Traytor, but a True man, both to my Queen and Country: And since you have put me out of your Company, I hope to go where I shall find much better, who will regard that Innocence which you have rejected. I am at a point never to beg for Mercy where I have no Guilt, but the Suit I have to you my Lords, is, that you will move the Queen to be good to my Children and Fami∣ly, and to see the Discharge of my Debts.
Thus fell that Illustrious Prince, whose greatness in Estate and Title was his only Crime, for being of an Antient and Splended Family, the Blood-Royal of England and France not being out of his Veins, and be∣ing Allyed to all the Considerable Families of England, and having an Estate to support that Greatness, of a hundred thousand Pounds a year; Besides the Fortunes he obtain'd by his Marriages, which was also very large: All his Paternal Estate was dispos'd of by the Queen, without regard to the Innocence of his Chil∣dren, the hard measure of his Accusations, and his Obedience, which led him to the pursuit of Her Com∣mands upon all occurrences: Which Estate, as it is divided, and Improv'd, is valu'd at five hundred thou∣sand Pounds a year. My Lord of Leicester, who was the Leading man at that time, (and sat with watchful Diligence) at the Helm, which he manag'd as his In∣terest or Passion inspir'd him: First propos'd the Mar∣riage of the Queen of Scots to the Duke of Norfolk; which he refus'd, till importun'd by the Perswasions of those that appear'd to be his Friends, and assur'd by a Letter under Queen Elizabeths own Hand of Her Con∣sent; all which ensnar'd him till the Consummation of the Marriage; which was made evident by a Letter kept long in the Family from the Hands of the Queen of Scots, in which she Subscrib'd her self, Your most Obedient Wife, Mary of Scotland and Norfolk: And this great Family thus Eclips'd, remain'd under the Cloud of a severe Deprivation, till the last King Charles of Blessed Memory, restor'd them to their former Titles and Dignities; that excellent Prince consider∣ed their long and silent Sufferings, with what forward∣ness
most of them engag'd their Lives and Fortunes in the Service of his Royal Father; there being but two of all that great and numerous Family that drew a Sword against their King; may those two be Bury'd in the dull ashes of Oblivion for ever, and wip▪d out of our way, as perhaps they are out of the Book of Life. A Brief Account of the Noble Family of the HOWARDS. THe Family of the Howards came into England with the Saxons, being from a vast length of time very considerable in that Country, having the Title of Barons, and the Name in that Language be∣ing Hoffwerd, as some Antient Books there Testify, which signifies the chief Office in the Court: William the Conquerour found them in a great Condition of Estate and Quality here, according to the Mode and Method of those Times, bearing Distinctions proper to Barons: They continued most Eminent in their Country, and link'd themselves into the greatest Fa∣milies in the Kingdom, as with all Evidence appears, behold here. A Brief Account of the Descent of the Dukes of NORFOLK. THomas of Brotherton, second Son of King Ed∣ward the First by Margaret of France his se∣cond Wife, was Earl of Norfolk and High Marshal of
England, whose Daughter and Heir being Married to John Lord Segrave, was created Dutchess of Norfolk; and Elizabeth their Daughter and Heir being Married to John Lord Mowbrey, was Mother to Thomas Mowbrey created Duke of Norfolk by King Richard the Second in the year one thousand three hundred ninety seven, and first Earl-Marshal of England: Which Thomas by Elizabeth his Wife, Sister and Heir of Thomas Fitz-Allen Earl of Arundel, was Father of John Mowbrey Second Duke of Norfolk, and of Margaret his Eldest Daughter, Wife to Sir Robert Howard Knight, whose Son John Mowbrey the Third Duke of Norfolk, was Father of John the Fourth Duke of Norfolk; whose Daughter and Heir Dying without Issue in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth: The Honours and Lands of Mowbrey were divided between John Lord Howard Son of Sir Robert Howard and Margaret Mowbrey, who was Created Duke of Norfolk by King Richard the Third, and William Lord Berkley Son of Isabella Se∣cond Daughter of Thomas Mowbrey First Duke of Nor∣folk: This John Lord Howard Duke of Norfolk was slain at the Battle of Brosworth one thousand four hun∣dred eighty five, and Attainted, leaving Thomas Howard Earl of Surry his Son: Who in the fifth year of King Henry the Eighth, was Restor'd Duke of Norfolk; and Dying, Thomas Howard his Son was Duke of Norfolk, and Father of Henry Earl of Surry, who was Beheaded the last of Henry the Eighth; which Henry Earl of Surry was Father of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, who was Beheaded and At∣tainted for the Marriage of the Queen of Scots the Fourteenth year of Queen Elizabeth; whose Son Phi∣lip
(Earl of Arundel in right of the Mother) dyed in the Tower, his Son Thomas the great Lord Marshal (whose memory is a lasting Honour to his Family) left his Son Henry of unblemish'd Honour and Repu∣tation also, whose Son Thomas was restor'd by the last King Charles the Second of Happy and Glorious Memory, to the Dignity of Duke of Norfolk, whose Brother Henry surviv'd him, and left two Sons, Henry the present Duke of Norfolk, and the Lord Thomas Howard, who hath Issue. This flourishing Family has spread it self into many Eminent Branches, as the Lord Viscount Stafford, the Earls of Suffolk and Barkshire, the Lord Escrick, the Earl of Carlile, and the rest of the Descendants from the Lord William Howard of Naworth, whose Memo∣ry is to be preserv'd as Sacred in the Family, who for Wisdom, Virtue and Honour, was the Glory of his Time; he was Third Son of Thomas Duke of Nor∣folk, whose Tryal and Unfortunate Death you have here had a view of; the Sons of which Lord William Howard, were men of great Honour, and serv'd their King with their Lives and Fortunes; his Second Son Sir Francis Howard, having raised a Regiment at his own proper Charge, and suffer'd a long Imprison∣ment in the Tower. Collonel Thomas Howard the Fourth Son of the Lord William, also raised a Regi∣ment for King Charles the First of Sacred Memory, and Bravely lost his Life at the Head of it; having re∣fus'd very Advantagious Conditions from the King of Portugal, who had invited him into his Service, he being a Souldier of long Experience Abroad, and much esteem'd for his Courage and Conduct, and de∣tain'd
here by the Commands of his Prince, whom his Honour, Religion and Conscience oblig'd him to obey; he fell (a willing Sacrifice for the Service of his Prince) to the rage of the Rebels. Here is also an Account of such Families as are Descended from the House of Howard, taken in the year 1660. BY the Daughter and Heir of Sir John Howard, who was of the same Family with the Duke of Norfolk, and Married to John Vere Earl of Oxford; are descended by the Heirs of Wingfield, and of Nevil Lord Latimer, the Families of Wingfield now remain∣ing, Percy Earls of Northumberland, Cecil Earl of Sa∣lisbury, Danvers late Earl of Danby, who quarters the Arms of Howard; Norris late Earl of Barkshire, the Lord Pawlet of Somersetshire, and many other Noble Families, namely the Antient and Honourable Family of the Lacies, and from John Howard first Duke of Norfolk of that Name, by his Daughter Married to Windham, and from them by Lutterel and Rogers descended the Marquess of Hartford, the Lord Seymor, and many other Antient Families in the West; and by other Daughters, the Families of Knivet and Gorges: From Lord Edmond Howard Third Son of Thomas Se∣cond Duke of Norfolk is descended the Lord Arundel of Warder; From the said Thomas Second Duke of Norfolk are descended first all those of the House of Nottingham and Iffingham, and from them by Daughters
the present Marquess of Winchester, the Earls of Mul∣grave and Peterborough, the Viscount Mordant, the Lord Fairfax, and many other Eminent Families. By his Daughter Married to the Earl of Darby, are de∣scended at this day the Earls of Darby, Bridgewater, the Lord Sturton, Morley, Dudley, Stafford, Shandois, Powis, and many other Noble Families. By his Daugh∣ter Married to Sir Rice ap Thomas, the Earls of Car∣bary, and many other Noble Families in Wales are descended. By his Daughter married to Sir Thomas Bullen Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond are descended, the Fa∣milies of Carie Earls of Dover and Monmouth, the Viscount Faulkland; and by the Daughter of Carie Married to the Family of Knowles, the Earls of Ban∣bury, Northumberland, Essex, Warwick, Holland, New∣port, and the Lord Paget, and many others. From Thomas Howard Third Duke of Norfolk are descended the Heirs of the Lord Scroope of Nevil, Earl of Westmorland, the Lord Berkley, and the Heirs of the Viscount Binden. From Thomas Howard Fourth Duke of Norfolk, the present Duke of Norfolk, the Viscount Stafford, the Earles of Suffolk, Barkshire, Carlile, Lord Howard of Escrick, all the Howards of the North, the Earl of Dorset, the late Duke of Richmond; and by Marriage at present many other Noble Families are nearly Al∣lyed, as the Earls of Northumberland, Bedford, Salis∣bury, Devonshire, the Lords Darcy, Sandis, Fairfax of Imulleth, Mac Donell, and many other Antient and Honourable Families are descended.
This great Duke of Norfolk whose Tryal you have read, first Married the Daughter and Heir of Fitz-Allen Earl of Arundel, by whom he had Philip, who was Poison'd in the Tower; the Dukes second Marriage was to the Daughter and Heir of the Lord Audley, by whom he had Thomas Earl of Suffolk, and the Lord William Howard of Naworth, who was long detain'd a Prisoner in the Tower after the death of the Duke. The Dukes third Marriage being to the Widow of the Lord Dacres of the North, who by the said Lord Dacres had two Daughters, Anne and Elizabeth, to whom the Duke Married his two Sons, Philip and the Lord William Howard. Thomas the Great Lord Marshal (who is never to be mention'd without the memory of his Honour) was the Son of Philip Earl of Arundel, and Anne the Eldest Daughter of the Lord Dacres, which Thomas Married the Lady Alathea Talbot, Daughter and Heir to the Earl of Shrewsbury, by whom he had Henry Lord Matrevers, and William Viscount Stafford, which Henry Married the Lady Elizabeth Stuart Daughter to the Duke to Lenox, and the Lord Viscount Stafford Married the Daughter and Heir of the Lord Baron Stafford; This Henry after Earl of Arundel, left Eight Sons and two Daughters, Thomas who died at Padua, and was restor'd to the Dukedom, Henry last Duke of Norfolk, Philip Lord Cardinal, Charles a person of much Honour and Integrity, Ed∣ward, Francis, Bernard and Esma. Henry, who after the Decease of Thomas, was Duke of Norfolk, Mar∣ried the Lady Anne Somerset, Eldest Daughter to the Marquess of Worcester, and Sister to the present Duke of Beaufort, by whom he had two Sons, Henry
the present Duke of Norfolk, who Married the Lady Mary Mordant Daughter to the Earl of Peterborough; and the Lord Thomas Howard, who Married the Daughter and Heir of Sir George Savil, of the Family of the Marquess of Halifax, by whom he hath Issue: Also the said Duke had two Daughters, the Eldest Married to the Duke of Gordon of Huntly, the young∣est to the Marquess of Waperiso. Charles the fourth Son Married Mary the Eldest Daughter, and Co-heir of George Tatershall of Hinshamsted in the County of Berkshire Esquire, a Lady of great Virtue, and extra∣ordinary Parts, of an Antient and Honourable Family, which came into England with the Saxons, and long retain'd the Title of Baron, as is recorded by many Authors, by whom he hath a Hopeful Son, named Henry-Charles Howard: Bernard Married to Catharine the Younger Daughter of the said George Tatershall Esq who hath also Issue, one Son Named Bernard and three Daughters. The Lady Elizabeth Teresa the youngest Sister of the last Duke of Norfolk, was Married to Alexander Mac Donell, Eldest Son to Sir James Mac Donell Baronet, and Nephew to the late Marquess of Antrim; by whom she had one Son Named Randal Mac Donell: She after Married to Bartholomew Russel Esq of Seaton in the County of Dublin, of the Fa∣mily of the Earls of Bedford. The Lord Thomas Howard, after Earl of Suffolk, se∣cond Son to Thomas Duke of Norfolk, who so unfor∣tunately lost his Life for Espousing the Interest of the Queen of Scots, Married the Daughter and Heir of Sir Ppilip Tenevit, whose Eldest Son Married to the Daughter of the Earl of Dunbar, his Eldest Daughter
to the Earl of Salisbury,  ¦bury, and the third to  Eldest had many Sons an  Berkshire being the second  Daughter of Cecil Earl of Sa  Sir Robert Howard of Clun, Marr  Nevil Lord of Abergaveny. The  created Lord Howard of Escrick, Marr  of the Lord Butler. One of the D  said Earl of Suffolk Married Percy Earl o  ∣land; another to Boil Earl of rory; one  and another to Walsingham, all of which ha. But to return to Philip the Eldest Son of t  William Howard of Naworth, who Married in Family of the Carols, by whom he left one Son ∣led William, who Married the Daughter of the Lord Evers, by whom he had Sons and Daughters, Charles the Eldest Son late Earl of Carlile having Married the Daughter of the late Lord Escrick Howard, by whom he had Edward the present Earl of Carlile, who Mar∣ried the Daughter and Heir of Sir William Ʋdall, by whom he hath a Hopeful Off-spring. Also two Daughters, one Married to the Lord Preston, the other to Sir John Fenwick. Sir Philip Howard Brother to the late Earl of Carlile, Married the Daughter of Sir Wil∣liam Newton, by whom he hath one Son. Sir Francis Howard the second Son of the Lord Wil∣liam Howard, Married the Daughter of Sir Henry Widrington, by whom he had Heirs, Francis his Eldest Son Married the Daughter of Sir William Gerrard, by whom he had two Daughters; and after Married the Daughter of John Townly of Townly Esq by whom he hath Issue.
Son of Sir Francis, Married  Dawson Esq hath Issue also.  ving taken Religious Orders.  ain in the late Wars. Son of the Lord William, Mar∣  er of Sir Henry Widrington, by  William the Eldest Son being  Daughter and Heir of George Cuning∣  by whom he had one Son Charles, who Mar∣d the Daughter of John Mear Esq. Dorothy the Daughter of Sir Charles Howard Married William Sl of Croxdale in the County of Durham, and hath Issue. Another Daughter Religious. Collonel Thomas Howard the fourth Son of the Lord William, who so eminently Serv'd his King, and lost his Life in that Service, Married Margaret Daughter to Sir William Evers, second Son to the Lord Evers, by whom he had one Son named Thomas, and six Daughters; Thomas married the Daughter and Heir of George Heron of Chip-Chace Esq by whom he hath three Daughters. Mary the Eldest Daughter of Col∣lonel Thomas Howard, married Ralph Fetherstonhalgh of Stanop in the County of Durham of an Antient Fami∣ly in the North, Margaret and Antonia were Religious, Catharine married to Nathaniel Lacy of Deeping in Lin∣colnshire Esq whose Family were formerly Earls of Lincoln; and after married to Edward Lacy of Brewry Castle in the County of Limerick Esq descended from the Earls of Ʋlster in Ireland. Teresa, the youngest Daughter of Collonel Thomas Howard married to Ralph Booth of the County of Durham Esq of an Antient Family related to the Lord Delamer, bearing the same Name and Arms, who hath Issue.
Thus hath this Illustrious Family spread it self over the three Kingdoms, and hath acquir'd so much Glory Abroad, that in all places where Nobility is known and understood, the Name of Howard is Honoured: Germany claims it by its Original, and France by Ally∣ance, Italy by Respect; having had that Object of Honour, Thomas the great Lord Marshal among them, whose Generous and Noble Disposition planted such lasting Obligations there, that even in these present times some of his Descendants have reap'd the Benefit. Courage has been so essentially due to this great Fami∣ly, that never any was known of that Blood, that did not possess an excessive share of that Virtue, which they generally imploy'd in the Service of their Prince, few of them having been in Rebellion; and 'tis wish'd they may never Sully themselves with so black a Crime, and as they are descended from Princes, so they may Unite themselves in a True Obedience to their Sove∣veraign, which is the best Defence of Families, no∣thing being so  as Faction and Sedition, which has a all imes prov'd a Canker to consume them. FINIS.
