L3355 18211626 107150
A LOYAL NEW-YEARS GIFT. Or an Acrostick on the Prayer of every true SUBJECT. God Bless King JAMES the Second And let him live long and Hapily. GReat, Good and Just, are seldome to be found Aton'd together in the same Compound: Only Great JAMES these Epithetes as due (Nature and Heaven conspiring to allow Double, what to an ordinary Mortals Lot Devolves to him) has by just Title got: By Birth-right, Great, Just in his Conversation, Loving whats Good, hath gain'd Good Commen∣dation. Let every Soul, since every Soul within Each of Three Kingdoms has partaker been, Even to Extreams, of Goodness most Divine, That like Sun-beams, from him the Fountain, shine; Sing forth his Praise; let all join in one Chorus, Heaven to beseech, that he may long before us Sway Britain's Scepter. May auspicious Jove Initiate this Year with his propitious Love. Kings Rule by him; they by his Order are: May he Protect our JAMES in Peace and War. I'th' Heavens whil'st Sun and Moon endure to shine, Let us be Bless'd with him, or with his Line. No Revolution may bright Phoebus make, In which he may not of fresh Joys partake. 'Gainst Foes Defend him Lord; Destroy them all Vainly who seek the Lord's Annointeds Fall. Increase his Friends; Establish sure his Throne, Even till this fleeting World's Decay'd and gone. All Blessings this or the next World afford Let them be poured on him from the Lord. May'st thou great Hero! long persist to be Our Faiths Defender and our Liberty. Each Tongue must now confess, even Rebels say Ne'er did our Land see such a New-Years Day. So happy we, who Bless'd are with a King Given us from Heaven; and with him each good thing. The base disturbers of our Peace he'll Quel; And be a Father to all that do well. He all just Rights and Privledge Maintains Nor suffers any that Unlawful Gains. Exact: He our Religions purer Streams Doth vindicate from innovating Dreams. Strange Nations see and wonder at our Bliss How we enjoy such happiness as this. Envy they may, but can't disturb our Peace A Gracious Prince makes us secure at Ease. Cease then, O cease, strange Fools that would Rebel Perfideous Wretches, know when ye are well. Our too abundant Happiness 't must be If ought disturd our great Tranquility. No happier People did the Sun e'er View Let's thankful be, O King; it is by you. Desist we never from pouring out our Prayers You may great Sir, see many happy Years. This may be Printed. R. P. LONDON, Printed by George Croom, at the Sign of the Blue-Ball in Thames-street near Baynards'-Castle. 1685.
