L581 12763963 93544
THE COPIE OF A LETTER SENT From VVILLIAM LAVD Archbishop of Canterbury the 28. of June MDCXLI. unto the Universitie of OXFORD: SPECIFYING, His willingnesse to resigne his Chancellor-ship, And withall deploring his sad Estate now in the time of his Imprisonment. Printed in the yeare, 1641.
The Arch-Bishops Letter to the University of OXFORD, declaring his willingnes to resigne up the Chancelorship. Dated June 28. 1641. MY present Condition is not un∣knowne to the whole world, yet by few pittied, or deplored; The righteous God best knowes the justice of my sufferings, on whom both in life and death, I will e∣ver depend, the last of which shall be most welcome, in that my life is now burthen∣some unto mee, my mind attended with sad, and grievious thoughts, my soule continually vexed with anxiety & trouble, groaning under the heavy burthen of a displeased Parliament; my name dis∣perst, and grossely abused by the multiplicity of Libellous Pamphlets, and my selfe bard from any wonted accesse to the best of Princes, and it is vox populi that I am Popishly affected: How earnest I have beene in my disputations, exhortations, and otherwise, to quench such sparks, least they should become coales. I hope after my decease, you will acknowledge, yet in the midst of my afflictions
there is nothing hath so nearely touched me, as the remembrance of your free and joyfull acceptance of mee, to be your Chancellour, and that I am now shut up from being able to doe you that Service which you might justly expect from mee, when I first received this honour, I intended to have car∣ryed it with mee to the Grave, neither were my hopes any lesse, since the Parliament by his Maje∣sties Command, committed mee to this Royall Prison. But sith (by reason of matters of greater conse∣quence yet in hand) the Parliament is pleased to procrastinate my triall, I do hereby as thankefully resigne my office of being Chancellour, as ever I received that dignity, intreating you to elect some honorable Person; who upon all occasions may be ready to serve you; I do beseech God to send you such a one as may doe all things for his glory, and the furtherance of your most famous University, This is the continuall Prayer of Your Dejected Friend and Chancellor, W. CANT. FINIS.
