M428A 12426308 61869
A Manifesto: OR An Account of the State of the present Differences between the most Serene and Potent KING OF DENMARK and NORWAY CHRISTIAN the V. And the most Serene DUKE of SLESWICK AND HOLSTEIN-GOTTORP CHRISTIAN ALBERT. Together with some Letters of the KING of Great Britain, the King of Denmark, and the Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, concerning a Mediation in these Differences, which the KING of Great Britain most Generously offer'd, and the King of Den∣mark refused and slighted. As also some other Letters of the Dukes of Brunswick-Lunenbourgh, the Emperor, &c. Whereby the Calumnies of a certain Danish Minister are plainly Detected. Printed in the Year 1677.
A Praemonition to the Reader. BEcause some Danish Ministers have publish'd Books full of lying Stories in the Courts of Princes, and forg'd many Calumnies to the prejudice of the most Serene Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, lest the Reader should doubt of the Truth of what is contain'd in this Manifesto, we have added at the end hereof the Authentick Papers of several Treaties and Agreements, which do clearly justifie every thing that is here∣in asserted.
An Account of the State of the present Differences between the most Serene and Potent King of Denmark and Norway Christian the V. And the most Serene Duke of Sleswick and Holstein-Gottorp Chri∣stian Albert. THE Differences between Christian the V. the most Serene and Potent King of Den∣mark and Norway, and Christian Albert the most Serene Duke of Sleswick and Hol∣stein-Gottorp, wherein the Treaty made at Rendsburg on the X. day of July, 1675. is to be in the first place fairly considered, being the subject of this present dis∣course; We hope we may with his Sacred Majesties leave Publish by command from the said Duke and in his name, what-ever we can with truth alledge, either as to the matter of Fact or Law, in behalf of the most Serene House of Gottorp, submitting it to the just Censure of the whole World: And we are perswaded that these our endeavours can offend no person, who loving true Piety follows the precepts of Christianity, which allows of no War to be lawful, but when it is just and necessary, and especially betwixt such as profess the same Religion and are so nearly related in blood.
In the examination of the merits of this Cause we shall strictly observe this Rule, To alledge nothing that is false, and likewise neither omit nor disguise any truth to the prejudice of so just a Cause; since the Justice of any cause cannot appear but by truth and faithfulness, without which Justice is but imperfect. And that Christian Prin∣ces and their most illustrious and excellent Ministers and Ambassadors, (who perhaps may at this time be employ∣ed in adjusting the Publick differences at Neguen, Ratis∣bone, or elsewhere) together with other great Men, lovers of Justice, may not be tyred with a prolix discourse; We shall propose thed state of the case in a few words, and then pro∣ceed to the Accusations wherewith the House of Gottorp is charged, which we do not question but to answer so fully, that all unprejudic'd persons may clearly judge of the matter of Fact, upon which the said Accusations are for the most part grounded. These Aspersions being wip'd off, we shall add the Laws and Constitutions, in vertue whereof the Duke of Gottorp ought, notwithstand∣ing the Treaty to which he was forced at Rendsburg, to be entirely restored. It is manifest to all that know any thing of our affairs, that the most Serene House of Gottorp possessing several Provinces bordering upon Denmark, which they have hi∣therto governed jointly with the Kings of Denmark, pur∣suant to a Treaty between them, That King has no reason to fear any thing from the House of Gottorp, if he will but suffer it to enjoy it's own Rights quietly; VVhereas on the contrary the House of Gottorp lyes exposed to the Invasion of the Danes, whenever they shall have a mind to lay hold of any fair opportunity, and abuse their Power contrary to Justice and the Publick
Faith. For although heretofore the Earls of Holstein have had grievous Wars with the Kings of Denmark; yet the state of Holstein, and the neighbouring Provinces, being much altered from what it was, the Danes can have no reason to suspect the House of Gottorp, and much less fear any harm from it, except what they may bring upon themselves, by provoking it by frequent Injuries and Assaults to it's own Defence. Since the Crown of Denmark is come to the Family of Oldenburg, and that these Provinces have been more than once divided between these Kings of Denmark and the Dukes of Sleswick and Holstein, the Power of the said Kings has been much encreased by the said Divisions, and by their Successions to the Crown of Norway; how∣ever it will appear that the Royalties of the House of Gottorp have not been therefore in the least diminished. The Dukedomes of Sleswick and Holstein have been both so divided, and the first held at least for many years from the Kingdom of Denmark, as the other alwayes from the Empire. The whole Dukedome of Sleswick is a part of Juitland reaching from the borders of Holstein to the Bridge of Coldingen; one part of it being possessed by the House of Holstein-Gottorp, and the other by the Kings of Denmark, as Dukes of Sleswick. Amongst the several Conditions from time to time agreed upon, the following have been more than once confirmed, viz. That the King of Den∣mark should not engage in any War unless for his own defence, or the maintenance of his Dignity, and then not till after ha∣ving communicated the same to the said Dukes; and that if thereupon a War should be agreed upon, that then the Dukes of Sleswick (of whom the King of Denmark is one) should
send to the said Kings assistance, a certain number of Horse and Foot, maintaining them at their own expences, the King contributing proportionably for his part of the Dukedome, and promising to defend both their Vassals. Chytr. lib. 24. Sat. p. 719. And we find that upon the said Kings not re∣garding this Agreement, but making War of their own heads, the Dukes of Gottorp have not been obliged to send the assistance stipulated, though it has been demanded from them. There have been almost perpetual VVars between the Danes and Swedes, which in former Ages have had dif∣ferent successes, but in this last Age been more favourable to the Swedes, especially since the success of their Arms in Germany. Hence it is come to pass, that the Danes, exasperated by the remembrance of the Losses they had sustained by their Provinces and Places which they had lost, in hopes of better success, and by the Instigation of evil Counsellors, pouring oyle upon the Fire, have taken all opportunities of making VVar against the Swedes, without acquainting the Dukes of Gottorp, much less consulting with them about it; but with so ill success, that they have been still punisht with greater Losses, having likewise thereby involved the Provinces and Subjects of the said Duke in all the calamities attending a VVar; by which, though the House of Gottorp hath suffered in∣finite Damages and Violations in its Rights, yet were they never extinguished, nor lest to the sole pleasure and determination of the King of Denmark as Supreme Prince. But not to take the matter too high, and to come nearer to our Subject, let the beginning and end of the late VVar between the Danes and Swedes be diligently con∣sidered,
for from thence springs all the mischief. Carolus Gustavus King of Sweden, making VVar against Poland, and having raised up many powerful Enemies, who seemed to have reduced his Army to great streights; Frederick the III. King of Denmark, of happy Memory, taking that opportunity, declared VVar against the Swedes, making great preparations both of Men and Arms, as thinking he should never have a more favourable oppor∣tunity to recover his Losses, and humble the Swedes. And the King of Sweden being by Marriage with the Daughter of Frederick, Duke of Gottorpe of happy Memory, be∣come nearly allied to that House; the said Duke Frede∣rick obtained a Promise from his Son-in-Law, that he would hearken to a Peace, which he undertook to mediate with the King of Denmark. The Duke there∣fore wrote several Letters with his own hand to the King of Denmark, to perswade him to Peace, and not only profer'd his own assistance to conclude it, but earnestly recommended the promoting of it to the Ambassador of the most Christian King. Yet so far was the King of Den∣mark from taking this Office in good part, that he never thought fit to give the Duke any Answer herein. But the event of this unnecessary War was, that the King of Den∣mark, instead of reasonable conditions of Peace which the Duke of Gottorp might have obtained for him, hav∣ing spent his Forces, was obliged at last to admit of such as a Conqueror would impose upon him. And whilst this Treaty was a concluding (by which Schonen and the neigh∣bouring Provinces were yielded up to the Swedes) the King of Sweden thought himself obliged to take care of the House of Gottorp, which having sustained great damages in this War, he thought ought likewise to
receive all just Satisfaction. Amongst other things it was agreed, that the House of Gottorp should hold and enjoy the Dukedom of Sleswick hereafter, not as for∣merly from the Crown of Denmark, but independently and absolutely, without subjection to any other Power. To this the King of Denmark seemed at first very un∣willing to consent; but when the States of that King∣dom offered him the same Right over that part of the Dutchy of Sleswick which was his, and thereby gave him occasion to aspire to the Monarchy of the whole King∣dom, he approved thereof both for himself and the Duke of Gottorp. Not long after the King having compassed his design, and obtained the Monarchy of the Kingdom of Denmark, from that time governed all things by his sole will and pleasure, exercising an independent Authority, and abso∣lute Dominion over the Persons and Estates of his Sub∣jects. Thus the Danish Commonwealth being chang∣ed, and all things having put on a new Face, the King endeavoured all he could, so to order the affairs of the Kingdom, as might best establish his Authority, enable him to repulse his Enemies, and recover his Losses. And nothing seeming more to oppose his designs then the Dukedom of Sleswick and Holstein, eminent in Riches, abounding with Valiant men, and unaccustomed to such kind of Dominion, which would adhere to the Duke of Gottorp, who had Souldiers and a well-fortified Town there, and that probably Holstein might demand help from the Emperor and Empire; the Danes begun to have an ill Eye upon the Duke and his Fort of Tuningen, sus∣pecting his League with the Swedes, and Journey to that King; which they endeavoured many ways to traduce,
insomuch that their envy against the House of Gottorp, and their Designs to break the Treaty made at Roschild, ap∣peared ain enough, though they endeavoured to cover their designs by writing several Letters, pretending all friendship and sincerity at the same time, to put them in practise. These Designs of Denmark being now grown so ripe, that nothing but an opportunity seemed wanting, it quickly offered it self. For the King of France having made War upon the Ʋnited Netherlands, and they hav∣ing eased themselves of the burthen thereof upon Ger∣many, the Elector of Brandenburg joyned himself, toge∣ther with others, with the Confederates, in opposition to the most Christian King, and afterwards concluded a Peace with him by the Mediation of the King of Sweden upon most advantageous Terms, who having interposed his Guarantee to the King of France, and the Elector soon after taking up Arms contrary thereunto, the Emperor Ele∣ctor of Brandenburg and others, fearing lest the Swedes should make good their Guarantee by force of Armes, drew the King of Denmark to their side for a diversion to the Swedes. No sooner had the King of Denmark got this opportunity, but he Muster'd his Army in Juitland, and presently after put them into Quarters; yet so as the Enemies of the Swedes, at the Court, had an opportunity still to perswade that King to a War against them; which the Swedes endeavoured to divert, by sending a splendid Embassy to Copenhaguen, but without success, being able to obtain only a short delay of that Expedition. In this conjuncture of Affairs, the King of Denmark had fully resolved upon a War against the Swedes, but suspecting that the House of Gottorp, to which he had
shewed so much ill-will, would not neglect their own Defence, whereby his Designs might miscarry; He thought in the first place, by depriving it of all its Riches, Arms, Forts, and Force, to ruin it wholly; and in order thereunto, the King made several exorbitant Demands, and moveing frequently with his Army, seemed to Threaten open Violence; afterwards in the Assembly of the States of the Province, he challenged to himself the major part of the Revenues, which had always been equally divided between him and the Duke of Gottorp, leaving a very small pro∣portion to the Duke: But his Highness having signi∣fied by his Ambassadors to the Kings Commissioners, that he would oppose this Demand, as contrary to the Antient Customs, the Assembly was dissolved without doing any thing, and Adjourned to another time, these Controversies encreasing daily more and more. But the most remarkable was that about the Succes∣sion to the County of Oldenburg and Delmenhorst, which being long debated, was at last left to the Imperial Tri∣bunal for a final decision, the most Serene Dukes of Holstein-Ploen being Plaintiff against the King of Den∣mark and Dukes of Gottorp: whilst these two last with∣stood joyntly the Dukes of Ploen, according as they had agreed between them, the business remained undetermi∣ned; but the Duke of Holstein-Ploen going another way to work, found means to transact with the King separate∣ly, and so that obstacle being removed, sentence was given in the Emperours Court against the Duke of Gottorp. This Transaction was carried so secretly, that the Duke of Gottorp has not yet been able to learn the particulars and conditions of the Agreement.
The King of Denmark in the mean time challenging to himself the whole Power in these Countries against all Right, and excluding the Duke of Gottorp from all share, not only there, but also in the District of Stad-budjad, a Fief of the House of Brunswick and Lunenbourg. For when this Cause was under debate in the Imperial Court, the King of Denmark himself by Letters to the Duke of Lunenbourg desired him, amongst other things, to intercede with the Emperour, that the said District Stad-budjad, no ways belonging to those Provinces, might not be involved in that Controversie. The Duke obtained his desires from the Emperour, and therefore, when the Sentence given by his Imperial Majesty con∣cerning these Countries came to be put in Execution, The Dukes of Brunswick, Lunenbourg, exempted again the said District from the Execution, and in express terms reserved to the House of Gottorp their Rights in it. Notwithstanding all this, the King commanded Homage to be paid to him alone by all the Subjects of that Di∣strict, not only excluding the Duke, but using his Am∣bassador ill, who had entred his Protestation against it, and attempting also to Usurp to himself the Toll of E upon Weser, belonging by Inheritance, partly to the House of Gottorp, and partly to the Kings of Denmark, endea∣vouring to dispossess the Duke of both. While these Differences encreased more and more, the King of Denmark in order to the carrying on his designes against the Swedes and the House of Gottorp, the more secretly and succesfully, caused the Swedish Ambas∣sador then at Copenhaguen, negotiating a Marriage for the King his Master, and thereby a firm Peace to be received with the greatest demonstrations of kindness and friend∣ship▪
And at the same time the Chancellor of Den∣mark wrote very civilly to the Resident of Gottorp, then at Hambourgh, telling him he would meet him half way, to endeavour a fair composition of all the differences be∣twixt the King and the Duke, which, he said, he desired above all things, and doubted not but a few hours would put an end to what had been kept on foot so many years, if he would be pleased to meet him accordingly. The King himself afterwards declared his mind to the same purpose to the President more than once, and last of all by the Earl of Oldenbourgh, who told the President, that the King desired nothing more then to have his Presence and assistance to accommodate these difficulties in so cri∣tical a juncture, by which compliance of his, he would oblige his Majesty, who was inclined to hearken to an accommodation. After this the Earl was sent by the King to the Duke of Gottorp, to assure him of his Friend∣ship, and let him know the necessity of the President's going to his Majesty, and after a short stay went to Ham∣borough with Letters from the Duke to the President, for whose further security to come to the King at Rensbourgh, his Majesty sent him a Passeport, and one of his Trum∣pets. Soon after the King of Denmark going to Holstein, to put his designs in Execution, acquainted the Duke of Gottorp with his Journey, desiring him not to be troubled at it, as having no other intention therin but to compose all things to both their satisfactions. The Duke of Gottorp trusting to several Letters full of the like assurances, when the King was on his way with all his Army to Holstein, sent one of his Gentlemen to Hadersleby, to complement him, and went himself soon after with his Brother the
Bishop of Lubeck and the Earl of Aldenburgh, then retur∣ned from Hambourgh to meet his Majesty, waiting upon him at Hensbourgh, after which the King being to go through Dennewerk, and his Highness having entertain∣ed him there with all imaginable respect and splendour, the King desired him to come and see him at Rendsbourgh, where he was to stay for sometime, and for a larger ex∣pression of kindness, both his Majesty and his Chancellor drunk several times to the good success of the approaching Consultation. After this Adolphus Kielmannus chief Minister to the Duke of Gottorp, notwithstanding his Sickness and the dissuasions of his Friends, went directly from Hambourgh to Rensbourgh, where having confer'd with the Chancellor of Denmark above eight hours about the principal mat∣ters in debate, he offer'd the Government of Tunderen for the County of Oldenbourgh and Delmenhorst, and having removed all other Impediments he could think upon, and taking the business to be near its conclusion, and to want nothing but the ratification and subscription of the Prin∣ces; he went to Gottorp to let his Master know, how far they had proceeded, and with what success. The Prince himself, that nothing might be wanting on his part for composing the remaining Differences, deputed Adolphus Buchwaldius Governour of Sleswick, Frederick Kielman∣nus the President, and Andrew Cramer one of his Coun∣sellors of State, with a special Commission to go to Rends∣bourg, June 22. 1675. being Arrived there, they con∣fer'd the next day with the Earl of Rantzo, and the Lord Wibius, and Gloxinius his Majesties Counsellors of State; and they being the same that had assisted at the Assembly of the States at Kilon, on the part of the King, without
effecting any thing, renewed the matter of the Taxes, saying, That the King persisted still in his demand of the greater part of them for the maintenance of his Army, which granted, his Majesty would bind himself by Re∣versal Letters, as they call them, (a thing not so much as mentioned in the Assembly of the States) never to make this a President for the future. But the newness of that being a prejudice great enough, the Duke of Gottorp thought it not secure to recede from the Antient Customs; yet to gratify the King, he made this Pro∣posal, That the greater Taxes should be paid, but to be equally divided and employed by each Prince, in raising and maintaining Souldiers for the defence of the said Dukedomes; and that the States might the easier consent thereunto, he desired the whole business might be pro∣posed to them, it being most agreeable to Antient Cu∣stomes and former Treaties, especially that of the Union, to consult the States about raising of an Army, maintain∣ing and quartering it, and then proceed according to their resolutions. While they were thus debating concerning Taxes, and other things, the Chancellor of Denmark wrote from Rendsbourgh to the President Kielmannus, acquainting him that the King being ready for a Treaty, it would be advantageous to both Princes, if the Duke of Gottorp would please to come to the King at Rendsbourgh, and by his Presence promote an Amicable composure of all these matters. The Duke remembring his Majesty had desi∣red the same thing of him at Dennewerk, to shew at once his duty to the King, and his inclinations to Peace, sent one of his Gentlemen upon St. John Baptists day to his Majesty, to acquaint him, that his Master was ready to
wait upon him, if he would give him leave. The King commending this Resolution of the Prince, said twice, he hoped the President Kielmannus would come along too. Accordingly next day, the Duke being perswaded that all was sincerely and honestly intended, begun that unhappy Journy with the President and some others, and being near Rendsburgh, was received with the shooting of several Guns. But hearing there from some of his, what had been said in the Kings Name about the Taxes, his Highness desired it might be regulated according to former Treaties and Antient Customes; and as to other things, he declared himself as above, protesting he would always obey the King, and wholly employ these Taxes in a War for the defence of his Country. At last comes that fatal and unfortunate day, the 26. of June, in which all the designs that had been so long a∣hatching against the House of Gottorp to its Ruin, were to be put in Execution, and that hidden Fire to break out into open Flames. It was hastened by some Letters, that came that very day from the Elector of Brandenbourg, and brought the News of the defeat of the Swedes in the Province of La Mark: Assoon as they were read, all things seemed to favour the Kings designs, and conspire to the Ruin of the House of Gottorp. The Danes glad and proud of this good Omen, thought it not sit to delay or dissemble it any longer, but called a Council of VVar, shut the Gates, drew up their Draw-bridges, sent their Forces to Sleswick, Tonninghen, and up and down; shut up the Harbour with a Boom, disarmed and secured the Dukes Troop of Guards, and permitted none to sti, unless they could show the Kings leave under his own Hand. The Duke himself, instead of being Invited to Dine with the
King, as formerly, had his Dinner brought him apart in his drawing Room, and Guards set to watch him; his Chamber-doors being bolted every Night: None of the King Ministers being suffered to come near him for some days, except the Sieur Winterfield, High-Marshal of the Court, to whom the Duke, having called him to him, said, That he was a Prince of the Empire, there un∣worthily Treated, contrary to his expectation, and unde∣servedly; nay, contrary to the greatest Protestations and assurances of Friendship, and Publick Faith, desiring him to acquaint the King therewith, that his Majesty might permit him to depart. But alas, all was in vain, it being resolved, that the Blow should be followed, this Detention being but a Prologue to more mischief. For the Duke and his Ministers being now in their Power, and a fair opportunity presenting it self to invade the Swedes, weakned by their loss at Fberlin, the Kings Deputies having sent for Buchwaldius, Frederick Christian Kielman, and Cramer, to Court, told them, that the Case being alter'd, they were no more to dis∣pute about giving the greatest part of the Taxes to the King, who would now challenge the whole alone, and quarter his Army up and down in the Dukes Territories to preserve them from the Enemy, and that the Empe∣rors Requisitorial Letters might be obeyed, which they would therefore now exhibite to them, shewing also by this their ill-will and premeditated Designs against the House of Gottorp. Moreover they added, that the King had for a long time been jealous of the Dukes designs and inclinations, and being to carry his Army out of the Country, he thought he ought to take care to leave no Enemies behind him, wherein he could not secure him∣self
but by seizing upon the Castle of Gottorp, the strong Town of Tonningen, and all the Dukes Forces, till the change of Affairs might secure him otherwise. That it was not sit for the Kings Majesty to exchange the Coun∣ties of Oldenbourgh and Delmenhorst, for that of Tunderen. That these and other things could not be done in haste, but required more time than the King could now spare, fearing lest some third Party might in the mean while seize those Provinces. That the King therefore would put Garrisons into all the Fortified places of the Coun∣try, and provide all other things necessary for its De∣fence: protesting withal, that if any loss should happen by the Dukes delay, the Reparation of it would be re∣quired from the Author thereof; but if the Duke would accept of one hundred and fifty thousand Dollars offered him at Copenhaguen, to renounce his Right to them, they still hoped his Majesty might be prevailed upon at the Dukes request to pay that mony. The Danes having proposed these severe conditions, and the Dukes Commissioners having been to consult their Master, returned this Answer, That as to the Taxes, the Duke, without prejudice to his Right, was forced to yield to the present juncture of time in that Matter. That the Requisitorial Letters of the Emperor concerned onely the Dukedom of Holstein, not that of Sleswick; and they being according to the Constitutions of the Empire, and the Pragmatick Sanction, could re∣quire nothing of him but a safe Passage, which his High∣ness would never deny, when ever the King should de∣sire it. That the Castle of Gottorp was neither by Art nor Scituation so strong as to be formidable, and therefore the King might well permit the Duke to secure the place
of his Residence and Habitation, with some Souldiers; and for an evident proof of his respect, the Duke was contented his Majesty should have as strong a Garrison in Tonningen as he himself, provided both should take the Oath of Fidelity to each Prince; and that the King would oblige himself, that upon the change of Affairs, all things should be restored again as they were. That if the King would dispose solely of all things in these Countries at his Pleasure, the Duke must yield to it, but hoped his Right should be saved entire: That he had never committed nor omitted any thing that might entitle the King to demand reparation of him; and for the Pro∣posals of an Exchange, they were neither such as impo∣sed a necessity upon his Majesties will, nor derogated from it. That he would leave the Transactions of Copenhaguen till they were set on Foot again. And lastly, That he earnestly begged, that the King would no longer delay to grant him and his, Liberty to go where they would. This most reasonable Answer of the Duke proved of no effect, the Danes being resolved to pass to the greatest Extremities: For the Kings Deputies signified again in Writing, That their Master persisted firm in his first of∣fers, hoping to provoke the Duke to discover his mind in the same manner. But he replyed only as before, request∣ing again, That the King would not urge so much the Sur∣render of his Castles and Forts, but consent to some easier Terms than these; which the Danes said were only Baga∣telles. But that King and his Minister were so far from remit∣ing any thing of the Rigour of their Demands, that they added Rebukes and Threats; For, said they, the Dukes absolute Power over Sleswick, being extorted from the King
by force of Arms, the Duke had thereby lost the Fief of it▪ and his being in a League with the King of Sweden, an Enemy to the Empire, might probably cause him to be dispossest of the Dukedome of Holstein, and the King to be invested therein. Moreover, that the King was fully resolved, That neither the Duke, nor any of his Ministers, should be set at Liberty, uniil he had seized all the Dukes strong-holds, and that he would even confine his Highnss apart from all his Ministers and Servants, and proceed to the Execution hereof by force of Arms. For as we have before mentioned, they had al∣ready Body of Horse and Foot in Sleswick, which block∣ed up the Castle of Gottorp, where the Reverend Bishop of Lubeck, Brother to the most Serene Duke, then was, and had also invested Tonningen and Holme: and that nothing might retard the Surrender of Tonningen, an Or∣der was drawn by the Kings command for the Duke to Sign, and send to the Person that commanded for him there. The Duke seeing himself betrayed, and without any help, deprived of his Liberty, and fallen into a very dan∣gerous distemper, fearing greater Evils might be intended against him and his Ministers, (which was not obscurely given him to understand) suffered at length the Surrender of all his Forts and Forces to be extorted from him: and though he only desired from the King that the Castle of Gottorp, the place of his Residence, might be free from a Garrison, he could not obtain it, nor so much as that the King would annex to that fatal Surrender, a Promise to secure him by Reversal Letters of the Restitution of his Forts, and what belonged to them. But though this was promised by the Chancellor of the Kingdom, in the hearing of the King and his Brother, who never contra∣dicted
it; yet his Majesty refused to oblige himself to it in Writing, the Chancellor answering again for his Ma∣ster, that a Kings promise by word of Mouth was more to be valued than any other Security. And when the Castle of Tonningen, with all his Magazins and Ammuni∣tion, was shortly after delivered up to Charles Arenstorf for the King, he added these words to the foot of the Inventory, which was signed by him, That all things should be restored fully and faithfully according to the Kings Promise. The Danes being Masters of the Castles of Gottorp, and all the other Forts, the Duke was carried to Gottorp on the 6. of Jly from one Prison to another: For the Danes had not only seized the Passages, Gates, and Fortificati∣ons of that place, but ordered a Company to watch night and day near his Highnesses Chamber, to let him know that he was still their Prisoner. The Prince being thus in their Power, the Princess his Wife, whom he had not been able by all his kind Letters to get out of Copen∣haguen, where her Mother had invited her before all these Troubles, and kept her, was at last restored to him, per∣haps for fear, lest she might prevail upon the King her Brothers mind, and avert those great Violences designed against her Husband and Children. VVho would not have thought the King fully satisfied with this? but it proved otherwise; For the Earl of Alefield Governor of Holstein, having sent for the President Kiel∣mannus, dictated to hm eight Articles of great Impor∣tance, and bid him acquaint the Duke with them by Bucwald, the Vice-President Kielman, and Cramer, and get him to declare his opinion about them, detaining the said President Kielman still at Rendsbourgh. This being
done, and they returned to Rendsbourgh, did according to their Instructions declare his Highnesses mind upon every Head, delivering also his Letters to the King and the Chancellor, and intreating them to have some regard at least to Justice and Equity. But all was in vain; for the Chancellor and the Governor having sent for the Dukes Deputies, and read to them these Eight Articles of their own Penning, demanded with great Threats, that the Duke should sign them without any Alteration or Limi∣tation; adding, that if the Duke refused to obey the Kings will, both Dukedomes and all belonging to them, being now in the hands of his Majesty, he could easily force a disarmed and forsaken Prince to do what his Ma∣jesty had a mind to, and then it would be too late to Repent. The Duke sensible of this new Violence, and of his being kept a Prisoner by the Danes, in his own Castle and House, yielded at last to Force, and with great reluctancy subscribed to these severe conditions, as think∣ing it in vain to hope for any more reasonable, and with his Brother, the Bishop of Lubeck, renounced their Su∣preme and Independent Right over the Dukedome of Sleswick, which was extorted from them by meer Vio∣lence and Necessity. At last the Duke being impatient to be kept always a Prisoner in his own House, and to be forced every day to consent to what the Danes would exact, and being in∣formed that the City of Sleswick, though unfortified, was yet full of Danish Souldiers, begun to be more jealous of the designs of the Danes, and seared either yet a closer Imprisonment, or to be conveyed God knows where. The most Serene Queen Dowager of Denmark was now come to Augustberg, and had sent for her Daughter the
Dukes Wife, who had acquainted the Duke her Husband with her intended Journey, in obedience to her Mother, praying him to accompany her: But the Duke remem∣bring that when the King went to Holstein just before these troubles, the Dutchess his Wife had been sent for to Copenhaguen, upon which all these mischiefs had befallen the House of Gottorp, apprehended new Evils to him and his, from this second Journey, and thought of his escape. Therefore to lay hold on the occasion, his Highness cau∣sed some Horses to be made ready, took a few of his Servants with him, commanded that his Dogs should follow, pretending his intention was to accompany his Dutchess part of the way, and then recreate himself with Hunting; but having gone a few hours with her, taking his leave of her, he rid away as fast as his Horse could carry him to Kilonium. Being there, as he was resolving to leave his tired Horses, and prosecute his Journey in a common Coach, word was brought him, that the Danish Troopers were riding, not only about Sleswick, but every∣where as far as Hambourgh, and guarded all the ways; not staying therefore to Dine, he was scarce gone out of Town, but he was met with two Danish Troopers, who taking hold of the Reins of the Horses to stop the Coach, the Duke telling them he was a certain Nobleman, esca∣ped to Eutin, where he heard, that both the Kielmans were carried away Prisoners to Copenhaguen. From Eutin he came to Hambourgh indeed, but as a Banisht Person, and one forc'd to leave his Country and Subjects, exposed to the will and pleasure of the Danes. For the King af∣terwards, contrary to the Engagement the 11. of March 1676. demolisht the strong Town of Tongen, and the Castle of Holme to the ground, the Drums beating, and
the Trumpets sounding; and having caused the Dukes Armes upon the great Guns to be defaced, sent them with all the Ammunition partly to Rendsbourgh, and partly to Copenhaguen; and exacting also Contributions to the va∣lue of many Millions of Gold, and a prodigious quantity of Corn, Chariots, and Horses; wasting all the Dukes Villages and Towns with Quartering his Souldiers in them, and causing them continually to pass and repass to and fro. This his Majesty does to this day, not having re∣mitted a penny of Taxes and Impositions for the Dukes Subjects thus expressed, though many times desired to it by the Dukes Letters and his Ambassadors, and using the Duke at the same rate, not permitting his Subjects and Servants to pay him any thing of his Revenue, that both Prince and Subjects might at last perish by Famine, and the many other Calamities they are forced to endure. The King nevertheless being extreamly vexed, that the Duke had chosen his abode in a City so Famous and Po∣pulous, from whence the whole Story of the Barbarity exercised against him, and the breach of so many reitera∣ted Engagements, might be spread over all the world, employed all sorts of Persuasions and Cunning to get his Highness back, and have him again in his Clutches, and at his disposal; but his Highness warned by his former Usage, having learnt to distrust, would not be prevailed upon. His Majesty for all that, remitted nothing of his Prosecution against the Duke, and both by Letters and Envoys demanded especially, with great earnestness, that the Duke in compliance with the late Treaty (if it may be so called) at Rendsbourgh, would solemnly receive from the King the Investiture of the Dukedome of Sleswick, threatning for default thereof to Confiscate the same.
On the other hand, the Duke sent him word, that the Transactions at Rendsbourgh were so unjust, that he thought his Promise less engaged thereby than the Danish Reputation. Yet for fear of exposing his Subjects to greater Cruelties, and to comply with the Times and the advice of those, who thought, that in Civility to the King, the Duke would do well to send some Gentlemen, to know his Majesties pleasure, and upon what condi∣tions he was resolved to grant that Fief; (for it is certain that it had been held formerly upon different conditions) the Duke thereupon sent his Ambassadors to Copenhaguen to desire the King, that he would be pleased first to re∣medy some of the chiefest grievances, which had Relation to the Fief it self, and then declare his pleasure about it. The Ambassador during their stay at Copenhaguen, had no success, and having once mentioned the Griev∣ances, were scarce ever after admitted or heard; the word Grievances offending the Danes extreamly, and the Kings design being, without any regard to them, to order all things according to his own Pleasure. Therefore the Ambassadors, being advised by the Queen-Mother to return to their Master, and let him know the whole business, and the eminent danger a delay would cast him into, and to return with new Instructions from him, agreeable to the Kings will; they parted from Copenhaguen without their Masters knowledge, or effecting any thing. But the King interpreting this and other things in the worst sence, sent a little after three Commissioners to Sleswick, the Metropolis of the Dukedome, viz. The Earl of Rantzo, the Lord Gloxin, and the Baron Lenten Assessor of Gluck∣stad, with Orders to Sequester the Dukedome in the Kings Name, and absolving the Magistrates and People
from their Allegiance to the Duke, oblige them to take an Oath of Fidelity to the King, and if any refused it, to deprive them of all their Offices; to bring in all the Dukes Revenues into the Kings Treasury, and put a Garrison a∣gain in the Castle of Gottorp; adding these secret Instru∣ctions, that if the Duke did not comply with the Kings pleasure within six weeks, and accept this Fief upon the Kings terms, it should for ever be annexed to the King∣dom of Denmark. And that these new Orders of the Kings might be more publick, and the better observed, the Kings Proclamation to that effect was published and affixed at Sleswick; in opposition to which Usurpation, the Duke published another, together with his solemn Protestation, commanding the States of the Dukedome and all his Subjects, to continue in their Loyalty and Obe∣dience to his Highness. The Narrative of the matter of Fact might very well end here, but that many calumnies thrown upon the House of Gottorp must make part of it. Therefore, that the Truth and the Innocence of the most Serene Duke may appear the better, and to take off all subject of cavil from the Danes, we will say something about what the Danes pretend to be most offended at, that so the Justice of the Dukes Cause may be more evident. First of all, we shall speak about the Dukedome of Sleswick, and shew that the Danes had not always the same right over it, but sometimes little or none. For when antiently the Venedi had great Wars with the Danes, the Diocess of Sleswick being chiefly inested by their Inroades and Robberies, to prevent it, the Kings of Denmark erected it into a Lieutenancy to oppose them, as formerly the Emperor had erected Denmark into a
Marquisate. In the beginning of the twelfth Century, he Vandals having invaded Sleswick, and razed the chief City thereof, no body would accept of that Lieutenancy, till at last Nicholas King of Denmark turn'd it into a Dukedome about the year 1118, and made his Brothers Son first Duke of it, who being Murthered by his Sub∣jects, was Canoniz'd, and call'd St. Canut. Now whether this Canut received the Dukedome to hold as a Fief of Denmark, is not only questioned, but rather denied by the great Historian Jo. Adolphus Cypraeus, in his Annals of Sleswick, lib. 1. cap. 21. 'Tis true, it cannot be disputed, but that the Kings of Denmark grant the same to be held as a Fief from them, but the terms upon which, have been different; and the Kings sometimes reserved nothing to themselves but the Solemnity of the Investiture. For Waldemar the Third, with the Advice of the States of the Kingdom, gave to Gerhard Earl of Holstein his Ʋnkle, for him, and his lawful Heirs, the Dukedome of South-Juitland, cum Dominio utili & directo, and all things belonging to it, and all the Vassals in the Diocess of Sleswick, to be enjoyed for ever by him and his, quietly and peaceably, and to be held as a Fief with the Armes of it. Renouncing for him, his Heirs and Successors, all the Right that ever they had in the same. Two years after, King Christopher made over the Island of Femeren, with the Propriety of it, to John the III. Earl of Holstein, and all his Heirs, as well Male as Female, to be held likewise as a Fief; which Donation was confirmed by Waldemar the IIII. his Son. And Christopher the II. being restored to his Throne, Waldemar the III. who had Resigned it, had the Hereditary Dukedome of Sleswick conferred upon him. John Meurs an excellent Writer of the Danish History, relates of Margaret the
prudent and careful Queen of Denmark, that she made a Peace with Gerhard Duke of Sleswick, and those of Holstein, Covenanting, That the sole Jurisdiction over Sleswick and Holstein should remain to their Dukes and Earls, and that for the future she should not meddle in the Affairs thereof, nor they in those of Denmark, lib. 5. Contin. Hist. Dan. p. 9. But Gerhard being Dead, Margaret and her Husband Eric demanded the Guardianship of his Children, and under that pretence, seizing upon many Castles and Places of the Dukedome, at last endeavoured to get the whole, and reunite it to the Crown of Den∣mark, which being perceived by Gerhards Sons, and o∣ther Princes, and that she demanded of them, first abso∣lutely to resign that Dukedome to the King and King∣dom of Denmark, before they should receive the Inve∣stiture of it, occasioned a sharp War for Thirty years. At last when the Dukedom came to Adolph the last, Duke of the House of Schawenburg, and that by his Interest, Christian the first, Son to Theodorick Earl of Oldenburgh and Hedewig Adolphus's Sister, had been Elected King of Denmark, He promised by a solemn Deed to his Ʋnckle, and the States of the Province of Sleswick, that he would never unite or incorporate the Dukedom of Sleswick to the King∣dom of Denmark, and that they should Swear Allegiance to him as Duke of Sleswick, and not as King of Denmark. And Adolph dying Ten years after without Children, Christian succeeded him, and from that time the Fief of the Dukedome of Sleswick was not solemnly granted by the Kings of Denmark to any Body, that I know (says the Learned David Chytraeus, lib. 24. Saxon. Hist. p. 717. seq.) for above 120 years after. There have been besides other disputes about this Duke∣dome, as, That this Fief should be exempted from the
performance of all Services; That the Succession should come to Women as well as Men: by which it appears, that it was not always granted or held upon the same con∣ditions, and that there is little Reason to envy the House of Gottorp, for having at its own great charges and cost, obtained for that Dukedome an Independent Authority, and thereby taken away all occasions of discord between them and the Danes. For after this Independent Sove∣raignty was granted, though they might have justly de∣manded other satisfactions to be made them, the Duke preferred a Peace which they had justly sought by the alteration of this Dukedome, and which was confirmed by the consent of the King and States of Denmark, as most advantageous both to the King and the House of Gottorp, to all the Monies they might expect. And as all other humane things or goods may by commerce pass from one hand to another, so there is no doubt, but the Right of an Independent and Supreme Power may likewise be trans∣mitted and alienated. Therefore if a proportioned satis∣faction be demanded to a great loss sustained, it may be given, not only in paying so much mony, or delivering up so many Towns and Provinces, but by quitting and transferring the Right of Supreme Power by those who have a right to Alienate; so that a Person, who before he had due satisfaction made him, had but a Dependent Power, may receive and retain it Supreme and Absolute: This being confirmed by a late instance of the Elector of Brandenburg, who, not many years ago, obtained Prussia in this manner. To say that the most Serene Dukes of Gottorp have for∣tified Tonningen, levied Forces, entred into a League with the Swedes, and made a Journey to Stockholme, is but a
frivolous Accusation. For what should hinder the Duke of Gottorp, or by what Law is he prohibited to fortifie a Town, or raise a Fort? and Building one in the Duke∣dome of Holstein, he only does what all the Princes and States of the Empire think they may do, and do every day. And if he would do the same in his Dukedome of Sleswick, we know no Law or Treaty by which he is pro∣hibited to do it. Frederick Duke of Gottorp having to his own cost found that he was exposed to all sorts of in∣juries and damages, when-ever the Enemies of the Kings of Denmark were by War, or otherwise, drawn into his Territories, and that he was secure no-where; towards the latter and of the year 1644. (during the War) began to fortifie Tonningen, which was not opposed by the King of Denmark, as there was no just reason to do it. But about the year 1660. that King laid Siege to the place, to force the Duke to abolish and annul the Treaty made at Roschild for the benefit of the House of Gottorp; whence you may well judge with how little sincerity the Danes intended to keep this Treaty, which they had so solemnly agreed and bound themselves to. But the Duke refusing to hearken to so unreasonable a demand, endured the Siege stoutly, till after some time a Peace was concluded with∣out the least mention that these Fortifications ought not to have been raised, or promise of demolishing them: For as this Fort was built only for the security and defence of the House of Gottorp, that the Dukes might have a Place to retire to in times of danger; so they never rais∣ed more Forces than were necessary for the defence of the Place: And if the Duke had intended to invade Den∣mark, he must have provided much greater Forces, and taken other Measures.
That the Duke has entred into a League with the King of Sweden, is not denied, but it is only such an one, as may enable him to resist an unjust Force, and defend himself. If the Danes do accuse him of making any other Leagues to the Ruin of Germany or Denmark, his High∣ness denies it absolutely, and desires no credit may be given them in a thing for which they can bring no evi∣dence: But if they alleadge, that the Conditions by which the Duke has sought to secure his own House from their Oppressions, are Hostile and against them; they plainly shew that they have a mind to wrong those they ought rather to Protect, and not provoke to a just Defence, which in the end may prove dangerous to Denmark it self. That Objection of the Dukes journey into Sweden is much of the same nature: For although his Highness would not be diverted by the Councils and demands of the King of Denmark, tending to nothing but a War, from going to see the King and Queen Mother his near Relations, and take their advice; yet this Journey was never undertaken to enter into new Alliances, those Princes being entred into one long before, but in respect and deference to the most Serene Queen his Sister, who had promised to come and see him. Nay, if the Danes (who are generally very clear-sighted in the affairs of the House of Gottorp) did not interpret all that which the House of Gottorp does in the worst sence, they could have satisfied themselves easily, that that Journey was never intended against their Interest. But some may say, that it was not lawful for the Duke of Gottorp to make a League with the King of Sweden, because he was declared an Enemy to the Empire. Such
fooleries are so ridiculous, that they deserve no Answer: But because they are spread abroad, and may deceive the simple, who are the greater number, we must say some∣thing to them. VVhy the French and Swedes have been declared Enemies of the Empire, is a matter we shall not meddle with. The Duke of Gottorp is not concerned in the Quarrel of either of them, and so ought not to be involved therein. The Duke has been allied with Sweden since 1661, long before the Swedes were declared Ene∣mies of the Empire, and at a time when all the Parties in War, even the Emperor, and also Spain, courted the Friendship of Sweden, and earnestly desired their Media∣tion to compose the differences then on Foot: Besides, there is no Article of that Treaty with Sweden, which may endanger the safety of the Empire, or any of its Mem∣bers, since it is wholly Defensive. Nay, the Duke has by express words excepted the Empire, declaring he would not be bound by this Treaty whenever any thing should happen to the prejudice of the same: And also the King of Sweden in it recommends to the Duke by all means to entertain a friendship with the King of Denmark. And the Danes themselves will not deny, but that they, the Elector of Brandenbourgh, and others, have invited Sweden to enter into a League with them; and therefore cannot blame in the Duke of Gottorp what they themselves did or would have done, especially since the Duke sought no∣thing more than to render the Peace and publick Safety more firm and secure. It is then a meer cavil to object, that the Dukes of Holstein have made a League with the Swedes, who are Enemies of the Empire, as such, since their help was never intended to be used but for a just defence against those, who contrary to the Faith of
Treaties, would invade them, and not to the prejudice of the Empire, or any body else, there being reason e∣nough to fear an Invasion by the face of things then, as the event has too unfortunately shewn. But because the Danes are of opinion, as to the Taxes, that their Kings demand of the greater part of them for himself was very just, and that the Duke had no reason to deny it, since his Majesty had an Army in Pay, or at least more Troops than his Highness, to defend both Dukedomes; this must be more particularly examined: And first, 'tis certain that the King would never acquaint the Duke, nor the States of the Province, with the de∣signs of this VVar, though it was to be carried on with their Monies, and so was far from undertaking it with their will and consent, according to the Treaties and an∣tient Customs. Moreover, though he had undertaken this VVar with the consent of the Duke and States, he could not demand more mony than was agreed by the antient Treaties, and was wont to be granted. Besides, this VVar was not entred into for the defence of these Dukedomes, but that the King of Denmark might take that occasion of invading the Swedes, and recover his losses in the last VVar. Again, if the King of Denmark thought, that because of his League with the Emperour and the Elector of Brandenbourgh, he could justly attack the Swedes; yet could he not violate the Agreements made by the Treaty of Roschild, trample it under feet, ruin the House of Gottorp; and to that end demand first the greater part of the Taxes, then overcharge the Dukes Subjects with Impositions, exhaust them almost totally, by forcing from them in less than half a year, several Millions of Gold. Nay, when the King of Denmark is
put upon a necessary and defensive War, 'tis but just he should bring into the Field a greater Army than the Duke▪ for the Dukedoms of Sleswick and Holstein lying as a fence to Denmark, and its security depending upon theirs, each Prince is bound to find Forces proportionably to the Land they possess, and which are to be secured from the Enemy. And though perhaps the King of Denmark may say, that▪ he will with his own Souldiers alone, defend those Duke∣domes, and therefore has right to demand money from them, and all other necessaries for War at his pleasure; yet it is to be considered, that this cannot be done but by violating in the highest manner the Rights of the Duke of Gottorp; for we must not think, that by reason of a War, the King may do every thing, and the House of Gottorp have no Power left in their own Territories. Nay, that Serene House pretends to as much Power and Right, as to the making and carrying on a VVar, as the King of Denmark, in quality of Duke of Sleswick and Holstein can any ways pretend to. The Danes now do not question, whether the House of Gottorp hath the Power of VVar, since they have enjoyed it in all Ages, and made use of it against the oppressions of the Danes: but that King en∣deavours to get it to himself, having in these late trou∣bles manifested his designs of absolutely depriving the House of Gottorp of the Power and Right of VVar; for when the Duke and all his Territories were in the Kings possession at Rendsbourgh, the Danes demanded an ac∣count of what Troops the Duke had sent for the defence of the Empire, ordering that they should be paid only by the Kings Commissioners, (as they are called) that the Duke of Gottorp might understand from thence, that he was not to keep any more Souldiers for his Defence, nor
to have any part of the Right and Power of VVar in the affairs of the Empire; or the Circle of Lower-Saxony, but that the King would challenge it wholly himself, to the great injury and oppression of the House of Gottorp, and danger of other Princes. But the Proceedings at Rendsbourgh are covered with this further pretence, as if by it the Antient Union be∣tween the Kings of Denmark and House of Gottorp was restored, and those Provinces re-establisht in their most flourishing Condition; and therefore since the greatest Masters of Prudence teach us, that that Government which makes both the Prince and his Subjects most hap∣py, ought to be preferred and kept, the King seems to have rather done well than ill, by having disposed and brought the Dukedomes from a less, to a more happy, nay, most happy state, by the transactions of Rendsbourgh. This is a fair Speech, but if we consider it a little nearer, we shall easily discover its fraud: For whereas the Kings of Denmark and Dukes of Gottorp, have their Lands, Governments, and Towns, in the Dukedomes of Sleswick and Holstein, not only contiguous, but intermixed with one another, and the safety and happiness of Denmark depending not a little upon the good Government of these Dukedomes, there were Treaties of Union made, con∣firmed, and exchanged on both sides, by which the Go∣vernment of these two Countries was left to both Princes joyntly, and they to command in them every year alter∣natively, and to have the whole Nobility and other the States, subject to them. And as it cannot be denied▪ but that this conjunction contributed very much to the peace and qulet of Denmark, so the Dukes of Gottorp have used this Right so carefully and discreetly, that none of
their Acts have in the least derogated from these Trea∣ties of Union, which is more than can be said of the Danes; for though they talk of the Union, when it is advantageous to them, yet have they often violated the same in things of the greatest Importance, which is proved by this: That the Kings of Denmark cannot without breach of the Treaties, (as most manifestly appears, by the Articles of the Union) enter into a VVar, nor carry it on at their own pleasure, without first acquainting the Dukes of Gottorp with their Designs, and obtaining his consent to it; nor in time of VVar dispose at his will of their Subjects, or their Estates, who are either in his or in the Dukes Territories. But as the will and authority of the Kings of Denmark have sometimes prevailed in other Affairs relating to these Dukedomes, so have they affected hitherto to take greater power than the Dukes, though but their equals there. And this having hap∣pened many times before the Danish Monarchy was He∣reditary, and the Danes since strengthning themselves by little and little, are now come to that, as to make and expound all manner of Treaties for the advantage of their King, and either think themselves no longer oblig'd to them then as they are found such, or as they may by them ensnare the Dukes of Gottorp. For the Danes publish openly, that their King will hereafter order matters in these Provinces, (the Government whereof is joyntly in him and the Duke) as a Prince having the Soveraign Power, and consequently use the Duke as his Vassal. This Joynt-Government being by the Treaties extended to both Dukedoms, it is easily to be seen, that the King intends to exercise a Soveraign and Independent Power in Sleswick, and afterwards by little and little Usurp the
same under divers pretences, and especially that of the Union in the Dukedome of Holstein, and so wholly abo∣lish the Dignity and Authority of the Dukes of Gottorp, either by the Right of a Military Power, or by degrees in time of Peace. Therefore, what one of the Fathers says of Religion, That she brought forth Riches, but the Daughter devoured the Mother, may be said upon this occasion; The Ʋnion brought forth this Joynt-Government, but the quarrelsome Daughter has destroyed her Mother. The Danes have no reason then to deceive the House of Gottorp, and the VVorld with the specious word of Union, since every one may see, that the former condition thereof is much alter'd, and the farther this Danish Soveraignty shall ex∣tend her VVings, the more the House of Gottorp will be endangered thereby. And no body can look upon this as a meer Conjecture and Guess, since the Danes have in times past and of late confirmed the Truth hereof, and forced the most incredu∣lous to Believe it: For in the beginning of May, 1677, the King began to demolish the VValls of the Fort of Tunderen, in the Dukedome of Sleswick, though it ap∣pertained to the Duke of Gottorp, without speaking a word to him of his design or reason for it. Not long before, a laden Ship belonging to some Merchants of Lubeck, was stranded upon the Shore near Newstadt, a Town of the Duke of Gottorp's, in the Dukedome of Holstein. Now this being without dispute in the Territories of the House of Gottorp, and some monys being due to the Duke as Lord of the Place for salvage of the Goods and the keeping of them, the Officer of the Place, to keep his Masters right, caused the Goods to be brought a-Shore, and to be shut up in a Barn, &c. The Duke intending they
should be restored to their Owners: But soon after came some of the Kings Officers with orders to confiscate the Goods, and having broken open the Barn-door, without any regard to Law, or the Soveraignty of the Place, con∣veyed the Goods away upon several Waggons to Hilgen∣haven, one of the Kings Towns, and thereby mani∣festly violated the Dukes right, having no Orders for the same but from the Kings Commissioners. Besides, in the latter end of March 1677, the King of Denmark sig∣nified to the Duke of Gottorp, that he thought fit some Publick days should be appointed for the Subjects, to Pray for the Preservation of the Country. But herein likewise was a design, for it being usual to set three days apart for publick Prayers yearly in his Highnesses Terri∣tories, in the week before Rogation-Sunday, the King re∣solv'd to take that time, and would not expect the consent of the Duke for it; but taking no notice thereof, com∣manded those days to be kept in the Dukedome of Sleswick in his own Name alone, and in the Dukedom of Holstein in his and the Duke of Holstein's Name, thereby infring∣ing the Articles of Union in several respects. And though the King publishes, he acquainted the Duke of Gottorp with this design, yet the Duke did never consent to the thing, nor the manner of it. It is by meer force and no right, that the King deteins that part of the Dukedome of Sleswick, which does and did belong to the Duke of Gottorp, as we shall at large prove: The Duke of Gottorp having already contradicted, and firmly contradicting all what his Majesty shall publish or command there in his Name alone. Besides, the King alone has no right to order matters of the Government of the Dukedome of Holstein, (which ought to be setled by both Princes) not having
the consent of the Duke, though he cause his Orders to be Published and Proclaimed in the Dukes name as well as his own. For a thing is not done by two persons un∣less there be a joynt consent. It is evident therefore, that this also has been done contrary to the ancient Trea∣ties: and because that the Kings Order had only his Ma∣jesties Seal, and that the King alone cannot enjoyn the States of the Provinces any thing, and especially because that all this hath been done at a time when the Duke, according to course, ought to have had the direction and Prerogative of the Soveraign Power, and Joint-Govern∣ment (from whose Power and Right herein, howsoever the Danes endeavour to detract by these pretended Novel∣ties) the most Serene Duke did on the first of May 1677, protest against it; and having appointed the usual days for publick Prayers, doth again hereby repeat his pub∣lick Protestation in that behalf. Lastly, this Calumny has also been added to the above∣mentioned, as if the Duke of Gottorp (though almost en∣tirely ruined by the Danes) should intend dangerous pra∣ctises against their state. And first, this Story has gone about, that he was raising Eight Thousand Men in Ire∣land, to Transport into his Territories, and a great many have believed it. But it being impossible to begin such a thing, much more to perfect it, without the knowledge and consent of the King of Great Britain, and the Danish Envoy at London having complained hereof, his Majesty desired him very prudently to prove it; which he not having hitherto been able to do, all good men are satis∣fied of the Vanity of the Fable. Afterwards another Story has been raised and spread in the Court of the Em∣peror and other Princes, having been presented in writing
by the Danes to the Deputies of the Circle of the Lower Saxony at Brunswick, that the Dukes Deputies being ex∣cluded from that Assembly, and the deliberations thereof, it might serve as a President to help them to perfect their yet worse Designs. It is also charged upon the Duke, that he has taken measures with the Duke of Mecklen∣bourgh, to contrive how they should with their own For∣ces, or those of the Swedes or others, retake Wismar and Gluckstadt from the Danes. They endeavour to prove this Story by I know not what discourse, of a certain Frenchman called De Luis, who was carried away Priso∣ner to Copenhaguen, and by some Letters they found about him. VVe shall not now dispute what the Duke of Gottorp, so unjustly oppressed by the Danes, may lawfully do a∣gainst them, and why he should not use all means for his own Defence: Neither is it necessary we should plead ano∣thers Cause, since it may be presumed, that no man will desert himself. But we solemnly affirm here with all sin∣cerity, in the Name, and by the Command of the Duke of Gottorp, that he never thought upon any such thing, nor exchanged a word with the Duke of Mecklenbourg about it, as that Duke has himself asserted to the Duke of Got∣torp's Minister sent to him expresly, promising to declare the same publickly, and that he never gave any Orders to this De Luis, nor trusted him with any Letters. The Danes themselves, when they think of it, insult over the Duke of Gottorp, and say, they wonder extreamly he will not submit to the Danish Dominion, that is so easie, see∣ing himself destitute of all help, and no Prince willing to raise an Army in his behalf. And yet at other times they make him so formidable, and so full of pernicious
designs against the Empire, the Kingdome of Denmark, and the Confederates, that they would have him decla∣red an Enemy of the Empire, excluded from all publick Assemblies, and having almost entirely ruined him them∣selves, to be quite oppressed by others. This is indeed a great Malice and Hatred, sit for none but men full of Gall, who are not ashamed to obtrude such Lies upon their King and the whole Christian world, that they may take away from the Duke all means of helping him∣self, and so stain his Innocence with calumnies▪ that so good a Prince might be thought not to deserve any pitty, and much less the help of Justice against such manifest Injuries, the greatness and splendor of whose Family is such, that there is scarce any great Family in Germany, to whom he is not Allied and Related. In a word, since the discourses or Letters of this De Luis, that are spread abroad, and pretended to be intercepted, do not at all con∣cern the Duke, we desire no Faith may be given to these Stories of the Danes, till they shew the Truth of them to the World, which undoubtedly they can never do. The falsehood of these Stories and Inventions thus plainly appearing, it remains we should give the Reasons why the Duke ought in any impartial judgment to be entirely restored to all his Rights, which the Danes have so contrary to all Justice Usurped. His Highness obtain∣ed three points chiefly by the Treaty of Roschild, viz. The Soveraignty or Supreme Power over the Dukedome of Sleswick, without any dependence from the King or Crown of Denmark; the Territory of Schwabstadt, and the Cathedral Church of Sleswick, with its Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and some other things. And because the King of Denmark had at that time entred into an unneces∣sary
War against the Swedes, not only without consult∣ing the Duke of Gottorp, but contrary to his Opinion, and notwithstanding his dissuading the said King from the same, and had brought great Calamities upon the Provinces and Subjects of the Duke, by drawing the Swedes, Imperialists, Brandenburgers, Polanders and Tar∣tars into them; the King of Sweden would have procu∣red a proportionable satisfaction to his Father-in-Law, and his Highness might justly have admitted of it; but was contented for all the damages he had sustained, with the remission of the Vassalage of the Dukedome of Sles∣wick, and the yielding up of the Soveraignty thereof to him, without demanding any thing more for his satis∣faction. This occasion of the Controversies and Wars between them being cut off, and both Princes having solemnly Sworn to keep this Peace, it seemed as if none more firm and secure could have been wished for; but the Danes continually tormented since the Peace at Roschild, by the remembrance of their having yielded up this So∣veraignty, have so far indulged their desire of Revenge, that they have studied nothing more than how to regain this Dukedome and its Soveraign Right, and wholly sup∣plant the House of Gottorp; which is fully proved by what we have said already, and the most severe conditi∣ons of Rendsbourgh, and the means used to force the Duke and his Ministers to consent to them; which being ne∣cessary to be known by those that would judge aright of these Differences, we shall, before we have done, give the world some account, leaving it to their just censure. And though the Danes have obtruded these conditions upon the Duke of Gottorp, and have extorted from him the Authentick Instrument of the Peace of Roschild; yet hereby they have done nothing but shown their own in∣sincerity,
and the dis-ingenuity of their Proceedings; and rendred themselves obliged upon many accounts to make the Duke amends for their violating of his Rights, and to restore him entirely to the same; which if they refuse to do, they deserve to be forced thereunto by all Princes who have any consideration for Faith, Justice, and Consci∣ence. And this we shall endeavour thus to demonstrate. 1. VVhatsoever was given, yielded, and promised to the Duke of Gottorp, by the King and Kingdom of Den∣mark, at the ending of the last War 1658, was yielded deliberately With their Will and Consent; and it was par∣ticularly provided, that neither of the Parties, under what pretence soever, should ever recede from the Arti∣cles agreed upon, and that they should be kept invio∣lable. Neither can the Danes object here, that they did not consent to these things freely and frankly, but only as forced by the Arms of Sweden; for having freely and vo∣luntarily attacked the Swedes, they were free certainly al∣so to consent to what satisfaction and compensation the Swedes would insist upon; and the Swedes having justly extended what they demanded to the benefit of the House of Gottorp, which had sustained so many losses by the War, the Danes have no reason to complain of them for it; the Swedes having then a just right by the Law of Na∣tions to require yet more from Denmark: And here this Rule of the Civil Law must take place, Whatsoever dam∣age a man suffers through his own de, is to be accounted no damage. 2. Not only nd the States of the Kingdome of Den  with the Duke of Gottorp, have Sworn each of eep those Articles inviolate; but the King of Great Britain, the Most Christian King, and the States of the Ʋnited-Provinces, by whose care the
Peace of Roschild was procured, have also approved the same as Guarantees; and thence it is manifest, that who∣soever of the Parties shall violate this Treaty, or refuse to be obliged by the same, doth not only offend against God and his Conscience, but also the Law of Nations, and particularly provokes the Arms of those Princes who are engaged solemnly in the Guaranty of the Treaty. 3. The Danes have consented to this Agreement twice already; first, by a general Approbation in the 22 Arti∣cle of the Peace of Roschild, made the 26 of Feb. 1658, and then more specially by the Agreement made at Copen∣haguen the 12 of May the same year. A little after the War between the Swedes and the Danes being renewed of a sudden, the Danes besieged Tonningen, and the Duke with all his Court residing in it, to make him re∣nounce the Articles above-mentioned, and renounce his Soveraignty in the Dukedome of Sleswick. The Danes indeed complained at that time, that the Swedes had re∣taken Arms against them, but whether justly or unjustly, is not our business now to dispute. For what has the Duke of Gottorp to do with it? The King of Sweden his Son-in-Law, did not give him the least notice, that he in∣tended to pass into Denmark and renew the War there; neither was his Highness charged of having committed any offence against the King of Denmark. But suppose this se∣cond War of the Swedes was unjust, as the Danes alledge, must therefore the Innocent and the Guilty be treated alike? what the Duke enjoyed, was as a just satisfaction, the Justice whereof he never did any thing against. Therefore when there was an end put to this War by the Peace of 1660; the Swedes indeed remitted again into the hands of the King of Denmark some things that had
been granted them by the Treaty of Roschild. But all that had been yielded or promised to the House of Gottorp remained as before without the least diminution. The Most Christian King, the King of Great Britain, and the States General of the Ʋnited Provinces, thinking it just to leave it so; the Danes for the third time now ap∣proving that Treaty, and agreeing besides with the Duke of Gottorp to pass a general Amnesty for all Injuries and other matters committed before that time, as appears by the 27 and 28 Articles of that Treaty. 4. Besides, when the Treaty of Peace was concluded between the Swedes and the Poles, with their Allies, the Emperor and Elector of Brandenbourgh at Oliva 1660, the King of Denmark and the Duke of Gottorp were not only included therein: But the Treaty between them the Swedes and the Duke made at Roschild, and renewed af∣terwards 1660, was also included in it, as if it had been transcribed word for word; the Danes ratisying what the Kings of Sweden and Poland, and the Emperour and Elector of Brandenbourg, had stipulated to that pur∣pose, and so now the fourth time solemnly approved the Agreements between themselves and the House of Gottorp. And to the intent that this Peace might be strictly kept by all Parties, not only the Danes and Poles, with their Confederates, promise one another a mutual Guaranty; but the King of France also entred into the same, agree∣ing amongst other things, That if any Prince thought himself grieved by any other way than force of Armes, he should not Revenge it by way of Arms, but complain to the several Princes, who were Parties in this Treaty, de∣siring them to procure him a present and sufficient satis∣faction, Vid. Artic. 22. 26. 31. & 35. of that Treaty.
I would fain have the Danes tell us, what Injuries the House of Gottorp has done them, either by way of Arms, or otherwise: If they cannot tell, nor prove any, the Duke of Gottorp has reason to expect to be restored to all his Rights by the Princes that have engaged their Faith in this Treaty, and that the Danes should be used as break∣ers of the Peace. If the Danes will make these trivial objections, which have been already answered, pass for Injuries, and especially the League made with Sweden by the Duke of Gottorp for his own defence; I am afraid they will find few expert Ministers of their mind. It has al∣ways, and ever will be lawful to make such Leagues. Nay, if the Danes will but remember their own Designs, and examine their Conscience, they must needs own them∣selves the Authors, or occasion of this League. For such Principles must never be neglected, nor the Power of any ever be raised to such a greatness, (or it must not be left in any ones power to do hurt, who has a mind to do it) that after∣wards you may not be in a condition to dispute your right upon equal terms. Saith Polyb. lib. 1. 5. The dissenting minds of Princes having been in all Ages happily reconciled by Marriage, and their Animo∣sities thereby laid down, and sometimes totally extin∣guisht; the Duke of Gottorp thought fit to use this Re∣medy, and having humbly demanded, and obtained as a Pledge of sincere Friendship between both Princes, the Daughter of Frederick King of Denmark of happy Me∣mory for his Wife; and several Articles being at the same time agreed upon by the King and the Duke, as well relating to the Dowry as other things, the King then a∣gain ratified all that had been so many times agreed be∣tween them concerning this Dukedome. So that the
King now for the fifth time gave his consent to it in the year 1667, most freely, and without the least appearance of constraint by War or otherwise. 6. The Danes without the least provocation or new injury (all former matters being by an Amnesty in the Treaty abolished on both sides) but out of a desire of Revenge, and hope of regaining their losses, have first broken this Peace and Agreement made and concluded between the King and States of Denmark, and the House of Gottorp, so often Sworn to and approved by both, part∣ly by committing Violences upon old abolish'd pretences, and which by several Conventions have been before ad∣justed, and partly by doing things either directly against the tenor of the Articles, or the necessary consequences of them; for whatever is acted contrary to Friendship, breaks the Peace which subsists by nothing else; And what other men are obliged to by Friendship alone,Grot. lib. 3. c. 20. n. 27. seq. Princes are further tied to by their Promises and Treaties. And therefore we hope it will find little credit what the Danes falsly accuse the Duke of, as if he should have provoked them justly to what they have done. For those break the Peace who first commit Violences, and not those that repel them, and much less those that only endeavour to defend themselves, saith Thucydides; where∣with agrees the common opinion of the Learned in the Law, who say, That to make a Defence lawful, it is not necessary to expect or receive the first blow. Therefore what is objected to Chosro in Procopius, may be applyed here; Those break the Peace, who in time of Peace or League are first found to endeavour to surprize others, and not thse that are first in Arms. Now, if any one will impartially consider all Transactions since the Peace of Roschild, it
can never be made out, that the House of Gottorp has conspired against the King of Denmark, but on the con∣trary, that the King hath laid snares for the Duke from time to time, and at last surpriz'd him at Rendsbourgh, as hath been before said. 7. If we consider well the means taken by the Danes to gratifie their desire of Revenge, though they have co∣vered their intentions with many fair words, we shall find them very false and unjust. For the Duke of Got∣torp and his Ministers having been drawn to Rendsbourgh upon the hopes given, and so many times confirmed of a fair composure of things, and several protestations of friendship and kindness, were presently after shut up, and detained in Prison, where they were forced to most unjust conditions: there was quite another thing intend∣ed than what was acted; and any man may easily see by what trick they were betrayed and trepanned. Therefore, whatever was concluded there, is void in Law; and the Danes have done nothing, either in forcing the House of Gottorp to agree to these unjust conditions, or extorting fit and just ones from it. Neither have they hereby confirm∣ed their old Right, nor got a new one. They have only taken Papers and Parchments from the Duke, but not the Right they lookt for; and in truth there has been only a Play Acted at Rendsbourgh, but it was a Tragedy. For if we weigh this by the Law of Nations, which is chiefly of Force between free Princes and People, the Convention at Rendsbourgh is absolutely null and void; nothing being more contrary to Faith and Justice than such tricks as these, and Princes being more strictly bound not to de∣part from it than any private person; especially since the Articles with the House of Gottorp of 1658, were agreed
upon, and signed with such Ceremony, and in such man∣ner, as equal them to an Oath; and that by them, not the King, but the injur'd Duke is to be entirely restored. It was a saying of the Antients, That amongst good men all proceedings ought to be sincere. Now Princes ought not only to be counted good, but the best of men; and the more punctual and sincere they are in their Treaties with others, the greater will their Reputation be. 8. This Transaction was likewise no small breach of the Law of Nations. The King had desired the Duke, after they had Feasted together friendly and kindly at Dennewerk, to come and see him at Rendsbourgh, and the Chancellor of the Kingdom having repeated this de∣sire of the Kings, the Duke sent word he would do him∣self the Honour to come and wait upon his Majesty. His Highness was received with the shooting of Guns, and all other demonstrations of kindness and respect, that he might believe himself welcome. But when he was de∣tained a Prisoner, with Guards to watch him, and that those who ought to have been used like Guests and well entertained, were not permitted to go away, nay, not so much as to stir out, the Law of Nations was eminently broken, and sufficient occasion given for Reparation. Many wonder that the Duke would trust his Person and his Ministers with the King, and that in a very strong Town. But they will cease wondering when they know all the repeated protestations of true Friendship made by the King and his Ministers, so that the Duke, who has a generous and great Soul, was afraid to be thought mi∣strustful, or give a suspition of it, esteeming with Livy, that to trust was the way to be trusted. Thus of old pe∣rish'd Dio, who knowing that Calippus had laid ambu∣shes
for him, was ashamed to use precaution against a Friend, and one whose Guest he then was, saith Plutarch. 9. And here we must not omit the Violences used to∣wards the Duke of Gottorp and his Ministers, and the Troubles they were put to. If a man puts another in Pri∣son or Custody to extort from him, all what is done by it is null, say the Civilians, Vid. Paulus Ictus. Lib. 22. ff. quod met. caus. gest. Nay, he that shuts any one in his house to get a Promise or Obligation from him, does force him to it. V. L. 1. Sent. Tit. 7. Sect. 8. Therefore in the Com∣monwealth of Rome, by the Julian Law, he was guilty of publick Violence, who had shut up a man with an ill design, re∣strained him, or got an Obligation from him by force; the Law declaring all such void. l. 5. pr. ff. ad. l. Jul. de vi publicâ. As force imposes a necessity upon the mind, and is commonly accompanied with fear, because of the im∣minent danger that unsetles the Soul, lib. 1. quod met. caus. So the Duke of Gottorp, a Friend, a near Relation, a Guest, a Brother, &c. being come to visit his Friend, Relation, Brother, &c. endured not only many hard vio∣lent injuries and unjust things, as well as all his Servants, but was terrified daily with new threats and apprehen∣sions of great Evils, by which his Mind and his Body were brought so low, that his grief cast him into a dan∣gerous distemper. Some of the Danes have endeavoured to conceal the disguise, nay, deny too what passed at Rendsbourgh, and perhaps are yet unwilling to confess the truth; not because they can stiffle what hath been done in the view of so many people, then at Rendsbourgh, but to suppress all they could the remembrance of this Infa∣mous Story. For we do not doubt but that there are many good men among the Danes, who abhor the Coun∣sel
of that man, who was then the great man with the King, and never kept within bounds. But however the Danes may be thought of by impartial judges of these things for his inexcusable proceeding, they can neither reap any advantage thereby, nor cause any damage to the House of Gottorp, or render its condi∣tion worse. For though by the Principles of Philosophy, whosoever has promised any thing by force or fear, seems to be bound to it in strictness of Law: Yet since the Ancients have been of opinion, that summum jus is some∣times injurious, and that the Law of Nature abhors an unjust force or constraint; no Prince ought to be bound by this summum jus, when accompanied with force, but rather restored to what has been forced from him, which the following words of Grotius explain and confirm. I am wholly of the opinion of those, who believe, that laying aside the Civil Law, (by which the Obligation may be taken away or diminisht) whosoever has promised a thing through fear, is bound, because he has given his absolute consent, and not a con∣ditional one, as in the case of one that mistakes. For as Aristotle says very well, he that throws his goods into the Sea for fear of Shipwrack, would willingly save them conditionally, viz. if the danger was not imminent; but he is absolutely content to lose them, considering the circumstance of time and place. But I esteem this most true, if the man to whom the Promise is made, has terrifyed he other not justly, but unjustly, though but a little, and upon this has got a Promise, he to whom the promise was made, is bound to release him from it, if the other desires it; not becaus the Promise is of no force, but for the injury done. L. 2. de Jure B. & P. c. 11. n. 7. He explains these last words thus in another place; He that has by cunning, force, or unjust fear, obtained from another a Contract or Promise,
is bound to release the Person of his said Contract; for he had a right neither to be deceived, nor to be forced; the first by the nature of Contracts, the other by the Liberty of Nature. Lib. 2. de Jure B. & P. c. 17. n. 17. And he repeats the same, lib. 3. c. 19. n. 4. 10. The King of Denmark can so much the less deny this right of Restitution to the House of Gottorp, because he himself would have challenged the same right when it was his own case▪ For his Majesty having extorted from the Duke, by meer force, all he thought fit, his Highness was reproached, that he had gotten these things before by force, and the Arms of an Enemy, and had given just cause consequently to the King to repossess himself the same way; It will then be very just, that the King suffer the Duke to make use of the same Law against his Majesty, which he would have used against his Highness, since this is a Rule of the Law of Nature, which obliges all Princes without distinction. I say the King would have made use of this Law against the Duke, that having been forced to the Treaty in question, he ought to have been restored unto his Rights again. But in this the Danes are very much mistaken, that they do not distinguish by what kind of force or fear one is constrained, whether just or unjust; and have gone about foolishly to perswade themselves and others, that the King had recovered the Soveraignty of the Dukedom of Sles∣wick, the same way he had lost it. For as Justice offers Restitution with both hands to a man, forced unjustly to a promise or grant; so it denies it flatly to one justly for∣ced. Therefore when any one has himself been the cause of his being compelled to promise o give, he cannot re∣cover it the same way, having lost his right of Restitu∣tion, by giving a just cause to the other, who has
justly employed a just force. Grot. lib. 2. c. 17. n. 19. 11. This Restitution due upon so many accounts, ought not to be denied, because of the great Evils and dangerous Errours which may spring from such a denial. For if we take the Treaty of Rendsbourgh into serious con∣sideration, we shall find the Duke of Gottorp deprived of all his Royalties, and the King alone invested with them, and all submitted to his Pleasure. For the King alone having undertaken the defence of both Dukedoms, de∣clared all the Dukes Treaties null, deprived him of his Souldiers, demolisht his Towns and Forts, detained him against his will in Custody, raised such great Taxes up∣on his Lands, that his Highness and his Subjects have nothing remaining; whence it is manifest that the Right of Peace and War, and the other great Royalties, are ta∣ken away from the Duke by this Treaty, or at least so much incroached upon, that all the Authority which he might of right, and has hitherto, after the Example of his Ancestors, enjoyed and exercised, is now in the King alone, and at his dispose, under whose power and pleasure his Highness must hereafter live, under the Notion of a Client or Vassal, but really as a Subject. So heretofore the Latins complained, That under the colour of a League with the Romans they lived in Slavery; and the Achaians, that their League was now become a precarious Slavery; and, as Tacitus speaks, A miserable Slavery was now falsly called Peace. And though Proculus be of opinion, that free Tenants are not under the Dominion or Subjection of the Patron, yet when a Prince or People come under the Protection of a Superiour Prince or People, we know by experience that a fall is easie in slippery ground, and that the Tenantship is soon changed into a soft Slavery, which
the Duke of Gottorp has the more reason to fear and avoid; For that the King of Denmarks Power reaching from the further part of Norway, as far as Holland, is very great, and that under the pretence of the Union at the Treaty of Rendsbourgh, vainly called by the Name of Pragmatick Sanction, an occasion may be taken to oppress or suppress the Authority and Dignity of the House of Gottorp. Who ever saw a Soveraign Prince without Royalties? Who can shew a Duke of Sleswick thus wholly divested of his high Prerogatives? If the Dukes of Sleswick are to be invested hereafter by giving them a Banner, and with the Ceremony observed at Ottenwaldt in 1580, will not that be a Proclaiming of them Subjects with the greater Pomp only, and telling the world by this Investiture, how proud they are of this Subjection? If the Dukes of Got∣torp were cast into this condition or abandoned in it, and on the contrary, the Kings of Denmark might govern at their Pleasure the Dukedomes of Sleswick and Holstein, and that part of them also which belongeth to the Duke, what an augmentation of Power would that be to them, and how might they abuse it if ever they would make use of it against Germany, and especially the Circle of the Lower-Saxony? This may be made out by an exact account of the vast sums of mony, and all other things they have extorted in a little time from those Provinces; it is hard∣ly credible how great the sums are. And we know well enough what an ambitious Example they have shown, and there is no question but opportunity and power will invite others to follow them. Therefore Prudence re∣quires rather that the Duke of Gottorp should be in time restored to his former condition, and all his Rights, than that so many Princes, Provinces, and Towns, be destroy∣ed
by his Ruin, which will be easily prevented, if the injury now done to his Highness be looked upon by every one of them as done to themselves. But suppose we should grant that the Duke of Gottorp has effectually bound himself by the conditions of Rendsbourg to a Vassalage for the Dukedom of Sleswick, (which suppo∣sition we yet constantly deny as false;) yet the delay of demanding the Investiture cannot be imputed to the Duke, but to the King alone: for who does not know that the Strong-holds of Tonningen and Holme are seated in the Dukedom of Sleswick? And the King without re∣gard to his Word, having razed them both, taken away the Garrisons and all the Artillery, kept the Duke be∣sieged in his Castle of Gottorp; and all this relating to the Dukedome of Sleswick, hath not the Duke justly de∣manded, that all these Grievances be first redressed, and satisfaction be made to him for them? If he had done otherwise, and blindly asked the Investiture, trusting himself to the Kings pleasure, there had never been any notice taken of the old and new Grievances, and his Highness had rashly submitted himself to a Vassalage, that had deprived him and his Posterity of all his Royal∣ties, and exposed them to the eternal Scorn of the world. Besides, since it was suggested to the Dukes Ambassadors sent to Copenhaguen about the Fief and Grievances, that they would do well to return to his Highness for new In∣structions about the Fief, without expecting any Orders from him; the King had certainly no cause given him for Sequestrations, and those other acts of Hostility com∣mitted by his Order in the Dukedom of Sleswick. And so we must not yield that the King, by doing Acts by which the Lord of a Fief uses to lose his Right, should take
away anothers Right; and not only gain by the Ruin of the other, but even by what ought to turn to his own loss, contrary to the Laws of Nature; Nations, Feudal, and all others whatsoever. Eric Duke of Sleswick, having left after his Death his Son Waldemar a Child, Christopher the Second King of Denmark, possessed himself of that Guardian-ship of Waldemar, and at the same time of the whole Territory of Sleswick, except Gottorp, which when he also besieged to gain the whole Dutchy, Gerhard Earl of Holstein, Unkle to Waldemar, with some others, oppos'd him stoutly, and for this Felony committed by the King in 1326, there was great Debate, which Meursius thus re∣lates; The Dukedom of Sleswick having been held till then as a Fief from Denmark, and these Princes by reason of this Ʋsurpation of the Kings, being unwilling it should continue so hereafter, was the occasion of a long Contention, lib. 4. p. 70, which ended, as we have said before. If this demand in the Name of Waldemar was not unreasonable, with how much more Justice doth our Duke desire that he might have his own, and a full Restitution from the King of what he detains from him so unjustly, and has Sequestrated by meer force; and God Almighty having ordered Restitu∣tion to be made where Covenants are broken, it is but just that his Vice-gerents upon Earth should endeavour to put his Decrees in Execution. 13. If we look upon his Sequestration rightly, and examine it by the Rules of Justice, we shall find it wholly void by Law. For it was neither done by any Conven∣tion of the Parties, nor by any Judicial Authority. The Danes, I presume, will confess the former, and the other we do not question but to make them also agree to. The King of Denmark having made himself Plaintiff against
the Duke of Gottorp, in the business of the Dukedome of Sleswick, his Majesty cannot be a Judge in the same cause: Which is explained by several Civilians, Ad. Tit. Cod. Nequis in suâ causâ judicet vel jus sibi dicat; that is to say, Let no man be Judge in his own Case, or do himself justice. And this must not be understood, as if the Positive Ro∣man Law only (by which the Danes are not bound) did prohibite any one to be Judge in his own cause, for the Law of Nature dictates the same, and right reason which obliges all the world, proclaims it. Men blinded by their affections do not see the truth in their own affairs, saith Ari∣stotle. And for this reason the Kings of Denmark them∣selves consented heretofore, that all Disputes about this Fief should be determined by Impartial Judges, accor∣ding to the contents of the Treaty of Union, and that both parties should abstain from hasty Sequestrations, Ord. jud. prov. part. 3. tit. 3. A judicial Sequestration being thus prohibited, because it is a kind of Execution wherewith a State ought not to begin; This Sequestra∣tion of the Dukedome of Sleswick cannot certainly be de∣fended by any Law, nor by any Judicial Authority, nor by a previous cognizance of the cause, upon which a just Sentence had followed, but only by the way of violence and absolute force; by which the Duke of Gottorp has been thrown out of a certain Possession and all his Re∣venues, and an usurped Possession transfer'd by pure Fact upon the Sequestrator, against the nature of all Judicial Sequestrations, which are made use of only for the bet∣ter keeping of things: so that this pretended Sequestra∣tion is really a violent spoil committed by the King (sup∣ported with more than one Army) upon the Duke naked and disarmed: Now it is the Opinion of all wise men,
that a person who has been spoiled, ought first of all to be restored. 14. And this Restitution is so much the more earnestly to be pressed, as this Sequestration may be dangerous both in Temporals and Spirituals. For the King having suffered himself to be perswaded, that he could absolve the common people, Priests, and Magistrates, Subjects to the Duke in the Dukedome of Sleswick, from the Alle∣giance they have sworn to their Prince, he has caused sometimes one, and sometimes another to be carried away by Souldiers from their habitations, and from their Sacred and Civil Functions, and some to Rendbourgh (where this whole Tragedy was begun, and where they have been put in Prison, at least detained for some time.) Those of the Dukes Officers and Subjects, that have seen and understood all that hath passed between the King and the Duke, must needs know, that his Majesty has indeed a great Power over his Subjects, but none over those of other Princes; at least not such a one as can free them from their Oath to God, and Allegiance to his Highness; especially whilst the matter in difference is not onely doubtful, but before no Judicial Court, much less de∣termined. Nay, they know that they are bound to suf∣fer rather the greatest Miseries, and the loss of their whole Fortunes, than to act against their own Consciences and Oaths, or do any thing to the prejudice of their Prince, lest they should provoke the Anger of God, and the Dukes just Revenge; no obedience being due to any body, that gives sentence out of his own Territory, where he has no Jurisdiction. L. Vel. ff. de Jurisd. And if others frighted with the noise of an Army, or the fear of great∣er Evils, renounce their Allegiance, let them consider how
they ensnare their Consciences, if not expose themselves to the punishments for Perjury and Perfidiousness. To prevent which, let a full and quick Restitution take away this illegal Sequestration. 15. The King caused this Sequestration of the Duke∣dome of Sleswick to be Proclaimed with a Threatning of Deprivation. It is apparent from what has been said, that this Sequestration is such, executed with that Rigour, as if the Duke was actually deprived and devested of the Dukedome of Sleswick; though this Deprivation be as unjust and violent as the Sequestration. How can the Authors of such Counsels be sufficiently wondred at, by those that remember, that a Fief is a Contract obliging both Parties, and that the Obligation between the Lord and his Vassal is as reciprocal, as that between Husband and Wife, saith Cujacius. Therefore, as a Vassal promises to his Lord upon Oath to perform truly, safely, securely, honestly, well, &c. so also doth the Lord to the Vassal, and is oblig'd to fulfil it; if he doth the contrary, he is declared of no Faith, Perjur'd and Perfidious by the Feudal Longobardick Law, 2 Feud. 6. Thence it is that all Felony which deprives a Vassal of a Fief, dprives the Lord also of the Propriety thereof, if committed by him, and confers it upon the Vassal; most especially if the Lord spoils him, that holds a Fief from him, of his Forts, wherein he may keep himself se∣cure much more: if the Lord demolishes and destroys them to the ground; If he uses the Vassal and his Sub∣jects ill, charges them with Imposts and Taxes, and Pil∣lages them; if he lays Siege to the Vassals Castle, or o∣ther his place of habitation: If the Lord bereaves him of the Fief by his own Authority, without cognizance of
the cause, and judgment thereupon; or if judging the cause himself, he alienates the same: For though the Lord accuse his Vassal of having done some act deserving De∣privation, yet he is not to be absolutely believed, though he be a Supreme Prince, saith Vultjs lib. 1. c. 11. n. 55. In a word, to repeat the proper Terms of the Law, If the Lord enters into the Fief by a bad way, that is to say, as Baron Schenkius explains it, ad lib. 2. Fud. Tit. 22. sed. Si vero Vassallus. If he breaks io Possession not by the way of the Law or Justice, but by Violence. For in such a case, if he refuses wholly to restore the Fief, and what belongs to it, he may be forced to it by the way of Arms. And there∣fore, if the Lord and Vassals are to be judged in the same manner, according to the opinion of all Feudists; certain∣ly the King of Denmark hath lost all his Right long be∣fore, if he had any, in that part of the Dukedom of Sles∣wick which belongs to the Duke of Gottorp, and the Duke ought to be Restored against the King, according to all Laws. 16. For the Duke of Gottorp having received this Dukedome with the greatest Right, and in the most ab∣solute manner, free from all Vassalage, and obtain'd and kept at a very chargable rate the Soveraign Dominion thereof by the so often repeated consent of the King and States of Denmark; the unjust Convention at Rendsbourgh cannot savour the King of Denmark's cause in this, nor take away the least part of the Dukes Soveraign Power in the Dukedome of Sleswick. This forced Agreement his Majesty himself having not a little receded from, and first broken, by demolishing the strong Towns, in which, by this very Agreement, he was only to put a Garrison for a while, and then to restore them: carrying away the
Dukes Ministers Prisoners, who had already bound them∣selves to the King by the Allegiance he required from them; reducing the Dukes Subjects to the last extremi∣ties, though his Majesty had promised before, that not a Hen should be touched, and other like things; by which things his Majesty seems not to desire the said Treaty should remain in force. 17. Lastly, an entire Restitution being the common refuge of Princes and Commonwealths, to which they have recourse in their Afflictions, the Duke of Sleswick cannot be excluded from this Priviledge of all Mankind. For though in the Commonwealth of Rome, Restitution was to be demanded from the Pretor within a certain time; this and the like are only Pleas of the Civil Law. Resti∣tution absolutely considered, is grounded upon the Prin∣ciples of Equity, which takes its Original from the purest Springs of the Law of Nature; and is so much the fitter for injured Princes and free Nations, as it is more impor∣tant to provide for the safety of Commonwealths than of private men. For why should not a Prince, as well or ra∣ther than a private Person, be restored unto all his Rights, if he has been deceiv'd or injur'd by fraud; force, unjust fear, or the like? Certainly there is no reason against it, Equity requires this remedy for both. Neither is it limi∣ted to these alone, but it is applicable as often as there is any cause of Restitution. L. . ff. de restit. in integ. Natural Equity it self requires, that a man deceived in any thing, where others ought to have proceeded with sincerity, be fully restored, especially since by such deceits whatever is done, is anaulled, saith a great Lawyer. Now, who must restore the Duke unto all his Rights? What hath been said before doth furnish us with an an∣swer.
The King of Denmark, who has unjustly injur'd the Duke, is beyond all others obliged to do it in the Court of Equity and Conscience, which demands as ready an obedience, as the King himself doth from his Subjects. For those that do an ill act knowingly, or are in∣strumental to it, are to be put in the number of those that can∣not go to Heaven without Repentance. And true Repentance requires absolutely, if there be time and power, that he that has done the Injury make satisfaction for it, Grot. lib. 3. de J. B. & P. c. 10. n. 3. & 4. From whence it appears too, that the King ought not only to restore what he hath extorted from the Duke at Rendsbourgh and afterwards, but make good also those damages his Highness and his Subjects have suffered by the War, and the occasion of it. What if the King of Denmark, for reason of State, excepting against this Court, refuses to restore the Duke? First, I say, that the great God is Judge, and the truth of his word will not so easily wear away as the Danish Coyn upon which it is stamped. Besides, the King there∣by would give the Duke just reason to endeavour to right himself. If an unjst fear caused by another, has forced any one to make a Promise, he that hath promised may demand Restitution, and, if denyed, may take it himself, Grot. lib. 3. de J. B. & P. c. 23. n. 2. When any one demands satisfacti∣on from his Fellow-Subject, the Authority of the Magi∣strate must be employed as Superiour, to force the Infe∣riours. And so in the Commonwealth of Rome, the Pretor having heard the cause, was wont to order Resti∣tution. But when a Prince must be restored against ano∣ther Prince, that is Soveraign as well as he, and his Equal, the injur'd Prince, or any for him, may perform the Office of Pretor, use all means to procure a full and
ample Reparation of his damages. If the Duke of Got∣torp is not strong enough to do it himself, all Christian Princes and Commonwealths must make this cause theirs, and employ all their Power to restore him; For Wars may be undertook not only for Friends and Allies, but for men, as such, if they are barbarously injured. Grot. lib. 3. de I. B. & P. c. 25. n. 1. & seq. And who is more injur'd than he, who by a Cousin of the same Family, his near Ally, and Brother, against his Faith so many times sworn, is so ill used, as to be deprived of all his Authority and Dignity? Therefore since other Princes are not a little concerned, when the condition of any Prince is brought so low, con∣trary to all Justice, and when perhaps his entire ruin is endeavoured, especially if these base Counsels proceed from Ministers, who in their actions and speeches, have no regard to the great Asserter of Faith, and consequent∣ly less to Faith it self, the foundation of Justice, and the tie of all human Societies; all Princes and States ought first of all to take care, that Faith be kept inviolable, and Treaties and Contracts between them be not violated, lest this tie of Friendship and Society being broke, the world should fall into confusion by their cnnivence be¦fore the time decreed by Divine Providence. And those Princes and States are chiefly obliged to take care of this Restitution, who have guaranted the Trea∣ties between the King of Denmark and the House of Got∣torp, and have signed the Instruments of Peace between Sweden and Germany, and that of Roschild and Oliva, engaging for the performance of them in such terms and expressions, that if they were meant, as they are set down, (which is not at all to be doubted,) no man but will be∣lieve they intend to perform their Promises. And to
induce them thereunto without any delay, let the great danger of this example, and the greatness of the Injuries be considered; and that it is also the earnest request of the Duke of Gottorp, who is every day more and more oppressed with new Injuries. And since amongst these Princes that are Securities, the good will of the most Serene and Potent King of Great Britain, towards the House of Gottorp, appears above the rest, his Majesty having not only engaged himself with other Princes and States, for the preserva∣tion of the Peace at Roschild, and the Treaty of Copen∣haguen, made between the King of Denmark and the House of Gottorp, soon after that at Roschild; but hav∣ing also passed his word and Guaranty for the Soveraignty yielded by the King and Kingdom of Denmark to the House of Gottorp; and most especially his Majesty being now the Mediator of all publick Differences: Give us leave, most Potent King, to let all the World know this great affection of your Majestie's towards the House of Gottorp, and to put you in mind of your special Engage∣ment to our Duke for the Soveraignty of Sleswick; which you can as easily make good, as you were pleased to en∣gage for it; that you may be known for as great a Defen∣der of the Civil as of the Christian Faith; and in judg∣ing the Differences between the King of Denmark and the House of Gottorp, or disposing all things to a Peace, make use of that Equity and Moderation, which may prove a Remedy to the Injur'd, a Defence to the Oppressed, and a Reward of Eternal Glory to your Majesty and the Noble People of England.
THE ARTICLES Of the TREATY at Rendsbourgh. KNow all Men to whom these Presents shall come, That whereas, for the common Security and Safe∣ty, several Treaties of Union and Conjunction have been heretofore made between the Kingdom of Den∣mark and the Dukedoms of Sleswick and Holstein, which have been renewed, augmented, and changed, accord∣ing to the Exigence of times; and that the most Serene and Potent Prince and Lord Christian the V. King of Denmark and Norway, Goths and Vandals, Duke of Sles∣wick and Holstein, Stormar and Dithmars, Earl of Olden∣bourgh and Delmenhorst, and the most Reverend and Serene Prince and Lord, the Lord Christian Albert, Heir of Nor∣way, Coadjutor of the Bishoprick of Lubeck, Duke of Sles∣wick and Holstein, Stormar and Dithmars, Earl of Olden∣bourgh and Delmenhorst, judging it very necessary in these dangerous and troublesome times, that such Treaties of Union be renewed after the Example of their Ancestors, and be accommodated to the present condition and State of their Kingdoms and Dominions: And his said Maje∣sty having appointed on his part [Here the Names of
the Kings Commissioners were inserted] and the said Duke on his part [Here the Names of the Dukes Com∣missioners were inserted] and the said Commissioners, having accordingly met together, have agreed upon the following Articles. I. As his Royal Majesty and his most Serene Highness do Govern joyntly the Dukedom of Sleswick and Holstein, and the Countries incorporated therein; so they shall both endeavour, according to the Contents of the former Treaties of Union, unanimously to direct all their Coun∣sels for the safety and augmentation of the said Duke∣doms, and to preserve them from all damage, danger, and detriment. II. Therefore, as often as necessity shall require it, or any danger seems to threaten these Dukedoms, they shall both do all they can, by united Counsels and Forces to prevent it; and if the thing comes to a War, let no Truce be made, nor Peace contracted, before the danger be removed from both their Heads, and satisfaction be made to both by the Enemy, and the publick security provided for. III. And as therefore his Royal Majesty by this takes en∣tirely upon him the Guaranty and Defence, both of the most Serene Duke, and the part he has in the Duke∣doms; so his said most Serene Highness promises again, that as often as his Royal Majesty shall be necessitated
to draw Forces from his Kingdomes for the defence of these Dukedoms, and the Countries incorporated therein, or shall be in War against any Forrein Prince whosoever he be, none excepted (though his Majesty thinks it al∣ready his due by the Union) he shall not only give him free passage through his Land, and all his Towns, but liberty to List and Muster Souldiers, assigning them quar∣ters and places to Encamp, and helping the King with all his Power. IIII. Because also, during these troublesome times, his Royal Majesty could not forbear by an unavoidable necessity to ask leave for his further security to put Garrisons of his own into the Forts of Gottorp and Tonningen, and the For∣tress of Stapelholme, which his most Serene Highness has granted, upon this certain hope that these troubles be∣ing over, and the Peace made, all things should be en∣tirely given back and restored as they were: And his most Serene Highness having made certain Leagues, in which there are some things which give no small jealousies to his Royal Majesty; that he may hereafter be more secure of the intentions of his most Serene Highness, and all occasion of mistrust be wholly taken away; it is agreed and covenanted on both sides, that it shall not be lawful hereafter for his most Serene Highness to make any Alli∣ances with Forrein Princes and States without a previous communication with his Majesty and his consent obtained, nor make use of any of those already made to the preju∣dice and detriment of his Royal Majesty.
V. And that the Forts and Strong-holds that are necessary for the Defence of these Dukedoms and Countries there∣in incorporated, may be provided and furnished with all necessaries, according to the Exigencies of times, and the threatning dangers, with least trouble to the States of the Provinces; both Parties have agreed, that hereafter the Contributions shall be brought into a common Trea∣sury, and shall not be imployed to any other use than this now mentioned. VI. But because the Contributions that have been paid till now, have been so far from keeping the Souldiers which are appointed for the Defence of these Dukedoms, that his Majesty has been necessitated to add considerable sums out of his own Revenue; and his most Serene High∣ness having put into his Coffers the best part of the Con∣tributions he has received, and employed the same to o∣ther uses, for which his Majesty pretends a satisfaction to be made to him: Therefore in lieu of a compensation, and that all things, as much as is possible, may be re∣establisht in the same state, and restored according to the Rule of the antient Division, which Hereditarily has been granted to each House; His most Serene Highness quits wholly and for ever to his Royal Majesty the Terri∣tory of Swabstadt, with half of the Chapter of Sleswick, and of the Cathedral Church, which together with the said Territory of Swabstadt, was heretofore yielded to his most Serene Highness by his Sacred Royal Majesty of glorious Memory, with all the Appurtenances, Revenues,
Profits, Domains, Prerogatives, and Royalties, as his most Serene Highness had the same yielded to him, and has quietly possessed till now. VII. As to the Controversies about the limits, and other things relating to the Territories of Ripen and Tundern, the discussion whereof remains in suspence till now, they shall be decided by Equity, and according to the Opini∣ons of the Royal Commissioners, who were present at the last Assembly held for that purpose; and if hereafter any differences or disputes should arise, either between his Majesty himself and his most Serene Highness, or their sub∣jects, which cannot be determined by them, they shall be composed amicably and according to the Articles of Union. VIII. And nothing being intended on both sides by the re∣newing of this Union and Treaty but to re-establish a per∣petual and most necessary good understanding between the Royal and Ducal Families, and to keep the same in∣violable for ever, and the novelties and changes which have happened in process of time, having given not a little occasion of mistrust; it is at last agreed and Covenanted, that to reduce all things to their former condition as soon as may be, his most Serene Highness and his Successors, shall renounce fully and for ever their Soveraignty over the Dukedom of Sleswick and it's appurtenances, together with the Island of Femaria, which they obtained by the Peace of Roschild, and the Treaty of Copenhaguen, in the same manner as if they had never obtained or been in pos∣session
of the said Soveraignty, and shall be obliged, no less than heretofore, within a year and a day, as often as the case, either by the death of the Lord or of the Vassal, shall happen, to demand and receive in due manner (as heretofore hath been used) from the Kings of Denmark, the Investiture of the said Dukedom of Sleswick and it's Appurtenances, together with the Island of Femaria, and to perform all things according to the form prescribed by the Act of Renuntiation to be made by his most Se∣rene Highness; for which end his most Serene Highness has also obliged himself to deliver up again, and consign into the hands of his Royal Majesty the Instrument he received from his late Sacred Majesty of glorious Memory, and from these Senators of the Kingdom then in being, which is hereby made void and rendred null. Lastly, this Union and Transaction shall remain en∣tire and firm, as the Basis and foundation of an everlast∣ing Friendship and Alliance between both Houses, and as a strong obligation by which his Royal Majesty and his most Serene Highness are joyned together, and shall be inviolably observed by both parties and their Successors, neither shall any of them do any thing contrary hereunto, or suffer the same to be done; and besides, all that is not here altered, shall by vertue of the antient Treaties, re∣main in full force. For the greater assurance of the per∣formance of these Presents, these Articles of Union and Agreement have been by Us, as well his Majesties, as his Highnesses Commissioners, deputed for this affair, signed and Sealed at Rendsbourg the 10. of July 1675.
Out of the Articles of Vnion made 1533. Neither Party shall enter into a War without the Counsel and consent of the other. And the same is confirmed by the other Treaties of Ʋnion. Out of the Transaction at Othen∣waldt 1579. If his Majesty for the defence of his Provinces and Subjects or the Conservation of his Dignity, is necessita∣ted to take up Arms, so that the business cannot be deter∣mined by way of Justice or a fair Composure, the most Serene Duke of Gottorp (if the War hath been undertaken and ended by his advice, and with his full consent, after a previous deliberation) shall be obliged to send the Suc∣cours agreed upon. Out of the Concordats of the Kingdom of Denmark, and the Dukedom of Sleswick & Holstein 1593. Neither of the Parties shall make War without the Advice and consent of the other; but if it happen that the King and Kingdom of Denmark, and the Dukes of Sleswick and Holstein, consent to refer their Contro∣versies to the Cognizance and Decision of a Judicial Court, and nevertheless either of them be attacked by force of Arms, the other Party shall send such roops to his Assistance, as by the following Articles are agreed upon.
Out of the Vnion renewed in the Year 1624. The Party whose Counsel and help is imployed, may and ought to make use of this Right, to profer his Medi∣ation to the Parties entring into War, for the composing their differences without coming to Arms, and to this end must invite and joyn with him other Neutral Princes and States; and if there be time, and no danger will a∣rise by delay, let him propose all just and equitable con∣ditions, not derogating from the Dignity of the Princes engaged, nor prejudicial to the cause, and try what suc∣cess that may have before they come to an open Rupture. Out of the Inventory 4 Jul. 1675. made when the Fort of Tonningen and all its Ammunition was deli∣vered up. This written Inventory, with all the things set down therein,—were delivered, and really received by me under-writen, Lieutenant-General of the most Serene King of Denmark and Norway, after the performance of the Surrender of the Fort of Tonningen; and I do engage my Faith, that all shall be fully restored according to the promise of his most Serene Royal Majesty, and as it ought to be, and to that end, have subscribed this with my own hand. Charles Arenstorff.
Out of the Instrument of Peace at Roschild 12. May 1658. As to the pretended satisfaction for the damages re∣ceived by the last War, the most Serene Duke of Got∣torp (the most excellent Mediators judging it fit) conde∣scends out of friendship and affection, to remit all his pretensions thereunto for all the Vassalage remitted to him, that the Amty between his most Serene Royal Majesty and the Duke, and also the Kingdom of Den∣mark, the Dukedoms and the Subjects of both Princes may remain firm and entire, and that the good corres∣pondence which ought to be between Allies, Brothers, and Neighbours, may be preserved. Out of the League between Sweden and Gottorp, made May 24. 1661. And as there is no other cause for the making of this Alliance, than to keep the Peace between the Princes of the North inviolate, and render the security of the House of Gottorp, established thereby, more entire; and the most Serene Duke of Gottorp not obliging himself in any thing to the King and Kingdom of Sweden, but what re∣lates to this Peace and Security, and the preservation of the Friendship and Amity between them: so no other Leagues, whether already made, or which shall be here∣after made, shall prejudice either of the Parties, nor be a hindrance to this Treaty, or take place against it. Be∣sides, the most Serene Duke, that he may remove all
suspition of his proceedings, desires that the extension or interpretation of this League may no ways reach his Im∣perial Majesty or the Empire, or any other Kings, Ele∣ctors and Princes, if they do not injure the Duke con∣trary to the Peace of the North; and he also reserves to himself the liberty to keep and improve, by the best ways he shall think fit, that good correspondence with the King of Denmark, which may and ought to be between Neighbours, and may be most advantageous to his Fa∣mily, Provinces, and Subjects, without derogating from the Peace of the North. Out of the Peace of Roschild made the 26 Feb. 1658. Art. 22. His most Serene Majesty of Denmark, shall be obli∣ged to satisfie Prince Frederick Duke of Sleswick and Holstein-Gottorp, according to Equity, which satisfaction shall be treated of by his Royal Majesties and his High∣nesses Commissioners; yet so as that this Treaty be fini∣shed before the second of May. Out of the Instrument of Peace between the most Serene King of Denmark and the Duke at Copenhaguen 12 of May 1658. Art. 6. And so in the Name of God the Grievances and De∣mands exhibited, are either absolutely or provisionally taken off, to the satisfaction of the interessed; and the
King and Prince do promise bona side, and in words with∣out equivocation, that they will keep this Treaty, and not recede from it under any pretence whatsoever, what∣ever it may be, and observe these Articles, as faithfully as those of the Peace at Roschild, employing all their cares to transmit and propagate this Friendship now renewed perfect and entire to their Posterity. We Frederick III. King of Denmark and Norway, &c. declare by these Presents, that we have, after mature de∣liberation upon all that has been proposed by the Lords Mediators, either by word of Mouth or in Writing, con∣cerning the Treaty and Conclusion of a Peace, consented, and by vertue of these Presents do consent to the same, as far as they agree with the Acts passed by the three States for the establishing a Peace between Us and the King of Sweden. Copenhaguen August 23. V. S. 1659. Another Declaration of his most Serene Royal Majesty upon the business of the Peace to be made with the King and Kingdom of Sweden, presented to the Lords Mediators Plenipoten∣tiaries at Copenhaguen. We Frederick III. by the Grace of God King of Den∣mark and Norway, Duke of Sleswick and Holstein, &c. To all and every one whom it doth or may any way concern; Be it known, that as we have among other
things, as well by our Declaration of the 14/24 August, shewed our great propensity to a Peace to the Lords Me∣diators of the three States, as by another of the 25/4 August / Sept. delivered by Our Order into the Hands of the same Me∣diators, by which we declare, that after a due conside∣ration of the Propositions of their Excellencies, made as well by word of Mouth as in Writing, the 18/28 of the same Month, for a happy Issue of this present Peace, We do consent to them all as far as they are agreeable with the resolutions past by the three States the 11/21 of May, the 14/24 of July, and 25/4 July / August about the Peace to be made between Us and the King and Kingdom of Sweden; so we do hereby testifie and confirm that VVe adhere still to the same Declaration; and to give a greater proof of our said Inclination for Peace, and to take away all sort of suspition of the contrary, VVe declare by these Presents, that VVe desire nothing more than that the Commissio∣ners of both Parties, without any delay of time, may meet at the place before appointed for the Treaty of Peace, and by the Mediation of the Ambassadors of the three States, make a happy conclusion of the same without any further delay. And VVe relying entirely upon the Integrity and Equi∣ty of the said Lords, do also hereby declare, That if it shall be thought fit to add or change any thing in the Treaty at Roschild, we remit and leave it all to their dis∣cretion and care. In greater trust and certainty whereof, we have to these Presents set Our Royal Hand and Seal at Our Court at Copenhaguen the 19. of March 1660. Frederick III.
Out of the Instrument of Peace at Roschild renewed in the Year 1660. Art. 27, & 28. VVhereas it was agreed by the 22th Article of the Treaty at Roschild, that his Royal Majesty of Denmark should be obliged to give an equitable satisfaction to the most High Prince, the Duke of Sleswick and Holstein-Gottorp, and his said Majesties and his said Highnesses Commissioners, after several Conferences held at Copen∣haguen the 12/22 of May 1658, having at last come to a final Agreement and Conclusion, it is hereby stipulated, that all those Treaties and Transactions shall be exactly ob∣served and fulfilled faithfully on both sides. Moreover, if there has happened any thing in this or the precedent VVars, which may any way create animosities and jea∣lousies between his most Serene Royal Majesty and King∣dom of Denmark and his most Serene Highness the Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, or any thing between his most Serene Royal Majesty and his most Serene Highness, their Mini∣sters, Servants, or Subjects, which may be taken any o∣ther ways than in good part; It shall all, as well for the sake of the mutual Consanguinity, and especially of her most Serene Royal Majesty the Queen of Sweden, as for the perpetuating the friendship between both Houses, from this day forward be forgotten, and be no more remembred to the prejudice of any one, but by vertue of this Trans∣action be wholly extinguished. And his most Serene Royal Majesty of Denmark, will also, when Denmark
shall be evacuated, not only withdraw his Army and Forces out of his Highnesses Country and Places, but likewise do his utmost endeavour to oblige his Allies to send away, and draw their Troops without any delay or ergiversation out of the Lands, Towns, and Forts of his Highness, which they have possessed themselves of. Out of the Treaty of Peace at Oliva. Art. 22. The Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, by the con∣sent of the Parties stipulating, shall be included in this Peace. Art. 26. The same is repeated. Art. 31. It importing very much to the establishment of this Peace, that it be made to reach all parties in Dif∣ference, and that the safety of Trade between all the Parties engaged in the VVar be provided for, and there∣fore, though the Controversies that are depending be∣tween the most Serene King and Kingdom of Sweden, and the most Serene King of Denmark, cannot be well deter∣mined here, but are now under discussion at Copenhaguen, and in a fair way of Composure, it is nevertheless Enact∣ed, that the Kingdoms and Countries of the most Serene King of Denmark and Norway, included in the Danish Peace, shall be comprehended in this Treaty; so that all which has been agreed and concluded between the said Kings of Sweden and Denmark, shall be part of this Peace, as if the particulars were specifyed, and set down in this Instrument; yet so as not to derogate from any thing of the Treaty already concluded, or which shall be conclu∣ded in Denmark, between both Kings and Kingdoms.
35. To the end that this Peace may be rendred more firm, permanent and secure, and remain inviolable on every side, the said Parties, as well Principal as Allies, now Treating, do promise besides, that they will and in∣tend to keep this Transaction and Peace inviolably, with all its Articles, Contents, and Clauses; and that it may not be violated hereafter, they oblige themselves to a mu∣tual Guaranty and reciprocal defence on all parts, promi∣sing by these, as firmly as it may be, that if it happen that any Party be attacked by another or others, either by Sea or Land, against the Contents of this Treaty, the Aggres∣sor shall, ipso facto, be accounted by all the rest as the Breaker of this Peace, losing all the benefit thereof, and the rest of the Parties now Treating shall be obliged to assist the Party injured with their Forces and Arms, within two Months at the furthest after thereunto desired by the injur'd Party, and prosecute the VVar against the Ag∣gressor until a Peace can be made to the satisfaction of all. But if it happen that one Party shall receive any grievous injury by the other, or some by others without force of Arms, it shall not be lawful to the Injur'd to have present∣ly recourse to Arms, but endeavours shall be used to com∣pose such kind of Controversies amicably and in a friendly manner.
Out of the Transactions at Gluck∣stadt, Octob. 12. 1667. And first, that a Friendly, kind, and filial affection may be restored between his most Serene Royal Majesty and the Duke of Gottorp, all those things which have been acted directly or indirectly against the Union, and and all those Treaties that concern the Kingdom of Den∣mark, the Dukedoms of Sleswick and Holstein, and all the Princes belonging to the same, shall on both sides be ab∣solutely forgotten, and are abolisht for ever; and the said Union (except as to what has been in 1658, and 1660, otherwise determined by the aforesaid Treaties of Ros∣child and Copenhaguen) shall subsist in its full force in Peace and VVar, any pretence or interpretation whatso∣ever notwithstanding, and shall be constantly observed. And neither Party shall molest or oppose the other for any cause whatsoever contrary to the same. At the end of this Transaction these words are set down. VVe do Attest and Certifie, that we have approved the foregoing Transaction, and all and every the Articles and Clauses of the same; and accordingly do approve, agree, and confirm it, promising for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, upon Our Royal Faith, that We shall not directly, nor indirectly act, or suffer any thing to be acted against the same, and that we shall firmly adhere there∣unto. Given under Our Hand and Signet. Frederick.
We CHARLES by the Grace of God of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, &c. Make known and certifie, That whereas the most Se∣rene Prince Frederick the III. by the same Grace of Denmark and Norway, Goths and Vandals King, Duke of Sleswick, Hlstein, Stormar and Dithmars, Earl in Olden∣bourgh and Delmenhorst, having wholly and fully freed and absolved the most High Prince the Lord Frederick Heir of Norway, Duke of Sleswick and Holstein, &c. and his lawful Heirs Males, from a certain Feudal Hom∣age and Vassalage for the Dukedom of Sleswick, and hav∣ing yielded up to him and his Descendents Males the Dukedom of Sleswick, with the Supreme and absolute Do∣minion thereof (commonly called the Soveraignty) and all its Rights and Appurtenances, as appears more fully by the Treaty or Instrument: And whereas the most High Prince the Lord Christian Albert, Elected Bishop of Lubeck, Heir of Norway, Duke of Sleswick, Holstein, Stormar, Dith∣mars, Earl in Oldenburgh and Delmenhorst, Our Cousin, having desired Us by the Illustrious Sir John Leyenberg Knight, Resident in Our Court for the most Potent King of Sweden, that interposing our Authority, We would confirm and ratifie by way of Guaranty,See the Pa∣tent for the Grant of this Soveraignty in Lundorpius, Contin. part. 8. lib. 8. cap. 10. pag. 318. and elsewhere. the said Treaty or Covenant concluded at Copenhaguen, with all and every one of its Clauses, as it is set down word for word in the German Exemplar (which We have received from the said Resident of the most Serene King of Sweden upon his Faith.) We therefore, as well to gratifie the demand and de∣sire of the most Serene King of Sweden, as to shew the affection VVe bear and will always bear to the aforesaid
Duke Christian Albert, nearly joyned to Us both in Friendship and Blood, have thought fit to constitute Our Selves as Guarantee, and a Security for the observation of this Treaty or Convention concluded at Copenhaguen the 12 May 1658; as by these in the best, most ample, and secure form, We do constitute Our Selves Guarantee, and a Security for the same; Promising upon Our Royal Faith, that We will maintain the Duke Christian Albert, his Heirs and Successors in the said, and all other and singular their Rights; and if any thing be attempted against his High∣ness, his Heirs and Successors, VVe shall endeavour by a Friendly Mediation, or by opposing all necessary means against force, that these Countries, Dominions, and Ter∣ritories, with all the Rights, Royalties, Soveraign and absolute Dominion, or Soveraignty thereof, may remain whole and safe to him. And for the greater security of all and singular the Premises, VVe have subscribed this Instrument of Guaranty with Our own hand, and have caused Our Great Seal of England to be affixed thereunto. Given at Our Palace of Westminster the 23. day of February, in the year one Thousand six Hundred Sixty five, and in the Eighteen year of Our Reign. Charles R.
SOME LETTERS OF THE KING OF Great Britain, THE King of Denmark, AND THE DUKE OF Holstein Gottorp.
The King of Great Britains Letter to His Majesty the King of Den∣mark, concerning a Mediation in the differences between His Majesty and the Duke of Holstein Gottorp. CHarles the Second, By the Grace of God King of Great Britain, &c. To the most Serene and Potent Prince Christian the Fifth, by the same Grace of Denmark, Norway, Goths and Vandals King, Duke of Sleswick, &c. Greeting. VVe were extreamly troubled to hear of the Differen∣ces lately arisen between your Majesty and Our good Cousin the Duke of Holstein, for the nearness and tie of Blood and common Interests between you; and therefore out of the Affection VVe bear to both your Families, and the good and advantage of the same, VVe did almost a Year ago offer our Mediation and good Offices between you; and VVe had long since charged Our Minister re∣siding at your Court to do it more solemnly, if your Ma∣jesties Envoy residing with Us had not induced and de∣sired Us, as in favour of himself; that all VVe should resolve to do therein, might be done through his hands, which We the rather consented to then, because he
charged himself seriously to represent to your Majesty the offers VVe made of Our Offices and Mediation. But your Majesty having not hitherto sent Us any direct Answer thereunto, and your said Envoy having only by the by insinuated to Us, that your Majesty rather desi∣sired, that since this Affair seemed to be purely Domestick, and concerned only the private Interests of two Prin∣ces of the same Blood, it might be left to be determined among your selves; VVe hoped not to have found your Majesty in this mind which VVe perceive by your Envoys discourse, you are of: However, VVe cannot but, out of the desire VVe have to reconcile two Princes that are of a Blood, so nearly Related to Us, and for other con∣siderations, (which induce Us to concern Our Selves with a more special care in this matter, than perhaps VVe should otherwise) repeat again in the most solemn man∣ner, the first Offer of Our Mediation and good Offices, not doubting but that your Majesty, after having seri∣ously reflected upon the thing, will think fit to admit of Our good Offices and Mediation, which you may be con∣fident, VVe shall always apply on all occasions which may concern your Majesty, in such manner, as you have reason to expect from the mutual Friendship between Us, of which VVe shall always give your Majesty those Proofs and Arguments which you can desire, &c. July 2. 1677.
The King of Denmark's Answer to his Majesty the King of Great Britain. CHristian the Fifth, By the Grace of God King of Denmark, &c. To the most Serene and Potent Prince, Charles the II. by the same Grace, King of Great Britain, &c. Greeting. By your Majesties Letters of the 10th of July last past, VVe have understood more at large what Reasons induced you to offer Us your Mediation and good Offices for com∣posing the Differences arising between Us and Our Cou∣sin and Kinsman Christian Albert Duke of Holstein. This Offer of your Majesties has been the more pleasing to Us, because VVe do not doubt at all, but it proceeds from a sincere and Brotherly affection towards Us; and We put so great a trust in your Friendship, that if there were place for any Mediation in these Differences, VVe would as readily accept of your Interposition for the composing of them, as VVe have accepted of the same in the present Negotiation for an Universal Peace, which We have constantly endeavour'd should remain solely in your Ma∣jesty. But the Disputes and Controversies complained
of by the Duke of Gottorp to your Majesty, being ground∣ed upon no other foundation than his endeavours to lay aside all the Alliances and Treaties which have subsisted for many Ages betwixt Our Royal Predecessors and his, and especially that which he Voluntarily made with Us at Rendsbourgh, and approved several times after, and so to free himself from all those ties, by which he is bound to Us as a Vassal of Our Kingdom of Denmark, and Our Dukedoms of Sleswick and Holstein are united together, hoping after the Example of his Father, (who in the last unhappy VVar supported by the Arms of the King of Sweden his Son-in-Law, and by the favour and unjust Authority of the English Usurper Cromwell, without any respect of his obligations to Our Kingdom, under colour of some frivolous and groundless pretensions, extorted most unjust, and almost intolerable conditions from Our Lord and Father of blessed and glorious Memory) to ac∣complish and perfect his pernicious designs and unjust attempts, in these troublesome times, as well by the help of his Neighbours Armes as your Majesties Authority. The Truth hereof appears also by this, that though VVe have divers times proposed to his Dilection, to restore him unto the former condition of his Ancestors, if he would keep to the aforesaid Treaties, and fulfil their Tenor, he does not cease nevertheless to complain of Force, and to sollicite the help and succours of other Prin∣ces and States, to finish those unjust Enterprises he has proposed to himself. From whence your Majesty, accor∣ding to your singular Prudence, will easily judge, whe∣ther VVe can, without the greatest prejudice to Our Rights, recede from the ancient Treaties, and those which have been made between Us and the Duke of Gottorp,
upon which the safety of Our Kingdoms and Dominions in great measure depends, or suffer them to be disputed, and thereby expose Our Selves to new and everlasting Differences and Quarrels; especially since it is expresly covenanted by the said Treaties, that if any disputes shall hereafter arise, they shall not be composed by the Medi∣ation of other Princes, but by other friendly and amicable means. For these and other Reasons which we have or∣dered Our Envoy Extraordinary, Resident at your Maje∣sties Court, to represent more amply to your Majesty, We do not doubt in the least, but your Majesty will not only think it wholly unjust, that We should consent to such prejudicial Treaties, and so contrary to the afore∣said Conventions and Domestick agreements, but also that by vertue of the Alliances VVe have with your Majesty, by which each of Us is obliged to promote the good of the other, and to keep all dangers from him, your Majesty will compel the aforesaid Duke to a better and more exact observance and execution of the Ancient Treaties, and all others, to the performance whereof he has bound himself, and seriously dissuade him from his usual pernicious designs against Us. The many proofs VVe have of your Justice, and your experienced com∣mendable Constancy and Faithfulness in keeping your Treaties, makes Us promise Our Selves this from your Majesties friendship; being also resolved never to suffer any thing to be wanting in Us that may prove for the advantage of your Majesty and your Subjects, and per∣swade you of Our sincere affection towards you. By which your Majesty, &c. Given at Our Court at Land∣scroon the 4th of August 1677.
The Duke of Holsteins Letter to his Majesty the King of Great Britain in Answer to the King of Denmarks. Most Serene and Potent Prince, &c. HAving had a view of the Letters written to your most Serene Majesty by the King of Denmark, the 4th of August of this present Year, We find by them, that his Majesty of Denmark does indeed com∣mend your Majesties offers of Mediation for composing Our Controversies, but in reality shews an aversion thereunto, and declines it as unnecessary, endeavouring to demonstrate the same by colouring his Actions with the specious pretence of ancient and late Treaties, and ac∣cusing Our Lord and Father, and Us with a great many things. These Letters being full of such complaints, VVe cannot but defend Our Innocence, and free Our Ho∣nour from such accusations, by letting your most Serene Majesty understand Our Reasons, why the differences be∣tween Us and the King of Denmark ought not to be ex∣cluded out of the Negotiations for an Universal Peace, not indeed can be debated any-where else without great dan∣ger and prejudice to Us. VVe have been so observing of the ancient Treaties and Alliances, that for several Ages the Dukes of Gottorp have lived under the Autho∣rity and at the Devotion of the Kings of Denmark. But
VVe are not by any Treaties to be oppressed by those who are obliged by Vertue of Our Alliances to defend Us, nor are VVe to submit Our Selves to a voluntary Slavery, but are rather by the said Treaties freed from so sad a Yoke. Let the Kings of Denmark but consider how they could make VVars upon VVars, and involve the Dukes of Gottorp's Territories so often in the Calamities attending VVar, not only without consulting the Dukes, but against their will and earnest dissuasions from the same, without breach to the ancient Treates and Alliances, from which VVe are sure it cannot be proved, that Our Ancestors ever receded rashly or unjustly. As to the Articles of Rendsbourgh, VVe confess that VVe do not think Our Selves further oblig'd to them, then either the goodness or equity of the cause, or of the way of proceeding will oblige Us. We came as Friends and Guests to Rends∣bourgh, inticed with great hopes and ample Protestations, that all things should be sincerely and fairly transacted and determined. But We were against the Laws of Na∣tions and Friendship Treated like Enemies, detained Pri∣soners, guarded with Souldiers, and at last sent from one Prison to another, every-where besieged, and through fear and threatnings compelled unjustly to most unreason∣able conditions, (which the very way of proceeding ar∣gues to be null). Therefore VVe are so far from con∣senting to them freely and voluntarily, that VVe have never so much as freely ratified them. For those things that are done by force, and through fear, may be some∣times made valid by a subsequent free consent; yet no consent is to be esteemed such, except the person who is said to have consented freely, be first set at full liberty: when on the contrary, fear once caused in any transaction
is supposed to continue still: and VVe were the more disturbed thereby, because VVe were by the King depri∣ved of all good Counsels, Our Principal Ministers being violently carried away Prisoners to Copenhaguen, and the rest frighted from Us by this unheard-of Example. The Soveraignty of the Dukedom of Sleswick, purchased with a very good Title, and at a dear rate, was yielded up to Our House by Frederick the Third King of Denmark, by his own free and often repeated consent, and has been quietly possessed by Us for above Sixteen years; neither is it any matter, that it was obtained partly by the for∣tunate Successes of the Arms of Sweden, since it is un∣doubtedly true, that VVars may be made not only for Or own good, but for the good of others, and that the King of Sweden was then justly provoked to take up Arms against the Danes, and that if the King of Denmark has suffered any force, it being but just, he cannot pretend to any Right of Restitution. VVe cannot like wise conceal, that by this and the foregoing Wars made by the Kings of Denmark, VVe have contracted many great Debts; and Our Subjects are so exhausted by Contributions, that part of them have been forced to quit the Country, and the rest are glad if they can get the coarsest sort of Bread to eat. Now when VVe quitted, by the last Treaty, all Our pretensions of satisfaction from the King of Den∣mark, in consideration of the Soveraignty which was yield∣ed up to Us; what have we got, I pray, that any one should envy Us for? It is the King of Denmark only is the gainer, who by that opportunity got the Soveraignty of that part of the Dukedom of Sleswick which is his, and thereby soon after an occasion of getting the Monarchy of the whole Kingdom. Therefore, since that Our Lord and
Father was by so many Solemn and publick Treaties ab∣solutely freed from the tie of Vassalage and Homage, it cannot certainly be imputed to him, that he had without any regard of his Alliance to the Kingdom of Denmark, extorted the Soveraignty of the said Dukedome, unless the King will slight all the Treaties of Peace and Con∣ventions that have been made upon that occasion, and by his Example incite the Kings of Spain and Poland, nay his own Subjects to repossess themselves of their lost Provinces, and Ancient Rights and Authorities, as soon as they shall have an occasion and power to do it. We do with all gratitude acknowledge your Majesties favour, that besides the general Guaranty of all the conditions of the Peace at Roschild, you have been pleased to oblige your Self to a special one for the Preservation and Asser∣tion of this Soveraignty. It is without any ground the King of Denmark pretends, that VVe obtained the Soveraignty by the favour of Cromwell only: For besides, that the good Offices and Mediations of other Kings and States intervened in this Affair, and the conclusion there∣of; VVe do not well conceive how the King of Denmark can show which of the Usurpers Acts your Majesty is pleased to hold or good, and which not: For it will not consist with reason of State, and the publick good, that they should be all annulled. Nay, if the King of Denmark will be pleased to look into the circumstances of this mat∣ter, he will find that the English Ambassador, who Resided at that time at Copenhaguen, was unknown to the King of Sweden, brought to his Majesty by the Danish Commissi∣oners, and by them Sollicited to employ his utmost en∣deavour for a Peace. It appears from hence, that all Our Complaints of the great Injuries We have sustained by
the Danes are just, and that We never designed any thing to the Kings prejudice, but that what may perhaps have displeased his Majesty, was solely intended for the de∣fence of Our House and Dominions, which is every way lawful; and therefore VVe are most unjustly reproached of intending and having such pernitious Designs, since we have only sought for a lawful Defence against an un∣usual Domination and Oppression. VVhich things being thus, as your most Serene Majesty may be more particu∣larly informed by a deduction we have lately caused to be Printed of this whole Affair, or by Our Envoy Extra∣ordinary Residing in London, we hope nothing will ap∣pear more reasonable, than that we should be admitted into the Treaty for an universal Peace, and that your most Serene Majesties Mediation should not be rejected by the King of Denmark, especially since he seems wil∣ling to admit of the good Offices of other Princes of the Empire. Neither will their Objection, as if the matters between the King and us were purely Domestick, be any ways material; seeing it is known by all the world, that a Peace confirmed by so many Protestations, was broken, and no regard had of any Domestick considerations; and therefore your Majesties Mediation is declined, for no o∣ther reason, but that which makes Criminals fly from their Tryals. For your Majesty will by what follows see, how improper a Jury of Sixteen men (as they call it) is to decide this Domestick business. In the year 1533, a Treaty was made between the Kingdom of Denmark and the Dukedom, and between the Princes and States of both, which usually bears the name of the Ʋnion; and among other things, a certain form of Judicature was agreed upon, according to which all the Controversie,
that should arise between the two Princes, or between them and the States, ought to be determined; viz. That the differences between them should be left to the Arbitration of Sixteen Counsellors, to be in equal number named by both Parties. And though by the Articles of this Treaty a very ample power seems to be given to these Judges, of examin∣ing and deciding all sorts of causes; yet we do not re∣member that ever disputes of Moment, and about the Dukedom of Sleswick, were brought to them, but they have always been left to the Mediation of Forrein Prin∣ces. For there is not only not a word in this Treaty, by which it may appear that these Princes have renounced all other Judgments and Arbitrations; but the express words of it, as well as the usage and custom, (which is the best interpreter of Laws and Treaties) have confined the Power of this Tribunal of Sixteen men, to affairs of lesser im∣portance; That is to say, when the complaint concerns any Lands or private Subjects. Therefore, not long after the Ʋnion made, several Transactions have been about the Fief of the Dukedome of Sleswick, first at Coldinga 1547, and then by the Interposition of the Elector of Saxony, of Ʋlrick Duke of Mecklenbourgh, and William Landgrave of Hesse at Odensea 1557; though nothing was then agreed on: but at last 1579, in the same place, it was expresly provided by a solemn Convention, That if there should happen any dispute about the Succession to the Dukedom of Sleswick, which was not decided by this Trans∣action, the Dukes of Sleswick should either themselves, or by the help of other Princes and Friends, endeavour to compose the same, or that it might be determined by a Judicial Sentence. Here is no mention of this Judg∣ment by Sixteen men, but rather all Controversies, that
may arise about the Dukedome of Sleswick, are in ex∣press words exempted without any contradiction from the States. And therefore the question about the So∣veraignty is so much the less to be referred to their deter∣mination, because in that Age, wherein the Vnion was made, such a thing was not so much as thought of; and therefore its Articles cannot extend to affairs of this na∣ture, and which are wholly above the condition of Sub∣jects. And though we can (without prejudice to Our cause) allow, that sometimes feudal differences about the Dutchy of Sleswick have been left to this sort of Arbitra∣tion, (which it seems may be done by the consent of both Princes,) yet there has happened so great a change in the Danish affairs and Ours, that we cannot be forced to consent thereunto against Our will; and the like Con∣troversies can no longer be debated there, at least with∣out great inconvenience, because such Constitutions re∣main only in force, so long as the state of publick Af∣fairs is the same and unalter'd; which being entirely changed, as well in Denmark as in these Duckedomes, and all the Power of the States of Denmark being devol∣ved unto the King and in his hand, and there being no such thing now as Senators of the Kingdom, who had great Authority when the Vnion was made, it is not reasonable his Majesty should sit as Judge in his own cause; and that a matter of so great moment should be submitted to the decision of those, who, for fear of the Kings Power, or to gain his favour, may be so much by∣assed, that Our loss may be irreparable. And therefore seeing that amongst free people and Princes, it has been always allowed to refuse to stand to the Arbitration of a Judge justly suspected, and that this present conjuncture
of Affairs, as well as the Transaction at Odensea, shows Us another way, VVe earnestly desire your most Serene Majesty will endeavour to prevail with the King of Den∣mark, that Our Differences may be Treated of at Nime∣guen, that so We may find some Remedy abroad for those vast Damages and Injuries VVe have sustained and re∣ceived, which VVe cannot hope for at home. For as the Peace at Roschild was made by the Interposition of several Kings and States, so it is of publick concern, that it should be restored and confirmed by the like means. All who think themselves injur'd contrary to the Treaties of Westphalia, Roschild, and Copenhaguen, have liberty to come to Nimeguen: And why should VVe who are op∣pressed contrary to all these Treaties, be hindred from it? At Nimeguen a general Peace is Treated of; why should our cause then not be admitted there, who have without all reason suffered most grievous injuries from the Danes, and been almost undone by them? We suppose the Ob∣jection is not considerable, that none are to be admitted there, but those who have joined their Arms to either of the Parties now in War. For if those who were in a condition to resist Arms by Arms, and return Force by Force, are admitted; with how much more reason ought VVe to be received, who being deprived of all Our Arms and other helps by the King of Denmark, have been for∣ced to endure all his affronts and injuries? VVe know that the Laws of Nature and Nations are for Us, and we do not think that any Prince will oppose it, but those who over-byassed by Partiality, or the desire of their own advantage, would have a Peace for themselves and theirs though at Our Cost, and the loss of Our Dignities and Dominions; not reflecting that the sum of Our Cause is
only, whether VVe shall become a Subject, or be a free Prince again; and after Our Example, Whether the o∣ther Princes of the Empire must not hereafter rather be∣come Subjects than enjoy their ancient Rights of free Princes. This being contrary to all Justice, to the Treaties so often repeated, and so Religiously Sworn to, to the common Interest of all Princes, and to the Honour and Authority of your most Serene Majesty, and other the Princes who are Guarantees, VVe do earnestly recom∣mend Our Cause to their good VVill and just Affection, and VVe have particularly great hopes in your most Se∣rene Majesties Equity and Protection. And if the King of Denmark desires to be admitted and heard at Nime∣guen, sure it cannot be upon any other Terms, than that he must in all things stand to that Law which he intends to use against others; and endure as patiently the just Complaints of those who have been highly injur'd by him, preferred to that great Assembly, as he has perhaps re∣solved vigorously to prosecute others there. Nay, let the King of Denmark be willing or not to accept of this Mediation and Place, certainly VVe will rely so entirely and constantly upon the Guaranty of the several Princes, who have entred into it, and especially upon the general and particular one of your most Serene Majesty, that VVe had rather suffer any thing whatsoever, then be forced away from that Sacred Anchor, being well assured, that your Majesty will employ your Authority as well a∣gainst those that decline your Mediation, as for those that have accepted thereof; and that Our Restoration and Safety will be secure and certain upon your most Serene Majesties Faith, which the Kings of Great Britain have always Religiously kept to God and men. May it please
God, that this Great Affair of the Peace may succeed un∣der the Auspices of your most Serene Majesty, and to your Immortal Praise, That every body may have his own, and none be hereafter Injur'd. And so we most earnest∣ly recommend your most Serene Majesty to his Grace and Protection. Given at Hambourgh the first of Octob. 1677. Christian Albert by the Grace of God, Heir of Norway named Coadjutor of Lubeck, Duke of Sleswick, Holstein, Stormar, Dithmars, Earl of Oldenbourg and Delmen∣horst, &c.
A Letter to his Majesty the King of Denmarke, from the Dukes of Brunswick-Lunenburgh, &c. Most Serene, WE have thought fit to let your Majesty under∣stand, that his Highness the Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, Our Beloved Cousin, has lately sig∣nified unto Us, that although the Affairs concerning the Succession of the Imperial Feifs, the Counties of Olden∣bourgh and Delmenhorst, after a long dispute, have at last been brought to a full and final determination, (and par∣ticularly the Town and Country of Bujading, a Feif of Our Princely House, has been adjudged not to depend upon the said two Counties, which also at the time of Execution shortly after in the Month of May, remained except and exempted accordingly); his said Highness conceiving no other hopes, but that as he equally shares with your Majesty in the same Rights and Regalities, and has 1674, received the Investiture of the same from Our Princely House, he should accordingly en∣joy the same quietly for the future: Yet his Highness found afterward in effect, that the Provincial Judge, con∣stituted by your Majesty and him joyntly, was removed
from his Office without the knowledge or consent of his Highness, and an other put into his room, who in Pub∣lick Prayers (contrary to the former Customs,) caused his Highness to be left out, pretending that your Majesty had given him orders so to do, (a Copy of which being communicated to Us, we thought fit here to insert it) and commanded all those Officers, both Ecclesiastical and Secular, to do homage to none but your Majesty, by which means, the said Town and Country of Budjad seems in effect subject to the abvesaid Imperial Execu∣tion. VVherefore his Highness thought fit and necessary to mind Us of the Dominium directum which Our Prince∣ly House holds over those Lands, and that your Majesty and He were joyntly invested therewith by Our Princely House, and that (according to the Universal Laws of Fiefs, as well as by the abovesaid Covenant, made at Hambourgh, and the Instruments thereof duly inter∣changed) we ought to Protect him as Feudatarie of Our House, in this his manifest Right (so solemnly gotten by the said Covenant and Agreement); and to desire Us, that without delay VVe would do Our parts, and endea∣vour with your Majesty, that his Highness neither direct∣ly, nor indirectly be disturbed in the possession of those Regalities, and enjoyment of the Revenues of the said Lands, but be suffered to continue therein quietly. VVhereas now it is manifest by the said Treaty, which praemeditatè, and after much pains, was at last concluded 1653 at Hambourgh, viz. That the said Town and Country of Bujad is a separate thing and Inde∣pendent from the Imperial Fiefs, (the Counties of Olden∣bourgh and Delmenhors) and since your Majesties Archives will show, what between his late Majesty, your Father of
Blessed Memory, and Us has passed; and that his Maje∣sty during the said Process of Law about the Succession of the said Counties (in a Letter dated at Copenhaguen the 29 of January 1668) desired of Us, that pursuant to the se∣cond Article of the said Treaty or Covenant (wherein it is expresly provided, that not any of the Princes of Holstein, either of the collateral, or any other line of that House, shall ever have pretension now, or for the future thereupon, and that on the contrary it shall neither lie in Our Power to confer the same upon any of them) VVe should make Our most humble Address to his Imperial Ma∣jesty to demonstrate the Interest of Our Princely House, and so prevent that the Town and County of Buja∣ding from being drawn into the Controversie about the Oldenbourgh Succession, &c. which we have done accor∣dingly; and the effect of it was, that that not only in the Sentence and Executions Commission, (afterwards publi∣shed) not one word of them was mentioned, but also when VVe, George William, the 22 and 24 of May at Olden∣bourgh and Delmenhorst, proceeded to the Execution up∣on the said Town and County of Budjading, by Our Sub-Delegats, appointed for that purpose, in the presence and hearing of the Duke of Holstein-Pleun's Deputy, his Chancellor, they were purposely and in plain Terms ex∣cepted and exempted; as it appears by the Rolls kept for that Act. VVherefore we could not but find Our Selves obliged at the request of Our Cousin Duke Christian Albert of Holstein, to second his desires in so just a matter, which so evidently concerns the Interest of Our Princely House: and as we have a sure confidence in the great aequanimity of your Majesty, that your Majesty doth not intend to
undertake, or suffer any thing to be undertaken, to so m¦nifest a prejudice of Our Princely House, contrary to th Treaty concerning the said Fief of the Town and Countr of Budjading, and Our Letters-Pattents, and the Rever∣sales thereof passed in order thereunto; so VVe beseeci your Majesty to take such order concerning the sai Country, that nothing may be committed which is pre∣judicial, but that pursuant to the said Covenant and Transactions, joint Possession and Enjoyment may for hereafter, as formerly, be permitted to his Highness Duke Christian Albert of Holstein, and that what already has been acted contrary to the Premises, (doubtless without your Majesties command and knowledge) may be altered, abolished, and all things reduced to their former condi∣tion. In so doing your Majesty will perform, what the Trea∣ty, Covenant, and Laws do require, and we shall upon all occasions be ready to do your Majesty acceptable Ser∣vice. 12 of Septemb. 1676. George Wilhelm. John Frederick. Radolph. Augustus.
His MAJESTY the King of Denmarks LETTER To his Highness the Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, CONCERNING The Sequestration of the Duke∣dome of Sleswick: And the said Dukes Answer thereunto. AS ALSO His Imperial Majesties Letter to the Duke of Holstein: With the Dukes ANSWER. Printed in the Year 1677.
The King of Denmark's Letter to the Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, concerning the Sequestration. Christian the Fifth, by the Grace of God, King of Denmark, &c. Serene Duke, &c. IT is not unknown to your Dilection, what hitherto hath past about the receiving of the Investiture over the Dukedome of Sleswick, whereunto you have obliged your Self by the late Agreement of Rends∣bourgh; and how your Dilection since that time, upon Our several well-meant Admonitions, by divers Letters directed to Us, hath promised the performance thereof; and in order thereunto, sent hither some of your Mini∣sters, who nevertheless under the pretext of going for some more particular instructions from your Dilection, are lately parted again from hence, without having dispatch∣ed any thing at all. And whereas We have hitherto in vain expected their promised return; the time likewise at the said Agreement of Rendsbourgh appointed for the receiving of the above-mentioned Investiture being al∣ready past in the Month of July last, besides divers other Terms since indulg'd which are long ago expired; We also having a sufficient and true information of those most dan∣gerous Machinations, which your Dilection hath in hand against Us and Our State; and besides, it being very re∣quisite, that VVe carefully do mind what is necessary for
the preserving of this Investiture, depending upon Us and Our Crown of Denmark: Therefore have VVe found Our Selves unavoidably, and as it were against Our will obliged, now to Sequestrate that part of the said Duke∣dome, wherewith your Dilections Ancestors have been heretofore Invested; and to issue out a Commission to some of Our Counsellors and Officers there residing, for putting in Execution the said Sequestration, and for per∣forming all that is necessary to be done about the same. Since therefore We would rather have desired any thing else, than to come to this Extremity, VVe have thought good to give notice of this Our Resolution to your Dilecti∣on, and to appoint yet, out of a super-abundance, another Term of Six weeks from the date hereof, for the receiving of the said Investiture, to the end tht your Dilection and all the VVorld may see, how willingly we would use all possible moderation herein, without any over-hastening of your Dilection. However, we do it with this further precaution and warning, that in case the said prefixed Term, contrary to all expectation, likewise should be disregarded by your Dilection, VVe then shall be neces∣sitated, though much against Our will, to proceed ad ipsam Privationem Feudi, or to the cutting off the Fief, and to take such further courses as the Feudal Laws do al∣low of. Of all this we have thought convenient to ad∣vertise your Dilection, Recommending, &c. Dated at Our Place of Residence at Copenhaguen the 19th of Decem∣ber 1676. Your Dilections Affectionate Cousen and Brother-in-Law, CHRISTIAN.
The Duke of Holsteins Answer to the foregoing Letter. Most Serene and most Potent King, &c. YOur Majesties Letter of the 19th of December last past, from Copenhaguen directed to Us, hath been presented to Our hands the second of this instant, by an Express from one of your Majesties Commissaries; by the Cntents whereof We have seen the same things, that already some days before had been published by some Letters Patents affix'd in Our Dukedome of Sles∣wick, viz. That your Majesty hath been induced to Sequestrate that part of the said Dukedom, which doth belong to Us, and to nominate to that effect certain Commissaries, with the annexed warning, that in case we did not within Six weeks, from the date of the said Letter, effectually accomplish the receiving of the Investiture over that Dukedom of Sleswick, your Majesty would proceed ad ipsam Privationem Feudi, or the cutting of the Feif, and take such further courses as the Feudal Laws do allow of, being moved thereunto by these Reasons: That We in the point of the receiving of the said Investi∣ture, neither had performed that so called late Agreement of Rendsbourgh, nor the Promises made by Our Letters under Our own hand, nor sent back our Ministers, who without any dispatch of Affairs were gone from Copenhaguen; but that on the contrary we had in hand most dangerous, and, by a singular accident, discovered machinations against your Majesty, and your State; and had also, as it were, unavoidably obliged
your Majesty to the preservation of your Majesties and the Crown of Denmark's Rights. Whereupon we cannot but with all due respect re∣turn this our Answer to your Majesty, that for the sake of your Majesty's own Glory, and high Reputation, and your Realms and Dominions welfare, We have most ardently desired and wished, that our thoughts at the first seeing of your Majesty's afore-mentioned Letters Patents, (as if they might have been publish∣ed without your knowledge) might have a sure ground, and your Majesty such a kindness for us, as not to in∣dulge any longer our Persecutors, but rather to put a period to those unusual hard proceedings, which we undeservedly have suffered from them, and to re-esta∣blish and consolidate that ancient tie and friendship, which hath proved so useful and beneficial to both Great Hou∣ses, and their respective Kingdoms, Territories, and Sub∣jects; seriously considering withal, that it cannot be a∣vailable, neither to the repute of your Majesties innate Generosity, nor to your Majesties Realms and Domini∣ons, to see us, (who are in many regards so nearly related, and never failed either in due Respects, or required Faithfulness to your Majesty,) thus oppressed, and redu∣ced to a quite desperate condition, without having been able to obtain the least redress, which yet lies so ab∣solutely in your Majesties own hands. However, this is our only and especial comfort in all our daily encreasing calamities, that your Majesty by your Letters doth furnish us with an occasion to make our justification before your self, and briefly to refute those accusations so inhumanly invented by our ill-willes. For your Majesties own Christian Conscience will be the best and surst witness for us, that we never have enter∣tained
any other Counsels, nor have negotiated with any body whatsoever about any other things, but what to our best understanding we have deemed to be good, expe∣dient, and lawful for a free Prince, to preserve our selves in that State God Almighty hath been pleased to settle us in, by making us a lawful Heir and Successor to the Duke our Father of Blessed Memory, and to transmit the same to our Posterity, as we had got it. VVe our sel∣ves have not made that Agreement concluded at Copen∣haguen on the 12th day of May, in the year 1658, but have inherited those Rights, which in due consideration of the manifold damages sustained have thereby accrued to our Family. And it is also known to the World, that we have employed none at all at the Treaty and Con∣clusion of the reiterated Northern Peace in the Camp for Copenhaguen, on the 27th. day of May in the year 1660, although we had then already taken the Govern∣ment upon Us; and the said Treaty of Copenhaguen hath nevertheless been confirmed therein, and the Guaranty thereof undertaken by the three most Puissant States of Christendom. And presupposing his Majesty the King of Denmark, Frederick the Third, our most Honoured Father-in-Law of glorious Memory, unwillingly and against his mind, (which yet is altogether unknown to us, since his Family as well as ours hath been benefit∣ed thereby,) should have proceeded to the granting of that Sovereignty, and other advantages promised to our Family; yet it was but a meer spontaneous Act; nay, it hath been an evident token of his Royal Affecti∣on towards us, that having observed by our Addresses for a near Alliance of Marriage in his Royal Family, our sincere inclination towards him, his Majesty in the year 1667, when the Contract of Marriage in his own Fortress
at Gluckstadt was a-making up, hath in all and the singu∣lar Articles, Points and Clauses, wholly, and to all per∣petuity, confirmed to us the abovesaid Treaty of Copen∣haguen, grounded upon the Soveraignty over the Duke∣dom of Sleswick, and established the same joyntly with that ancient Union for a perpetual rule betwixt both Fa∣milies, with this engagement, and Royal firm Parol, that himself and his hereditary Successors in the Government, neither directly nor indirectly would act, nor cause to be acted against the same. But in what manner we have since been dealt withal at Rendsbourgh, in the year 1675, and how we have been constrained by a most troublesome detention to surrender our Fortresses, Artillery, Ammu∣nition and Militia; yet with this Comfort given us, that all differences therewith were ended, and upon change of Times, and an ensuing Peace, all should be restored in such a condition as it was taken from us: and how, not∣withstanding all ths, (after we forsooth, for our Person, were dismissed to Gotorp, yet still had strange Troops about us, and so only had changed place, but not deten∣tion,) certain Articles have been prescribed to our Mini∣sters and Counsellors remaining behind in Arrest, and we forced to the pretended Ratification thereof, even as we were to the surrender of our Fortresses without any liber∣ty left us, only therein to alter things quite inconsistent with the Dignity of a free German Prince of the Empire: We are as unwilling to relate, as your Majesty can be de∣sirous to hear, and should also have forborn to mention it either to your Majesty, or to any others, if we were not assured in our Conscience that your Majesty, out of an in∣bred Heroick Love to Justice, doth detest such a way of proceeding, and in that regard hath laid a Ground for that high displeasure your Majesty thereupon conceived
against him, who out of Reasons unknown to us, hath oc∣casioned all that mischief which then did befal us. And since that time we have not been able to imagin, that your Majesty should ever have intended, to set up that so called Agreement of Rendsbourgh, proceeding from such derogatory and extorted Principles, and con∣sequently made void by Law, into a Pragmatical Sancti∣on, after your Majesty hath charged our Subjects with such Contributions as are intolerable, and do quite cut off both our extraordinary and ordinary Revenues, and hath quite demolished to the ground our Fortresses, your Majesty having thereby introduced an impossibility to perform what the pretended Agreement of Rendsbourgh doth import: For if we by virtue thereof are to re∣ceive the Investiture over the Dukedom of Sleswick, it must be done at least after such a manner, as the Duke our Father of Blessed memory the last time, viz. in the year 1648, received the same; and then we ought to be Invested not only with the bare Land, but also with those Fortresses, since the last Feudal Letter doth make express mention thereof. It is true, we do confess, that even after such rigorous proceedings, to testifie our defe∣rence to your Majesty, and our desire of Peace, but chief∣ly, to ease our Subjects something groaning under their burthen, and to promote their freedom according to our Power; we have come so far, as to condescend at length to the receiving the Investiture upon these terms, that all things should be resetled in such a state, as they had been before the pretended Agreement of Rendsbourgh, and that the weighty burthen lying upon our Territories, should be taken off, and due satisfaction effectually made for the damages sustained: And for that purpose we have sent
some of our Ministers to Copenhaguen; but our just desires have been rejected, an unconditional performance of the Feudal duty insisted on, and the redress of our Grievances set out of doors, and our Ministers having alleadged the want of full Powers thereunto, have been sent back for new Instructions, without being recalled by us from Copenhaguen, as her Majesty the Queen Mother by her own Letters deted at Copenhaguen the 19th day of Novem∣ber, 1676, hath informed us. And we do confess very freely, that in case our Subjects presently after our Con∣ditional Promise made, had been eased from their bur∣then, the Fortresses reduced to their former state, and due satisfaction effectually given us, we would have done the utmost, and undergone afresh that Feudal Duty. But whereas also, since possession hath been taken of our part of Stadt and Butjadinger-Land, notwithstanding the same hath no Relation at all to that Process, which was made at Vienna in the Cause of Oldenourgh, (be∣sides his descending as a Fief from the Ducal House of Brunswick-Lunenbourgh;) our Subjects likewise both in Holstein and Sleswick, have been forbid to pay us the few remaining ordinary dues; and furthermore such aims are taken, as to exclude us from that Treaty of a General Peace at Nimeguen, and consequently from all hopes of redress; and lately Navigation hath even been by open Proclamations absolutely Interdicted to all our In∣habitants and Subjects of the Dukedoms of Sleswick and Holstein, without affording us, as Prince Regent, the least knowledge thereof, much less designing us to joyn in the said Publication, if the same had been requi∣red: We therefore have had good reason to wave the sending over our Deputies the second time again, after
they were thus dismissed before, but rather have taken a firm resolution to get our Cause ventilated and discussed at the Treaty of the General Peace at Nimeguen, with this certain hope and confidence, that no Potentate concerned therein will dispute our admission, in regard that amongst other high concerns, the re-establishment of the Northern Peace, will be also treated there, which is not only the foundation of our Soveraignty over the Dukedom of Sleswick, with the other advantages sti∣pulated for us and our Family, but also is an essential part thereof, and stands comprehended under the under∣taken General and Special Warranty. Neither do we think that your Majesties Ministers in Holland have had any orders to render difficult the impetrating of the Pas∣ports, by us desired from the States General of the Ʋni∣ted Provinces, for our Ministers destined to Nimegn; seeing they have not been able to alledge any thing at all which should deserve the least reflection, and exclude us from the General-Treaty, if we were but to be consider∣ed as a German Prince, and had no concerns in the re∣establishment of the Northern Peace, which nevertheless hath first of all been endangered on our side. But con∣cerning those machinations discovered by a singular ac∣cident, whereby, as we do conceive, some endeavours are used, to justifie that (in all points formally commen∣ced) Sequestration, we have not the least cause to clear our selves in that respect, before any particulars are nearer touched, and it be duly made appear to us, that we have been concerned in any of those Machinations represented to your Majesty. However we are sure and confident, that we never have been so deservedly sus∣pected privy to any thing as that thereby just cause
should have been given, to charge us therewith by Po∣tentates, both within and without the Empire, and to alienate their former inclination from Us and our Fa∣mily; much less can a Pretext thereby conveniently be taken to sequestrate that part of the Dukedom of Sleswick, which with all right Hereditarily and Properly doth be∣long to us, and to menace us with a total deprivation thereof; and we do also fully perswade our selves, that your Majesty will put this to the serious consideration of your Ministers, who have brought this Process upon the Stage, and perhaps do endeavour to assert it's con∣sistency with the Feudal Laws, That as your Majesty doubtless makes great doubt, to assume a Judges part in your own Cause, so neither the Sequestration of the Fief, nor the Deprivation of the same, can or may consist after that manner, as it is intended against us, al∣though we should be indisputably oblig'd to that Vassal∣age of the Dukedom of Sleswick, which yet, saving all due respect to your Majesty, we find our selves necessita∣ted solemnly to contradict, except one would presume to Act by nullities, or by making no reflection upon the Law. And the common Feudal Laws, whereupon like∣wise the ancient Unions and Hereditary Agreements, (in case any difference as well in Feudal as other matters should arise) are usually grounded, do shew, That not only in the total deprivation of a Fief, but also in the Sequestration, the hearing of the Cause before a Com∣petent Judge, ought solemnly to precede it, (notwith∣standing one should presume to assert the necessity of a Sequestration,) in case the Parties shew themselves un∣willing, the reasons whereof, nevertheless, will never be made out of those pretended Machinations.
Having therefore pondered all the above-mentioned, and such other concomitant circumstances, we cannot but still keep to our resolution once deliberately taken, and remit that point of our undeservedly questioned Soveraignty over the Dukedome of Sleswick, with all the other aliented Dignities, Prerogatives, Territo∣ries, and Fortresses; as also all due and equitable satis∣faction, and what else can conduce to our future Se∣curity, to the place of Congress for a general Peace at Nimeguen, patiently expecting from God and time, what Conclusion there will be made and come forth about the restoring the Northern Peace, and conse∣quently also of our Rights and Concerns. But we do in the mean time very kindly and instantly intreat withal your Majesty, that out of an Inclination to Ju∣stice, and in regard of that desolate condition, where∣unto we and ours thus undeservedly see our selves more and more reduced, your Majesty would be pleased till then, and till the speediest (God grant) ensuing con∣clusion of a general Peace, to preserve all peaceable thoughts, and not to press upon us any further with the said Investiture, and any other demands; but on the contrary, without delay to recal that unjust and ungrounded Sequestration, and not only leave to us the enjoyment of all our Rights and Prerogatives undisturb∣ed, but also to take off the exceeding Contributions from our quite exhausted Subjects, and to restore that part of Stadt and Budjadinger-Land, and also of the Cu∣stoms at Elistiet, properly appertaining unto us, and ami∣cably and friendly to interpret this our unavoidable Justi∣fication and Declaration; with this assurance, that as we have in all Points carefully observed that high respect
due to your Majesty, so likewise we have intended to say or write nothing, which should tend against the same. All this is very consentaneous to equity, and to your Majesties inbred Generosity; and we shall be ready for our part every-where to praise such your Majesties kind∣ness, and with due thankfulness, and all possible services, always acknowledge the same; most faithfully recom∣mending withal your Majesty to God Almighty's Prote∣ction. Dated Hambourgh the 16th of Jan. 1677. Your Majesties Obsequious Cousin and Brother-in-Law Christian Albrecht.
THE EMPERORS LETTER TO THE Duke of Holstein. LEOPOLD by the Grace of GOD Elected Roman-Emperor. Serene Duke, &c. BY these We give your Dilection to understand, that We are informed, how you have not only for your part approved of those proposals which were made to you by Graventable the Swedish Minister, (lately residing in Our Imperial City of Ham∣borough,) about certain Levies to be made in Foreign Parts, and are come to a certain conclusion with him in that affair; but also that your Dilection for the promo∣ting of the said Levies hath made use of Kielman your late President's Monys, that lie there, and taken there∣of the Sum of 200000 Rix-dollars, and that your Dile∣ction doth employ in this affair the Swedish President
Kley, (who hitherto hath pretended to live there as a private man,) and also another person named Ʋlke. And although We do repose a far better confidence in your Dilection, than to think that you (setting aside your strict Ties and Duties towards Us, and the whole Roman Empire,) will thus lose your Self, and by such prohibited, and culpable advantages, take the Enemies part, contrary to the publick Statutes of the Empire, and Our Imperial Avocatories published thereupon; yet have We thought good kindly to acquaint, and seriously to admonish you by these, that in case things should be thus, your Dilection might betimes desist from such En∣terprizes, and embracing better Counsel, comport your Self according to what Duty doth require of a Loyal Member of the Empire, lest otherwise We should be obliged to cause your Dilection be proceeded against ac∣cording to Our Imperial Avocatories; all which is for your Dilections Government: Tendring withal Our Imperial Grace and good VVill to your Dilection. Dated at Our Castle at Lintz the 6th of January in the Year of Our Lord 1677. of Our Reign in the Roman Empire the 19th. In Hungary the 22th, and in Bohemia the 21th. LEOPOLD, V. Leopold William Count of Konigsegg, Ad mandatum Sacrae Caesareae Majestatis proprium, John Ambrose Hogell.
The Duke of Holstein's Answer to the foregoing Letter of the Emperor. Most Serene, &c. YOur Imperial Majesties most gracious Letter from Lintz of the 6th Instant, hath been some days ago delivered to Me by your Imperial Majesties Minister here residing, the Lord Baron of Rond, and received by Me with all the humblest respects Imagin∣able: but with extream astonishment I understood by the contents thereof, that your Imperial Majesty had got Information, as if I had not only, for my part, approved of those Proposals which had been made to me by Graventable the Swedish Minister, lately Residing here in Hamborough, about certain Levies to be made in Foreign Parts, and had come to a certain conclusion with him in that affair; but also, that for the promoting of the said Levies, I had made use of Kielman, my late Presi∣dent's Moneys, that lie here, and taken thereof the Sum of 200000 Rix-dollars, and that I also did employ in this affair the Swedish President Kley, (who hitherto hath pretended to live here as a private man,) and another person named Ʋlcke: Wherefore your Imperial Majesty most graciously hath thought good to acquaint me there∣with, and seriously to admonish me, that in case things should be thus, (which yet your Imperial Majesty would scarce expect from me,) I may betimes desist from such Enterprizes, and embracing better Counsel, compor my
Self according to what Duty doth require of a Loyal Member of the Empire, lest otherwise your Imperial Ma∣jesty should be obliged to cause Me be proceeded against according to your published Imperial Avocatories. It is true, I can promise my Self nothing else from your Imperial Majesties most mild and yet most just dis∣position, but that your Imperial Majesties very gracious Letter, (although occasioned by the industrious contri∣vance of some envious persons, who, by all ways and means, seek very watchfully the oppression and ruin of my self, and my Ducal House) hath been sent to me for no other end, but that your Imperial Majesty might there∣by get a fitter occasion to discover my Innocency, and consequently, by your Imperial Majesties Authority and highest Power, to Protect me as a Loyal Member and Prince of the Empire, against those who have made no Conscience for the space of these 19 Months, to Treat me unworthily, and oppress me undeservedly, leaving me nothing of all my Princely Dignity but bare life. However, when I call to mind again, in what manner your Imperial Majesties Requisitorials concerning me, which were delivered into his Majesty the King of Den∣marks hands, have been (by the contrivance of some Mi∣nisters, bearing an hatred to me) abused so far, that they begun almost from that very hour to exhaust my poor Subjects, as well of Holstein, as of Sleswick, with in∣tolerable Contributions, and to render them quite unca∣pable to contribute so much, as they were lawfully bound to do for the upholding my Princely State and Dignity; (which proceedings are yet till this very moment conti∣nued, to the utter destruction of my Territories, though no further Imperial Requisitorials have been signified to
me, which have been granted to other States of the low∣er Circle of Saxony in the point of Quarters:) Then have I just reason to fear, that they likewise now under your Imperial Majesties highest Name and Authority, though against your Imperial Majesties will and in∣tention, do go about to colour, and palliate what they newly have contriv'd for the finishing of my premeditated ruin, and partly have already brought to an Execution. All which I have by my former complaints, with all sub∣mission represented to your Imperial Majesty, and there∣by most humbly implored your speedy Protection; where∣unto also I do now refer my self, in hopes your Imperial Majesty will be pleased, not only most graciously to hear, but also see them according to your Imperial Clemency forthwith redressed. Concerning those Accusations brought before your Imperial Majesty, and laid home at my door, I should never have Imagined, upon what bottom and foundati∣on they could be grounded, unless your Imperial Maje∣sty by the Nomination of certain Persons had obliged me to a more exact Information; whereupon I most humbly can assure your Imperial Majesty, by the true and faithful Word of a Prince, that I never had the least knowledge of these specified Projects, touching the Levies of some Forreign Forces, much less have I approved of the same, or dealt or agreed about them, directly or indirectly, with any man in the VVorld. And I can protest with Truth it self, that Kleyhe the King of Sweden's President, hath not, all the time of his abode here, made any Propositi∣ons to me concerning my Conjunction with Forreign Crowns against your Imperial Majesty, and your high Allies, nor ever offered to perswade me to any such thing.
But this I do declare willingly and freely, that I have caused my disconsolate condition, whereunto I find my self undeservedly reduced, to be fully represented to his Majesty the King of Great Britain, as Guarantee of the Northern Peace, which first of all began to bleed and suffer on my side; to whom I made it my humble Re∣quest, that his said Majesty would be pleased, (in respect both of that General and Special Guaranty taken upon him concerning my Soveraignty over the Dukedom of Sleswick, lawfully obtained,) to procure my Restitution, and due Satisfaction; which I have been so far from dis∣owning, that I was content that the Memorials about the said Subject exhibited from time to time by my Deputy, should be faithfully communicated to the Danish Minister residing in England. For which end I have also em∣ployed at that Court the same Ʋlcken my Counsellor there, whom I did for almost two years imploy at your Imperial Majesties Court; and have amongst other Negotiations also caused my most humble Remon∣strations and frequent Instances by him to be made to your Imperial Majesty for my Protection, with certain hopes, that he hath behaved himself so well, that no cause is left to mistrust him, or to charge him with any sinister and ill-grounded accusations. Since therefore the abovesaid foul aspersions, studiously contrived by my ill-wishers, can never be proved nor laid to my door; the rest consequently must fall to the ground, which charge me that for the carrying on of such fictitious Levies, I should have taken and employed the said Sum of 200000 Rixdollers belonging to the Heirs of Kielman, which monies I do not know in the least if they do lye here or no. Whereas now my Innocency, and the
Fictitiousness of those Sinister imputations do sufficiently appear by the premises; I can with all submission assure your Imperial Majesty that nothing in the World shall be ever forced from me, which may offend and interrupt my Loyal Duties tendred to your Imperial Majesty, and to the Roman Empire, and that Devotion which my Ancestors have Sealed with their Princely Blood to the Mighty House of Austria. I do therefore again most humbly implore your Imperial Majesty, as the most Sacred Head of the Empire, that your Imperial Majesty would be pleased not to give way to the Suspicions raised against me, but rather, out of your Highest Fatherly care provide such ways and means, whereby I, as a devoted Co-member of the Roman Empire, may be upheld and freed from all my pressing Calamities. Thus longingly I do look for your Imperial Majesties effectual and gracious Resolution, &c. Dated at Hambourgh the 20 of Jan. Ann. 1677. FINIS.
