O530A 99826666 31071
AN ANSWER TO THE CHALLENGE Of Mr. Henry Jennings (Protest∣ant Arch-deacon of Dromore) which evidently makes-out the present Church of Romes doct∣rine to have been maintain'd in the first five ages, & the adversa∣rys Principles to be only a heap of heresies lawfully condemn'd by the primitive Church. To which is annexed An Answer to one Whealy. Set forth by JAMES O SHIELL Reader of Divinity. Remember the dayes of old consider the years of many generations, aske thy Father, & he will shew thee, thy elders, & they will tell thee. Deut c. 32. v. 7. Permissu Superiorum. 1699,
TO THE QUEEN MADAM, THis little book makes bold to adress it self to your Sacred Majestie, not to inform or in∣struct you in any thing it con∣taines, for beside the gifts of na∣ture and great perfections, with which your Majestie is so richly indowed; you had the advātage of being born & bred in the most Catholick Country of Europe, & beīg well educated & throwly instructed in vertue, piety, religiō & in all other things, proper for so great a Princess to learn. The end and scope of this small trea∣tise
is Madam; first to answer a Challēge made to all Catholicks in General, by one of the most da∣reing, & most presumptuous of the protesāt it party; next to pre∣vent unwary, and well meaning Christians from being seduc'd, or impos'd upon by such artifices which it will effect by Gods help; so it be but countenanc'd by your Sacred Majestie; If you consider only its style & contexture, or the Author that compos'd it, it cānot on either of those accounts de∣serve this honour: but the Doct∣trine it comprehends, being com∣piled & faithfully extracted out of the scripture, holy Fathers, & Ancient Coūcils, it may on that score well pretend the patronage & protection of so great a Quen; a
descēded from the Glori∣ous House of Est, which has fur∣nish'd Europe for many hunderds of years, with Illustrious Dukes & Princes, Famous Generals, great states-men & most Eminent prelates, & Church-men; & yet never did oblige it more than in giving it so great a Princess, so fit a consort for our Gratious King, whose piety & zeal are with-out example, who for his re∣ligion only, has lost the Imperial crown of three Kingdoms, & for his great resignation, & Christiā patience, will infallibly receive a crown of everlastīg Glory; your Majestyes Heroycal & sted fast resolution of still prefering reli∣gio beforé all Temporal inrest, and your great zeal for the ser∣vice
of God & the Catholick cause do evidently prove that no other Princess, but yourself could be so agreable to his Majestie; & so conformable to his generous in∣clinations in this particular, as well as in all other Royal perfec∣tions. The King, & your Majes∣ties chief study is to maītaī & sup∣port that religion for which both have sacrific'd your all; & your daily businesse is to comfort the poor, to cloath the naked, & to feed the hungry, to provide for the Fatherless & widowes, & to supply all their wāts, ever to the straitning of yourselves; & in a word to promote in others' by your own example the practice of all the workes of piety & Charity imaginable. Now since standing∣up
in defence of truth & endea∣vouring to instruct the ignorant in matters of salvation, has ever been accounted a work of Chari∣ty, this little book, (how ever meanly write) may deservé your Majestie's Royal protectiō & approbation, this will render it more acceptable to all good Chri∣stians, & supply it's want where∣ever it is defective either in lan∣guage or composition; for this reason Madam, the Author does most humbly presume to lay it at your Majesties feet, & to beg you wou'd be Graciously pleas'd not only to afford it the honour of your Royal patronage; but also ot accept of it, as a small testimo¦ny of the fidelity, & greatfull respect, justly due from all his
Country, where with he is ob∣lig'd daily to pray for your Majestie, & ever to continue. MADAM, Your Majesties Most obedient, and most Loyal and most Humble Subject, and Sevarnt. JAMES O SHIELL
An Answer to Mr. Iennings Challenge. ALtho' this Treatise be but small, yet it treats not of small matters, the subject of it being of no less consequēce than the salvation of those christians, who are led astray from the true faith, because they are not guid∣ed by any christian motive or Authority, but rather by their own wordly interest, and liberti∣nism; whith now a days too many preferre before gods cause and the salvation of their own souls, notwithstanding all the convinc∣ing arguments both of our an∣cient and modern controvertists, who with a great deal of pains
have shifted the wheat from the tares, and inspite of all oppositiō, have made out very clearly the reall and naked truth of their assertions in all controverted points between our pretended reformers & the present church of Rome; for which reason I wou'd at present forbear writ∣ing of a subject so often scann'd and discuss'd before, but that I was over perswaded at the ear∣nest request of a certin person of quality, who faithfully promis'd to be come a Roman catholick, if she cu'd get but a satisfactory answer to an extravagant bold challange of one that stiles him∣self a prelat of the church of England, now residing in the
north of Ireland, where he makes a great figure, and wou'd faine, perswade the ignorant and vn∣wary to belive that his notions are truely catholick. To prevent wdich imposture, and in hopes that some copyes of this litle work may for the good of souls pass over the seas to that af∣flicted country, where books of controversy are very scarce. J made it my business to get it prin∣ted, havīg compos'd it as succint and compendious as the subject cou'd possibly permit that it may-be no burden in a mans pocket. If the reader be not of the church of Rome, I do advise him to per∣ruse it with a serious consideratiō and remorse of conscience, which
if he does, perhaps it may be an ocasion of leading him to the true light, and way of salvation, whatever he may carp vpon the method or language; I shall bear it patiētly if he does but observe and consider the meaning, and doctrine thereof. But be∣fore I proceed further, I must take notice of this daring cham∣pions legerdemain, who being sensible  of his own want of proofs, and authoritys to make out any one point now contro∣verted, he wou'd faine turn the scale & impose upon the Roman catholicks to prove their asser∣tions; whereas it is plain that since he owns the church of Rome to have been in a legal posses∣sion
of the true faith for above 300 years after christ, he ought cōsequently to suppose that she kept the same faith all along, unless he can prove the contrary: yet this is no peculiar device of our bold challenger, but rather the ordinary practice of all pretē∣ded reformers, who finding no solid grounds for their new no∣tions are forc'd to trust wholy to negatives, and endeavor upon that account to impose the proof upon the lawfull possessors; but among all methinks it seems very unfair for any that stiles himself of the church of England, to de∣ny this principle of lawfull pos∣session, since their own best wri∣ters do much insist upon it to
make out their right against thoses secttaryes, who like new swarms separated from the stock. As the Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Qua∣kers, sosinians &c. But to come to the present point let us see the arrogant challange of this proud Goliah, which runs to this pur∣pose. Whosoever is deserious to find and embrace a church where the old incorrupted principles of christianity are taught, & such doctrines only as were maintain'd by the ancient and pure church even of Rome for upward of 300 years after christ, let him em∣brace the present church of England, where the said princi∣ples are duely profess'd the old
church of Rome and the present church of England, being the same in principles; whereas the doctrines which the presnt church of Rome has added over and above what the church of England, maintains, & wherein the said churches do now differ, were never maintain'd by the said ancient church of Rome, but newly brought-in, some eight or nine hundred years, others seven & the most of thē 600 years after christ. In justification of which charge we alwayes have and still do bid defiance to any Roman catholick livīg to bring any suf∣ficient sentence out of any old doctor or father, or out of any old council, or out of the holy
scriptures or any one, example of the primitive church whereby it may be clearly, and plainly prov'd. 1 That there was any privat masse in the whole world at that time for the space of six hūdred years after christ. 2 That the communion was ad∣ministred unto the people under one kind. 3 That the people then had their common prayes in a tōgue, which they understood not. 4 That the bishop of Rome was then call'd the universal ishop, or the head of the universal church. 5, That then the people were taught to believe that christs body
is really or substantially in the sacrament. 6. That then the people did fall down, and worship it with godly honour. 7. That in the sacrament after the words of consecration there reman only the accidents & shew, without the substance of bread and wine. 8. That whosoever had then said the sacrament is only but a figure, a pledge, a token, or re∣membrance of christs body, had therefore been judg'd for an here tick. 9. That images were then sett up in churches to the intent that the people might worship them. 10. That then the people did in∣vocate
saints, or pray to them. 11. That then the people be∣liev'd that there is a third place, which commonly the Papists call purgatory. 12 That then the people were forbiddē to read the word of god in their own tongue. If these thīgs be as we alleage, it follows that whosoever maītaīe the aforsaid abus'd principles, are not of the āciēt church of Rome but only of the presēt corrupted church of Rome & if our allegatiōs be false, we desire to be disprov'd. Before I come to any particular answer to the several points of this extravagant challange, which the mans ignorance or vanity makes him belive unans∣werable. I will only thus in gene∣ral
retort his own argument upon himself, that J may form his dis∣curse, in the true and right me∣thod. Whosoever desires to find and embtace a church wherein the old incorrupted principles of christi∣āity are taught and such doctrines only as were maintain'd by the ancient and pure church even of Rome for upwards of 300 years after christ, let him embrace the present church of Rome, wherein the said principles are duely pro∣fess'd, the old and the present church of Rome being still the same in principles, whereas the doctrines of those who now call themselues the church of Eng∣land, and wherein the said
churehes do now differ, were ne∣ver maītain'd by the āciēt church of Rome, but rather impiously brought in by a series of hereticks, who for those very doctrines were from time to time cōdemn'd by many general, national, and provincial councils and also by the most eminent fathers and doctors of the catholick church in those respective ages; whose authorityes, and very words. I will hereafter produce in my answer to the several points heré controverted, that every impar∣tial reader may see how all the aspersions, and calumnies rais'd by our pretended refor∣mers against the church of Rome, are but meer fictions with∣out
any toserable ground, reason or authority. In the mean time I think it is very plain that my retortion ought to take place before my adversaryes precaious sort of discourse, and consequently that such a challange belogs properly to the church of Rome, and not to any upstart sectary whatsoever, for as J hinted before, it is a principle in all well govern'd common-wealths that a peacable possessor ought not to be distur∣b'd untill by manifest proof he is convicted to be an unlawfull possessor: but the church of Rome which undenyably was a peace∣able possessor of thé true faith for the first 300 or as my adversary
is willing to allows for six hun∣dred years after christ was never convicted by any competent au∣thority or proof, that ever she fell from the true faith of Jesus christ: therefore it necessarily follows that shee must be still sup∣pos'd to retain the same true faith to this very day. The major is manifest, and a maxim in law, and the minor J prove thus. If the church of Rome could at any time be juridically condem∣n'd, or declar'd to have fallen from the true faith, it must have been either by some immediate revelation or commission from God, as the written law was abrogated to make Place for the law of grace and as the high
Priesthood was transfer'd from the house of Heli, to an other family, or by some other Church call'd and summon'd by the inspi∣ration of the holy Ghost, in some National, or general Council, as the Arians, Macedonians, Nesto∣rians, Pelagians, Eutychians, and many other Heresies were con∣demn'd in former times, but nei∣ther of those can be alleag'd in the case propos'd, the first is not so much as pretended, nor can the later be alleag'd by any man in his wits; for no National, or General Council, no, nor any old Chronicles, Registers, Ecclesiast∣al, or prophane Histories, makes tention that ever the Roman Church fell from the true faith:
so that if we except the inconsi∣derable dregs of cōdemn'd Here¦sies; which lay hid in obscur corners of the earth, there wa no Church, or society of Christiās extāt in the sixth, sevēth, eighth ninth, &c. Centuryes, but were a in communion with the Church o Rome, in their respective ages, & all the eminent Doctors & Father of those times, seriously expos her cause as the cause of Chris wherefore either the Church Rome, kept the true faith invio¦lably all that while, or Christ ha no true Church upon earth: whic is plainly giveing the lye not on¦ly to the Angel Gabriel, who d¦clar'd that  of Christs Kingdo which is his Church, ther shou be no end. Luke chap. the 1. v.
but also to Christ himself, who expressly promis'd, that the Gates of Hell shou'd not prevaile agaīst his Church. Math. chap. the 16. v. 18. and that he wou'd be with his disciples in the administration of their function, even to the end of the world. Math. chap 28. v. the 20. For a further confirmation of this point, it is evident, that no Church, or society of Christians, can shew their lineal, and lawfull succession of pastors, and Bishops, ever since the Apostles time, but the present Church of Rome, and such as are in communion with her; for those that now stile themselves, the Church of Eng∣land, cannot for their lives shew
any before Cranmer, in Edward the fixth time; as appears by Goodman, the Protestant Bishop of Hereford, in his Catalogue of all the Bishops of England since the first plātatiō of Christiā religi¦on amōgst them, where he expres¦sly names, Thomas Cranmer to be the first protestant Bishop, tha was ever seen in England. Upon the whole matter, since none but the presēt Romā Catholik Church, can pretend to have had since the Apostles time, a continued se∣ries of Bishops, with whom all their cōtemporaryes of the ortho∣dox▪ part of Christians alwayes agreed in one faith and comu¦nion, it plainly follows that she alone can pretend to the purity of
the Christian faith. And there∣fore, whosoever desires to find, and embrace a Church, wherein the old incorrupted principles of Chrstianity are taught, and such principles only as were main∣tain,d, by the Ancient and pure Church of Rome, for upwards of 300. years after Christ, let him em∣brace the present Church of Rome, wherein the said principles are duely profess'd; as I shall manifestly prove in my Answer to the aforsaid points: for be∣ing the ancient Father St. Basile in his 63. Epistle, declares unto us. That we ought not to pase er calumnyes; not out of revenge but lest we shu'd seem to give way to a lye∣or suffer men seduc'd to be further de∣cev'd:
I shall (therefore) answer my Adversary a challēge, in the same order that he has laid , chap. 1. Proving both publick and priva Masses, to have been celebcated in the premitive Church. This Challenger, seens to lav his main stress, upon the word privat Masse, but what he means by it, he does not explain: tis certain, that altho' Masses were said pri∣vately in all age, especially dur∣ing the persecution of the Hea∣thens when Christians perform'd their Devotions, in caves, and vaults, under ground; yet the word privat masse, was seldom us'd by Catholick writers, either before or since the year 600. until Martin Luther by his book de-Missa
privata, oblig'd Catholick Divines, to write upon that sub∣ject, and confute to the full Lu∣thers arguments against it, but why is the question rais'd about private masse does my adversary own that publick Masses were in use, in the primitive church? If so, he must either quitt the old, as well as the present Church of Rome, or condemn his own Church of England, which de∣clares against all masses, both pri∣vat & publick; and indeed who∣soever admits one, can have no tolerable reason to deny the o∣ther, contrary to the practice of so many ages. But let him deny or own what he pleases, tis evident to us by the undeniable testi∣monyes
of several Fathers, and Councils, more ancient than the year 600, that both publick, and privat masses, were then in use in the Catholick Church, and offer'd to the Almighty, both for the li∣ving, and the dead, as occasion re∣quir'd. St. James the Apostle spea∣king to Almighty God in his li∣turgy sayes: we offer unto thee an unbloody sacrifice for our sins, and for the ignorance of the people. And St. Andrew likewise said, (as the Priests and Deacons of Achia in the book they writt of this A∣postles passion I sacrifice daily unto Almighty God, an immaculate lamb—who, when he is truely sacrific'd, and his flesh truely eaten remains still who∣ly and alive. St. Ireneus, who liv'd
the year 180 in his 4. book against heresies, c: 32: after speaking of the sacrifices which were offer'd in the old law: sayes, that our Lord taught the Apostles to offer anew sacri∣fice, which the Church afterwards beīg taught by the Apostles offer'd through the universal world St. Cyprian, who liv'd the year 250. prohibit'd to offer any sacrifice for the soul of Gemininus Faustus, because he did not observe the decree of his own antecessors, the Bishops. Cornelius Bishop of Rome, who liv'd about the year 254. com∣plains, that the persecution was so great in his own time, that they could not say masses, either in publick Churches, or in Caves under ground, which Authority may be seen, Tomo. 1. Biblia
Sanctorum Patrum. Ter∣tuiliam who liv'd in the same century sayes: in his book decoro∣na miit s, c. . that masse were then offer  so the souls of the dead. and Fusebius Cesariensis, who liv'd the year 326, relates in his 4. book c, 4. that there were masses said for the soul of Constant the Great St Cyril of Jerusalem who liv'd in the same century, Catech: 5. sayes thus: we belive that the holy, and dreadfull sacri∣fice▪ which is offer'd upon the altar, is agreat relief to those for whom its offer'd, so Zomenus relates in his 7. book c. 5. that St. Gregory Na∣zianzen said Masse in a privat chappel, and Paulinus (writing the life of St. Ambrose) affirms that
St. Ambrose said Masse in a certaī Gentel somans house & St. Am∣brose himself in his commentary on the 38: Psal.  bids the Priests, to offer this holy sacrifice for o∣thers Thedet (who liv'd the year 40. in his History c▪ 20.) de∣clare▪ himself to have said masse, in a Hermits cell; and St▪ Gre∣gorie in his 37. Homily affirms that the holy Bishp Cassins was wont to say masse, in his oratory, being hinder'd from going to the church, by reason of his infir∣mity: St. Hierome (who liv'd the year 390. in his Commentary on the . chap of the proverbs) sayes the following words: Its to be Ob∣serv'd, that altho' there is no hopes of
pardon for the wicked, after their death, yet there are those who dye with small sins. and after their death, can be discharg'd, either by chastifing them with punishments, or by their friends prayrs, alms, and celebration of masses. In his commentary on St. Pauls Epist: to Titus, he sayes thus If the Laity are commanded to abstaine from their wives in the time of com∣munion, what is to be suppos'd of the Bishop▪ who daily for his own, and the peoples sins, offers to God the underfiled sacrifice; he hath such an other Au∣thority, in his first book against Jovinian, c. 19. speaking of the priests. St. Chrisostome who liv'd in the later end of the 4. century in his; homily on St. Pauls Epist. to the Philippians, speaking of
those who dye in the fear of God) sayes thus: It was not in vain the Apostles order'd that they shou'd be remember'd in the venerable, and ter∣ribile mysteries, for they knew this to be a relief, and help to them for when all the people with open arms, and the priests offer that dreadfull sacrifice, full of veneration, how shall we not pa∣cific God, praying for them he hath such an other Authority in his 41. Homily, on St. Pauls first Epist: to the Corinthians, and in his 7. Homily on his Epist: to the He∣brews, he sayes thus, speaking of Christ, we offer alwayes the same, truely noe other, but still the same, there∣fore it is one sacrifice for this reason; because he is offer'd in several places. are they many Christs, no, not at all, but
one Christ, in all places, who is wholy and intirely, here, and there, one bo in his 32. de Consubstantiali  Sharply reprehend, those who ne¦glect to hear masse; and in his 2 Homily (de baptismo) he compare those, who leave masse before th last benediction) to Judas, who the Lords last supper, departe before giving thanks, More  his Authorityes may be seen, n only in his liturgy, but (also) i several places; manifestly prov¦ing, the ancient practice of cele¦brating masses: St. Augustin (wh liv'd in the begining of the 5. cen¦tury) declares (in his 9 book o Confession c. 12. that there w masse said for the soul of his own Moth Monica, her body being laid beside t
sepulchre. In his 32 Ser: de verb is Apostoli, speaking of the dead, he sayes the following words: the prayers of the holy church, the comfortable sacrifice, and the alms, which are offer'd for those spirits, is not to be doubted, that they are help'd by them—for this hast been deliver'd by the Fa∣thers, which new the universal Church observes; that those whodye, in the com∣munion of the body, & blood of Christy are remembr'd, when the sacri∣fice is offer'd—who doubts them to be favour'd for prayers are not in vain offer'd for them to God. And in his Enchiridion c. 110. he (also) sayes: that it is not to be deny'd, that the soul of the dead are os'd, when the holy sacrifice is offer'd for them. In his 22. book of the city of God,
chap. 8. he relates, that when Hes∣perious's coūtry house was trou∣bl'd, by malignant spirits; tha he desir'd one of his priests, to go thither, by the vertue of whose prayers, the spirits might give o∣ver: one of them went (saith he) and offer'd there, the sacrifice of the body of Christ—and after¦wards the House, was no more troul'd. More of St. Augustins Authorityes may be seen, in hi 46. Epist. in his book de cura pro∣morcuis: c. 18. in his book de¦sancta virgin: c. 45. in his first book de origine animae c. 9. 11: & in his 84. treatise in Joānem. All which I omit to produce for brevi¦ti sake; & shall only insert, that of venerable Bede, who in his first
book c: 29 lates▪ that St. Gre∣gory had sent Priestly ornaments to St. Augustin, the apostle of England, and in his 4 book c: 2 he tells, that when Jma was taken captive by the enemyes that he cou'd never bety'd by rea∣son of several masses, which his brother Tunna the monke said for his soul; believing that he was kill'd in the battel and also in his 5 book c. 13. speaking of that ter∣rible vision of Driethelme, who after his death reviu'd and told wonderfull things concerning the pains of purgatory from which (said venerable Bede) Prayers, alms, fasts, and celebrations of masses doe release many before the day of Judgment.
Now let us see the councils Au∣thorityes, It was decree'd in the 5 can: of the council of Vasens (a∣towne in France where 18 Bishops gather'd the year 442) that kyrie eleison shu'd be said in the masses throughout all the Churches of France; as it was said long before in the East and in all Italy, here are the councils very words: quia tam in sede apostolica, quam etiam per totas Orientis atque Italiae provincias dulcis, et nimis salubris consuetudo in tromissa est, ut kirieelcison cum grandi affectu, accompūctione dicatur, placuit etiam ut in ominibus Ecclesiis nostris ista consuetudo sancta, et ad matu∣tinum, et ad missas, et ad vesperam deo propitiante intromittatur. Like∣wise it was enacted in the 6 can
of the same council that the fol∣lowing words, holy, holy, holy, shu'd be said īmornig masses, ī the masses of lent and in those masses which were offer'd for the dead, as it was accustom'd to be said in sol∣emn Masses the words of the Coū∣cil are these: In omnibus missis, sive matutinis, sive quadragessimalibus sive in illisquae prodefunctorum commemor∣ationibus siunt semper sanctus, sauctus, sāctus, eo ordine quo ad missas publicas dici debeat, quiatam dulcis, et desidera∣bilis vox etiam die noctuque possit dici fastidium non potest generare, et hoc nobis justum visum est ut nomen Do∣mini Papae quicunque sedi apostolicae praefuerit in nostris Ecclesiis recitetur. Which Authorieyes doe not only make out the ancient practice of celebreating Masses, but also
the Popes supremacy of which I shall treate in my answer to the 4 point. In the mean time let us hear the Declarations of other old Councils concerning the pre∣sent point. We read in the 18 can: of the council of Agato celebrea∣ted the year 506 that the seculars were then oblig'd to receive the Communiō trice in the year (viz) at Christemas, haster and Whit∣suntide, and in the 47 can of the same coūcil tis expres'd that they were oblig'd to hear masse every sunday. Which plainly makes. out, that in the primitive Church it was lawfull for the Priest to say masse tho' none else wou'd recei∣ve the Communion along with him; to confirm which I shall pro∣duce
the Authorityes of the two following Councils, who sate a∣bove a thousand years agoe the fathers of the 12 council of To∣leto can▪ 5, sharply reprehend'd certain Priests for not receiving the Communion when they said Masses; which is asign, that they acknowledg'd the Masse to be lawfull tho' none wou'd commu∣nicate, but onely the Priest. And the council of Nant c: 30 (quoted by Ivo p: 3 deer: e 70  prohibit'd the Priests to say masse alone with∣ōut the assistance of one to an∣swer them, which Authority prov∣es the ancient practise of celebra¦ting privat masses, Tho' Luther and his doctrine aleadges the contrary) for the fathers of that
Council only obliges the Priests to have clerks to answer them, but mentions not a word of a se∣cond person to be requisite for receiving the communion along with the Priest, for they knew too well that there was no divine, or Ecclesiastical precept obliging the Priest not to say Masse, if none else wou'd communicate a∣long with him; and moreover, that there was no Precept com∣manding others to receive the Communion as often as the Priest wou'd celebrat Masse, (for that was left to the peoples owne De∣votion) but in the time of the afore∣said solemnityes specifi'd by the council of Agatho. all which may be confirm'd, by St. Chrysostomes
words, who in his 3. Homily on Saint Pauls Epistle to the Eph∣esians, complains, that then the people were so undevout, that tho' there was Masse daily celebrat'd yet none of them Communicated. There are seve∣ral other Authorityes, that might be produc'd, for the further proof of this point, but to avoide tediousnesse, J will conclude with the following passage. 'Tis not pertinent to the Essence of a Sa∣crifice, the standers by or those for whom 'tis offer'd to be par∣takers of it: but Masse is a Sa∣crifice: therefore 'tis not pertinent to the essence of Masse the stan∣ders by, or those for whom it's offer'd to be partakers of it.
The major is evident out of the 6. & 7. chap. of Leviticus, where we read that the Priests of the old law were commanded to offer Sacrïfices & that the standers by or any of those for whom they were offer'd did not take the least particle of them; the minor also is evident, out of the 9 th canon of the Apostles; and out of the 24 chap: of the 3 Council of Cartage. who sate in the year 397: and declar'd masse to be a lawfull sacrifice; as for the con∣sequence tis undenyable, being the argument is in forme: Chap. 2 Provng that the Communio was admīnistred under one kind in th Primitive Church The Authorityes which my ad¦versary
defies to be produc'd doe clearly make-out the ancient pra∣tice of Receiving the Communi∣on under one sole species in the Primitive Church therefore this doctrine was not first brought in by the present Chuch of Rome, either in the 6, 7, 8, or 9 age; the consequens is manifest, as will ap∣pear hereafter. As for the antice∣dent▪ it may be prov'd by the ex∣ample of Christ himself, Luck c. 24 v: 30. 35 where we read the following words. It came to passe as he sate at met with them, he tooke bread & bless'd i & bake, & gave to them. And they told wha things were done in the way, & how he wa known by them in breakīg of bread. But there is no mention made of the cup:
no, not in the whole Chapter & St. Hierome in Paula's epitaph St. Augustin in his 3 book d consensu Evangelistarum c: 23 venerable Bede, Thèophilactus and several others in the com¦mentary of this chapter, do plainly affirm, that our saviou gave then the blessed sacremen to those two disciples? moreove we read in the acts of the Apost¦les [c: 2 v: 42) that the beliver Continued stedfastly in the Apostle Doctrine and fellowship, in breakin of bread, and in prayers; but w see no kind of mention made o the cup, but rather a confirmation of the contrary, as is manifest b the 46 verse of the same Chap¦ter: wherefore I may lawfully īfe
that our Saviour Jesus Christ did not oblige all the belivers to Communicate in both species; otherwise certainly himself wou'd not be the first transgres∣sor of his own law; neither wou'd he promise everlasting life to those who wou'd receive the communion under the forme of bread, as he did, John c. 6 v: 51 saying thus; I am the living bread, which came down from heaven, if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever; where by we see plainly that everlasting life is promis'd to us, for eating worthily that heavenly bread. Now let us see did those of the primitive Church ever practice to give the communion in one
sole species; to prove which will produce the Authoritye and examples of those, Father who then liv'd. Tertulian, wh Liv'd th year 230, in is bo of Oration c. 14 and in his book ad Uxorem, c. 5. gives  understand that it was then custom to carry the Euchar home for private Communi St. Ambrose who liv'd in the Century, relates in his Oration  Obitu Satyri that then the peop were wont to keep the Euchar about them, and that his o brother Satyras once in a shi¦rak was miraculously Sa from being drown'd▪ by the v¦tue of the blessed Euchar which was ty'd about his ne
St. Basil, who liv'd in the same Century expressly affirms (in his Epist: to Caesaria Patricia) that it was a common practice to bring the Eucharist home to their hou∣ses, and to receive it, when they pleas'd; which is a manifest sign that then the people did not al∣wayes receive the Communion in both species, for those who tooke it under the forme of wine, re∣ceiv'd it in the Church from the Priests, or Deacons; as St. Cyprian relates in his ser. De lapsis, and those who pleas'd to bring it home under the forme of bread for privat Communion were not hinder'd; until by reason of seve∣ral abuses, which happen'd; the Father of the Council of Caesa∣ragust:
who sate the year 382 Can: 3, prohibit'd it. St. Denis who liv'd in the 2  in his book de Eceles:  Chap: af∣firs that it was  custom to give the Communion to the chil∣dren under the  of wine, and St. Cyprian, who liv'd the year 250 in his sermon Delapsis, makes mention of acertain child, who receiv'd the Communion under the forme of wine and also of three more who receiv'd it un∣der one sole species. St. Denis of Alexandria, who has been St. Cy∣prians contemprory, in his Epists to Tobias, tells of a certain Priest▪ who gave a particle of the con∣secrat'd host to aboy, in order to bring it, to serapion, who wa
desparate ill in his dying bead. Paulinus, who has been very fa∣miliar with St. Ambrose and pre∣sent at his deah, relates (writing his life) that he receiv'd the Communion only under the form of bread; and St. Basil did the same, as also we read in his Life; which neither of them wou'd offer to do, if they had believ'd it to be either agaīst the doctrine of the Church, or the institution of Christ. Sozomenus in his 8 book c: 5, & Nicepherus in his 13: Book c 7 writes of a certain womā who was infected by the Macedonian heresie, but thinking to conceal her wickedness, and pretending before the people, to be a Catho∣lick, she receiv'd the blessed Sa∣crement
under the form of bread from the hād of St. Chrisostome, which afterwards she gave pri∣vately to her maid thinking to eat in its sted other bread, which shee brought from home▪ but it seems, that God Almighty was pleas'd to discover her pro¦phane intention, for that bread which she thought to eat, was sudēdly turn'd into a stone before all the cōgregatiō. The Manichees who abhorr'd wine (believing it to be the Devils gall) never Communicated by only under the forme of bread: as St. Leos 4 Ser: in ent expressly testifies: but Epi∣phanius, St. Augustin & several others who writt of the Maniche∣an errors never mention'd that
they err'd in Receiving the Com∣munion in one sole species. But I acknowledge that the Bishops of Italy about the year. 444. did much Recommend the use of the Chalice, that the Manichees might be discover'd, who lurking amōghst the Catholicks alwayes Receiv'd the Communion under the forme of bread; but never the Chalice & whosoever then dur∣ing that Heresie wou'd not at the publicke Communion of Easter Receive the Chalice was sus∣pected to be a Manichean; where∣by the reader may plainly see, that the Church has reason to forbid at one time, what it per∣mits, at an other; Christ having left unto it a dispensing power to
alter all matters of indifferency in the discipline thereof, as the time, place, and circumstances wou'd require, which St Au∣gustin (in his 118 Epistle openly declares, and it may be confirm'd by St. Pauls first Epistle: to the Corinthians. c. 11 v. 34. but the Manichean heresie being smothe∣red, the Receiving of the om∣munion under one kind was after∣wards Commōly practis'd in the Church as Hugo de sancto Vic∣tore, who liv'd about the year 1130 relates in his book Now before I shall proceed fur∣ther in my Answer, let the reader observe those four points, which Commonly have been in practice in the Primitive Church (viz.
that then the people wou'd bring the Eucharist home to their hous∣es under the forme of bread for private Communion. Secondly that the Communion was sent and given to the sick under the same forme. Thirdly that infants & children Receiv'd the Communion under the forme of wine only: Fourthly that the Primitive Christians Receiv'd publickly in the Churches, the Communion either under one or both species as they pleas'd, untill the Fathers of the Council of Constance a∣bout the year 1414.) order'd the layties to Receive in one sole species; not decreeing that the Receivīg thereof in both species
was unlawfull, or ever prohibited before by the Churh, but for se∣veral other weighty reasons, of which I shall produce only two. First, that (thereby) they might supresse and smother the Heresie of certain Germans & Bohemins who then obstinatly deny'd th integrety of the Sacrement to be contain'd in one sole species. Secondly that for the future they might prevēt several abuses & prophanations which formerly happen'd, when the Chalice was given to the laity, who thro their weak zeal, and cold Devotion permitted very offtē drops of the holy blood to be spilt, as St. Chrys. ostome (in his first Epistleto Inno∣centius, & Eneas Silviusin his di∣alogue
de utraque specie) relate, which is against the subime Reverene due to this most excellt Sacrament. Wherefore it evidently appears, that neither the Gcā, or Latnes ever believ'd that all which is written in the Gospel touching the Communion under two spe∣cies, is to be so universaly under∣stood that it on prehends all Christians▪ but that they alwayes suppos'd and believ'd from the very begining of Christianity that one sole spees was sfficient for a true & lawfull Communion; so that the Council of Constance did but follow the tradition and Doctrine of all precedent ages, when it defin'd that the Commu∣nion under, one sole species, was
as good, and as sufficient as un∣der both species; and that those who wou'd Receive it under one kind, wou'd neither contradict the institution of Christ or depri¦ve themselves of the fruit of this holy Sacrament; for whether we eat or whether we drink, or whe¦ther we do both togeather, we alwayes apply the same Death of Jesus Christ, & alwayes Receive the same substance of the blessed Sacrament, and the same effec of grace, for the true flesh, and blood of Jesus Christ are whoely and ntirly contain'd in ever drop of the blessed blood, an in every particle of the blesse Host:  as well as he is cōtaīd the whole cup, or in the whole Host
or in both, therefore let no bodie foolishly belive, that more benefit is Receiv'd by taking the Com∣munion in two species, than in taking it in one alone; for being that every drop of the blessed blood and every particle of the divided Host, is a maine Ocean of spiritual Blessings, many of them by the same moral action Receiv'd, affords no more grace then one alone; being that one alone contains the whole foun∣taine intirly: therefore it appears that it was never our Saviours intention to oblige all Chris∣tians to Receive the Sacrament in both species, for if this had been his intention, he wou'd cer∣tainly institute i, in a materia
more common to all nations, as he did in the institution of the Sacrament of baptism; knowing the wine to be so scarce in several parts of the world, that the poor inhabitants tereof coud but very seldom, or perhaps never Receive the Communion for the want of wine, therefore our Sa∣viours intention was (when he said Drinke e all of this o o∣blige the Discples who only then were present, and also their suc∣cessors wo are the Priests, that day offer this most holy Sacri∣fice under both species, and when he said to his Disciples John▪ c 6. v. 63. that the flesh profit∣teth nothing, his meaning was, that it profitteth nothing o
believe his bodie to be only hu∣man flesh excluding the divine nature as the Jews beliv'd, who deny'd Chist to be the son of God. Cap 3 provig hat te Comn Prayers were  genal∣ly undestood by all hose of the Prmi∣tive Chuch. The holy scripture encourags us to pay tho' we destand o what is said: theefre is law∣full and expedient for us o pry tho' we understnd no  is sa the ancedent is manifest by S Paul fist Epist: to e, Co∣rnthins, chap. 4 v.  whe e sayes thu:  peaeth n  unknown tong, eakh not  men but unto God, for no man under∣standeth
him. Nay some times the speaker did not understand what himself said for the gift of lan∣guages and the gift of interpre∣ting languages are two distinct gifts as is evident by the 11. v. and did not alwayes meet togea∣ther as may be seen by the 13. v. of the aforsaid chapter for there the Apostle exhorts him who spea∣keth in an unknown tongue to pray that he may interpret; which is a sign that ordinaril he cou'd not; as is manifest by the 14. v; where he sayes thus,  I pray in an un∣known  spirit payeth, but  understng is unfruitfull where  see, that St. Paul  unerstan∣ding to be unfruitfull and not
our prayers, when we pray in an unknown tongue; moreover you see, that St, Paul gives to understand that it is lawfull, and not prohibited to pray in an un∣known tongue. Now let us prove the consequen∣e what the Apostles did, and practis'd, is lawfull and expedi∣ent for us to practice: but the Apostles publick liturgies have been in languages, which were not Generally understood by all the nations they Converted therefore tis lawfull and expe∣dient for our liturgies to be in a language not generally under∣stood by all nations  use them: the major is evident and I shall prove the Minor he
Apostles publick liturgies were all in Hebrew, Greec, Syriack, or Latine, as is manifest by all Ancient writters.) which were not generally known languages, to all nr alf the Nations by them converted, and it was also in the same languages those of the primitive Curch had their own publick lturgies, afer the Apostles death, as all the follo∣wing. Fathers doe openly de∣clare St iprian (who liv'd in the 3 Century expounding the Lords Prayer) affims that then the publick liturgie was in Latin, and St. August  in his bookde Dono pee, chap 13, in his . book de Doctin Chistiana chap. 13, and also expounding the 123.
Psal: and in his 173. Epistle de∣clares that all the western Chur∣ches had their Masse in Latin and St. Hierome (: in :) affirms that all the stern Chur∣ches had their Masse in Greek and vs'd St. Basils Greek liturgie: but then the Latin and Greek were not the vulgar languages of all Nations for before those times there were several other languages as is manifest, by the acts of the Apostle: Chap: 2. Ʋ. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. where we read the following words: and they were all fill'd with the holy Ghost, and began to speake with other tongues, as the spirit gave them utterance. nd there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, de∣vout men out of every Nation under
heaven, Now when this was nois'd abroad the multude came togeather and were confounded, because that every man head them speake in his own language, and they were all a∣maz'd, and marvell'd, saying one to an other; behold, are not all these who speak Galileans, and how hear we every man in our tongue, wherein we were born. Whereby it plainly appears, that neither the Apostles or the Fathers of the Primitive Church, ever judg'd it to be ex∣pedient or necessary to translate the publick liturgie into the mo∣ther tongue of every Nation; nor consequently that it was Requi∣site, that it shuld be immediatly and expressly understood by eve∣ry one of the hearers; for they
knew too well that the end, for which the publick liturgie has been first instituted. does not re∣quire this: for the drift which the Church had in appoining liturgies, is that thereby a conti∣nual tribute, or homage of pray∣ers, and thanksgivings, might be publickly offer'd to God by the Priest & also that the Christi∣ans (by their personal assistance at this publick service might unanimously exercise exterior acts of Religion agreeīg With the whole Church represented by the Ecclesiastical meeting of every pious congregation: moreover that every Christian by his pre∣sence at this service, might con∣sent to the publick Prayers, and
thanksgiving of the Church, in order to be made partaker of the graces, fruits, and benefits, which the Church commonly obtaines by its liturgies and publick o∣blation, for when the Priest cele∣brats Masse, or sayes any publck prayers belonging to it, he offers them to God for the people pre∣sent, for the whole Church, or for any other necessity of the people who are absent: so that it matters not, whether the people under∣stands him or no: because they ha∣ve as much benefit by his prayers, and oblation as if they had un∣derstood what he sayes; for if they hear him not speaking a∣word, they might be partakers of his prayers, and intercession,
being God to whom they are of∣fer'd, hears and understands him: for in Sacrifices, Prayers, and thanksgivings; the Priest speaks not to the Congregation, but to God: according to that of St. Paul's first Epist: to the Corinth: c 14. v 2: which is Confirm'd by the following example: when any man layes sick, or in distress at home, he sends to the Church to be pray'd for, by the Priest, and Congregation: now, shall we believe? because he neither hears, or understands the prayers offer'd for him, that he obtains no bene∣fit thereby? no, (the Lord forbid) for if so, the Prayers of the Righteous wou'd avail nothing, which is against that of St, James.
c. 5. v. 15 16: and wich is more, we wou'd never be the better for our Saviours intercession for us▪ to his heavenly Father because we neither heare nor understand him, or know when he interceds for us: yet we Receive innumer∣able benefits by his intercession: and also by the Priests intercessi∣on, when he Celebrats Masse, or sayes any other publick office or prayers institted by the Church: for in this Common office he re∣presents our Saviours place one earth: and we are certain that the fervent Prayers of a Righteous man availeth much, according to that of St. James c.  v. 15. 16. whe∣ther we understand them, or no for their effects doe not depend
of our intelligence, but rather of the acceptation of God Almigh∣ty, to whom they are offer'd. But now o discover the folly of those who do uncharitably cen∣sure th Church of Rome for ha∣ving her Common Prayrs in an unknown tongue: let them know, that there are many Millions of the said Church, who doe under∣stand it in Latin and those who doe not, that they are so well instructed by the Cergy, that they know when to kneel, when to stand, when to Pray▪ when to give thanks▪ and when to do re∣verence, and when not: besides they have the most part of the Masse if not the whole, in their English, Italian, French, Dutch,
and Spanish prayer book: which also was formerly in the Irish prayer books▪ and would conti∣nue so still; but that the penna lawes of that Kingdom (in Qeen Elizabeth's raign) prohibited any Irish Schooles; which oblig'd them to use their Prayers in Latin and English? exceptsome of the vulgar, who were not able to a∣low their Children Schooling to learn either of them: yet they ha∣ve traditionaly from their Clergy and parents their prayers: and other necessary instructions in Irish, taught them by word of mouth, and also that part of the Masse wherein they might ha∣ve any doubt, or scrouple. So that it is not said in Latin by
the Priest, to the intent that the people might not understand him; or to the intent that the flock might be keept in darkness (as some of the pretended Refor∣mers doe falsly reporte) but to the intent that the holy Catho∣lick Church in her Liturgies might vse one generall, & Com∣mon language, wherein all Na∣tions doe indisputably agree, & which is more practis'd than any other langauge, by the whole world; so that if one travls thro' all Europe, he shall alwayes find the same liturgie us'd in all Catholick Churches which conformity is a manifest sign of good Goverment, which is in the Church of Rome.
Chap 4 Proving the Pope of Rome's Supremacy in the Premitive Church. Christ's promise to St. Peter, and the charge which he com∣mitted unto him after his resur∣rection, requires some chef and Universal Pastor in the Church▪ whom all the rest ought to obey: but it was alwayes beliv'd in the Primitive Church. St. Peter and his successor (the Pope of Rome) to have been that chief and Uni∣versal Pastor: therefore it was alwayes believ'd in the Primiti∣ve Church, St. Peter and his successor (the Pope of Rome) to have been the chief and Uni∣versal Pastor, whom all the rest ought to obey: the minor and con∣sequence are manifest: as shall ap¦pear
hereafter. In the mean time, let us hear our Saviour's Promise to St. Peter. Matt: Chap 16. v: 18, and I say also unt yo, that thou art Peter, and upon this  I will uild my Church, and the Gates of Hl shall not prevail against it. By which words our Saviour promis'd the Supream Goverment of the who∣le Church on Earth, to St Peter: as all the following Fathers and Doctor, do openly Declare. Ori∣gines Homily 5 in Exoum, Ter∣tullian in his book de Praescrip: St, Cyprian in his Epist: to Quin∣tus: St Athanasius in his Epist: to Felix: St. Basil in his book a∣gainst Eunomius St. Hilarius & St. Hierome expounding the a∣forsaid text: St. Chrysostome
Hom: 55. in Matt: St. Cyrill of Alexandria in his 2 book c 1: in Ioann: St, Ambrose ser: 47, and in his book de Isaac c. 3, St. Leo ser: 11. of our Saviours Passi∣on, and in his 2 ser: of St. Peter and St. Paul, St, Augustin in Psal: Contra partem Donati, and in his 2 book against Gaudentius Epistles, c 23. which promise was effectually fullfil'd after Christ's Resurrection, as all the aforsaid Fathers doe Testifie: and it mani∣festly appears by our Saviour's own words: Iohn c. 21, v. 15 16. & 17 where we read that Christ Commanded St. Peter thrice con∣sequently to feed the flock, say∣ing thus: feed my Lambs, feed my Lambs, feed my Sheep, which words
doe plainly make-out, that it was our Saviour's intention to ap∣point Peter the Supream head and chief pastor over all Christians, under himself on earth: which is further Confirm'd y the fol∣lowing Testimonies. S. Denis the Areopagite (cited by S Da∣mascen ora: 2. de dormitione Deiparae affirms, that he and Timothy were both present: at the blessed Vrgin Mar's death, to be hold that body, which gave te begining of life: and that there was also present bo∣th fames, and Peter the Supream, and most anent top of Divines S, Irenaeus (who liv'd in the 2 Age, in his 3 book c 3) says, that all Churches round abou ought to resort the Roman Chuch, by reason of her more powrfull Prin∣cipality.
Tertullia (who liv'd in the ye 2, in his boo call' Scor∣piau , speaking to a heretick) sayes thus: so alho' you thk hea∣ven to be still  p: remember te Lord to have lef her it's eres, with Pter, and by Peter to the Church. O∣rigines (who liv'd about the same time Ho 5 in Exod: sayes thus: Obrve what th Lod said to hat ge∣at fndation of the Church, and most solid oc upon whom Christ built his Church And o te 6 Chap. of S. Paul's. Epist: to the Rome: he also sayes, the folowing whords: when the cif char of fdīg Christ▪s sheep was given to S. Peter, and the Church foundd upon him—there was requr'd of him te Confesson of no vertue, but of Charity. S. Cyprian
(who also liv'd in the same Cen∣tury. Epist to Iulian) sayes thus: we hold Peter to e the hd & root of the Church. Epist: 5, he sayes the following words: Peter upon whom the Church ha been bui spoe for all, asweīg in the Church's name sayg, nd to whom shall we go: and in hi 71. Epist: he also saes thus: Peter whom th Lor first choes'd, and upon whom he built his Church St. Epiphanius, who liv'd in the year 30 sayes' (heresie 51) that Christ chos'd Peter first in order to ma him the Captaine of his Discipls; and heresie 5, e calls St. Peter the ri of the Apostles, St. Ambrose, who also liv'd about that same time, in his Commentary on St. Paul's Epist: to the Gala: c. 1, speaking of St. Paul sayes
thus: I was it, that he long'd for to see Peter, who was the chiefest of the Apostle, to whom our Saviour intrusted the care of all the Churches. and also in his Commentary on St Paul's 2. Epist: to the Corin: c▪ 12, he says: Andrew firt fllow ur Saviour, yet Andrew Receiv'd not the spremacy, but Peter. Optatus, who liv'd in the year 365. sayes thus (in is 2. book against Perminian) there is oe chai, and you dar not deny to now that the chai was first bestowed vnto Peter in the City of Rome, where Peter the head fll the Apostles continued. S. Basil (who also liv'd in the ame age in his ser: de Iudicio dei) calls Peter that blessed one, who was pre∣fer'd before the rest of the Apostles. u∣sebius Emissenus (who also liv,d
about the same time, in his ser: de nativi: St. Joan▪ speaking of Christ) says that he first comitted his Lambs, afterwards his sheep to Peter, becue he made him not only pastor, but pstor of pastors; and Ecu∣menius, who like wise then liv'd, sayes the following words, in his commentary on the 1. Cap. of the acts, Not Iames, but Peter rais'd up, as being both mor fervent, and also the president of the Disciples. S. Cy∣rill of Ierusalem (ho liv'd in the same Century, Catech: 2: sayes thus, Peter the Prince and most excel∣lent of all the Apostles St Hierome (who liv'd, in the year 90, in his first book against the Pelagians c 14) calls, Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, upon whom the Lord's Church
has been built: and also in his first book against Jovinian Cap. 14, he sayes, That one of the twelve was choe∣sen to be the head of the rest that the occsion of shisme might be prevented St. Chrysostom, [who liv'd in the same time, in his 2 Hom: de paenit: in Psal. 50) calls St Peter the pillar: of the Church, the foundation of the fath and the head of the Apostolical qure: and in his last Hom: on Ion he sayes, that the charge of the brothers (that is to say, of the Apostles) & of the whole whld was cmmited to Peter and also in his 55 hom: on Matt: he sayes; that the pastor and hed of the Chuch was onc a poor fisherman. Theodoretus who liv'd in the year 430. sayes thus, [in his Epist: to Leo.) Paul that preacher
of the truth, and trumpet of the holy Ghost, run'd to great Peter, that he might bring his Sentence to those, who indeavor▪d, to establish the legals in Antioch. S Augustin who liv'd in the same age in his 24 Ser: de Temp:  cas's Peter, the governer of the Church. And in his 68. Epist: he calls him, the head of the Apostles, the gate keeper of heaen, &c. & in his last Treatise in Ioan: he sayes thus: whom Peter by reason of the Su∣premacy of his Apostle-ship &c. S. Leo (who liv'd in the year 440, in his 3 ser: de Aslump: sua ad Poni:) sayes the following words: out of the whol world one Peter is chosen, who is prefer'd before all people, and before the Apostles, and be∣fore all the fathers of the Church, and
altho' among the people of God the be many Priests, and many pastors, ye Peter particularly governs them all and Christ governs them principaly S Gregory (in his 4. ook 32. E. pist: which is to Mauritius the Emperor) sayes: that it was maifes to all that knew the hosple, the char∣ge of the whle Church to have been committd by the ord to Peter the Prin∣ce of all the Apostle. And the Ge∣neral Council of Calcedon, whe∣rein 630 Father were assembled, call'd (action 3) S. Peter the Rock and pillar of the Church. All which proofs do sufficiently make-out, that it was alwayes believ'd, and acknowledg'd, by those of the Primitive Church, St. Peter to have been instituted a supream
pastor: but the same charge still remains, being the office of a pastor is an ordinary, and a per¦petual office and as long as there are sheep to be feed, so long there ought to be a pastor to feed them. which because St. Peter did not perform in his own person those many hundred years; there must needs be some other lawfull successor, to execute the office in his place: for we see by daily ex∣perience many strifes and conten∣tions to happen amonghst the flock, in matters of faith and dis∣cipline: who then shall appease & reconcile them? you will say the Bishops; but how often doth dif∣ferences of this sort araise, and happen amonghst the Bishops
themselfs? perhaps you will an∣swer, that they ought to appeal to Primates and Patriarches: but what if they be also at variance? as Flavianus and Dioscorus, Cy∣rill and Nestor were: peradven∣ture you may say: that they ought to goe to temporal princes, and civil Magistrates: but tis not their part to ingage themselves in Ecclesiastical affairs; and their factions may be more dangerous then any of the former: to whom then shall the people appeal? it will be said, to a general Council: but who shall summon? who shall order? or who shall direct, and guide that assembly? what if they decline from the true faith of Ie∣sus Christ? as the Council of Ari∣minium,
the second Council of Ephesi' and several other Schis∣matical Councils did? who then shall Iudge their case? who shall deside their dissentions? unless some certain head be appointed by the divine providence of the holy Ghost: whose decrees are in∣fallible & whose censures ought to be obey'd, and in respect of whom St. Peter may be still said to perform his duty, and feed the sheep intrusted to his charge? as the premisses do plainly make-out Now let us see, if those of the Primitive Church did belive, and acknowledge, the Popes of Rome (successiuely from age to age, sin∣ce Peter's death) to have been that Supream head of the Uni∣versal
Church (as St Peter was in hs own time, St. Irenous, who liv'd in the year 180, in his 3 book Chap 3) sayes, the following words: The fouders of the Church de∣liver'd the Episcopay of over-seeing the Church to Linus, and Anacletus succeeded Linus, Clemens, Anacletus, Evaristus, Clemens: &c. numbring all the rest of the Popes of Rome, who govern'd the Church, from St. Peter's time, to that very in∣stant St. Basil (who liv'd, in the 4 Century, in his 52 Epist: which is to St. Athanasius) sayes thus: It is convenient, that we shu'd write to the Bishop of Rome, that he might take notice of what is done here, and pro∣duce his sentence—and use his Au∣thority in the case, & choese some sound
men—who can crrect those stoburn and crosse people, that are here with us—and cancel what has been done, by force ud violnce in Ariminium. St. Athauasius (in his Ep: written in the name of all the Bisops in Egypt, to Marke Pope of Rome) sayes the following words: To the holy and Ʋenerable Marke, Pope of the Ʋniversal Church, ruler of the holy Apostoical sea—we desire (by the Authority of your holy sea which is the Mother, and had of all Churches,) that we may know by the present lega∣tes, what ought to be done, for the re∣covery and correction of the faith full Orthodox; fo being supported by your Authority, and srnthn'd by your Prayers, we can escape safe from the enemyes of God's Church, and ours—and
& be able to root-out those committed unto us. such an other convincing Authority may be seen, in St A∣thanasius's Epist: to Felix, and also in St, Cyprian's Epistles, to Cornelius, Lucius, and Stephen, Popes of Rome. St, Hierome (in his Epistle, to Pope Damas) sayes thus: altho' your grande ter∣risies me yet yr mildness invicts me I do crave from the Priest, the victim of Salvation, from the Pastor, succor to a sheep—I speake to the succssor of the fisher, and disciple of the cross, following none bu Christ, I do joyne with your holynesse in communion, that is to say, with the chaier of Peter, for I know the Church to have been built upon that Rocke: whosover shall eat the amb out of this house, is pro∣phane:
St Crysostome (in his first Epist: to Pope Innocentius be∣seeches him, to declare the proceedings of the Eastern Bishops void, and of no effect, and to punish (with Ecclesiastical Censure) the promoters of the discorde, and in his 2 book (de Sacerdotio Chp  he syes the fallowing words (speaking of Christ) why did he sed his own blood? certainly it was to purchase those sheep, whose care he committed both to Peter, and to Peter's succesors, Theodoretus (in his Epist. to Pope Leo) sayes thus: I do expect the sentence of your Aposlo∣lical sea, and I humbly beseech, and Pray your holynesse, that your just and upright judgment may ade me, ap∣pealing to you, and command m to come before you: & in his Epist: to
Renatus, he also sayes thus: I be∣seech you to perswade the most holy Arch∣bishop Leo to use his Apostolical Authori∣ty and command me to appear, at your Council, for that holy sea has, the Go∣verment of all Churches thro' the whole world: St Augustin (in his 262 Epist: which is to Pope Caelestinus) sayes the following words: I congratulate your merits, that our Lord estabish'd you in that sea, without any opposion of the people, se∣condly I do inform your holynesse of what is committed near us here that, not only by praying for us, but also by advising and assisting us, you may rel∣ef us—I beseech you thro' the blood of Christ and remembrance of the A∣postle Peters who admonish'd the chi∣fest of the Christian people) not to su∣fer
these things to be done. All which Authorityes do plainly make-out, that the holy Fathers and Doctors of the primitive Church firmly believ'd, and acknowledg'd, the Popes of Rome to have been (suc∣cessively from age, to age,) the Supteam head of the Universal Church on earth: Which may be further confirm'd by the cōtinual practice, and consent of several Nations: who in the primitive Church appeal'd to the Popes of Rome: acknowledging each of them [in his own time to have been Christ's Vicar-generall on earth: As for exemple, to whose high tribunal did Flavianus the Patriarch of Constantinople ap∣peal from the  Ephesian Coun∣cil
but to that of Leo Pope  Rome: as Liberatus in his brevi¦ate c 12. writes; whose assistance di Athanasius Bishop of Alexandr (depos'd by the Aerians] implore but the assistance of Marke Feli and Iulius, Popes of Rome:  St. Athanasiu's own Epistles ( the aforsaid) do expressly testifi and also Sozomenus, in his; boo c. . Under whose wings, did S Chrysostome fly, for justice? (beit depos'd by Theophilus, and h adherences) but under the win of Innocentius the first: as appea by St Chrysostome's 1. & 2. Epi to the same To whom did For naus, & Felix (being depos'd Africk) appeal? but to Corneli Pope of Rome. as St. Cyprian
his first book Epist: 3: declares. To whom did Basilide appeal? but to Pope Stephen, as St. Cyprian testifies, Epist: 68. To the Pope of Rome, Valent, and Ursacius came to give an account of their treachery against St. Athanasius, and to crave pardon for the same as Epiphanius (heresie 68 relates) Marcion (being excommunicated by his own Bishop in Asia (came to Rome, to be absolv'd by Pus the first: as St. Epiphanius re∣lates, (heresie 42) who depos'd Anthimus, the Patriarch of Con∣stantinople? and establish'd in his place Mena; but Agapetus the Pope, as Liberatus affirms in his beviat 62. and also Zonarias, writīg the life of Iustinian. Who
depos'd Flavianus the Patrian of Antioch? but Pope Danias, Theodoret relates, in his 5  c 23 who depos'd Polychron Bishop of Ierusalem▪ about  year 434, but Pope Sixtus th as appears, in the acts of Six Who depos'd Dioscorus Pa¦arch of Alexandria? but the of Rome: as Gelatius's Epistle the Dardanian Bishops, expre declares: wherin he also rela that Pope Iulius the first, reslo Athanasius Alexādrinus, Pau Constantinopolitanus, & Mar¦lus Ancyranus to their own Bi¦opricks. who re-establish'd Pe (St. Athanasius successor be wrongfully depos'd by the A¦ans) but Pope Damas: as Sozo
us affirms, in his 6 bok c: 9. who estor'd Theodoretus (being also rongfull depos'd, by the Ai∣ns in the 2 Ephesian svnod, but Pope Leo: as is manifest by the first action of the General Coun∣cil of Calcedon. It was, only the Popes of Rome, hat had (i the Primitive Chur∣ch) their deputies, and Vicar∣generals in all foraign and re∣mote Countryes (viz.) Anastasius Bishop of Thesalōica, in the Ori∣ent: as apears by St. Leo's 84 Epist: Potentius' in Africk as the same Leo's 87 Epist declares: A∣acius Patriarch of Constantino∣le, in Egypt: whom the Pope of Rome, commanded to depose the Bishop of Alexandria, as Gelatius,
relates in his Epist to the Dar∣danian Bishops. Celestinus Pope of Rome, Authoriz'd St. Cyrill of Alexandria to proced against Nestor (then Bishop of Coun∣stontinople) as appears by Cae∣lestinus's Ep: to St Cyrill: which is to be seen in St. Cyrill's 4. tome, where also St Cyrill declares) in his Epist: to those of Counstan∣tinople) that the charge of that Bishoprick, was committed unto himself by the Bishop of Rome. Pope Hormisda instituted Salus∣tius (Bishop of Sevil) his Vicar∣general through Spain, and Por∣tugall, as appears by the said Hormista's Epist: to the same: and St, Gregory instituted Vi∣gilius Bishop of Orleance to be
his Vicargeneral, thro' all Fran¦ce: as may beseen, in St Gregory's 4th. book Epïst: 52. It was also the Pope of Rome's Legates, that were Presidents in the General Councils of the Pri∣mitivc Church, as for example; Hosius, Vitus, and Vincentius, St, Sylvester's Legates, have been presidents in the General Coun∣cil of Nice: as Cedrinus in his Compendio, Potius in his book de 7, Synodis, and St: Athanasius in his Epist (to those, who leade a solitary life) do relate. St Cyrill of Alexandria, Pope Caelestinu's Legate preceded, in the Coun∣cil of Ephesias as Liberatus in his Breviate c, 15. & Evagrius in his first book c. 4: do write. Paschasius
Lcsius, and Bonifacius, St.  Legates, were Presidents in the General Council of Calce∣don, a is evident by the  action of he ame Coucil, and also by S Leo's 47 Epist: Archdmus, and Philaxens Iulius the first's Legates, preed in the Gene∣ral Council of Sards: as St. A∣thanasius in his  Apology, and Theodoretus in his a book c 15, do declare. It was, only to the Pope of Rome, the decrees and Canons, of all General, and famous Councils, where sent (in the primitive Church) in order to be approv'd, and confirm'd, by his holynesse: as for example: it was, to St. Syl∣vester Pope of Rome, the Fathers
of the Council of Nice, sent a letter most humbly beseeching his holynesse, to Ratifie and con∣firme, the decrees of the said Co∣uncil: which letter is to be seen in the second Tome of the Coun∣cils. The Fathers of this Coun∣cil, were in number, 318, and sate in the year 325. The Fathers of the General Coūcil of Constātinople (being in number 150, assembled in the year 381) writ to Damas Pope of Rome, by (Cyriacus Eu∣sebius, and Prisianus, Bishops) praying him, to aprove and con∣firme their Canons: this Councils letter, is to be seen in Theodoret's 5th. book c. 9. The decrees of the General Council of Ephess (whe∣rein 200 Fathers sate, in the year
431) were sent to Pope Celesti∣nus, in order to be confim'd: as St. Cyrill's Epist: testifies: which Epistle is to be seen in the 3 Tome of the Councils. The Fathers of the General Council of Calcedon (being in number 630, and sate in the year 451) sent their Canons, to Pope Leo, in order to be con∣firm'd, by him: as appears, by the said Council's Epistle to the same; which is to be seen in the 4th: To∣me of the Councils. The Fathers of the Milevian Council, sent the∣ir Canōs to Pope Innocentius the first, (in the year 416) to be con∣firm'd: as appears, by this Coun∣cil's Epistle; which is to be seen▪ in the 1 Tome of the Coūcils. The Fathers of the Council of Car∣thage,
sent their Canōs, (the year 356, to be confirm'd, by Pope Ste∣phen: as is manifest by their own Epistle, which is to be seen in St. Cyrill's 2 book, and also in the first Tome of the Councils I might produce several other convincing proofs, concerning this point; but that I may be easie to the reader: I will conclude, on∣ly with these followīg Councils, who sate, in the Primitive Church and acknowledg'd in their very Canons, the Pope of Rome's Su∣premacy (viz.) the 20 chap: of the Council of Rome, who sate in the year 324. The 3 chap: of the 3. & 4th: Council of Rome, who sate in the year 502. The 3, 4th & 9th Canon, of the Council of Sardis,
wherein 376 Fathers were. The 6th Canon of the General Coun∣cil of Nice. The 5 Canō of the Ge∣neral Council of Constantinople. The 1, 2, 3, & 16. Action of the Ge∣neral Council of Calcedon, who sayes thus: (in the 16th) we throughly consider ruly, that all Prmacy & chief honour, is to be keept, for the Arch Bishop of old Rome. Chap: 5 Proving, that the Real Presen∣ce, was believ'd by those of the Primiti∣ve Church The very words of Iesus Christ, and also the Authentical Testi∣monyes of the holy Fathers and Doctors of the Primitive Church do clearly affirm, that Christ's true body and blood, are Real∣ly and Substantially present, in
the holy Sacrament: therefore this Doctrine was not newly bro∣ught-in, since the Primitive Church: the consequens is most certain, as we shall see here-after, and I prove the first part of the Anticedent, by our Saviour's own words, Iohn c 6 v 51, where he sayes thus: I am the living bread, which came down from heaven, if any man eat of this bread, he shall live forever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. But then the Iewes wanting true faith, said one to an other: how can this man give u his flesh to eate v 52. certainly then our Saviour (who came to this world to instruct, and leade us, out of all darknesse, to the true
light) hearing the Iewes murmu∣ring so, and doubting of what he said to be true, wou'd explain the aforesaid words, if he had any mystical meaning: but he was so far from so doing, that he confir∣m'd and repeated them again, o∣ver and over as is manifest by the 53 54 &c. v: where we read the following words. then Iesus said unto them, verily verily I say unto ye, except ye eate the flesh of the son of man, and drinke his blood, ye have no life in ye: whosoever eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, hath eternall life and I will raise him up at the last day: for my flesh is meat indeed and my blood is drinke indeed: he that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me and I  him: as the
living Father hath sent me and I live by the Father: so he that eateth me, even he shall live by me. This is the bread which came down from heaven: not as your Fathers did eate anna, and are dead, he that eateth of this bread shall live for ever. So that eve∣ry faithfull & sincere Christian may plainly understand, that if our Saviour then had not meant, that he was to give his own true flesh and blood to be really eaten and dranke, that he wou'd not so proceed, in confirming what he said in the begining, and also that he wou'd not suffer his own disciples to part with-out declar∣ing his mind to them, as he did often before when he spoe in parables; neither wou'd he decla¦re,
at his last supper, that he gave to his discples, his own body and blood saying thus: Take eate, this his my bdy: and he tooke the cup, and gave thankes, and gave it to them, say∣ing drinke ye all of it; for his is my blood of the new testmet, which shall be shd for many for the remission of sinnes. Matt: c 26 v: 26 27 & 28 I leave it to all faithfull Christi∣ans, seriously to be consider'd; whether Christ gave, only figura∣tively his own body and blood, for the remission of our sinnes, or his reall body and blood? If he gave them really for our Salvati∣on; he also gave them really t his disciples, as his own word do manifestly affirme; to deny which, is of no less consequence,
than to charge Christ with un∣truth: or at lest that he had not words significant, to explain his intention; which is rash and im∣pious to judge of his infinite pow∣er: therefore all Christians are oblig'd not to mistrust of the tru∣th of Christ's words, or doubt of their literal sence, in the afore∣said text: for being we acknow∣ledge, that Christ is omnipotent, and consequently that it is in his Power to make of the bread and wine his own flesh and blood, (by his divine benediction) we ought not to doubt of what he said to be true; and if in case he had not exprest so plainly his mind unto us, concerning this mysterie, we ought to believe it firmly, by St,
Paul's testimonye (ae Corinth: c: 11 v: 23 24 &c.) saying thus: for I have receiv'd of the Lord that which also I deliver'd uto ye; that he Lord Jesus (the same night in which he w betrayed) ooke bread, and when he had given thankes, he brake and said, take eate, this is my body which shall be liver'd for ye thi do ye in remem∣brane of m: afte the ame māner also he tooke the cp when he had supped, saying this cup is the new testament, in my blood, this doe ye, as often as ye drinke it in remembrace of me; for as often as ye eate ths brad and drinke this cup, ye do shew the Lords death till be come. whosoever shall at this bread,  drinke this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the od. By which
words St Paul openly declares, that Christ gave his own body & blood to his disciples, at his last supper; and also he affirms, him∣self to have been taught this doc∣trine, by the Lord; and that he deliever'd the same, to the Corin∣thians, that there by he might per∣swade them not to doubt of what he said to be true; but to firmly believe the reall presence, beng it was the Lords doctrine delie∣uer'd unto him, in order to teach it to the Christians. Now let us heare the Authority∣es of the holy Fathers & Doctors of the Primitive Church, where∣with I shall prove the second Part of the antecedent. St. Ignati∣us (the Apostles Disciple. in his
Epist: to those of Smyrna, cied by Theodoret in his  Dialogue) sayes thus: they mit not the Eu∣charists and olations, because they confess not the Euchrst to be the fles of our Saviour, who suffer'd for ou sinne. Let the reader take otice of those heretickes, against whose principles St Ignatius speaks in the aforsaid text: for they rejec∣ted the Eucharist, lest they would be forc'd to confess, that Christ had true flesh: but if the Eucha∣rist had not then been believ'd to be Christ's rue flesh, those he∣retiks could have no kind of rea∣son to re-ject it, for they did no deny the figure or Image of Chris but what they deny'd was, tha Christ had true flesh. The like ar¦gumen
may be form'd against the Jewes admiration (hearing the word▪ of Christ Iohn c: 6 v. 51 &c.) for if then the jewes would believe that Christ was to give his flesh only in figure and remembran∣ce, they would have no reasō to murmur, or to mistrust the tru∣th of Christ's words: so that it manifestly appears, that the Jewes suppos'd, that Christ meant his true flesh; and also that those he∣retiks of the prmitive Church be∣liev'd and acknowledge, that it was then some of the Catholick Doctrine, to believe that Christ's true flesh, was really present in the holy Eucharist St. ustin Martyr (who liv'd in the year 150, in his 2 Apology to Antoninus)
sayes thus: we do not receive this as common bread, or as common drinke, but as the son of God Iesus Christ ou Saviour inrnate, had flesh and blood for our salvation, so—are we taught, that th Eucharist is the flesh & blood of the same Iesus incarnate St Irenaeus (who liv'd in the same Century, speaking of the hereticks of the Synagogue, who deny'd, Christ to have been the son of God) sayes the following words: [in his 4th book c 34) how can they be as∣sured, the bread in which thankes are given to be the body of our Lord, & the chalice his blood? if they acknowledge him not to be the son of the maker of the world. Tertullian (who liv'd in the year 230) sayes thus: (in his book of the resurrection of the
flesh) the flesh is wash'd, that the soul may be clean'd, the flesh is anoin∣ted, that the soul may be consecrated the flesh eateth of the body and blood of Christ: that the soul may be urish|'d. Origns (who liv'd in the same age,) sayes thus (hom: 7th in Eum: speakīg of the old law) thn the manna was meat in figure, but now the flesh of God, is meat inspecie, as himself sayes. my flesh is mat in deed; and in his 5th Hom: in diversa loca Evangely (speaking of the Centurian) he sayes the follwing words: whn you receive the holy meat and uncorrupted banquet, when you receive the bread and cup of ief▪ you eat & drinke the body & blood of the Lord, then the Lord inters into your house; you therefore (humbling your∣self)
immitate this Centurian, & say o Lord I am not worthy, that thou sho¦est inter into y house. St Cypria who liv'd in same Century, in his 5th: ser: de Lapsis) sayes thus Vio∣lence is infer'd to his body & blood & they offend now more the Lord wi their hands & mouh, than when th deny'd the Lord, and in his ser: o the Lords supper, he also sayes the following words: the doc∣trin of this Sacrament is streange,  the Evangelical schooles publih'd  this doctrine, & it first appear'd to th world by Christ the teacher thereof, th Christians should drinke blood, who drinking is most strictly forbidden  the Authority of the old law—but  Gospel commends to drinke it. Befo I shall proceed further, I mu
take notice of St. Cyprian's words positively affirming, that this Doctrine of the real presence has been first taught by Christ, and his Disciples, and also that Christians are commanded to drinke blood, which was prohibi∣ted by the old law: for the old law did not prohibit to drinke blood in figure, or in remembrance; for the Jewes did drinke the blood of Christ figuratively, in drinking the water, which flow'd our of the Rocke: therefore that which was prohibited by the old law, was only to drinke true and real blood: but St. Cyprian clearly af∣firms, that the Gospel commāds the Christians to drinke that, which was prohibited by the old law:
therefore St. Cyprian affir that the Christians are comman¦ed by the Gospel, to drinke t and real blood, and consequen not in figure, as my adversa would faine perswade. St. Hila¦us (who liv'd in the 4th: Cent¦ry, in his 18th: book of the T¦nity, says thus: If the word be t incarnate, we do truly receive the w flesh—of the flesh & blood's  there is noe roome left for being doubt, for by the Lord's own confes and by our faith, it is truly flesh truly blood—let us read what is wri and let us understand what we r and then we will perform the dut perfect faith, for according to the tural truth of Christ in us, what  we learn, unless we learn it fom
we learn it imprudently, & impiously; fr he said, my flh is meat in deed &c. St. Cyril of Ierusalem (who liv'd in the sme Century, Catech: 4) say the following words. This of St. Paul's Doctrine can sufficiently make ye most certain cocerning the divine mysteries—& seeing Christ himself so affirms, & sayes of the bread, this is m body: wh afterwards can presume to doubt? & the same also say∣ing & confirming, this is my blood; who I say can doubt? & say, that it is not his blood. St. Ambrose (who also liv'd in the same Century, in his book de Mysterys Initian∣dis c 9th:) sayes the following words: Perhaps you may say; I see the contrary; how can you affirm to me, that I can receive Christ's body? & this now
we are to prove: therefore w use great examples, that we may prove this not to be what nature form'd, but what be∣nediction consecrated; & the benedic∣tion to be of more power, than the na∣turs, because even he very nature is converted by the benediction; Moses threw a rod, which he converted into a serpent, & aftrwards he tooke the serpent's tail & converted the same in∣to a rod: therefore you see the nature of the serpent, & of he rod to have been twie chang'd by a Prophetical benedic∣tion—If human benediction be of such power, that it can change nature; what do we say to the divine consecra∣tion? where the very words of the Lord our Saviour, do worke, for the Sacramē which you receive is perfected by the words of Christ, what if Elias's words
were of such force that they cou'd draw fie out of heven? will not Christs wrds be able to change the nature of the ele∣ments? Of all the workes in the world you have read! because he said & they were made, he commanded & they were created: therefore Christ's words which cou'd make that which was not, of no∣thing, can they not change these things, which are, into that, which they were not? for it is not less to give things new beings, than to change their natures: but why doe w use arguments? but let us use his own examples, & prove the truth of this mysterie by the Incarnatiō's example: did the course of nature take place, when the Lord was born of Mary?—it is manifest that the Virgin conceiv'd contrary to the order of nature, & this body which we perform is of
the Virgin. Why do you iquire here th cuse of  Chst's body? when the Lord himself w or of the Virgin beyond the cors of nature. Surly the true flesh of Christ was cruci∣fi'd; & buri'd, truly thn the scrament i of that same flesh. Tho' what I have already produc'd of this e∣minent Doctor's, Authority might satisfie any impartial reader; yet I will adde these other Authori∣tyes of his, confirming the same: in his 4th: book de Sacram: c: 5. he sayes thus: The Lord Iesus Christ declar'd unto us, that we receive his own body & blood, why shu'd we doubt of his Authority, & testimoney, and in his 6th: book c, 1, he also sayes thus: as our Lord Iesus Christ, is the true son of God—even so it is true
flesh, which we receive, as himself said. St. Gregory Nazanzen (who liv'd in the same age, in his 2 Oration de Paschae) sayes, the followings words: eate the body & drinke the blood, with-out confusion & doubt—be constant firm, & sted∣fast, you need not be any thing troubl'd in mind, for the adversary's discourse. St Ephrem, (who liv'd in the year 365, in his book de Natura Dei minima Scrutanda c: 5) sayes the following words: why do you track∣out unsearchable things? If you search curiously these things; new you will not be call'd faithfull, but curious, be faithfull & innocent partake of the immaculate body of thy Lord, with full faith, being sure that you do eat the intire lambe, the mysteries of Christ
are everlasting fire, do not rashly sear them over, est you should burn in the∣ir search. St. Epiphanius (who liv'd in the year 370, in his book nam'd Ancoratus] sayes thus: We see tha our Saviour tooke in his hands (as th Evangelist hath)—& when he gave thanks, he said this is my body—& none mistrusts his words, for he wh dose not believe, it to be his true fleh falls from grace & life; and in a no∣ther place (cited by the Fathers of the 7th: General Council, in the 6th: Action) he sayes the fol∣lowing words: Never shall o find our Lord, or his Apostles, or the Fa∣thers, saying that the unbloody sacri∣fice, which is offer'd by the Priests, is an Image, but his very body & blood St. Hierome (who liv'd in the year
390, Epist: to Hedib:) sayes thus: but let us know, that the bread which the Lord brake & gave to his Disci∣ples was the Lord our Saviours body; himself saying to them, take ye, & eat this is my body. St, Chrysostom, (who liv'd the year 398, Hon: 1 in Matt:) sayes, the following words: he who bestowed his own life for you, why will he sorn to give you his own body? therefore let us harken the Priests—how noble how admira∣ble is that thing, which is granted unto us—he has given us, his own flesh &c. He also sayes thus: (Hom: 53) Let us believe God, let us not contra∣dict him, altho' what he sayes, may seem strange to our sense & imagination, for it surpases our sense & reason. I beseech you, what may we suppose of his
words in all things, chiefly in mysteries not only considering hese things, which layes before us, but also his words, for we cannot be deceiv'd by them, but our senses may easilie be deceiv'd: his words cannot be false—therefore because he said this is my body, let us he convinc'd by noe ambiguity, but let us believe, & perceive this, with the eyes of our understanding—O how many now sayes! I wou'd fain se his face, & countenance, I wou'd wish to see his garments;—therefore you see him, you feele him, you eat him, you desire to see his garmēts, truly he delive∣r'd himself to you, not only that you may see him, but also that you may touch him, & intertain him, in yourself, In his 3. book de sacerdotio, he sayes thus: he that its above with his
Father, even in the same instant of time, is touch'd by the hands of all, & gives himself to all those, who are wil∣ling to receive him—whereas Christ leaving his flesh to us, yet ascending to heaven, there also he hath it. More of St. Chrysostom's Authorityes (plainly confirmīg the same) may be seen in his 8. Hom. on Matt. 45th. on John. 3 on St. Paus's E∣pist. to the Ephes. in his 2. to those of Antioch, and in his 6th. book de Sacerdotio. St. Augustin (who liv'd the year 420) expounding that of the 33. Psal. he was carri'd in his own hands: puts the question inquiring, how can these words be understod; & āswers sayīg thus: we cannot find this in David according to the litteral sense; but we may
find it in Christ; for Crs  in his own hads we gv  body▪ he said thi  he carid that bd . In his . book , legis e Prophet c 9 he sayes, he fol∣lowing wrds: w receive the Me∣diator of God & man Ieus Christ, with a ful heart & mouth, gvng us, his own flsh & blood, to be  & dranke. Here the Reader may take notice of the word mouth, that thereby he may understand S. Augustin to have openly de∣clar'd, that we do not receive the flesh & blood of Christ in figure, and by faith only (as my adversa∣ry believes) which may be fur∣ther confirm'd, by S. Augustin's own words, in his 2. ser. de ver∣bis
Apostoli, where he sayes thus: we understnd the true master, divine redeemer, kīd Saviour, recommending unto us our price his own lood, for he spoke of his own body & blood. More of S. Augustin's, Authorityes (proving the Real presence) may be seen, in his 11th. 26th. 27th. & 31 Treatise in John. in his commē∣tary on the 98th▪ psal. in his 2. book agaīst Petiliās letters in his 17th. book of the City of God, c. 20. In his 3. book or the Trinity c. 4. & 10. in his, book super Leviticum, . 57. In his 2. ser. de Temp. an in several other places, which woud be too tedious to produce here: therefore I will conclude only, with the two following Authori∣tyes: S. Cyrll of Alexandria (who
liv'd in the year 430, in his Epist. to Nestor, which Epist. was aprov'd of, by the Fathers of the Gene∣ral Council of Ephesi) sayes thus: so immediatly we come to the mystical blessings, & we are sanctifi'd, being partakers of the holy body, & pre∣cious blood of Christ, the Redeemer of us all, not taking it to be, common flesh (God forbid)—But made the proper flesh of the word himself: that s to say of the son of God. It was de∣fin'd in the 18. Can. of the first General Council of Nice, That Deacons, who have no power to offer sa∣crifice, ought not to give the body & blood of Christ to Priests, who have that power. All which proofs, do evidently make-out, that it was alwayes believ'd (ī the Primitive
Church) that Christ's body and blood, were really and substanci∣ally presēt in the holy sacrament▪ and consequently that our Savi∣our had no mystical, or figurati∣ve meaning, in the institution of this sacrament. So that it is to be admir'd, what pretence can my adversary aleadge, for denying the real presence, If he has not a mind to deny all mysteries, that surpasles, his own weake under∣standing; if so, he may be the same rule, Presume to deny that of the blessed Trinity Incarnati∣on, Resurrectiō &c. for they sur∣passe his understanding and ca∣pacity, as well as this of the reall presence. Chap. 6 Proving that the holy Eucha∣rist was ador'd, & worshipp'd
by those of the Primitve Church. If it was lawfull to fall down and worship our Sa∣viour Jesus Christ with Godly honour, when he was in this world, tis also lawfull to fall∣down and worship the holy Eu∣charist with Godly honour, but it was lawfull to falldown & worship our Saviour Jesus Christ with Go∣dly honour, when he was in this world therefore tis lawfull to fall down & worship the holy Eucha∣rist with Godly hōour. The cōse∣quence is most certain, as we shall see hereafter, and the minor is manifest Mat. c. 2 v 11. c. 14. v. 33. Jo. c 9 v. 38. as for The major it may be prov'd tus: the same Saviour Jesus Christ, who was worship'd,
in this world is really & substn∣tially present in the holy Sacra∣ment, as I have prov'd in my an∣swer to the adversarys 5th. point, and will confirm it, in my answer to his 7th. therefore if t was law∣full to full-down, and worship our Saviour Iesus Christ with Godly honour whē he was in this world; tis also lawfull to fall-down, and worship te holy Eu∣charist with Godly honour. Tho' the aforesaid argument might be a sufficient answer to this point. yet I will produce the following Authorityes, to confirm the same. St Denis the Areeopagite (who liv'd in the Apostles time, in his book de Eccles. Hier. c. 3) makes mention, of the Incencīg of the altar,
of the Priest washing his hands, of  elevation of the blessed Host, &  the adoration thereof. Origines (wh liv'd in the 3. Cētury in his 3. Ho in Exod.) sayes thus: I design to ¦monish ye, with the examples of  own religion: ye know who are acc∣m'd to be present at the divi mysteries, when ye receive the Lor body, how with all caution  veneration, ye take heed, least  smal particle of it, should fall down, le any thing of the consecrated gift sh slip out: for ye belive your selves,  guilty, (and ye rightly believe) if  thing of it wou'd fall by your neglig¦ce. St Ambrose (who liv'd in th 4th. Century, in his 3. book of th Holy Ghost c. 12. expounding, th of the 98. Psal: where we a
bid to worship the footstool of his fee) sayes thus: therefore by the foot∣stool, the earth is understood, and by the earth, the flesh of Christ, which, also evē at this day, we adore in myste∣ries, and which the Apostles ador'd in the Lord Jesus. S. Chrysostome (who also liv'd in the 4▪ Century, in his . hom. on S Pau'ls Epist. to the E∣phesians.] sayes thus: we speake of the body, and of him, who differs nothing from it, how many are made partakers of that body? how many tastes of his blood? remember that it is the body, & blood of him, who refides above the heavens, who is humbly ador'd by the Angels. He also sayes the follo∣wing words (hom. 24th. on St. Pauls first Epist. to the Corinthi∣ans) the wisemen regarded thîs body
laing n the ange, the ipio aarou men, having let thi  tey & home, & made along voy & when they ariv'd, wih grat  & trembing they worhipp▪d  let us therefore the Citizens of he immitate the barbarous people—do not see him in the mnge, but on at, not a woman keepig: him,  the Priest holding him—let us the¦fore weaken our selves, an be gr afraid, let us shew a great deal n reveece, than these barbarous people for open the gates of heaven, and l and then you will see, that whi said to be true; for that which i t most precious, and most to be ador' al thinks, I do hw you the same  on earth, even as, in a Kigs pal that which is most magnificē of thīgs,
not the alls, no  t the King , t that y  do nt hw yo th Agl▪ Ar∣ges, o he heaves bt tir maser;  have percv'd, hw ou  on the h, that which is most excellent, & est to be regarded of al things, nei∣her do ou only see hi but aso yo h him▪ & you ea him & after you at him, you return home; clean & pu∣ifie your soul, & prepare your mind against the receiving of these mysteries or if a King's son wih a neat, & pre¦ious own had been give to you o e carri'd, you wou'd slight all the thīgs  the world, but now receiving, not he son of a worldly King, but the only egottn son of Go &c. St Augustin who liv'd in the begining of the
5th. Century, expounding the 9 Psal) sayes that the earth, is th Lords footstool, according to th of Isaiah c 66 v. 1. saying thu the heaven is my throne, & the ear is my footstool, and he inquires ho is it lawfull to adore the earth with-out impiety: and then h sayes the following words: being troubl'd in mind I do turn myself Christ, because I do seeke him & I find▪ how the earth is ador'd, with-out im∣piety, the footstool of his feet is ador'd▪ for he receiv'd earth from the earth, be∣cause the flesh is of the earth & he re¦ceiv'd flesh from the flesh of Mary▪ & because he walk'd here in that flesh, & gave us the same flesh to eate for our safety, none eats of that flesh if he adores it not before; tis found-out after
what  otstool of  Lord may  not only, t we doe not  it, but  we sin, in not a orig it. More  S. Augustin's Authoryes may  seen (to the same purpose) in s 118. Epist. c. 3. and in his 120 pist c. 7. which I omit to produ∣ least, I shu'd be too trouble∣e to the reader. Chap. 7 Proving that Transubstātia∣ was believ'd by those of the Primi∣ve Church. I shall only here enlarge those ts of scripture, produc'd in my nswer to the 5th. point, with the llowing Authorityes of the ly Fathers and Doctors of the rimitive Church. Tertullian (who
liv'd in the begining of the 3. Cenury in his 4. book agai Mcian c. 4) saes   bead taken and distributed  his ¦sciples, he mae hs ow body: St.  martyr, and S Ieneus (who bo liv'd before ertulliā do aff the same: as the reader may see  their Authorityes produc'd  my answer to the 5. point. S: ¦prian (who liv'd the year 25 his sermon of the Lord's sup ayes thus: the read which ou gave to his Disciples, being chang not in shpe, but in natûre b the ¦nipotency of the word, was made le S, Cyrill of Jerusalem (who liv'd in the 4. Century speaking  Christ in his 4. Catech.) sayes th followig words: he did once in Ca of
Galelee, only by his will, turn water nto wine, which is near blood; ad hall he not be wrthy, to be believ'd o u? that he tun'd wine into blood erefore let us receive the body and ood of Christ, with all assurance, for nder the shape of bread the body is given to you, and under the shape of ine the blood is given—therefore let us not consider it, as bare bread, and bare wine; for it is the body and blood of Christ, according to the Lord's own words: for altho' your sense wou'd not represent this to you, nevertheless let faith confirm you: you ought not to judge these things by the taste—there∣foe knowing this & with all certain∣ly holding, the bread which is seen y us, not to be bread (altho' the taste perceives it to be bread) but to be the bo∣dy of
Christ, & the wine which is see  altho' it may seem to the pall be wine: notwithstandīg it is not  but the blood of Christ. Let the ¦der be Pleas'd to take notice  plainly St Cyprian affirms, (by  former words) that the substa of the bread & wine is dissol at the intrance of Christ's b and blood: and also how St. Cy bids us not to judge of this my¦rie according to the apprehensio of our senses, but to firmly belie∣ve the true and real presence of Christ's body and blood unde the shape of bread, and wine▪ that is to say under the accidents, which the bread and wine had, before cheir substance was chan∣g'd. St. Gregorie Nysen, (who
liv'd the year 380. in his Oration term'd Cateehetica c. 370.) sayes thus: I do also now rightly believe the sanctifi'd bread to be chang'd into the body of Christ—and these things he bestows transelementing the thīgs that are seen, into it, by the vertue of his blessings. which words do plainly make-out, that St. Gregorie posi∣tively believ'd the Transubstan∣tiation, otherwise he wou'd not have said these words. St Ambro∣se (who siv'd about the same time, in his 4th. book of sacra∣ments c. 4th.) sayes thus: perhaps you may say, my bread is ordinary, but the bread is bread before the words of consecration, but when consecration comes it is the flesh of Christ a no∣ther convincing Authority of St.
Ambrose may be seē in my answ∣er to the 5th point St, Gaudentius (who also liv'd in the 4th. age, in his 2. Treatis on Exod.) sayes the following words: the Cream and Lord of natures, who brought forth the bread out of the earth, and again of the bread (because he can do it, & promis'd it) made his proper body: and who of the water made wine, made of the wine his own blood S. Chryso∣stome (who liv'd in the year 398. in his 83. hom. on S. Matt. speaking of this mysterie) sayes thus: these are not the works of human power which the Lord perform'd in that supper, the same also offers now the sa∣crifice he performs, we enjoy the office of ministers: truly tis he, who sancti∣fies, and chages these things. And
(in his Homily of the Eucharist in aenys) he also sayes the following words: do you see the bread? do you see the wine? do they go like other meat to the privy? (the Lord forbid) you ought not to imagin so: for evē as after wax is apply'd to the fire—nothing of the substance remains—even so, consider here the mysteries, the sub∣stance of the body to be consum'd: that is to say, that the breads sub∣stāce is annichilated, when Chri∣st's body inters under those acci∣dents, which formerly the bread had before it was annuld St. Augustin [in his 8, ser▪ de ver∣bis Apostoli sayes thus: I told ye, that the bread which is offer'd is call'd bread, before the words of Christ; but as soone, as Christ's words are pronoun∣c'd,
then tis not call'd bread, but it is call'd the body. And in the book of the Incarnatiō of Christ, we read the following words: tis not to be believ'd, that the ubstance of the bread, or wine remains, but that the bread is cheang'd into Christ's body, and the wine into his blood &c, St. Cyrill of Alexandria, in his Epist. to Calosyrius, and Eusebi∣us Emissenus, Ser. de corpore Do∣mini, do affirm the same. All which Authorityes do evidently make. out, the thing signifi'd by the word Transubstantiation (that is to say the real change of the substance of bread and wine, a the intrance of Christ's flesh & blood) to have been alwayes be∣liev'd, and maintain'd by the holy
Fathers, and Doctors of the Pri∣mitive Church; so that it plainly appears, that this Doctrine of Transubstantiation was not brou∣ghtin, by the Church of Rome, either in the 6th. 7th. 8th. or 9th age; or by the Council of Latran (in the year 1215) as some of the pretēnded reformers do falsly aleadge. It is not worth my while to an∣swer here the Adversary's 8th. po∣int; for it is sufficiently answer'd by what I have produc'd in my answers to the three last points: for tis manifest, that all those, who contradicted (in the Primitive Church) the aforsaid Doctrine, that they were esteem'd and be∣liv'd (by the holy Catholicke
Churh) to have been notorious heretickes: as I will shew in the later end of this worke. Chap. 8. Proving the use, and vene¦ration of Images, in the Primitive Church. If it be lawfull to worship o∣ther creatures, tis also lawfull to worship Images: but tis lawfull to worship other creatures: there∣fore tis lawfull to worship Ima∣ges, the major is manifest for the sae honour, which the scripture forbids to be given to the one; forbids it to be given to the other: (as I will shew hereafter) there∣fore if it be lawfull to worship other creatures, tis also lawfull to worshp Images. whose making and puting up in Churches, is
commanded by the holy scripture: as evidently appears by the follo∣wing texts (Exodus c 25 v. 18. 19. 22) where we read that God com∣manded two Cerubins to be made of god which were to be set up on both sides of the Arke, before which the people were to pray, and promis'd that there he wou'd meet with Moses▪ we read also (Numb. c. 21 v. 8 and 9) that the Lord commanded Moses, to make a fiery serpent, and to set it up, on a pole and that it shu'd come to passe, that if any one, would be bitten by a serpent, that he wou'd recover, when he wou'd looke upon the serpent of brasse. more examples may be seen in the
3 book of Kings c. 6. v. 35. c. 7. v. 25. 29. and 36. c. 10. v. 19. in the 2. book of Chronicles c 3. v. 10 and 14. where we read that Salomon caus'd, (at several times) Images to be made, but we can never find out, that ever he was repre∣hended for so doing. Now let us see is it lawfull to worship other creatures, that thereby the minor may be prov'd, Lot seeing the Angels, bow him∣self with his face to wards the ground, Gen. c. 19. v. 1. Baaam did the same, seeing the Angel of the Lord, Numb. c▪ 22 v. 31. and also Joshua: as may be seen Joshua c. 5. v. 14. Saul seeing the soul of Samuel, stoop'd with his face towards the groūd and bowed himself: as may be seen in the first book
of Kings c. 28 v. 14. and (in the 3. book of Kings. c 18 v 7.) we read, that Abadiah fell on his face, and worshipp'd Elyah. The sons of the Prophets seeing Elisha, they came to meet him, and bowed them∣selves to the ground before him: as may be seen in the 4th book of Kings c. 2. v. 15. we also read in the 2. c. v. 46. of Daniel, that the King Nebuchad-nezzar fell upon his face, and worshipp'd Daniel, and commanded that they shu'd offer an oblation, and sweetodours unto him. Chirist approv'd of the making, and exalting of the brazen ser∣pent, and owens it to have been the type and figure of himself exalted on the crosse, ohn c. 3 v 14. S. Iohn the Baptist wor∣shipp'd
the very latehet of our Saviours shooe the latchet of whose shooes (saith he) I am not worthy to unloose: John. c. 1. v. 27. for which fact St Augustin on that place, concluds him to have been full of the holy Ghost▪ the Patriarch Jacob ador'd, the top of Joeph's rod (a signe, or Image of his re∣gal power) as we read in S Pauls Epist to the Hebrews c. 1 v 2. the Primitive Christians venerated the very shadow, and garments of S Peter and Paul, and receiv'd thereby speciall benefit: as may be seen in the acts of the Apostles  5. v. 15. and c 19 v. 11. and St. Paul in his Epist. to the Philippi∣ans . 2. v. 10. commands us to ho∣nour the name of Jesus, which is
only asign, or Image of our re∣demptiō: as the name Iehoa is of our creation, which was in so gre∣at honour, with the Jewes that the common people durst not utter it: no! nor the very Priests but on∣ly in the time of sacrifice, and so∣lemne benediction: as Phil rela∣tes, writing the life of Moses, nay the very plate on which the name of God was written, on the high Priest's forehead, is calld the plate of sacred veneration, Exodus c. 18. v▪ 36. 38. and we read in the 22. c. v 26 of Ezekiel, that God commanded the temple (which was an Image of his heavenly house) to be honour'd as a holy place, and reprehended those Priest's, who poluted it, saving
thus: her Priests have violated my law, and have prophaned mine holy thinks; they have put no diference be∣twen the holy and prophen. Now let us see did those of the Primitīve Church, ever use or worship Images. Tertulian (who liv'd in the 3 age, in his 2▪ book de Pudici.) affirms, that the Image of Chrīst bearing a lambe on his shol∣ders, was graven on the chalices us'd in Churches, St, Gregory Nysen (who liv'd in the 4th. Century, in his Oration of Theodorus) sayes: that the silent picture painted on the wall doth declare several things, and that it is very profitable, this same holy Father, was wont to weep contemplating the Image of Abraham facrifizing his son Isaac: as
himself testifies, in his ser. preach|'d in Constantinople. S. Basil (who liv'd in the same Century, in his Epist. to Julian the Emperour) after numbering seyeral points of faith▪ which himself believ'd; brings in, the Apostles, Pro∣phets, and Martyers, & then con∣cluds saying thus: the characters of their Images. I do honour and worship, thiefly being this was deliver'd by the Apostles, and not prohibited: and why shu'd it not be shewed painted in all our Churches. & in hisser. of Barlaam, he also sayes, the followīg words: ye famous painters raise-up! and ex∣toll your arts in painting this saint's Image—and likwise let Christ's I∣mage be painted St. Hierome (who liv'd in the year 90. writing the
life of Paula) sayes, that shee was wont to prostrate herself before the cru∣cifix, and ador'd it as if shee had be∣held the Lord crucifi'd bfoe her eyes. S, Crysostome (in his ser. quod ve∣teris et novi Testamenti unus sit Legislator) declar'd, that himself lov'd a picture of melted wax full of piery. and (in his Liturgy) he sayes, that the Priest was wont to how down his head before the Image of Christ: he makes also mention of Christ: Image in his ser. deferia quint Caena Dmini Paladius (who liv'd in the same time, in his 11th. E∣pist.) relates that the Bishop of Jeru∣salem was wont yearly, at the solemnit of Easter, to expose the crosse, to be a∣dor'd by the people, he himself first a∣doring it. St. Cyrill of Alexandria
(who liv'd in the 5 Century, in his homily against Nestor) sayes thus: hail mother of God—through whom the precious crosse is made fa∣mous, and ador'd throughout the world. Caelius Sedulius (who also liv'd in the 5 Century, in his 5th book) sayes the following words: neither is there any, who dose not know, that the Image of the crosse ought to b wor∣shipp'd. S. Gregorie (who liv'd in the same Century, in his 7 book Epist. 5) bids the Bishop Januarius. to take the crucifix and the Jmage of the blessed virgin from the Jewes, who did not give them the due veneration. And in his 53 Epist. (which is to Se∣cūdinus) he sayes thus: I do know that you long for our Saviour's Image, that by contemplating it, you might
burn the more with the love of the Lord, Eusebius (writing the life of Constant the great,) relates, that agreat many of Golden, and Sil∣ver Images were put up in the Churches, which he caus'd to be built, in Palestine, & in his 7. book, c. 14. he affirms himself to ha∣ve seē the Apostles Images, which then were very old, and in great veneration with the people. Da∣mas relates (writing the life of St. Sylvester) that the afore∣said Constantine commanded an Image of pure Gold to be made, which he order'd to be put up in the Church, wherein he was bap∣tiz'd, on the right hand of which, he plac'd the Image of our Savi∣our, and on the left hand, the
Image of St. John the Baptist; he also order'd the Image of our Saviour, of four Angels, and of the twelve Apostles, to be put up in the Church of St. John Latran, in Rome, in order to be venerated by the Christians. Evodius (in his 2. book writing of S. Stephen's miracles) sayes that his Image was put up in the same Church wherein his reliques were pre, serv'd, and that agreat multitude∣of people were vs'd to freqent that Church, out of particular devotion, who venerated both the Image & his reliques. The Disci¦ples of S. Epiphanius, plac'd his Image in the Church which they built in his honour, and were wont to pray most fervently be∣fore
the same Image: as the Fa∣thers of the 7th General Coun∣cil do declare, in the 6th. Action. St. Ambrose (in his Oration of Theodosiu's death, sayes that it was discreetly done of Helena to order the crosse (where upon our Saviour was crucifi'd) to be taken up our of the ground (whe∣re the Jewes absconded it, that it might be worshipp'd by the Chris∣tians: and (in his Epist. de inven∣tion sanctorum Gervasy et Prota∣sy) he declares, that he knew him, who appear'd to himself, to be S. Paul, by his Image, which he had before. S Augustin (in his first book de Consensu Evangelista∣rum) affirms, himself to have seen in several places Christ's Image,
painted betwen S. Peter and St. Paul's Images: and (in his 3th. book of the Trinity c. 10. in his 2. de Doct. Christ. c. 25. and also in his 3. book c. 9) he sayes, that Images are very profitable, in or∣der to move the people to devo∣tion. Metaphrastes (in the life of Constantine the great) Euagri∣us (in his 4t. book c. 26) and Damsenus (in his first book de Imaginibus) do relate, that a pa∣inter endeavoring to raw the I∣mage of Christ, whose splendour when he cou'd not behold, our Saviour himself tooke a peece of white nen and saving it on his face, imprinted there-on the Image of his divine countenance, and after-wards sent it to King
Abagarus, who long'd to see our Saviour, which Image after a∣while (out of of particular vene∣ration) was brought by Philip the General of Mauritiu's ar∣my unto the field, and gain'd the∣reby a most glorious victory from the Persians: as Theopaes re∣lates in his 17th. book. Marianus scotus in his Cronicles (writing of the 39 year) makes mention of an other Image painted after the same manner by our Saviour, in a handkerchief offer'd to him (by a devout woman call'd Vero∣nica) as he sweared carying the crosse to mount alvary, which Image in the reign of Tiberius the Emperour,) was brought to Rome, and there honourably re∣serv'd,
and shew'd to the people every munday and thursday. Se¦veral other Images of Christ, were made even by those who liv'd in his one time: as for example, there was one made by the wo∣man whom he heal'd of the bloody flux, which was set up in the city Penades, where several miracles were wrought upon the account of it: as Eusebius (in his 7 book c. 14th) Sozomenus (in his 5th. book c. 20) and Damascenus (in his first book de Imaginibus) do relate, for a certain herbe which grew at the foot of that Image, when it came to be so high that it cou'd touch the hem of the Image, it receiv'd vertue to heal all kind of distempers, and (as
Sozomenus testifies) when Julia the Emprour order'd to fall it down and to place his own I∣mage in stead of it, his was im∣mediatly consum'd by fire from heaven, which miracle the Pa∣gans seeing, most impiously (by the instinct of the divel) brake our Saviours Image, not conside∣ring, that he who caus'd their Em∣prours Image to be burn'd, might by the same power, cause also fire to come down from heauen, in order to burn both themselves and thier Emprour too, only that his divine goodness and clemency had more patience to expect their conversion of which the Em∣prours Image was uncapable. an∣other Image of Christ was made
by Nicodemus; which a Christian (43. years after it was made) carri'd from Jerusalem to Berith a Village in Syria, where (in de∣ision of our Saviour's Passion) it was by the Jewes crown'd whip∣p'd, pierc'd, &c & vs'd it with all manner of villany as they us'd our Saviour himself: but not with out great miracle for as they pierc'd it, there issu'd out of it, aboundance of water and blood: by which divers maladyes were cur'd, and several Jewes conver ted, seeing these miracles: as A∣thanasius (in his book de Passione Imaginis Domini c. 4th.) and Gregorie of Tours (de gloria martyrum c. 21.) do relate. To which examples may be also ad∣ded
those Images of our blessed Lady; one made by S. Luke, which is to be seen at this very day in the Church of Loretta in Itali; and an other of hers, whch Eudoxia sent from Jeru∣salem to Pulcheria, which shee plac'd near her own seat in the Church, that shee built in Con∣stantinople: as Nicepherus wri∣tes (in his 14th. book c. 2.) I might Produce several other I∣mages, which were made & wor∣shipp'd by those of the Primiti∣ve Church, If I had not suppos'd that any impartial reader might plainly perceive (by what I have already produc'd) that the vse of Images is no new Doctrine i the holy Catholick Church, and
consequently that their worship and veneration, is not prohibited by the second commandment, (as my adversary and his adhe∣rence do falsly teach) for that which is prohibited by this com∣mandment, and also by the scri∣ture in several places, is to wor∣ship, or adore any creature with that honour, which is due to the Almighty God: as formerly the Gentiles did, when they made I∣dols and false Gods; which after∣wards they worshipp'd and ador'd even as if every one of them had been a true, and an Eternal God: wherefore they are alwayes be∣liev'd by those of the Church of Rome to have been Idolators, & impious for soe doing; which
they wou'd not judge, if themsel∣ves were guilty of the same crime, or of any other of that kind: there∣fore the worship which is peculi∣ar to God is commonly call'd by the divines, Cultus atriae that is to say, a soveraign honour, and the Church of Rome most strictly forbids all her members, to give it to any creature: therefore the honour & veneration, which shee alowes to be given to Images, is not that of Latria, or severaign as all the Fathers of the 7th. Ge∣neral Council do declare (in the 7th. Action) but it is an inferi∣or kind of veneration call'd re∣lative, that is to say, that they are worshipp'd, in as much as they represent unto us Godly thing
and are instruments apt to move the people to thinke of what our Saviour & the Saints, have suffer'd & done in this world, so that they serve in a māner as books to those who cannot read, & exci∣tes the people to great devotion, & pietv, which other wise wou'd not have inter'd into their tho∣ughts or imaginations: o that the reader may take notice, how uncharitable the pretended re∣formers do continually preach to their poor ignorant flock▪ that the Papists are Idolators and impi∣ous, by worshipping graven Im∣ages, as Gods, that thereby they might render the holy Ca∣tholick Church odious and abo∣minable, to the very simple peo∣ple,
fearing that any of the wou'd embrace her principles, o offer to find out the real verity of her uncorrpted doctrine. Chap. 9 Proving the invocation of Angels, and Saints to be lawfull,  practis'd by those of the Primitive Church The Angels, and Saints his a special care of us, and we recei∣ve several benefits by their as∣sistance and merits: therefore it is lawfull to invocate them, that they may interced for us to God the antecedent is manifest by the following texs. And the Ang of God call'd t Haga ou of heaven and said unto her, what aileth th Haga? fear not: for God hath ha the voice of the child. Genesis c.
17. and the Angel of the Lord call'd unto him out of heaven and said Abra∣ham, Abraham; lay not their hand up∣on the child, neither do thou any thing unto him, for I know that thou fearest God. Genesis c. 22. v. 11. 12. The An∣gel which redeem'd me from all evil blesse these boyes. Genesis c. 48. v. 16. Then the Angel of the Lord went fo∣rth, & smote in the camp of the Assy∣tian, an hundred and fou score & five thousand. Isaiah c. 37. v. 36. Then the Angel of the Lord Answer'd & said O Lord of hosts! how long will thou not have mercy in Jerusalem, and n the cityes of Juda, against which thou hast indignation these three score and ten years. Zechariah c. 1. v. 12. Michael one of the Princes come to help me. there is none that holdeth with me
in these things, but Michael Daniel , 10. v 13. & 21. But while he thought  these things, behol'd, the Angel of the Lord appear'd unto him in a dream, saying, Ioseph son of David, fear no to take unto thee Mary they wife▪ for that which is conceiv'd in her is of the holy Ghost. Matt. c. 1. v. 20. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones for I say unto ye that in heaven their Angels do alwayes behold the face of my Father, which is in heaven. Matt. c. 18. v. 1. And four & twenty el∣ders felldown before the lambe having every one of them harps and golden vi∣als full of odours, which are the pray∣ers of the Saints. Revelations, c. 5 v. 8. and c. 8. v. 3. & 4. and an other Angel came & stood at the altar, ha∣ving a golden censer, & there was
given unto him much incense, that he shou'd offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar, which was before the throne: & the smoake of the incense which came with the prayers of the Saints ascended up be∣fore God out of the Angels hands. we read in the 2. book of the Macca∣bees c. 15. that Judas Machabeus had seen Onias the high Priest and Jeremiah the Prophet (after their death) interceding to God for the people of Israel, and that this book is Canonical I will pro∣ve in my answer to the next po∣int.) we read also in the 15 c. v. . of Jeremiah that the Lord spoke unto him saying thus: Tho' Moses and Sa∣muel stood before me, yet my minde cou'd not be towords this people cast
them out of my sight, and let th go forth: which words our Lor wou'd not have said; If Moses  Samuel (tho' dead) were not wo to interced for the Jewes: whi may be confirm'd out of Exod c. 32 v. 13. where we read th Moses himself beg'd of the Lor to shew his mercy to the peopl for the sake of Abraham, Isaac, a Israel, his own servants. for (as The∣odoret q. 67. on Exod▪ saye Moses thinking himself so  insufficient to pacifie the Lord he sets down not only his o promise, but also the aforsai Patriarchs merits, that the reb the Lord might be more willi to have commisseration upon th people, and pardon them, whic
then he did: as is manifest by the 14 v. of the same chap. Moses also endeavour'd an other time to pa∣cifie the Lord's fury thro' the aforsaid Patriarchs merits, & assis∣tance: as is evident out of Deut. c. 9. v. 27 wherre he sayes thus: remember they servāts Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: looke not unto the stoubborn∣ness of this people, nor to their wicked∣ness, nor to their sinne▪ Was it not for the sake of Abra∣ham (tho' dead) his son Isaac ob∣tain'd several requests & favours from the Lord? Genesis c. 26. v. 3. 4▪ 5. & 24. wou'd not the Lord divide Salomon's Kindom, & give it to his servants? If it had not been for the sake of David: as may be seen ïn the 3 book of Kings
c. 11. v. 11. 12. was it not for the sake of David Aby as obtain'd? that his son Asa reign'd in Jerusalem: as may be seen in the same book c. 15. v. 4. was it not also for the sake of David (tho' dead) the Lord sav'd the city of Jerusalem from being destroy'd by the Assyrians: as is evident out of the 4th. book of King c. 19. v. 32 & 3. & . 20. v. 6. when Salomon beg'd any great request from the Lord, was not he wont, to set down the merits of David? that thereby he might the sooner obtain his request; as may be seen in the 131. Psalm. v. 1. 10. which is in the Protestant bi∣ble the 132. Psalm. Now let the reader consider what a great happiness it is to ha∣ve
a faithfull friend and Patron in great honour and request with God almighty thro' whoe merits and intercission, one may obtain several benefits, which otherwise wou'd not be granted: as the pre∣misses do evidently make-out, for as God almighty was graciously pleas'd (thro' the bountifullnesse of his infinite mercy) to grant for the merits and intercession of these Patriarches, (who then we∣re but in Limbo Patrum) so many benefits and requests, to those whom they protected in this world why also now in the law of grace wou'd not the same God (most mercyfully) grant us any lawfull request? for the intercession and great merits of his holy Mother,
beloved Apostles, faithfull Mar∣tyres, and true Confessors, who are in great honour and request, residing with himself in eaven; Especially being this dose not de∣rogate to the honour of Christ▪ as I will prove by the following passage. If it be unlawfull to invocate Angel, & Saints either it is because they known not what we say: or because it wou'd derogate to the honour of Christ, who is said to be the mediator betwen God & man, according to that of John in his first Epist. c. 2. v. 1. not for the first, as I have already shew'd and shall confirm it by the following examples. We read in the 4th. book of Kings c. 5.
v. 26 that Eliha knew (tho' abēt) Gehazie's Simonie: and (in the c, 6th. v. 12.) that Elisha also knew what was said in the King of Sy∣ria's private Chamber: & (in the 15th▪ c. v. 10. of Luke) that the Angels of God doth rejoyce at the conversion of a sinner, which is the greatest secret that one can have; yet it can be known to the Angels, and also to the Saints in heaven, either by a dis∣tinct revelation from the clear vision of God's essence, or by the visiō of themselves: as S. Grego∣rie [in his 2. book of Dialogues c. 3.) affirms saying thus: what is it, that there they know not? where they know him who knowes all. Neither dose it derogate to the
honour of Christ, for the Church of Rome certainly believes, Ch∣rist to be the chief Mediator be∣twen God and man: as St Paul affirms, (in his Epist to Timothy c. 2. v. 5.) therefore she dose not allow to invocate Angels or Sa∣ints in order to obtain any re∣quest immediatly and directly from themsleves, for she acknow∣ledges that to be a folly, & con∣sequently not to be in their pow∣er. So that she only allows to beg of them to join their prayers, & intercessiō with those of the faith∣full, that thereby they might the sooner & easier obtain from God their requests, thro' the meri and inecession of Jesus Christ, which is manifest out of
St. Leo's 2 Oration de Jejunio, and also by the publick Orations of the Church, wherein she im∣plores the intercession of Angels and Saints: for she wou'd have them to be efficacious thro' the assistance and merits of Christ; it is therefore they alwayes end with the following words: Per Do∣mium nostrum Jesum Christum Filim um, qui tcum vivit, et regna in unitate spiritus sainti, Deus per osnnia saecula saeulorum A men, whereby the reader may plainly perceve, that the invocations of Saints dose not derogate to the honour of Christ: otherwise St Paul might be accus'd for beseeching the Romans Colossians, Hebres, & Theslalonians, to assist himself in
his prayers, and also to pray for him to God: as is eident by St Paul's own Epistles: to the Ro∣mans c, 15 v. 30. to the Hebrews c. 13. v. 18. 19. to the Colossians c. 4. v. 3. in his first and scond to the Thessalonians c. 5 v. 25. c, 3. v. 1 so that the Adversary must either Confess the invocation of Saints not to dergate Christ's honour; or else to condemn St: Paul's Doctrine: for I dfie him ever to make-out that the inter∣cession of those, who live in this world, is acceptable to God, & nt the intercession of hose, who are cōfirm'd in grace & glory: or that one is prejudice to Christ & the other not Now letus héare the holy Fa∣thers
Authorityes and the practice of the Primitive Church. St Ireae∣us who liv'd in the 2 Century, in his 5th book against hereses) sayes thus: and as Eve was seduc'd that the might avoid God: even so, may was advis'd to obey God that she might become Eves advocate Origines who liv'd in the 3 Century, in his first homily on Ezech:) sayes thus-come Angel and receive the converted from the former error, from the devilish Doctrine—call the rest of your compa∣ions that ye may together instuct in the faith, all those who formerly has een deceiv'd: more of Origen's Au∣thorityes may be seen hom. 3. in Diversa Loca Novi Testamenti hom. 16. in osue, and hom. 26: in Nume. Cornelius (who liv'd
in the same century, in his first E∣pist. sayes thus we are Praying God, & our Lord Jesus Christ that by the inter∣cessions of his own holy Apostles, he may purge out the blemishes of your sinnes. St. Cyprian (who also liv'd in the 3. Century, in his book de Disiplina, et Habitu Virgi∣num speaking to the Vir∣gins) sayes thus: peform spiritually come prosperously, and be mindfull of us. Eusebius Caes. (who liv'd the year 326. in his 13. book de Evang. Praep. c. 7.) sayes, we ouldiers of true piey do daily practise these thing, honouring the friend▪s of God—& praying to them—by whose intercession to God we do freely acknowledge to be much favour'd. S. Athansius (wo liv'd in the same Century in his
ser. in Evangelium, speaking of the blessed Virgin Mary) sayes the following words: incline they hearing to our prayers, and do not for∣get they people—, we cry to thee, be mindfull of us most holy Virgin, who also after your delivery contnu'd a Virgin—Lady & Mistress, and Queen and Mother of God intercede for us. St Hilarius (who liv'd the year 355. in psal  9) sayes that the na∣ture of God dose not want the interce∣ssion of Angels—God being ignorant of nothīg that we do but our own weak∣ness wants it: he has such another Authority speaking of the Apos∣tles, and Prophets intercession expounding the 124. Psalm. St. Basil (who liv'd in the same age, in his Oration of the 40. Marty∣es)
sayes thus: whosoever is oppress' with trouble, let him sly for refuge t these martyres, that he may be ridd o his troubles: and whosoever rejoyces let him Pray to them hat he ay con∣tinue in his prosperityes. And in his 205. Epist. which is to Julian, af∣ter specifying several points of faith which himself beliv'd, he sayes the following words: and I do embrace the holy Apostles, Prophets and invocate them in my supplication to God, that by their intercession he might be mercyfull to me. S. Cyrill of Jerusalem (who liv'd about the same time, Catech. 5.) sayes thus: when we offer this sacrifice we also make mention of those who d'd before us, first of the Patriarchs, Prophets, A∣postles, and Martyres, that God may
receive our prayer by their intercession. S. Ephraem (who also liv'd in the same Century in his ser. de Lau∣dibus Martyrum) sayes the follo∣wing words: we beseech ye most holy Martyres, who for the sake of the Lord readily and willingly suffer'd torments for which ye are all now most fa∣liar with God, that ye may be pleas'd to intercede to the Lord for us poor sinners, that the grace of Christ might light upon us. St. Gregorie Nazian∣zen (who liv'd the year 370, in his Oration speaking to S. Atha∣nasius after his (death) sayes thus and look upon us favorably from a∣love and govern this holy people, nu∣ish and feed us in peace, direct and take us up in the battel, and place us with your self and with those, who are
in the same condtion with you; he implores also St. Cyprian & St. Basil's assistance, in his Oràtions of them (after their death.) St. Ambrose (who liv'd the same ti∣me) sayes the following words: the Anges who are employ'd to asist us ought to be pray'd to, and the Maryres—they can interced for our sins, who with their proper blood wash'd a way if they had any sins—let s not be asham'd to apply them a intercessors of our weakness. More of this holy Doctors Authority may be seen in his 2. book de Virg. in his 10, book in Lucam, expounding the 21. , and in his Preparation be∣fore mass, where he begs the as∣sistance and intercession of the Apostles, Martyres & Cōfessors,
S. Gregorie Nysen (who liv'd the year 380 in his Oration of St. Theodr Mryer) sayes thus: we stand i ed o great favours, intrcde ad pay eanstly to the niversal Ki  Lord for the Coun∣ey—for we , e ex∣ct dangers, the wicked Sithios are t far o dclarig war against s,  for us as a Soudier▪ as a maryer se the liberty of  for your fellow rvant: altho' you hae es the world  you knw th disposition, interest d  of  nture; beg , that these ublick assemblyes ay not give over  the urious, wi∣ed and orbrous  wo'd aise agaīst us and assls our Church∣ and Altars—but if it be requisite  have more assistance and prayers ga∣ther
your consorts the Martyres, and pray along with them, for the prayers o many righteous doth wash away the  of many: admonish Peter, move Paul and John tht beloved Disciple, tha they may take care of those Churches, for whose sake they endur'd chains, suf∣fer'd dangers and death. S. Hierome (who liv'd the year 390, in his Oratiō on Paula sayes thus: earwel O Paula and help with your prayers thy worshipper in his old age—fo you who is present will more easily ob∣tain, what you demand. S. Chriso∣stome (who also liv'd the same time, in his 45. homily, speaking of St. Meletuis) sayes thus: there∣fore let us all together men and wo∣men both young and old pray to holy Miletius &c.
In his ser. speaking of the blessed Lady, he sayes the followīg words: t us recurr to the most holy Virgin Mary Mother of God, that by her interssion e may obtain our request—we beseech ee to intercede for us daily to our Lord Jesus Christ thy own son, that y thee thro' his grace and benignity e may be pardon'd. & in his 66. hom. to the people of Antioch he sayes thus: he who gose in his purple d royal crown laying by his pride raws near the Saints sepulchres, hum∣bly beseeching them to intercede for him  God &c. More of St. Chrysostoms Authorityes may be seen in his 5th. hom. in Matt. in his ser. de Juventio, and Maximio and in his first hom. on St. Paul's first Epist. o the Thessalonians, where he
Numbers several benefit grāted by the Saints intercession & thro' their merits S. Augustin (who liv'd the year 40 in his 7 book against the Donasts , speaking of St. Cyprian) sayes the ollo∣wing words we beseech him to a us with his prayers &c. in his 84. Treatise in John, he sayes, that it was therefore they did not pray for the Martyres as they did for other people who dy'd, because they knew that they did not want their payers; but they wanted the Martyres rayers: and in his 29. Ser: of the Saints (speaking of St Peter's Miracles) he sayes thus: If then the shadow of his body coul'd relieve, how much more now the plenitude of his ver∣tue? If then a certain noise of him passing
prevaic'd to these who beseech'd him,  much  his  gras? f the , he may see ore of St  Athorities,  Vrbis Aposoli:  his  Q  his book  c. 4. and in   n the 19. . of   pro∣,  with the Auth  General Cocil of  Fa∣ers   . & earnest∣  Flianus (then  themselves as   by the . Action: we red in the Bishop of Eu∣ps  to eo the Empr  in the ater end
of this Council that they de∣clar'd themselves to acknowled∣ge, that holy Proerius was regis∣ter'd in the Cathologue of Marty res, & that they beg'd God Almi∣ghty to be favourable & mercifull to themselves thro' his intercessiō all which Authorityes do evidēt∣ly make out that the Catholicks of the Primitive Church where accustom'd to invocate Saints. Chap. 10 Proving that Purgatory, was believ'd by those of the Primitive. Church. For the better intelligence of this point let the reader know, that altho' the sinners crime is forgivē, yet the sinner under gose some temporal punishment: as is mani∣fest Numb: c. 12. v: 1. 2 10, 14;
where we read that when the sin of murmuring was forgiven to Mary, by Moses intercession; yet in punishment thereof she had the leprofie for the speace of se∣ven dayes, and was oblig'd to lev the whole camp during that time. When the Israelites sinn'd against God, and offer'd to rebel against Moses tho' their sinnes ee forgiven thro' the Lord's infinite mercy, and by the inter∣cession of Moses yet in punishmēt of their crime several of them dy'd in the wilderness and never as admited to come to the land of promise Num  14, v. 19. 20, . . 24▪ 3 7. & also when David sin∣n'd against the Lord his crime was forgiven but in punishment
thereof; his son dy'd the  book of Kings , 12 v 13 14 18▪ finally we read in St Paul's first Epist: to the Cormthians,  11 v: 30 that several of the Cormthians were mortifi'd by the Lord and also that some of them dy'd; because they receiv'd unworthily the holy Sacrament, but then their sins has been forgiven: as is evi∣dent by the 32, v, where St. Paul sayes the following words: but when we are judg'd we  chastized, by the Lord, that we shu'd not be con∣demn'd. hereby the reader may plainly  that God dose not  the punishment, as  forgiven the
emency and infinite mercy changes that eternal punishment into some temporal affliction,  if the sinner dose not un∣dergo in this world▪ he must suf∣fe for it after his dath, before ever he shall enter into the Kīg∣dom of eaven, for non is re∣ceiv'd there untill he is even as clean fom all manner of sin, and fault as he was immediatly after his Baptism, as witnesseth that of Iohn : c 21. v 27, This presuppos'd I may lawfully inferr that ther must be some place of temporl punishment  order to purifie and cleanse nos ouls who doe not perform  world, and
sins, to which ternal punishmēt is not due; for it wou'd be a most ūreasonable thig of us to believe that he who immediatly has been in the state of grace and dyes suddenly after speaking an idle word, or committing some other smal offence shu'd be oblig'd to everlasting torments, even as he who suddenly dyes without any kind of repentance after com∣mitting murder, adultry, or some other great crime: therefore be∣ing he cannot inter the into hea∣ven by reason of that small of∣fence he must go to some other place untill he is puri'd which I shall prove by the following ar∣gument. what ever the old and new Testament, the holy Fathers and
Doctors of the Primitive Church, several Councils, true and won∣derfull revelations, affirms; ought to be believ'd by all Christians: but the old and new Testament, the holy Fathers, and Doctors of the Primitive Church, several Councils, true and wonderfull revelation affirms that which the Church of Rome calls Purgatory; to be a place of temporal punish∣ment wherin some souls are cha∣stiz'd and purifi'd after lēving this world: therefore Purgatory ought to be believ'd by all Chris∣tians: the consequence is evident; s we shall see hereafter: and the major cannot be deny'd by a∣ny true Christian: as for the min∣nor, I will prove it after the same
order, werei 's f'd: there∣fore I ill begn  the Auo∣es of the old Testament. We fin in the 6 Ps which is the  n the  English          3.  in  18 . O ,  s c.  8. t.  his
perpetualy, and o casen one in his , is o punish hi sevely  this ite i or∣der , and so concluds w the following words: O Lord  peas'd to,  in this wold—th I  ot wnt tha correctīg ire. And it hall  to psse, that he that is let i z and e that remaineth in Jersalem, shal be call'd oy. when te Lord that hae wash'd away the  of the dagers of zion, & shall have pug'd the blod of Jerusalem from the idt the o by the spirit of jugedment, and by the spirit of burning. Isaih c. 4. v 3. and 4. which text (according to St. Augustin in his 20th. book of the City of God c. 25.) mns the releasment, hich souls do get from the bur∣ning
fire of Purgatory. Micah. c. 7. v. 7. 8. and 9  will look unto the Lord. I will wait for the God of my sal∣vation: my God will heare me, rejoice not against me O! mine enemy when I fall I shall arise, when I sit in dark∣nesse the Lord shall be light onto me. I will beare the indignatiō of the Lord, because I have sinn'd against him, untill he plead my case, and execute judge∣ment for me he will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousnesse. Which words (as St. Hierome affirms in his commen∣tary on the last c. of I saiah) means the releasment of those souls who do suffer in Purgatory fire. Zecha∣riah c. 9. v, 11. you also by the blood of they covenant have brought forth your prisoners out of the pt wherein
there is no water. S. Pete speakïg of those Prisones (in his  Ep. c. 3. v. 18. 19 & 20,) sayes thus. for christ also hath once suffer'd for sins, the just for the unjust (that he might brīg us to God) beig put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit: by which also he went and preach'd unto the spirits in prison; which sometimes were disobedent when once the long suffering of God waited in the dayes of Noah, while the arke was a preparīg, Mlachi. c. 3 v. 3, and he shall sit is a refiner and a purier of silver: and e shall purifie the sons of Levi, and urge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offerīg in righteousnesse. Which text signifies the punishment of Purgatory; as the following Fathers do testifies
Origines hom. 6. in Exod. S. Am∣brose in his commentary on the 36. psal. St Hierme in the expo∣sition of this text, and St. Au∣gustin in his 20th. book of the city of God c. 25. we find in the 2, book of Machabees, c. 12. v. 3. that Judas Machabeus had sent to Jerusalem twelve thousand pee∣ces of silver to be offer'd for the souls of his souldirs, here are the very words of the scripture: and making a athering he sent twel∣ve thousand dracmes of fver to erusa∣lem for sacrfice to be offer'd for nne well and religiously thinking of the Resurection for unless he p'd that they that were slaie should raise againe, it should seem superflous and vain  prayfor the dead and because he coni∣der'd
tha they, which had taken their sleep with Godliness, had very Good grace lay'd up for them. It is therefore a holy and healthfull cogita∣ion to pray for the dead, that tey may e loose from sinnes. perhaps you may Answer, saying that this book is not the word of God, or canonical, and consequently that it's Authority is of no force. but in case it wou'd not be canonical it self, it ought to be sooner belie∣r'd then either Calvin or Luthers nd consequently prefer'd be∣fore their Authorityes; being Ju∣as was always esteem'd to have een a most faithfull servant to God Almighty, and then has een a high Priest of the true Church. Moreover ti's false that
this book is not Canonical, for Tradition and the Authority of the holy Catholick Church, (which is all the testimony we can produce to prove that any book of the whole Bible is cano∣nical or the true word of God) expressly affirms, that this book is Canonical, and consquently the word of God: as may e seen in Innocēt the first's letter to Exu∣perius, in St Cyprian's first book c. 3. in his book de Exoratio Martyry; c. 11. in St. Gregorie Nazianzens Oration de Macha∣baeis, in St, Ambrose's 2. book de Jacob c, 10. 11. 12. in St. Augustīs 2. book against Gaudentus E∣pistles, c. 23 in his 2 book de Doc. Christ. c. 8. & in his 18. book of
the City of God c. 36. and also in the 47 Chap. of the 3. Coun∣cil of Carthage, celebrated the year 397▪ whose very words are these: Item placuit, ut praeter scrip∣turas Canonicas nihil in Ecclesia lega∣tur, sub nomine divinarum scriptura∣rum. Sunt autem canonicae Scripturae, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numeri, Deuteronomium, Jesus nave, Judicum Ruth Regum libriquatuor, Paralip∣menon libri duo, Job, psalterium, Da∣vidicum, Salomonis libri quinque, libri duodecim Prophetarum, Isaias, Jeremia, Ezechiel, Daniel, Tobias, Judith, Ester, Esdrae libri, duo, Macha∣barum libri duo, Novi autem Testa∣menti, Evangeliorum libri quatuor, Actuum Apostolorum liber vnus, Pauli Apostoli Epistolae tredecim, ejusdm ad
Hebraeos una, Petri Apostoli duae, Joānis Apostoli tres, Judae Apostoli una, et Jaco∣bi una, Apocalipsis Joannis iber unus. Whereby the reader may plainly see that my adversary can have no kind of tolerable reason to reject the books of Mchabees, more than any other book of the whole Bible; Now let us heare those texts of the new Testament which speaks of Purgatory Mat. c, 5. v. 2 But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother with∣out a cause shall be in danger of judgment & whosoever shall say to his brother Ra∣cha, shall be in dāger of Coūcil: but who∣soever shall say thou fool shall be in danger of hell fire. Which text ex∣pressly declares the soul to be punish'd after leavīg this world.
for three several sinnes; and that only for the last of them he shall suffer Eternal fire: so that I my lawfully infer, that there must be some other place wherin the souls are punish'd for the two o∣ther sinnes: but that other place cannot be heaven: as is evident; neither is it hell, as the text makes-out: therefore it must be that place of teporal Punish∣ment, which the holy Catholick Church commonly call's Purga∣tory; Which may be confirm'd by the 2 & 6. v. of the same Chap. where we read thus: agree with your adversar quickly whils you are in the way with him, lest the adver¦sary would deliver thee to the judge & the judge deliver thee to the officer. &
thou be cast in prson. verly I say unto thee, thou shal by n means come ou thence till thou hast payed the uttermost farthing. Whereby the reader may see, that the word of God con∣firms the premsses, by bidding us to make penance in this world, lest we shu'd be sent to that pri∣son, out of which  cannot go till we pay the last farthing: that is to sa, untill our souls will be purifi'd from all manner of innes: as the following Fathers do ex∣pressly declare. ertullian in his book de Anima. c 17. S. Cypri∣an in his 4th. book Epist. 2 Ori∣gines hom 35 in Luca Euse∣bius Emisenus hom de piphia. St Ambrose expoundīg the 12. c of Luke & St. Hierome on thee afore∣said
text▪ where he sayes the following words: this is what St. Matthew declares you shall not go out of the prison, till also the small sin be punish'd Matt. c. 12 v. 32. and whosoever speakeh a word against the son of ma i shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him nei∣ther in this world neihern the world. to come. Which words S Matthew wou'd ot have said, If he ha not suppos'd, that some si will be fogiven in the world to come. We fid also the following words in St. Pauls first Epist. to the Co∣rinthians c, 3 v. 15. f any man wre shall be burnt, he shall suffer cosse; but hiself shall be sav'd yet so, as by fire. By which words▪ S. Paul clearly
firms that some souls after leaving this world shall be purgd, and purifi'd by a temporal fire; as the following Fathers do testifie: St. Ambrose in his comentary on this text, & in his 20. ser. on the 18. psal: S Hierome on the 4. Chap. of Amos, St. Augustin on the 37. Psal. & S, Gregorie in his 4. book of Dialogues c. 39. Now let us beare the holy Fa∣thers very words. S. Denis (who has been St. Paul's Disciple▪ in his book de Ecces. Hier, c. 7.) sayes thus: Then the Venerable Bishops do draw near▪ and perform the hoy prayers over the dead, beseechng the divine clemency, to forgive the dead all the sinnes, which he commitd by his human weaknesse, and to place h▪ in
light, and in the region of the living, Terullian (who liv'd in the year 230. in his book de Monogamia) bids acrtain womn, to pray and give offerings for the soul of her de∣ased husband. Origenes (who liv'd in the year 220. ho. 6 on Exod. speaking of the soul's progresse, when it comes to Purgatory) sayes the following words: and when it is arsld there  willbrīg many good wors ad altle iniquity, that  is purg'd and disolv'd even as lead is by re St. Athanasius (who liv'd in the 4 age, in his 34. Question to Antchus, speaking of the Prayer and oblaions of∣fer'd for the dead) sayes thus: If they woud ot receive some benefit by this, certainly there wou'd be no
commemorat▪ on made in grief, orr and nerals—we know the ols  sinners to receive som befit by the  bloody sacriie & by the graific i offer'd for them s our Lord who h the dominion of both the quck a the dead rde'd and commanded. S Cyrill of Ierusaem (who liv'd i the same age, Catech. Myst: .) sayes the following woris: we  pray fr all hose, who dy'd among us, believing the obltion of the holy & terrible sacrifice to be a geat help to those souls, for whom it is offer'd St. Ephrem (who liv▪d the ame time in his lat will: earnestly be eches the people to be alwayes mindfull of himelf in their Prayers St. Bail (who also thē liv'd) instituted an Oration in his Liturgie, in order to
e said for the dead; and on the 9. p of Isaiah, he sayes thus: there  if we wl discover the sinne by infession, we shall dr, even a the y which is eae, and it is t that urrasory fire sould make an ed of  dose not treaten peptua death, d exile, but it grants purgin: a cor∣ng to that of the Apostle, bu hm∣elf shall be sav'd, ye so as b fre. Gregorie NaZanzn (who livd the year 70. in his Funeral Ora∣tion of Caesrius most humbly be∣seeche the Cristians to pray for the sous of the dead and himself prayes: for the soul of Caearius, in the same Oration. St. ppha∣nius (who as been conemporary to St Gregorie, in th end of his ork against Heresis  numbers the
prayers for the dead amongst th doctrine of the holy Catholic Church; and Heresie 75. he call Aerius an heretick, for denying it to be awfull to pray for the de ad. St. Ambrose (who also liv'd a∣bout the same time, in his 2 boo Epist. 8. which is to Faustus con¦cerning his sisters death) saye thus: therefore I do judge that she i not as much to be moan'd, as she i to be oblig'd b prayers, neither is s to he griev'd by your tears; but rath hr soul is to be recommended to G by blations & in his Oratis of The odosius, Valētinianus & Satyrus death, he prays most fervently o their souls, & promisses to offer sa¦crifices for them; And expound the 3, Chap. of St. Paul's Epist.
orinthians, he sayes the follo∣ing words: but whn aul sayes, so, as by fre indeed e decares it he shall be sav'd, but he will suf∣r the punishmet of fire, that he may purg'd b ire and mae sound, and mus not be tortur'd perpetually by nal fire, a the traitous re. he has ch a nother passage in his 20th  in psal 8. St. Gregorie Nys∣n (who liv'd the year 380 in is Oration of the dead) sayes us: wherefore, that both the digni∣ of human nature and free will miht left, and that the evil might cease, ivine wsdom invented this means—t either in this pesent life one must  purg'd by prayers, and exercise of rtue, or after his death to be cleas'd the forace of purging fire—he
cannot be capble to enjoye Cd, unle Pugatory fire will take away the spi dispes'd on the soul. St Hierom (who liv'd in the year 390. in hi pist. to Pammachus concerning  the death of Paulina) sayes thus▪ other husbads dospread violets rose lilyes, and flowers pon the tobs  their wifes; but our Pomachus  uses the balom of alms: knowing  to be written, that as water quenchet fire, even so alms quencheth the sinns; and expounding the 4. chap. of Amos, he also sayes thus: according to tha, whih we read in St Paul; he shall be sav'd, yet so as by fire: therefore he ho is sav'd by fre, is hurry'd a∣way as if  were a fire-brand out of the bunig slame. St Chrisostoe (who liv'd in the year 398 hom 41 on St
uls first Epist. to the Corinthi∣s speaking of the dead) sayes e following words: lt us assst um, not with tears, but with prayers  supplicaions, alms and oblations;  these things has not been rashly vnted; neither is it in vain that we ember those wody'd, in the divi∣ Mysteries, and that we pray for m, beseehing the expos'd lambe, ho takes away the sinnes of the world at thence forth they might have some solation—therefore let us help m and let us perorm their comme∣nation; for if obs sacrfice made sa∣sfaction for his ons! what do you ubt? if thoe who dy ha some solation we effeing sacrifice for m More of St. Chrisstom's Au∣thority may be seen, in my answer
to the first point? and in his  hom in Ioann & 2 in act a Apos St Augustin (who liv'd in th year 426. in his 21. book of th Cty of God c. 27) sayes, that the are some Saints, who ater thei death gose straight to heaven an afterwards can help othrs: an that there are others of such a bad life, who after their death are no sav'd, neither can they help others and finally that there are others, who after their death cannot go straight to heaven by the vertue of their own proper merits; but that they can be reliev'd, by the merits and good works of their friends; and in the 16th chap of the same book, (speaking of the infants, who immediatly dye after
eir Baptism) he sayes thus: It is t only that Eternal punishment is  prepar'd for them; but neither shall ey suffer Purgatory torments; and  te 24 Chap. he puts a question quirīg, why dose not the Chur∣h pray for those who dye with∣ut repentance; & answers sayīg hus: Ti's because they are computed be of the divels party—but the hurch & faithfull's prayers are heard  the behal of others, who did not have themselves so ill in this life, ither did they deserve to go directly heaven; In his book of Homil yes om. 16. he sayes, that those who s sinnes deserving temporal unishments, shall go thro' pur∣tory fire according to that of ul. he shall be sav'd, as by fire.
And expounding the 37. psalm. he sayes thus: that ire is slighted because ti's said he shall be sav'd; ti's sure▪ but altho' he shall be sav'd by fire; yet that fire is more grievous than any thing, that a man can suffer in this life. In his 2. book de Genesi c. 20 (speaking of him who makes not good use of his life) he sayes thus: after this life, he shall either suffer the purging fire, or eternal pu∣nishment; & in his book de Cura pro Mortuis e. 1. he sayes the ollowing words: we read in the Machabees that sacrifice has been of∣fer'd for the dead but altho' it wou'd never be read in the old Testament, yet the Authority of the whoe Church which is manifest in this custom, is not weaks, where in the priests prayers,
which are offer'd to God at his Altar, the commemoration for the dead has also it's one place. and in the 4 c of the same book he sayes thus: sup∣plications for the souls of the dead ought not to be omttted, which are to be made for all those who dy'd in the Chistia and Catholick society, tho' their names be nt specifi'd the Church receives it vnder a General mmemoration, that it might be offer'd by the holy publick mother for them, even as for those who has not parents oy children, relation or friends to remember them; and in the 18. c. speaking of the sacrifices, pray∣ers, and alms which are offer'd for the dead) he sayes the follo∣ing words: they do not avai to all those for whom they are offer'd, but
only to those who deserv'd it when they liv'd, but because we can not dis∣cern who are those, it must needs be offer'd for all Christians; in his 9th. book of Confession c. 13. he earnest∣ly beseeches others to pray for the soul of his mother Monica; and in his book of heresie c. 53. he calls Aerius a heretick for not allowing sacrifice to be offer'd for the dead; more of his Autho∣rity may be seen in my answer to the first point. Now let us heare the Council decrees. It was enacted in the 29 Chap. of the 3. Council of Carthage the year 397. that the holy sacrament shu'd not be re∣ceiv'd by any, but by those who wou'd be fasting, and in case
that there wou'd be any office to be perform'd in the afternoon, for the dead, that it shu'd be only perform'd in prayers with∣out offering the holy sacrifice. It was also decreed in the 47. hap. of the 4. Council of Car∣thage celebrated the year 398 that in prayers and oblations there shu'd be a commemoration made of those who accidentally would dye in their Journey or by sea, Jf they executed attentively the law of penance. Likewise it was enacted in the 34 chap of the first Council of Bracara (now call'd Braga a City in Portugal the year 412.) not to pray for the souls of those who wou'd kill themselves; and in the 39 chap.
of the same Council the clergy where commanded to divide the ablations which wou'd be offer'd amongh themselves, that equaly they might be oblig'd to pray for the dead. It was also decreed in the Council of Cavaillon (a town in France the year 40) that they shu'd pray in their solemn Masses for the souls of the dead c. 16. which may be seen de Con∣see Dist 1. Can. Visum est; and the same was practis'd before in France: as is evident by the 6. Canon of the Council of Vasens produc'd in my answer to the first point. But that I may not be too tedi∣ous in proving the minor, I shall conclude with the following re∣velations.
St. Gregorie relates (in his 4th. book of Dialogues . 40) that the soul of Paschasius appear'd to the holy Bishop St, Germas, and ould him that God was pleas'd to release him∣self ou of Purgatory by his pra∣yers; he also relates (c. 55) that the soul of a certain monke appear'd to himself, and ould him that it as releas'd by the vertue of thirty mases which he order'd to be said for him. St. Gregorie the bishop of Tours (in his book de Gloria Confesorum c 5.) af∣firms that the soul of Vitulina appear'd to St Martin, and ould him that it suffer'd the punish∣ment of Purgatory by reason of a smal sine which she commited
ted in this life. Venerable Bede (in his 5. book of the Historie of Englād, c 13) relates that terrible vision of Driethelme, who after his death reviv'd and tould won∣derfull things concerning hell, Purgatory, and Paradise. Petrus Damianus (in his pist to Desi∣derius) relates that the soul of Severinus the Bishop of Coliein appear'd to a certain Priest and tould that he sufferd in purga∣tory, because when he was a live he did not use to say his canoni∣cal hours in distinct times, but said all in the morning, that he might spend the whole day at∣tending temporal affairs & also St. Bernard (writing the life of St. Malachias) relates that his
Sisters soul appear'd to St. Mala∣chias, and tould him that it suf∣fer'd the pains of Purgatory. and Gulus Abbas (wiīg the life of St. Bernard in his first book c. 10 sayes that one of St. Bernards monks (ho dy'd) ap∣pear'd to St Bernard, and tould him that he was relast out of purgatory by his prayers. It is also to be seen in the life of St Anselmus that he was for a ole twelve-moūth offering sacrifices for the releasment of a certain friends soul, who was punish'd in Purgatory, but was releast thro' the merits of God and by his continual prayers. several o∣ther revelations might be produ∣c'd, which for brevity sake  o∣mit
to inse here: for I suppose what I have already produc▪d to have evidently made out the ve∣rity, of my minor, and also to have fully satisfi'd the reader. Chap 11 Proving that all those of the Primitive Church had not the word of God in their Mother togue, and that the reading thereof is not profita∣ble (or generaly allowed) to all people. There were severall nations in the first five centuryes who did not generally understand either the Syriack, Hebrew, Greeck, or Latin Togue: therefore there were several nations in the first five centuryes, who had not the word of God in their own ton∣gue▪ the antecedent is evident
Acts Cap 2. as may be seen in my answer to the adversary's 3. point. And  prove the consequence thus: the word of God was nei∣ther written, or translated into any other language in the first five Cnturyes, but only in the aforesaid? as all ancient writters do unanimously affirm; therefore there were several natons in the first five Centuryes, who had not the word of God in their own tongue, who conseqently cou'd not rea the Scripture: nav those who cou'd understand some of these languages, had no General accesse to the reading thereof; for in those times there were but few exampls  of it, which were only in Manu-script (for the art
of Printing was not then found∣out, nor in a long tme after) & researv'd by the Church: as St Denis the Arepagite declares (in his book de Eccles. Hier.) saying, that the acred mysteries were kept secred from the commonality; whereby it appears that it was then needlesse to prohibit them to read the scrpture; whereas they were otherwise nder'd by the aforsaid impediments; It also appears that the reading thereof in the Mother tongue is not ne∣cessary for all nations; for if it were; certainly those of the Pri∣mitive Church wou'd translate it into several other languages; and the Apostles, who had the gift of all tongues (Acts c. 2.)
wou'd not only write the new Testament in Greek, Hebrew, & atin, (as they have done) but also in other languages in which they preach'd the gospel through out the universal world, accordīg o that of St. Paul to the Romans . 10 v. 18. neither wou'd S. Paul write in Greeck, but in Latin to the Romans, whose vlgar lan∣guage was not the Greeck, but the Latin tongue; and St. Peter and St. James wou'd not write in Greeck their Epistles to the Jewes, bu in the languages of those countryes wherein they were dispers'd, which then have been the Iewes maternal langua∣ges, and not the Greeck: neither finally wou'd St. Iohn write his
first Epist in Greeck to the Par∣thians, whose, maternal Langua∣ge was not the Greeck but an∣other distinct Language; where∣by it plainly appears that nei∣ther the Apostles or the Primitive Church ever believ'd that it was necessary for all nations to have the word of God in their own tongue. Now let us see, who are those, that are oblig'd to, expound read, and interpret the word of God, to thew which I will produce the followin Authorityes. St. Basil (in his 25 Qvestion) sayes, that it is the superiors obligatio (that is to say the pastors) to know and earn those things, whih afterwards they ought to teach others, but of others not
know more then behoueth them; and S. Augustin (in his first book de moribus Ecclefie c. 1.) puts the Question inquiring, what man if judgment doth not understand that the exposiition of the scripture is to be ask'd of them who by their profession are Doctors of the Church. which may be further confirm'd by the Eunch's example (Acts c. 8. v. 30. 31 & 35) for when Philip ask'd him did he understand what he as reading out of Isaiah he▪ an∣swer'd saying, how an I understand it, except some man should guide me wherefore he desir'd Philip to sit with him, in order to expound it to him, which Philip willingly perform'd (knowing that it was his obligation) whereby it ap∣pears,
that the Eunch, tho' a man of great Authority (with Qeen Candace) yet did not presume to interpret the scripture himself; but ask'd thê meaning thereof from one of those, who were ap∣pointed by God in order to in∣struct and teach others; accor∣ding to that of St. Paul to the E∣phesians c. 4. v. 11 12▪ & 14 saying tus: and he gave some Apostles and some prophets, and some Evangelists & some pastors, and teachers for the pe∣fectig o the Saints, for the worke of the ministery, for the edifying of the bo o Christ; tat we hence forth may be no more children toss'd to and fr, and carri'd about with every wind of Doctrine by the slight of men and cuning craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive. to prevent which danger St. Paul himsel his Epist. to the Hebrew. 13 v. 17) expresly commands us to obey the pastors, and to submit our selves to their judgments hom God imploy'd to rule us, and watch over our souls, for hich they must give an account for the want of which submissi∣on, and due obedience to the lawfull Pastors, and Doctors of the true Church ti's ast la∣mentable prospect to behold the miserable condition, wherein those of Ireland, England, Scot∣land, Holland &c are, ever since they unfortunatly (by the apos∣acy of Luther, and Calvin in the 16 age) have deserted their
true and lawfull mother, the Chuat Rome, which is (as St. August affirms in his first book of Symbol to the Cateched c. 6) the holy Church, the only Church the true Church, the Catholick Church, that fights against all hereitcs, yet cannot be convine'd, all hereies deserts he, even as usless twigs, that are cut from the vine, but she still remains in her root, in her vine and in her charity. which cha∣racter the pretended reformers cannot give to any of their own new Conventicles; who are alwa∣yes in a continual confusion, ne∣ver agreeing among themselves, for every different sect of them supports the tenets of it's own doctrine by some misinterpreted
text of scripture (even as those hereticks of the Primitive Chur∣ch which is so inculeated in their brains, that each of them is rea∣dy to sacrifice his life for the de∣fence of his own particular Doc∣trine: the Lutherans condemning the Calvinists, the modern Pre∣byterians condemning the refor∣m'd Church of England, the Ana∣aptists, and Quakers despising all others, in repect of their own purity; some of them admiting all the books of scripture to be ca∣nonical, others affirming part of it to be apocriphall; some adding to their Bibles, that which they suppose the Apostles either ne∣glected, or forgot; others dimi∣nishing, and taking away what
in their opinion were first put-in over-plus, which now a dayes they fīd disagreable to their own prin∣ciples; by reason of which altera∣tion, several of their Bibles do differ in many places; which is to be admir'd, for how durst they be so presumpious? as e alter or cor∣rupt it, being he is curs'd, who adds to, or diminisheth the word of God. Revelation, c. 22. v. 18. 19. for since we are all certain that the first Bible, which the holy Catholick Church receiv'd from the Apostles, (and us'd it for the space of 14. hundred and od years, after Christs birth) was written by the inspiration of the holy Ghost▪ what kind of any to∣lerable pretence can they have
now after so many ages to alter and corrupt it, whereas very of∣ten the alterīg of one letter chan∣ges the sense of a whole sentence; much more whē they alter words, ay whole sentence! as if what God ordain'd in the beginig, had now need to be corrected by their wisdom; to such presumptious people might be we apply'd the following words of Christ Matt. c, 7. v. 6. give not that which is holy unto the dogs; neither caye our pearls before swine, lst they trample them under their feet, and turn again, and rent you. So that it appears if those corrupters cou'd coake y any pretention their ungodly de∣sign, that they wou'd not leave one text in the whoe scripture,
which they find disagreable to the∣ir own principles, but what they woud a teror corrupt; & if in case any zelous Christian shu'd offer to diswade their followers from perusing it after that corruption, they wou'd imprudently answer, (as they do now) that if they shud be hinder'd from reading the word of God in their own tongue; that they wou'd be kept in igno∣race and darkness, as the Pa∣pists are; so that as the serpent deceiv'd Eve perswading her to eat of the forbidden fruit, that she might come to the knowledge of good and evil (Gen. c. 3) even so the divel by his subility and ambuss deludes the poor igno∣rant people perswading them to
read expound and interpret their corrupted Bibles, and not to be beholding to the Church or past∣rors, who might deceive them, in teaching that which wou'd be contrary to the word of God, to prevent which, now their very tinkers, coblers, butchers, tail∣ers, and all sort of curious, and ignornt mechaicks do take the liberty of interpreting and expounding the whole Bible to their own ruine and destruction, 2. Petri c. 3. v. 16. for how can such ignorant people understand, or expound either o themselves, or to others the prophesie of Eze∣kiel, of Daniel the Revelaions of St. Iohn? where a S. Herome affirms, every sentence is a mist∣tery:
which of them can expound the Canticles, or what Salomon meāt by those similitudes of Gods Church? or the following texts? I am the Lord they God visiting the iniquit of he Fathers upon the child∣ren unto the 3. & 4. Generation Exod. c. 20. v. 5. which seems to be contradicted by that of Fzekiel c. 18. v. 20 saying thus: the soul that sinneth it shall die, the son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, we are expressly commanded by the 20 c. v. 2. of Exodus to ho∣nour our Fathers, and mothers. But it is said in the 14. Chap. of Luke v. 26 that he  heats not his Fa∣ther and mother—cannot be the disci∣ple of Christ. Moreover Deutero∣nomie c. 6. v. 13. it is written, that
thou shall fear the Lord thy Gd & serve him, and war by his Name. Which seems to be conradcted by that of St. Mat. c. 5. v. 34. where we read thus. I sa unt yo swear not at all. these and several other texts (which ight seem to the unlearned to contradict each others, and also the misteres of the holy scripture) do excee the poor ignorant people's under∣standing and weake capacity, nay the very Disciples of Christ▪ cu'd not understand the prop esis of the old Testament, untill their understanding were open'd, whe∣reby they came to their true knowledge: as evidently appears Luke c 24. v. 27. and 45 where we read the following words. and
begining at Moses and all the prophets he expuded unto them that things concerning himself; then he opened their understanding that they might understand the scriptures. For want of which understanding in the law of God, the pretended refor∣mers, and also the ancient here∣ks of the Primitive Church, deserted their true Mother, the holy Catholick Church; by misin∣terpreing the word of God; as for example: the Aerians dening te 2. person of the Blssed Tin∣t to be God, and alleging for their ground, that of St. John c. 17. v.  saying thus: holy Father keep through thine own Name, thoe who ou hast given me, that they may be one as we are▪ the Eunomians
asserting the holy Ghost not to be God, and producing for their Authority that of Christ Matt. c. 11. v 27. where he sayes thus: all things are deliver'd unto me by my Father, neiher knoweth any man the Father, save the son' and he to whom∣soever the son will reveal him the Eutychians affirming, the divine nature in Christ to have been converted into his human nature, and alleaging for their ground that of St John c. 1. v, 14. where we read the following words. & the word was made lesh, and dowleth among us. The Berengarians, Wicklefians, Husites, Lutherans, and Caluinists err'd so grossly & in so many texts of scripture, by reason of the great liberty they
tooke in interpreting, and ex∣pounding it to the advantage of their own design that their errors (i they were all related) woud require a whole book to them∣selves; so that it plainly appears, that the reading, and interpre∣ting of the serpture is not pro∣fitable to all people, & specially to those, who do not ecur for the interpretation thereof to the holy Catholick Church, which has a▪ promise of the infallible asistan∣ce of the holy Ghost to the con∣sumation of the world Matt c. 2 v. 2. so that the Church of Rome had great reason to hunder the ignorant sort of people, (who might easily be deceiv'd) rom pe∣rusing it, with-out having license
from their respective Bishops, & especially in those countryes where heresie abounds and where Bibles are corrupted; fearing lest that instead of acquiring more knowledge thereby, they might peradventure fall into greater ignorance, or some heresie as the aforsaid sectaries have done; & in so prohibiting she imitate the example of fond parents, who keeps all sort dangerous weapons from the hands of their children & forbids them all kind of diea, which might occasion, or creat any ill distemper. Chap. 12 Proving that the preten∣ded reformers Doctrines are but a heap of several old heresies lawfully condem∣n'd by the Primitive Church
Having sufficiently made-out by the same Authorityes (which my adversay in his Challenge de∣fies to be produc'd) that the old and present Church of Rome is still the same in prīciples; ti's now fit that I shu'd let my adversary know what principles himself, & the rest of the new reformers do embrace; I will only produce the following point. 1 The Aerians demolish'd, and threwdown the Altars where up∣on the holy sacrifice were wont to be offer'd; as the following Fathers do relate: St. Athanasius in his Epist. de fuga sua, Theo∣doretus in his 4th. book of His∣tory c. 19. & 2. and Ruffinus in his 11. book c. ,
Martin Luther, who apostated from the Church of Rome the year 1517. and John Calvin who did the same the year 1538. cau∣s'd alo the Altars of those Chur∣ches, which ere under their jurisdictions, to be throwdown & demoish'd: as may be seen in Luther's boo de Formula Missa pro Ecclesia Wittmbergeni. & in Calvin's 4th. book of Institu∣tions c. 18. 2 The Arians rejected all tra∣ditions, which were not written in the word of God: as St. Au∣gustin in his first book against Maximius c. 2. & last, testifies; which heresie the Nestorians, & utychians held afther-wards: as appears by the first Action of the
2 General Council of Nice, the Nitorians errors were condem∣n'd by the General Council of Ephese the year 41. as may be seen Tomo 3 Cociliorum. Luther in his commentary on St. Pauls pist. to the Galaans c 2. and Calvin in his 4. book of In∣stitutions . 8. held also the same heresie 3 The Aerians and Eunomians deny'd that Images ought to be venerated: as the Father of the 2 Council of Nice, do relate in the 6. Action John Calvin in his first book Chap. 11. and in his  4 book c. 9. and now all the reformers do teach the same 4 The Aerians held that there
is no difference between Bishops and Priests, but that they are of equal dignity and jurisdiction: As St. Epiphanius heresie 75. & St: Augustin heresie 3. do write. Luther in his book of the Cap∣tivity of Babylon cap. de Ordinis Sacramento, and adversus falso nominatum ordinem Episcoporum and Calvin in his 4. book of In∣stutions c. 3 held likewise the same hereie, which now the presbyte∣rians, and several others doe em∣brace 5 The Aerians did not judge it lawfull to pray for the dead, or to offer any sacrifice or alms for their releasment, and did not be∣lieve that there was any place of temporal punishments after this
life; as St, Augustin heresie 33 and St. Epiphanius heresie 5 do relate; the Cerinthians held the same as, St. Epiphanius writes heresie 8. the Cerinthians er∣rors were comdemn'd by the Ge∣neral Council of Ephese the year 431. as may be seen tomo 3. Conciliorum; as for the Arians errors they have been condemn'd by all the following Councils (viz) by the Council of Alexan∣dria the year 3 5. tomo 1. Concilio∣rum, by the Councils of Rome which sate the year 37. and the year 369. by the first General Council of Nice the year 325. the first General Council of Con∣stantinople the year 381. and by the Council of A reminium which sate the year 359. all which Coun∣cils
are to be seen tomo 2. Con∣ciliorum, their errors were also condemn'd by the General Council of Ephese the year 431 tom. 3. Conciliorum by the Coun∣cil of Calcedon, that sate the year 451 tom. 4. Counciliorum, and by the Fathers of the 2. Council of Constantinople the year 536. which may be seen tomo 5. Con∣ciliorum. Luther in his Epist. to the Val¦dinians & Calvin in his & book of Institutions c. 5. taught also this last point of the Aerian heresie about Purgatory, which now all their followers do firmly believe; 6 The Novatians believ'd that confirmation was no sacrament
as Theodoretus in his 3 book de Haere. Fab. writes; & the Donatists believ'd the same: as Optatus, in his 2 book against Perminian relates: Luther in his book of the Cap∣tivity of Babylon cap. d Confir∣matione, and Calvin in his 4th, book of Institutions c. 19 did embrace, & teach the same heresie 7 The Novatians held that the Church had no power to forgive sins committed after Baptism, & consequently they did not allow auricular confession, or that the Church cu'd grant Indulgence as all the following Fathers do write St, Cyprian in his 57. Epist. to Pope Cornelius St. Epiphanius heresie 59 St Augus∣tin
heresie 38 and Theodoretus in his 3 book de haereticis fabu∣lis; the Novations errors have been condemn'd by the Coun∣cil of Carthage the year 252. by the Council of Rome the year 253. by the Council of Ita∣ly the same year & by the Council of Arles the year 452. as may be seen omo 1. and 4. Concilio∣rum. Luther in his book of the Capi∣tivity of Babylon Cap. de extre∣ma unctione, & Calvin in his 4. book of Institutions c. 19 held also this point of the Novatian heresie. 8 The Donatists gave out that the Catholick Church fell from the true faith of Jesus Christ,
and that themselves were renew∣ing it again in Africk: as Opta∣tus in his 1. 2. & 6. book against the Donatists, and St. Augustin heresie 69. and in his book de v∣nitate Ecclesiae c. 12. do relate. Luther in his discourse tomo 2. cap. de partibus and Calvin in his 4th. book c. 2. likewise gave-out that the holy Catholick Church fell visibly from the true faith, and that themselves were reviving it again:  therefore they & their followers are call'd reformers▪ 9 The Donatists held that the holy Eucharist ought not to be ador'd, they brake-down the Al∣tars, and gave the blessed sacra∣ment to their dogs: as Optatus
in his 2. & 6 book against Per∣minian, and St. Augustin in his 2. book against Petilian c. 51. 60. in his 3 . book c. 40. and also in his 163 Epist. do relate. Luther in his book de Eucharis∣tia ad Waldenses, and Calvin de vitand is superstiionibus, held likewise that the holy Eucharist ought not to be ador'd: 10 The Donaists deny'd the Pope of Romes spremacy: s O∣patus and St. Augustin do declare in the aforsaid books. Luther in his book de potestate Papae and assertione articuli 25. and Calvin in his 4th book of Institutions c. 6. deny'd the same. 11 The Donatists reprov'd the
life and vows of monks and reli∣gious people: as also Optatus & St. Augustin write in the afore∣said books; Vigilantius and Pe∣tilianus reprov'd the same; as St. Hierome in his book against Vi∣gilantius, and St. Augustin in his 3. book c: 40 against Petilianus do affirm but the Donatists er∣rors were declar'd to be false & erronious Doctrines by the Coun∣cil of Rome the year 313. by the Councils which sate in Africk in the time of Jnocentius the first being the begining of the 5. Century and by several other Councils Marti Luther writing of the monastical vows held also this last point of the Donatists here∣e,
that he might have some kind of pretence to dispence with himself in his three religious ows & merrie Cathrine the Nun, whom he deluded out of her monastery; our Saviour Iesus Christ most strictly commands us to be ware of the doctrine of such false Prophets, and he tells us, that we shall know them by their fruits; here are his very words. Be∣ware of false prophets, which come to you in sheps clothing, but in wardly they are ruvening wolves. ye shall know them, by their ruits: do men a∣ther grapes of thorns, or igs of this∣tles? even so every good tree bringth forth good fruit, but a bad ree bngeth forh evil fruit. Matt c. 7. v. 15. 16. & 17.
12 The Eustachians endeavor'd to demolish and extirpate the Ecclesiastical convents: as socra∣tes in his 2 book c. 3 and sozo∣menus in his 3. book c. 13, do re∣late; the Eustachians errors have been condemn'd by the Fathers of the Council of Gangris, which sae the year 324. Luther an Calvins Disciples did embrace this Eustachian error, for they threw-down all the convents and monastarves of those Countryes and Provinces, wherein they made any conquest. 13 All the following hereicks rejected matrimony & den'd it to be a Sacrament, as these Fathers do write of their heresie; Simon Magus: as St Augustin in his book
e hereibus c, 1. Nicolaites as t. Epiphanius heresie 25 Titia∣us as St. Irenaeus in his first book. . 31▪ Admiani, as St. Augustin eresie 31 the Manicheans as St. Augustin heresie 46 the usta∣hians as socrates in his 2. book . 33. Marcian as St Hierome in is first book against Jovinianus, and the Prisillanists: as St Leos  Epist dclares; the Prisillanists errors were condemn'd by all the following Councils (viz) by the Council of Caesaragust the year 8. by the Council of Toleto the year 400 the Council f Bur∣deaux the ear 385. and by the Council of Spaine in the year 447 which Coūcils are to be seen omo 2 &  Conciorum
Luther in his book de captivitate cap de matrimoni & Calvin in his 4 book of Institutions c, 19. held also that matrimony is no sacrament 14 Iovinianus held that there are no venial sins, but that all sins are mortal, as St. Hierome relates in his 2 book c, 15 & 16. against Jovi∣nianus, and also St. Augustin he∣resie 28; the Pelagians were of the same opinion as St. Hierome wri∣tes in his 2 book against them Jovinianus's errors were condem∣n'd by the Fathers of the Coun∣cil of Milan, which ate the year 390 tomo secundo Con∣ciliorum; and so were the Pela∣gians errors by the following Councils (viz) by the Milevian
Council the year 416 by the A∣ican Council the year 48, as y be seen tomo  Conciliorum and also b  ral Council of  which e the year 43  Conci∣orum Luther assertione articuli 32 & alvin in his 2 book of Insu∣ons c. 18 and in his 3 book c 4 eld likewise that all sins are mor∣l. 15 Simon Magus and Menander eld that Christs true flesh is not lly present in the holy Eu∣harist: as St. Ignatius declares  his Epist. to those of Smyrna, f which Theodoretus makes ention in his 3. dialogue, other reticks of the Primitive
Church held the same, as S Cyrill writes in his Epist. to Ca¦losirius, Tho' Luther never expresl affirm'd this point of the old he ree; yet all his Disciples do en¦deavou to defend it; and so di Calvin in his book de Caena Do¦mini, (where he reprehends Lu¦ther for not holding it,) and als in his 4 book c. 17. 16 Simon Magus held that fait alone is suicient for salvation and consequently that good wo¦kes are needless in order to sa¦vation: as St. Irenaeus in his fir book c. 20. and Theodoret de heretic is fabulis, do write Eunomius held the same erro as St. Augustin in his book d
eresibus declares, c. 54 Luther in his book de libertate hristiana, and Calvin in his 3. ook of Institutions c. 19. held o the same error, that thereby ey might provoke others to be ven to all kind of vices as them∣lves were. 17. The Eunomians held that e reliques of Saints ought not  be veerated, as Magnes in s 4 book against Theostines firms▪ and Vigilantius held the e error: as St. Hierome writes  his book against Vigilantus ut the Eunomians errors have een condemn'd by the . Coun∣il of Rome the year 369. by the eneral Council of Constantino∣e the year 381 tomo secundo
by the Council of Calcedon which sate the year 451 tomo 4. Coūciliorum & also by the Coun∣cil of Constantinople the year 553. tomo 5 Conciliorum Luther in his  de cruce and in his book de missa abroganda, held the same and so did Calvin admonitione de reliquiis 18 Vigilancius affirm'd that it is unlawfull to invocate Saints, as St. Hierome writes in his book against Vigilantius's errors. Luther in his book de Eucharis∣tia ad Waldenses, and Calvin in his 3 book of Institutions c. 20. believ'd and held the same error. 19 The Massalians rejected the fast commanded by the Church as St. Epiphanis heresie 8. and
Theodoretus in his 4. book c. 11. do relate; the Aerians did the same: as St. Augustin declares in his book of heresie c. 33. and so did the Eustachians as St. Epi∣phanius heresie 75. and Socrates in his 2. book c. 33. do write. Calvin in his 4th. book of In∣stitutions c. 12 rejected the same: which error both his and Luthers Disciples do willingly embrace, that théy might indulge their own bodies, whilest they are in this world. 20 Thë Massalias held that holy order is no sacrament: as St. Damascenus relates in his irst book of haeresie. the Massa∣ians errors were condemn'd by he Fathers of the Council of
Syda, who sate the year 383. as may be seen Tomo▪ 2. Conci∣liorum, and by a nother Council in the Orient the year 417 Tomo 3. Conciliorum Luther in his book of the Cap∣tivity of Babylon cap. de ordine, held also that holy order is no Sacrament, which error his Disci∣ples do now firmly believe. 21 Helvidius raught that the Blesled Virgin Mary bore child∣ren to Joseph, who were brothers to Iesus Christ; as St. Hierome relates in his book against Hel∣vidius's errors, which were con∣demn'd in the Council of Milan the year 390. as may be seen Tomo 2. Conciliorum. Calvin ad Caput 1. Lucae af∣firm'd
the same error, which se∣veral of his followers do now certainly believe. 22 Eusebius in his 3. book of his∣tory c. 25. and St. Hierome in his book de viris illustribus, do make mention of certain hereticks, who deny'd the Epist. of St. James, o Juda, the 2. Epist. of St Peter, & also the 2. & 3. of St. John to be canonical Luther in his prologue on these Epist. rejects St James and Juda's Epistles; and he doubts of the rest to be canonical. 23 The Marcionites deny'd the revelations of St. John to be ca∣nonical, as Tertullian relates in his 3. & 4. book against Marcion the Theodotians deny'd the same
as St. Epiphanius wries hereie 51. & 54. the aforesaid Martiontes did also deny St. Pauls pist. o the Hebrews to be canonical, as St. Hierome declares in his pre∣face on St. Pauls Epist. to Tius, and so did Arius, as Theodretus relates in his preface on St. Pauls Epist. to the Hbrews. Luther in his preface on the old Testament affirms the evelation not to be canonical, and in his prologe on that to the Hebrews he sayes likewise that it is not canonical 24 The Marcionites, & Basilidi∣ans held that all the old Testamēt was apocryphal; as St. Irenaeus relates in his book c. 20. 22. & 29. the Manicheans held the same
as St Epiphanius affirms heresie 66. but the Maniheans errors were conden'd by the General Ephesian Council, the year 431. Too . Concilioru, and also by the Council of Rome the year 444. which is to be  in the sae Tom. as for th Mini-teors, they  bn cdem∣n'd by the Geral Conil o Calo the  51. oo 4. Conciliorum, and by the  Coun∣cil of Constaninle the year 553. where also the  er∣rors were condemn'd, as may be seen Tomo 5. Conciliorum. Lur and Calvins Disciples are something milder than the aforesaid hereticks, for they do no  tha all the old Tsta∣ment
is apocriphal, yet théy deny several books of it, to be cano∣nical, and chiefly those books, which vidently do falsifie their own principles. If I had not suppos'd that the premisses might sufficiently de∣monstrate, what Doctrines my ad∣versary and the reformers do maintain; I wou'd produce seve∣ral other points of old heresies, which also they maintain, but lest I shu'd be too troublesome to thè reader, I will only conclude with the following passage. Whosoever maintains or hath for his principles the aforesaid points, is lawfully accus'd, for maintaining old heresies, false and erronious Doctrines confu∣ted
by the holy Fathers, and law∣fully condemn'd by several Coū∣cils of the Primitive Church: but th pretended reformers do main∣tain and have for their principles the aforesaid points: therefore the pretented reformers are law∣fully accus'd for maintaining old heresies false and erronious Doc∣trines confuted by the holy Fa∣thers, and lawfully condemn'd by several Councils of the primitive Church. the minor is manifest, as for the major ti's prov'd, by what I have already produc'd: for certaīly all those holy Fathers and Doctors, wou'd not make it their business to reprehend, and confut the chief promoters of the said points, if they had not
understood, and firmly believ'd. that they taught false and erro∣nious Doctrines: neither wou'd all the aforesaid Councils of the Primitive Church, (which my ad∣versary in his challenge acknow∣ledges to have then retain'd the true faith of Jesus Christ) con∣demn their Doctrines if they were not also Hethrodox, & contrary to the true faith, which they and their forefathers receiv'd from Jesus Christ & his Disciples: ther∣fore whosoever desires to find & embrace a Church, wherein the old incorrupted principles of Christianity are aught, and such Doctrines only as were maintain|'d by the ancient & pr Church even of Roe for up-wards of 500
years after Christ, let him embra∣ce the present Church of Rome, wherein the said principles are duely professd, the old, and the present Church of Rome being still the same in prīciples, where∣as the Doctrines of those who now call themselves reformers, the Church of Englād, Presbyteriās, Quakers &c. & wherein the said convinicles do now dier from the presēt Church of Rome,  never maintain'd by the ancient Church of Rome; but  ∣piously brought in by a seres of Hereticks, who for these very Doctrines, were from time to  condemn'd by many , na∣tional, & Provincial Councils; &  also by the most eminent
and Doctors of the primitive Church; as the premisses do evi∣dently make-out, so that the rea∣der may take noce of my adver∣sarys ignorance and presumption for censuring, & contradicting a religion so anciēt, which lawfull mission, acknowledgment of an∣tiquity, holy Fathers, several Councils, divine miracles, & the word of God, do plainly demōstra∣te to be the only true and Aposto∣lical line, which leads Souls to the true way of everlasting glory & happiness: therefore reader if you have been heretofore of my ad∣versarys opinion, I beseech you for the love of Jesus Christ, to compare seriously his principles, and those of the Church of Rome
togeather, and then to consider ttentively the state and circum∣stances, wherein you are out of he holy Catholick Church; out of which there is no salvation to be expected, as the following holy Fathers do openly declare. St. Cy∣rian in his book de vnitate Ec∣clesiae (speaking of those who are out of the Church) sayes thus: do they thinke Christ is amongst them?  tho' they were drawn to torments, & xecution for the confession of the name of Christ, yet this pollutiō is not wash'd away, no not with blood this inexpia∣ble, and inexcusable crime, of schis is not purg'd away, even by death it∣self. St. Chrysostome (in his 11. ho. on St. Pauls Epist. to the Ephesiās) ayes also thus: there is nothing so
provokes the wrth of God, a the divi∣sion of the Church, i so uch that tho' we shu'd have perform'd all other sort of good thigs, yt we hall inurr a∣pisment  lss cr, for dividing the vnity of the Church, than those who have do, who  and di∣vided Christs . St. Augustin in his 4. book of ymbole Cap: 10. sayes e following words. If any man be so sparted from her, he shal be  from he number of the childn▪ ither shall e have God for his Father,  woud not have the Church for  ther, nd it will nothing  him to have rightly be∣liv'd, o to  so many good workes, witht the clusion of the soeraign good,  spr ga Emar. he say also the following
ords: out of the Church a heretick ay have all things, but salvation,  may have the sacraments, he may ave faith, and preach it—only salva∣ion he cannot hav; which may be urther confirm'd by the words of t. James c. 2. v. 10. sayīg thus: who∣iver shall keep the whole law and t offends in one point, he is guilty of ll▪ therefore being the salvation f your soul doth wholly depend f the true belief, and intire ob∣ervation of all those points of ith, which the holy Catholick Church sufficiently proposes, & iversaly teaches: I do earnestly eseech you, to open the eyes of our understanding (for I know hat you have no invincible ig∣norance
whereby yo might be excus'd) to embrace the principles and Doctrines of that pure & an∣cent Church against which the ga∣tes of hell cannot prevail Matt. c. 16. v. 1. assure your self that I do not invite you to any old he∣resie (as my adversary does) no (the Lord forbid) but to the reli∣gion preach'd and taught by Je∣sus Christ and his Disciples; to that I say where with your fore fathers, and anteceslors have been still contented, since eve they left Paganism, untill in the 16. age they were deceiv'd by the erronious Doctrines of those fal∣se prophets; Luther, and Calvin▪ hold fast the form of sound words, which thou hast hard from me in faith and
live which is in Christ Jesus 2. Timo∣thy c. 1 v. 13, neither give heed to fables, and endless genelogies, which minister questions, rather than Godly ifying in the faith: from which some having sweru'd have turn'd aside unto vain jagling, desiring to be teachers if the law, understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. 1. Timothy c. 1. v. 4. 6. 7. let not villfull or gross ignorance, the temporal riches and vanity of this transitory world, or comply∣nce to the request of your friēds deceive & mislead you, but con∣sider seriously the very words of your Saviour and redeemer Jesus Christ Matt: c. 16. v. 26. saying thus: for what is a man profited, if he hall gain the whole world & loose his
own soul or what shall a man give in exchang for his own soul? what will it then a il you (after this life) to be now for few years, or day∣es in great honour, favour & re∣quest in this deceitfull world? & afterward to be perpetually tor∣mented in pain, grief, & miseryes, with out any hopes of mercy, or redemption, where neither frieds pompe, nor riches can prevail in order to give you the lest dram of consolation: from which pu∣nishment the Lord Jesus Christ of his infinite mercy defend both you & me & all Christians, Amen. FINIS.
An Answer to what oe Wealy lleages (in his Almanack) against St. Peters Supremacy. AFter having compos'd this little work Wheay's Alma∣nack (for the year 199) came accidentally into my hāds, where∣in he (or some other malicious person in his name) labours to in∣fect the whole Kingdom, with false & pernicious Doctrine, whi∣ch he pretends to ground on some nonensical arguments, that he forms against St. Peter & the Pope of Rome's Supremacy; and tho' 'tis hardly worth any mans
while to cōfute them; yet because it concerns what I have said in my Answer to mr lennings fourth poit;  thīke it fit to let him know his own ignorance and the errors of his pretended Doctrine. First he offers to infer (by a new invented consequence of his own) that Peter was neither Bishop of An∣tioch, or Rome, because (as he falsly alleages) the Papists have not as yet agreed amōg themselves about the time he first remov'd from Antioch to Rome. But in case this had been true which I will shew hereafter to be false his illegal consequēce does not follow: for tho' the Authors do not agree about the begining of the wcks of Daniel (c. 9. v. 24.)
prophesyīg the comīg of Christ or how many years Saul did reign in Isrel, or how many years there are since the creation of the world, shall we infer that Daniels prophesie never began, that Saul never reign'd in Israel, and that the world was never created? no, we leave such illegitimate conse∣quēces to Whealy, who as it seems cannot infer better. His secōd argument is. he that suf∣fers ebue is not superior to him that gi∣es it: but Peter suffer'd rebuke from his llow Apostle Paul (Gal. c. 2. v. 11. 12.  herefore Peter was not superior to Paul. This maor is evidēly false: as ap∣ears in the first book of Kīgs, c. 13 here we read that Saul tho Kīg of Israel, suffer'd to be rebuk'd by Samuel; and in the second book of
Kings c. 12. that David suffer'd to be rebuk'd by Natha; & finally we read in the 6th Chap. of St. John that our aviour suffer'd not only the Jewes, but also the very Disciples to reprhend his words, hen he told them that he woud gve them his flesh to eat and his blood to drinke; we see al∣so by dly experience, that Kings Magistrates, and superiors are re∣prehended by their inferiors, not only privatly, but in publick Ser∣mons, wen they preach against the ices of the said superiours: & indeed we see that the Prince of Orange has been often rebuk'd these six or seaven year past by Whealy in his yearly Almanacks, wherein he reflects with the vlest
expressions imaginable on their acred Majesties, King ames, his Queen, & the Prince of Wales; whereby the Prince of Orange, himself is consequently rebuk'd, yet never order'd the Author to be punish'd. As for that action of Peter not eating meat with the Gentiles, for which he was rebuk'd by Paul; let the adversary know that if Peter had  then eaten with the Gentiles, he would  harply reprehended by  the Jewes & Pharsis, who thought it to be unlawfull by any means to keep company, eat, or drink with the Gen; an so Peter beīg between these wo ex∣treams, he thought it be to eat
with the Gentiles and in so do∣ing, he is not only excus'd, but highly commended by all the E∣astern, and Greian Fahes in their commentary on the aforsaid text; and St. Chrisostome in his commentary on the 10. Chap. of the Acts affirms that it was done by divine dispensation, which e∣vidently appears Act c. 1▪ v. 7. 8. & 9. where we read that Peter was  commāded to eat with the Gentiles. And the motive that mov'd St. Paul to reprehend him, was fearing let that others, who would not be in the same circum∣stances wherein Peter then has been or dispens'd with, as he was should be lead by his example; for inferiors are commōly led by the
examples of their superiors, which to prevent in that point St. Paul thought it convenient to repre∣hend him whose humility, for not contradicting Paul (his inferior) is most highly prays'd by the fol∣lowing Fathers (viz) St. Cypian in his Epist. to Quintus St, Au∣gustin in his 9: Epist. St. Grego∣rie hom. 18: o Ezekīel, saying thus: behold St. Peter reprehended by his owne inferior, and does not fe  reprehension. As for these texts which the ad∣versary brings out of St. Pauls second Epist. to the Cor. (c. 11. 5. and c. 12. v. 11.) they prove no∣thing against Peer's supremacy, for Pauls intetion was to sop e mouths of some adversaryes
he had among the Crinthians, that oppos'd his Doctrine, allea∣ging it to be grounded n some subtile and sophistical arguments and not thought by Christ: as that of Peter, John, & Jame was & consequently ought not to be of any great Authority; which sus∣picion occasion'd him to declare (in the aforesaid text) that he was not inerior to an f the Apostes; that is to say, that his Doctrine was as true, & of as much Authority (being written by the inspiration of the holy Ghost  as any of the Apostles Doctrine, which is true but nothīg to te present purpose Whealy's third argument. he that is accus'd by other, and plead his cause before them, is not supeor
those that accses him, or before whom he plead▪ but St, Peter was acus'd before the rest of the Apostles, & len∣ded his cause before them at Hierualem (Acts. c. 11. v. 1. &c.) therefore Pe∣ter was not superior to he rest of the Apostles. The major is false for tho' a King is accus'd by some of his own subjects, and pleads his cause before the Palment, or a Prince before a Council,  supe∣rior before his community; It does not argue that the King has no superemmency over the Pa∣ment; the Prince over his Coun∣cil, the superior over his cmu∣nity; otherwise it might be law∣fully iner'd, that our Saviour had no superemmecy over his own Disciples, before ho he
was often accus'd by the Jewes: as appears Matt. c. 21 Make c. 15 Lke c. 3 Iohn   7 & 8. As for that which Whaly brings out of Peter's second pist c. 3. v. . ti's not to hi pupose, tho' he de∣ceifully wrests it in order to in∣fr a uatural consequence; for it was Peer icut in that Chap. to assure certain people of Christs coming to judgment &c. and to thinke the paence of God to conduce to their salvatiō, as Paul write to them in his Epistles; so tht it was necessary for Peter to speake in the plural number: but perhaps Whealy by some new fund Arimeick, may make two into one:  fo I acknowledge that Peter ought to speake in the
singular number: but it is too late for Wealy, after so many ages, to pretend to teach him how ought to expresse himself in mat∣ters of such great consequences. Whealy's fourth argument he that is sent is not superior to him that sends him, but when the Apostles at Hierusa∣lem head that Samaria receiv'd the word of God they sent to them Peter & Iohn Acts. c. 8. v. 14. therefore Pe∣ter was not superior to the rest of the Apostles. this major is false, for one may undergo such a mission by his īferiors advise of his own accord. with out any subjection to those that send him; as is evident in the second book of Kings c 15 where we read that Smuel sent Saul (tho' King) to destroy Amalk &
the children of Israel sent Phine▪ has their high Priest and superi∣or to the chidren of Ruben & Gd (then in the land Glead) as may be seen in the 2, Chap of Joshua v. 13 and finally Hrod sent the wisemen over whom e had no pwer to Behelem to searge diligtly for the child Matt: c 2. v 8. so that Whealy can make no advantage of Peters missiō to Samaria, which favours not his design in the es; but ra∣ther confirms the contrary: where∣as he denys Peter to have been bishop, for it was resolv'd by those that were in that ssmbly that it wou'd be expeient to send Bi∣shop to the Samarians who then receiv'd th faith in order to con∣firm
them in the same; so that it was agreed that John and the chifest Bishop (viz,) Peter shoud go thither to perform the same, which they did to the Samarians great satisfacton After this Whealy produces an argument which he sound in a ma∣nuel of cotrovesie (prited at Doway the ear 654) provīg that to be the only Church of God, whih hath had a cotinued suc∣cession of Bishops & pastors from the time of Christ and the Apos∣tles to this present da; which he denys with out giving any Au∣thority, or reason; but promises in the following page to confute it; I will be silent in the matter untill I see what he can alleadge agaīst it.
He afterwards ites out of the same manuel the following texts Isa. c. 59. v. . c. 60. v 1. 3. 1. c. 62 v. ▪ Ezil c. 37 v. 26 & Da∣niel c. 7 v. 13. 14 proving the in∣fallibility of the Church which in Whealy's opinion can have no relation o , they being write long before the Apostles dayes; but if this shu'd tae place, it would as well prove that all the prophesies of the old Testament concerning Christs passion, resu∣rection, and assention could have no relation to the said Mysteries they being prophesy'd lōg before any f hm came to pass, all Whealy's witt can shew noe tole∣rable reason for denying the one and admitting the other; as for
the texts which he brings out of Matt c. 28 v. 20 John c 14 v. 16. Ephe c. 4 v. 11. & 12 it is but some of Whealy's calumnyes to alleage that the Author of the said Ma∣nuel ever Produc'd them in or∣der to prove St Peter supremacy; whereas he only akes use of them to prove the visibility and infallibility of the true Church, and its contīnued succession of Bishops & Pastors from the time of the Apostles till now as appears in the 2. 37 & 45 page of the same Manuel After this Whealy denyes Peter to have been Bishop of Antioch or Rome for six several reasons, and sayes in the first that he can∣not grant it because the scriptures are
wholy silent in the mattr But if he can grant nothing wherein te scrptures are silent he is no true Christian for he does not believe or grant the Apostles creed or tat the present Bible of which he makes use himself to be the ūcor∣rupted word f God, or the bap∣tism of children before they come to the years of discrection to be lawfull and sufficien for salvatiō seeing the scriptures are  holly silent in these matters beside, he Possitively swears to several poīts that are not mention'd therein, and consequently contradicts his owne assertion, this is too evident to require a proof for he wicked∣ly swears & believes that the true flesh & blood of Christ are not re∣ally present
in the blessed Sacrament, that the Virgin Mary Mother of God hath no more power than a nother Woman, that the Bishop of Rome hath no spiritual or tem∣poral jurisdiction over England, Ireland, or Scotland; and several other points propos'd by the pre∣sent goverment: therefore he be∣lieves and wickedly swears to se∣veral points (as articles of faith) wherein he himself pretends the Scripture to be wholly silent: but let Whealy deny or own what he pleases its evident to us by the testimonies of all ancient writers, and the following holy Fathers & Doctors that Peter was Bishop of Rome, (viz) St. Irenaeus in his 3. book c. 36. Tertullian in his
book de Prescrip. adversus hereti∣cos St. Cyprian in his first book Epist:. 3. and in his 4. book Epist. 2. Eusebius in his chronicle of the 44. year S. Epiphanius heresie 27. S. Athanasius in his Epist. to those who lead a solitary life. Do∣rotheus in his Inventory. Sozome∣nus in his 4. book c. 4. Optatus in his 2. book against Perminīan, S. Ambrose in his book of the Sa∣craments c. 1. St. Hierome de Viris Illustribus and in his first Epist. to Damas St. Augustin in his 2. book against Petilian c. 51. and in his 165 Epist. Theodoret in his Epist to Leo. Isidorus wri∣ting the life of Peter, and all o∣ther ancient writers till the year 1400. before which time I defie
Whealy to produce any Author that ever write of Peter's not be∣ing Bishop of Rome. Whealy's second reason for de∣nying this matter. the office of an A∣postle was deriv'd immediatly from Christ, and by consequence more honou∣rable and supream than that of Bishop, which was ordain'd by men only. it were therefore no less than madness to think Peter so weake of judgment to quitt the more honourable for the lesser, or the superiour for an inferior. But in this Answer Whealy makes two false suppositions; first he suppo∣ses that Peter was ordain'd Bishop by men and not by Christ as A∣ron was formerly ordain'd by God chief Priest over the Isralites secondly he supposes that there is
an incompbility between the office of an Apostle and that of Bishop, which s also  tho' they be two  they do not tend to incompaible effects; for they both tend to the glory of God propagating the Doctrine of Christ, and establishing the holy Catholick Church, which no man of sence can deny. As to Whealy's third reason wherein he sayes, that the commi∣ssion of an Apostle, go ye forth & teach all nations &c. was then more univer∣sal than that of Bishoprick &c. If this wou'd prove any thing against Peters being Bishop, it wou'd al∣so prove that James was not Bi∣shop of Jerusalen, or John Bishop of Ephese, because their commi∣ssion,
was also, to go forth and teach all nations &c. which hinder'd them not from being Bishops of the aforesaid seas as all ancient writers do unanimously testifie; as to that which he adds saying that 'tis epressly agaīst the special command of Christ to accept of bishoprick at all; 'tis but some of his presbyterian Doctrine, where with he not on∣ly attakes the Church of Rome; but also the present Church of Englād: as manifestly appears by what he produces in his last ar∣gument out of Luke c. 12. v 25 & 26. His fourth reason against Peter being Bishop is, that Peter was A∣postle of the circumcision and such as write his Epistles from Babylon not to
Rome but to the scatered ees &c. which reason cōtradicts Whealys third Answer, where in he sayes that it was agaīst Christs commād that Peter should accept of bi∣shoprick at all, because (as he al∣leages) he was oblig'd to go fth and teach all nations; but if Peter was oblig'd to teach all nations, he was not only an Apostle of the circumcision for the word all nations comprehēds both the Jew∣es and Gentiles; by which it ap∣pears that Whealy in his owne discourse cōtradicts himself; as for Peters being Apostle only of the circumcision, and Paul only of the Gentiles, 'tis false as is manifest by that of the Acts c. 15. v, 7, where we find the followīg words
when there had been much disputing Peter rose up and said to them men & bretheren ye know that a good while agoe God made choice among us that the Gentiles by my mouth should he are the word of the Gospel and believe &c. as for that which Whealy adds that Peter writ his Epistles from Babylon and not to Rome &c. it proves his ignorance, and cōfirms what he would faine deny: for in Peter first Epist c. 5. v: 1. by the word Babylon Rome is meant▪ as Papias the Apostles Disciple (ci∣ted by Eusebius in his 2. book of History c. 15. St. Hierome in his book de Viris Illustribus in Mar∣co, Eunomius, Venerable Bed and all the Fathers that ever writ a commentary on that Epist. do
unanimously declare; and it is evident out of the 17. c. of revela∣tions, where John sayes that Ba∣bylon was builded on seaven hills and that i'ts Impire did extend o∣ver the Kings of the earth: which notwithstandig should fall down and be destroy'd; all which has beē verify'd of the City of Rome and of no other City in the whole world, for it was foerly and is at present builded on seaven hills and it's Impire only did then reach all parts of the world, yet what John fore see came to pass for the Roman Impire was redu∣c'd almost to nothing, the City wholly run'd, by the Goths, Wandals, Hunns, & Longobards: but what occasion'd people in
them times to call Rome Babylon, was a certain similitude that was between the City of Rome and that of Babylon, when in the time of Nabuchodōoor Babylō was an Imperial City, whose King Na∣buchodonoor crully persecuted the people of God durīg their cap∣tivity there; evē so in the time of the Apostles Rome was an Jmpe∣rial City, whose Improur was Ne∣ro, who persecuted most cruelly the people of God during his reign it's therefore the City of Rome was call'd another Babylon Whealy's fifth reason is groun∣ded on the audiēce given to Paul in the Apostles assembly Acts c. 15. v. 12. by which it seems that Peter till then was wholly a stranger
to the wonders Paul told them he had perform'd amōg the Gentiles. this con∣sequēce is false, for tho' General Ginkle related in a Council of war before the Prince of Orange how he behav'd himself at the breach of Agherim against the I∣rish, it cannot be infer'd that the Prince of Orange himself was till then wholly a strāger to the Irish affairs, and that he never fought at the breach of the Boyne, or els∣where against them. & tho' Peter gave audience to Paul telling the Miracles & wonders, which God had wrought among the Gentiles by him and Barnabas; it does not follow that Peter never preach'd the Gospel to any of the Gen∣tiles before that time. as for
Whealy's 6th reason that it was after Pauls said relation that the A∣postles and Elders sent Barsabas and Silos with him to Antioch to assist in the ministry; I allow that to be true but what Whealy would infer out of it is false; for it does not at all follow out of this, that the Gospel was never preach'd be∣fore in any of those Countryes; but what might be lawfully in∣fer'd, is that Barsabas & Silos were not commāded to go with Paul to Antioch, till after the said relatiō but before this time (beīg the 18. year after our Saviours Passiō) the Gospel was preach'd not only in Antioch. but also in Rome by Pe∣ter, as I will shew hereafter. as for Whealy's new commētary on the words of our Saviour Mathew
c. 16. v. 18. 19. John c. 21. v. 15. 16 17. I believe no man of sense will pre∣fer it before the exposiion of all the holy Fathers and Doctors which is cōtrary to that of Whea∣ly's: as may be seē in my Anwer to Mr. Jēnīgs 4 poīt; as for that word only which our Saviour would have added if he meant Peter in particular as Whealy pretends I would willingly know by what reason can he or any other shew that the word only would be re∣quisite here to prove Peter's su∣premacy and not in that of John. c, 6. v. 50. where he & the present Church of England do wrest the words of Christ to a figurative sence without the lest mētiō of the word only or siguratively; by which it appears how incoher∣ently
Whealy argues; ad pre∣tends to expoūd the wors of Christ in the said txts, 'its apparent that it would be su∣perfluous for Christ to express the word ōly in either of these te∣xts (viz) Matt c. 16. & John, c. 21 it was enough that he spoake to Pe∣ter personaly in the singular num¦ber, & in these words Blessed art tou Simon Brjona for flesh & blood have not reveal'd it ūto thee but my Father who is in heaven, & I say also unto thee that thou art Peter & upon this rck I will bu¦ild my Church & the gates of Hell shall not prevaile agaīst it & I will give unto thee the Keyes of the Kīgdom of Hea∣vē & what soever thou shall bīd on earth shall he boūd in heavē whatsoever thou shall loose on earh shall be loos'd in heavē Mat. c. 16 v. 1718. 19 so whē they had dīed
Jesus said to Simon Peter Simon sonne of Jonas lovest thou me more than these he said unto him yea Lord thou knowest that I love thee, he saith unto him feede my lambes, he saith unto him again the second time Simon sonne of Jonas lo∣vest thou me? he saith unto him yea Lord thou knowest that I love thee, he saith unto him feede my sheepe, he said unto him the third time Simon sonne of Jonas lovest thou me? Peter was grieved be∣cause he said unto him the third time, lovest thou me, and he said unto him, Lord thou knowest that I love thee, Iesus said unto him feede my sheep. John c▪ 21. v. 15. 16 17. which words do plainly prove that our Saviour then meant Peter and none else of the Apostles, for he excluded them by the words Simon Peter sonne of Jonas levest thou me, which
as the reader may observe our Sa∣viour thrice cōsequētly repeated and after Peter answer'd each time, he gave him in charge his lambes and sheepe commanding him to feede them; which he would not have done if he had then meant equally all the rest of the Apostles (as Whealy falsly alleages) but would speake to them Generally in the plural number, as he did in that of Matt. c. 18. v. 19, when he commanded them to go and teach all nations; as for that new explication which Whealy gives, saying that our Saviour speake particularly to Peter more than to the other Apostles because they were not in the danger that Peter was of swearing cusing & denying his
blessed Master as Peter afterwards did (Matt c. 26. v. 7.) therefre wanted not the consolation which the Saviour of the world judg'd nedfull for the support of a falin Peer nd therefore it was he pray'd that his faih should not faie Luke c. 2. v. . Whealy expresly contrdicts himself in this matter, for in his very last point he slaly denyes that our Sa∣viour comitted any particular charge to Peter more than to any other of the pstles for want of the word only and here he owns that our Saviours words were par∣ticularly apply'd to Peter more than to any other of the Apostle which is a manifest contradiction for things signify'd by words must of necessity be apply'd to him to
whom the words are apply'd: as Philosophers commonly teach as for Whealy's explication saying that it was particularly apply'd to Pe∣ter because he was in danger of swearīg cursing &c. tis nonsence, at lest if he pretends to be a Christian, for our Saviour spoake these words of John (c. 21.) to Peter after he deny'd him, & after his resurrec∣tion: so that there was no dāger of Peter's cursing, swearing, and de∣nying Christ the second time, if our Saviour was not to suffer a∣gain after his resurection, which would be an abominable Doctrine to thinke of, that his first Passion & sufferings was not suficient to re∣deem all mankīd; If it was in order to give Peter some consolation
our Saviour spoake to him & also pray'd to his heavenly Father that his faith should not faile (accor∣ding to that of Luke c. 22 v. 31. a Whealy alleages) why did he exclude St. Thomas? who by noe perswasion would believe our Sa∣viours resurrection, untill he saw the wounds in his hands, and put his finger into the same, and trust his hand into his side, John c. 20. v. 25▪ for really Peters error was of less cōse quēce, than that of Thomas, for he only deny'd that he knew Christ personally, and that out of human fear, for which act he immediatly repented and wept betterly; as ap∣pears Mat c. 26. v. 75. but we find nothing of Thomas's repentance, tho' he would not believe one of
the chiefest Misteryes of faith; nor do we find in Scripture that our Saviour spoake so favourably to him, or pray'd his heavenly Fa∣ther that his faith should not faile; so that there must needs be some other thīg ūderstood by the said texts, which Whealy ought not to deny since he cannot shew scripture, Authority, or reason but impiously strives to misinter∣pret the plain words of our Savi∣our, to favour his owne wicked design. I see he passes over sligh∣tly one of the convincing argu∣mēts that he▪ foūd in that manuel of cōtroversie, which he pretends to confute; and denyes the major, minor, and consequence with-out giving any manner of reason, on∣ly
alleaging that th rst of the Apos∣tles are nam'd before Peter in several places of Scripture; but because he could not poīt any of those places he was forc'd to leave the whle argument in it's vigor, and run to an other of his owne (as commōly all sectaryes do when they find themselves at a stand) saying that if Christ had invested Peter with any such dominion, either Peter or ome of the Evangelists would upon some occa∣sion or other mention'd it: but Peter is no where in scripture said to be invested therefore Peter had no such dominion, as they pretēd he had. the major passes yet it may be absolutly deny'd, for all the actions of Christ are not individually mention'd in scrip∣ture; as evidently appears by the
following words of John C. 1, v. 25 there are also many other things, which Jesus did, which if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world it self could not contain the bookes that should be written. So that it appears that if the scripturs were silent in this matter (as they are not) that it would not follow that no such thing hath been, as I have shew'd by several other ex∣amples before now; the minor also is false: as evidently appears by what I have produc'd on f St. Mathew c. 16. & S. John c. , & the consequence cannot be true, for out of false premisses there cannot follow but a false conse¦quence. As for that frivolus argument wherewith
the adversary falsly accuses the Catholicks, alleaging that they conclude Peter to have been bishop of Rome, because he remov'd his sea from Antioch; let the reader be pleas'd to observe that consequence, to be only some of his calumnies, and not that consequence which the Catholicks do infer, but this which follows: Peter remov'd his sea from Antioch to Rome: there∣fore Peter was bishop of Rome; so that the other is but some of his ill infer'd consequences. As for these two reasons which he alleages, first saying, that it would be more reasonable to conclude▪ that in case Peter had been Bishop of Antioch and would from thence remove, that it was to Ierusalem he remov'd, because
his following calculation proves S. Pe∣ter to have been often there▪ secondly because he was Apostle of the circumci∣sion I retort his first reason thus. It were more reasonable to con∣clude that all shoe-makers would apply themselves in makeing of shooes, thā to impeach themselves in matters of divinity & contra∣versye: therefore it were more reasōable to cōclude that Whea∣ly, who is a shoe-maker would ap∣ply himself in makeing of shooes thā to impeach himself in matters of divinity and controversie, this consequence does not happen: as is manifest by what Whealy pu∣blishes in his Almanack; so that it appears, that that which is more reasonable to conclude does not
alwayes happē; for if it thou'd in∣deed we would never wrong our neighbours, or commit any sinne against our creator & redeemer; for it would be more reasonable to conclude that we ought to obey his commādmēts, than to be come rebells against him, yet we see by daily experiēce that this happens, & no that which is more reasona∣ble to conclude. As to that remo∣ving of Peter, let Whealy know that it was convenient that the chiefest sea of Christianity shoud be fixd, and florish in that City of Rome, which formerly was the chiefest City & head of Idolatry; & it's the General opiniō of eve∣ral holy Fathers, that Peter was commanded by a special revelati∣on
to fix his sea there; but if in case he had fixd it in Jerusalem his successours the Bishops of Jerusa∣lem would in haei▪ St Peter's su∣prmacy, & have the same juris∣diction, that now those of Rome have▪ as to the adversary's second reasō, I say tha there was no such compact between Peter & Paul (viz) that o should only preach to the Jewes, & the oner to the Gentiles; otherwise Peter would not have declar'd in the assembly that the Apostle &  is had at Jerusalem, that God  a∣mong them that the Gētiles by his mouth should hare the word of God & beleve Acts c. 15. v. 7. neither would Paul preach to the Jes when he came to Rome. Acts c. 28. v. 2. 3 &c.
So that the agreement between them was, that Peter shoud preach where ever he pleas'd, but princi∣pally to the Jewes, and that also Paul wou'd do the same, but prī∣cipally to the Gentiles▪ as for Pe∣ter's being at Jerusalem several times, it argues not that he remo∣v'd his sea thither, whē he quitted Antioch: as for example Mr. Boy∣le the Bishop of Down (in Irelād) remov'd his sea from thence, and sate in the three last Parlements in Dublin: shall you therefore in∣fer that it was to Dublin he re∣mov'd his sea? this consequence would not follow: for he remov'd his sea to Clougher, and so might Peter remove his from Autioch to Rome; tho' he was present at these
assemblies of the Apostles & El∣ders at Jerusalem▪ as for Peter's creation, I say that he was created Bishop by Christ, after hi Resur∣rection (even as Aron was institu∣ted high Priest by God over the Israelites) when he gave him in charge the whole Church, as all the proofs which I have produc'd in my Answer to Mr Jennīgs 4th. point do plainly make-out; & if in case he had been made Bishop by the Apostles it would not pro∣ve that he was not their superior: as appears in the case of our Sa∣viour, who was superior to S. John Baptist, and the Iewes, yet was Baptis'd by the one, and circum∣cis'd by the others: as in manifest Luke c. 2▪ & .
Now to come to Whealys prepos∣terous sort of calculation, the rea∣der will be pleas'd to take notice of the followīg discouse, where∣by he may plainly see how S. Pe∣ter came to be Bishop of Antioch and Rome before the 19th. year after our Saviour's Passion; he stay'd about four years after in Judea, he as at Jerusalm behol∣ding Christ's asecution according to that of the Acts c. 1. v.  & Paul gave him a visit the third year af∣ter his owne conversion Gala, c. 1: v. 18. in the begining or the 5th. year after our Saviour's Passion, Peter went to Sra and fixt his sea in Antioch, where he remain∣ed seaven years, but did not con∣tinue in the City all that time
for he went now and then to the ajacent provinces, and preach'd the Gospel there (viz) in Pontos, Asia, Capodocia &c. about the end of the 7th year he return'd to Ierusalem (being 11 years after our Saviour's Passion) and was immediatly imprison'd by Herod Acts c. 12. v. 4. but was soone in∣larg'd by an Angel: as appears by the 7. 8. & 9. v. of the same chap. the same year, which was the se∣cond of the Impire of Claudius: he came to Rome and fix't his sea there, & preach'd the Gospel to them for the space of seaven years, after which time he was expell'd out of the City by Claudius, and so were all the Jewes then in Ita∣ly Acts. c. 18. v. 2. after this expul∣sion
(which happen'd in the be gi∣uing of the 19th, year after our Lords Passion (Peter went to Jeru∣salem, & when those of Antioch heard of his coming thither they sent Paul and Barnabas to him in order to decide a controversie ri∣sen amōg them about the circum∣cision, which he did before the whole assembly; as appears Acts. c. 15 v, 10. he could not after¦wards return to Rom,e for the space of four years, by which time Claudius the Improur dy'd; so that the advers party's foolish de∣mōstratiō is groūdless & apparēt∣ly false, wherein he pretēds to pro∣ve, that Peter could not be Bishop of Rome dureing the first 19. years after Christ's Passion, because the scripture makes mē∣tion
of his being in Ierusalem four se∣veral times durīg that time as also his preaching the Gospel in Iudea Siria &c. But if this had hinder'd Peter's being Bishop of Rome untill that 19th. year Whealy may as well cō∣clude that the Prince of Orange was not Crown'd in Englād from the year 1688. untill 1699. be∣cause that dureīg this time he was seen every year in Irelād, Hollād, or Flanders as for his saying that the Second year of Nero's Impire is the 19th. of the years assign'd of Peter's be∣ing Bishop of Rome. it's manifestly false; for it is but the 1th. year, for as I have shew'd before, Peter came first to Rome the secōd year of Claudius Impire, who raign'd 13 years, nine mounths & 20, dayes
so that eleavē years of Cluiu's Impire with those  and two years of Nero's, do not make up fully 14 years: before which time Paul never came to Rome, as is evident Act, c. 28. v. 14 but he write before then his Epist. to the Romans in his Jour∣ney to Ierusalem, and in the 16. c. he salutes many of the Romans, and Jewes, who were then Chris∣tians, and converted by Peter be∣fore he was expell'd by Claudius: where by it appears that Whealy is wholly a strenger not only to ancient Historyes, but also to the very scripture, by which he pre tends to prove his false Doctrine▪ as for Paul's two years imprisonment in Rome under Nero, and not makeing
mention of Peter in his Epistles to the Golossians, Timothy &c. It proves not that Peter could not be then in Rome, as for example: it can∣not be infer'd that Christ was not circumcis'd, because S. Ma∣thew makes noe mention of it; that the star did not appear to the wise-men, because Luke is silent in the matter: that Christ was not born of a Virgin, be∣cause Marke makes no mention of it; so that it is to be admir'd, how any mā of sence can offer to infer such an illegal consequēce: as if St. Paul had been oblig'd to specifie all Christians then in Rome, or as if he had possitively affirm'd that not Christiā had beē at Rome that time, but only those
that he names▪ to explain these texts Colo: c. 4. v. 1 12. 2. Timoth. c. 4 v. 10. 11. &c. on which Whealy insists; the reader may observe, that Pauls intent, was to give an account of his owne domestick family to those, to whom then he write, who knew them before, which is a most usual thing, for commonly when people write to their well-wishers, they salute them in their acquaintences na∣me, & if they goe from one pla∣ce to an other they give them an account of their removeal. so that from first to last Whealy cannot make out that Peter was not Bishop of Rome from the second year of Claudius reign, till he was crucifi'd in the same
City (with his head down wards) by Nero the Empour's orders 25 year after, which Whealy might easily understand (with-out any manner of confusion, or incon∣gruity) out of the following Fa∣thers and ancient writers, (viz) S. Ignatius in his Epist. to the Romans; Eusebius in his 2 book c. 25. Egesippus in his 3. book c. 2. Origenes in his 3. on Geneses St. Athanasius in his Apology de fuga sua. S. Chrysostome in his 32 hom. on S. Paul's Epist to the Romans▪ Tertullian in his book de Praescrip. Lactantius in his . book Divinarum Institutionum c. 21. St. Ambrose in his Oration against Auxenis St. Hierome de Viris Illustribus. St. Augustin
in his fist book de Consensu E∣vangelist. c. 10. St: Maximus in his 5. ser de Natali Apostolorum. Sulpitius in his 2 book of History Orosius in his 7th. Eutropius also in his 7th. book writing the life of Nero. Isidorus writing the life of St. Peter. S. Leo in his first ser. de Natali Apostolorum & seve∣ral other Fathers do testifie the same: by which it manifestly appears that the Papists do agee among themselves a∣bout the time that St. Peter came to be Bishop of Rome; for of all the Catholick writers there are only two, who do not agree in this point (viz) Marianus Scotus▪ who sayes that St. Peter came first to Rome in the fourth year of Clau∣dius's
reign, and Onphrius Panonius, who sayes that he first fix't his sea in Rome before he came to Antioch, and remov'd again from Antioch to Rome Whealy's last argument▪ when there was a dispute among the Apostles which of them should be counted grea∣test (Luke c. 22. v. 24.) our Saviour tould them (v. 25. & 26.) the King of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, (but sayes he) ye shall not be so, but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger, and he that is chief, as him that doth serve; so that it seems Christ himself deny'd them any such supremacy, and if Christ was in the right, the Church now in com∣munion with the sea of Rome, is much in the wrong, to exercise a jurisdiction
which Christ himself Prohibited This argument proves what Whealy would willingly deny; for these words greatest & chief do plaīly shew that there was one chief among the Apostles, whom Christ commanded to be as their minister, not obeying & serveing them, as servants doe; but ruling & governing them in humility & Charity, according to that of the Acts c. 20. v. 24. & also to that of St. Pauls first Epist. to the Co∣rinth. c. 11. v. 22. & 23. & this is the same title that the Popes of Rome give themselves in their buls & patents, for every one of them stiles himself thus▪ servāt to the servants of God; & truely if these words would mean what Whea∣ly
pretends to prove they would plainly make-out that it is not ōly the Church of Rome; but also the present Church of England exercises such a jurisdiction, as he pretends to be prohibited by Christ, for the Church of Englād allows of primates, Bishops, and several other Ecclesiastical dig∣nitaryes; & perhaps this is what he would faine prove, in order to run them down, and make them all Presbyterians, who do not al∣low of such dignitaryes, not with∣standing that St. Paul in his Epist to Timothy c. 3 v. 1. recomends the office of a Bishop. as for that which Whealy adds, saying that there was no such thing, as suprematy heard of, till about the year of Christ 196.
'tis but some of his invèntions, as may be seen in my Answer to Mr. Jennings fourth poīt, where∣in I have shew'd that St. Denis the Apostles Disciple calls S▪ Pe∣ter the Supream; &c. and indeed if Whealy will not give better rea∣sons and grounds, for what he promises to prove in his followīg Almanacks, than he has given in what he pretends to prove in this years Almanack, he will shew, but his owne ignorāce & presumption as he has done in what he write this year FINIS
INDEX MAsses were said in the first five ages after Christs birth p. 20. The communion was given under one kind to the laty in the first five ages p. 38 Common prayers were said in a lan∣guage not vulgarly vnderstood by all the hearers in the first five ages p, 55 The Pope of Romes supremacy was acknowledg'd in the first five ages, p. 68. The reall presence was believ'd in the first five ages p. 98. The holy Eucharist was ador'd in the first five ages p 125. Transustatiation was believ'd in the first five ages p. 133. Images has been venerated in the first five ages p. 142. Saints were pray'd too, in the first
five ages p. 164. Purgatory was believ'd in the first five ages p. 188. All these of the first five ages had not the word of God in their maternal language p. 224. The reformers Doctrines are but a heap of old heresies lawfully condem∣n'd in the first five ages p 243 An Answer to what Whealy allea∣ges against St, Peters Supremacy at the later end p. 1.
Errata. PAge. 8. 1. 13. r. prayers p. 13. l. 13. r. peaceable. p. 16 l. 11. r. espous'd p. 30, l. 13 r. 64. p. 39. l, 12. r. Luke. p. 66. l. 5. r. Queen. p. 85. l. 8 r. sayes. p. 86. l. 16. r. relieve. p. 109 l. 8. r. Num. l. 17. r, life p. 10. l. 4. r. the p. 118. l. 10. 151. l. 9. 172. l. 5. 173. l. 20. 174. l. 6. 175. l. 1. 79. l. 12. 190. l. 16. 191 l. 4. & 209. l, 7. r. does p. 148. l. 3 r. things p. 76. l, 18. r. a before preiudice p. 78. l. 14. r. souldiers p. 220. l. . r. were p. 232. l. 4. r, catechesed p. 237. l. 13. r. ruine. these with ome other oversights which appen'd in the correction, the ourteus reader is most humbly esir'd charitably to mend with is penn.
