O89 13335923 99091
Licensed, May 8. 1678. Ro. L'Estrange.
THE Obliging Mistress: OR, THE Fashionable Gallant. A NOVEL. Uxor Coruscat Cornibus Mariti. By a Person of Quality. LONDON, Printed for J. Magnes, and R. Bent∣ley, in Russel-street, near the Piaz∣za in Covent-Garden, 1678.
To the Honoured Ma∣dam; Madam S. B. Madam, I Give my self the Assurance to Dedicate this small Trifle to you, from the fre∣quent Injunctions you have for∣merly laid upon me, to do my self this honour: An Incou∣ragement, I must confess, too great for a Man of my Cha∣racter not to embrace, especial∣ly when he has your Promise in Advance, that whatsoever he dare commit to your Patronage,
you will raise up all the Power of your Vertue to secure from the rage and fury of malevolent Censors. AND, did the World know to what Beauty and Soveraign Goodness I address this, I should have no need to fear their Malice, or be-speak their Fa∣vour: for, your charming Sex but looks, and conquers; and how many Potent Enemies so∣ever others may have to grap∣ple with, you need but once to make your Appearance, to see them all humbly silent at your Feet. BEAƲTY is now the only Shroud to wrap a trembling
Writer in, and keep him safe from Blasts, and stormy Winds: It is like SACRED MAJE∣STY, to which all the World pays the Tribute of awful Reve∣rence and Devotion, and to whose absolute PREROGA∣TIVE Mankind owes its utmost Loyalty: So that it would seem no less than a Crime of highest TREASON, but to think of bringing its Power into Dispute and Question: Therefore, where That is once pleas'd to stand up in defence, who is so hardy to oppose, who so daring to break forth into Rebellion against it? That Man may then be bold in∣deed, who has Beauty's Ban∣ner to protect him.
BƲT, Madam, you do not place your chiefest value there; you consider Beauty as one of the perishable Goods of Time, and proportionable to that Sen∣timent you give it its estimati∣on: for you have more sublime Regards, inward Accomplish∣ments, and the Adornings of the Mind take up all your Contem∣plations. The Sphere of Ver∣tue is that you desire, and love to move in; and you would have that only to influence and actuate all your Principles. This is a Truth sufficiently known by all that have the ho∣nour to know you; and they will say, I have taken you but
in little, should I lay out my utmost Efforts to do you justice: and I would be glad to see the Person that is capable of draw∣ing you fully to the Life. Madam, it were easie for me to expatiate upon the Theme of your Goodness; for I must give in my protest here, that I know nothing more Supreme: but I am sensible how much your humility will be offended at it, and, after all, that the Essay would appear but faint and hollow; and therefore, to save your blushes, and conceal my own weakness, I'll quit this Subject, and give you a short Account of that which you are next to read.
I met with it in French, and found it to be a true History of the Amours of a Lady of Qua∣lity of that Country; but be∣cause I perceived it did betray her frailty, and was too de∣tractive and derogatory from her honour, I have vail'd all their real Names under those of my own Constitution and Fancy; and I hope I have done no harm in exposing their Story, since I have carried it on all the way through a dis∣guise. BƲT possibly it may be thought that I have done ex∣tremely amiss in making you this Present; for here is a La∣dy
whose Fate has been to have her Love predominant over her Vertue, and you make your Ver∣tue to be superiour to all things; so that how can you ever be a∣ble to appear in the defence of that, which by your Vertue you are so much obliged to dis∣approve? But I do not under∣stand, why, although one ought to have an Aversion for the Crime, one may not at the same time have a pity and compassion for the Person. Besides, to whom should the miserable, through their Fate, have re∣course, if not to those who at least-wise are able to give them the relief of their tenderness?
But, Madam, I can say more, if she was over come by her Love, it was after a very great Com∣bat of her Reason and Vertue; and that love of hers cost her her Life, and does she deserve to have no body stand up in her favour? I know your goodness so well, that it cannot but in∣gage you to afford your chari∣table supports to the frailty of the dead, and therefore with∣out any further trouble will leave her fatal Story to you; hoping you'll still honour me with your kind thoughts, and let me bear the Quality of, Madam, Your most humble Servant,
THE Obliging Mistress: OR, THE Fashionable Gallant. IN the Famous City of Spira were two Noble and Ancient Families who had long been at Enmity, almost to their utter ruine, by the frequent At∣tempts they both made against the Lives and Fortunes of each other. There was only left in one a Son called Bazugen, and in the other a Daughter named Orazia: by the Mediation of some Friends the dif∣ference between the old Fathers was composed; and to confirm the Accommodation, they consent∣ed to an Intermarriage of their Children; but both of them be∣ing
of an Age as yet not capable of such a Solemnity, they proceeded no farther than a Contract, which was performed with more than or∣dinary Ceremonies. This being the Seal set to the Articles of A∣greement, the Father of Orazia died not long after in peace with all the world, nor did the Father of Bazugen long survive him; they both, as they had before con∣trived it, left their Estates to the trust of Friends; so to be disposed of, as that if either of this our In∣fant-couple hereafter should refuse to consummate their Matrimonial Rites, they should have no longer an Interest in any part of the In∣heritance. This, you may ima∣gine, was a certain cause to effect a Marriage, but an uncertain course to produce an Affection; nay, such a compulsion doth generally check the growth, where otherwise it might have flourished, because our
Nature is a perfect Enemy to con∣straint, and even causes an Aversi∣on in us to that which we should otherwise have coveted, when it comes once, as it were, to be ne∣cessitated, or forced upon us. IN short, they both grew up to a Marriageable state, which made them conclude it with all the Rites and Ceremonies befitting the So∣lemnity of such an expectation. Orazia was delivered up to Bazu∣gen at the Altar, and the Friends of both immediately resigned the trust they had committed to them by the Fathers to the young Bazugen, who not to spend his Youth in i∣dleness, as most of his Age and Fortunes commonly do, bought himself a Place, which was one of the first Charges of the Robe. After their Nuptials, the new-married Couple spent several Months in all the pleasures of Feasts and Divertisements. Al∣though
their Marriage had been less from Affection than Interest, yet the young Bazugen thought himself the happiest man in the world in the possession of so ac∣complished a person; and his Wife was not forgetful of any of those things which she thought her self obliged to by her duty, to make him know that she received as great a satisfaction in him. BUT about that time, after that they were married, she fell into some little indisposition, for which the Physitians advised her to use the Bath: She resolved to go to a house her Husband had, that was not much above six miles from Spira, and which was near to the River; the season and the time being then very fit for her to take the Bath there. She had made a Friendship with a Lady, whose name was Lulevin∣da, who also had a house at that
place; and one day, the Weather being extraordinary fair and invi∣ting, drawed some friends of that Ladies Husbands and hers to come and see them. As that place was not very far, as I have told you, from Spira, they got thither before the heat of the day; and to bene∣fit themselves by it, they went im∣mediately out to walk. From the Garden they came out just upon the Bank of the River, which was only parted from it by a Balustrade; and being insensibly got from the house of Lulevinda, they came to a place, which was behind that of the young Bazu∣gen's, where his Wife was walk∣ing all alone by a Row of Wil∣lows. Though she was in a careless negligent manner there, her Beau∣ty and her ravishing Air did bring an extraordinary surprize upon all the Company, and struck the heart
of the Gallant Sefuseo, who was the person that had appointed that Rendezvous, with the beginnings of a most violent passion. He stood as if he had been almost a Statue, at the sight of a person to whom he thought nothing could be com∣parable. After dinner, Lulevinda percei∣ving by what had been every ones discourse of the fair Orazia, (for that was the name of young Bazu∣gen's Lady) that all the company would be extreamly pleased to be acquainted with her, she sent to desire her to come and pass away the rest of that day at her house: Bazugen her Husband bore her company thither. Her charming conversation did give an absolute mortal wound to the heart of the amorous Sefuseo. She had natural∣ly a pleasant kind of melancholy, accompanied with an air that was full of spirit and sweetness, which
ravished him exceedingly; so that she presently became the passionate object of his devoted Love. ON the other side if the Gene∣rous Sefuseo was so strangely capti∣vated by her Triumphant Beauty, and the Charms of her Wit, she had with some joy observed the affection he immediately had for her; having also found something in him which had made her distin∣guish him from the rest of the Company, as indeed he had in his person all that might induce her to consider him to his advantage; for with all the Qualities that a brisk Gallant, who was young and hand∣som, could have, he had an air so Noble, and so great, that he seem∣ed to be born for something extra∣ordinary. After Supper, the beautiful O∣razia, who was obliged to rise be∣times because of her Bath, seeing that her Husband was ingaged in
play with the Husband of Lule∣vinda, went away to her own house all alone. THE passionate Sefuseo, who could not find an opportunity to tell her what he felt for her, and who was extreamly troubled to think of going from that place without acquainting her with it, abandoned himself to the violence of his Love. He secretly stole out of Lulevinda's house, a little after Orazia was got out of it; and without ever considering what the dangers were he expos'd himself to, he went directly to her house, where without asking any body for her, or so much as speaking to any, he went into her Chamber, which he very fortunately litt upon. Orazia, who was got already in∣to her Bed, and heard some-body walking up and down in the Chamber, supposing it to be her
Husband, asked him if he had lost any thing: Yes, Madam, immedi∣ately answer'd the violent Sefuseo; then sighing, he said, I have lost, and much more than ever I thought I was capable of losing: for in short, Madam, I am that mi∣serable Sefuseo who has seen you to day, and who is come to demand your pardon, for having found you ten thousand times more adorable than all the beautiful Divinities that ever he beheld in his life: I expose my self to all things to ac∣quaint you with it; and now after you have heard it, command me if you please to die; but do not ac∣cuse the boldness I have taken, but the excess of a passion which your eyes have created, and which I clearly see will never end but with my life. AT this accident Orazia was struck with the greatest astonish∣ment in the world. After she had
treated the adventurous Sefuseo as the most desperate of all men, and had several times told him, that if he would not withdraw, she should be obliged to make him repent his presumption; she called one of her Women to her, named Bonnellvie. The rash and daring Sefuseo then began to perceive how far his love had transported him, and to how many dangers he was exposed; and coming up to Orazia's Bed-fide, and by accident lighting upon one of her hands, which she had put out to thrust him back, taking it in∣to his, and wetting it with a thou∣sand tears; It is not so much for me, as for you, Madam, said he to her, with an Air that sufficiently declared the condition of his Soul, that I conjure you to reflect upon what you now do: What will there be said, Madam, if it should come to be known that a Man has been in your Chamber at so unseasona∣ble
an hour of the night? Ah! Madam, they will have no more goodness for you, than they would have for me, and yet pray Heaven that I might be the only wretched person. Bonnelivie, who had heard her Mistress call her, after she had done folding up her Gown which she was then about, came into the Chamber, and ask'd her what her pleasure and commands were. O∣razia had well considered on the prudent discourse of the wise Sefu∣seo, that it was true, if such a thing should happen to be known, it might be criminally turn'd upon her; as likewise that it might make an ill impression upon the mind of her Husband, having recovered her self as well as she could, resolving to send Bonnellvie quickly out of the Room, she gave her some or∣ders for the next day, such as the trouble and confusion in which she
was permitted her to think of, and so dismist her. But after Bonnellvie was retired, addressing her self to Sefuseo, who was in the same condition as a Cri∣minal, that expects the Sentence of Death to be past upon him; Do not think, said she to him, con∣tinuing to speak to him in that an∣gry way she had begun, that it has been out of any design to save you from the confusion you deserve, which hath made me change my resolution, my only consideration obliged me to it, though I am trou∣bled that a person, for whom I had conceived an Esteem, should do me such an injury: But since by your procedure you have made your self unworthy of it, all that I can do, if you will obey me in retiring, is, that I will not revenge my self of your indiscretion, but in leaving you to the shame you ought to have for it all your life-time: And
in ending those words, and in cast∣ing upon him a thousand other re∣proaches, she commanded him once more to retire. The sad and heavy Sefuseo, o're∣whelmed with these reproaches, flung himself upon his knees at the fair Orazia's Bed-side; and having conjured her to be pleased to hear him, he so powerfully represented to her, and with such violent marks of a Soul filled with love and sor∣row, that it clearly demonstrated his passion had not left him Master of his Reason: but that he could not resolve to go away from her, without letting her know the effect which her beauteous Charms had wrought upon his heart, that she began to attribute to the force of a true Love, what she had at the first taken for an indiscretion mixt with too much disrespect. SO that afterwards there was a very warm Combate in herheart:
The secret inclination she had had for the Gallant Sefuseo, succeeding her resentment, made her feel a certain kind of joy, to know that she had got an humble Votary in him. She at first rejected this joy, as a thing that was Criminal, but she was at last vanquished by it. If she did not absolutely pardon what the violence of his passion had for∣ced him to commit, she did not continue to treat him in the same way of severity and rigour; only made him to consider, that she could not suffer, without wounding her Vertue, that another man be∣sides her Husband should have any affection for her. SHE obliged him afterwards to retire, fearing that her Husband would return, which had given her no small disquiet, as indeed it could not well do otherwise. Having seen that she had left the Compa∣ny, he broke up play almost at the
same time that the hasty Sefuseo had slunk out of Lulevinda's house; but by an extraordinary good turn of Fortune, out of a fear to wake her, he went to undress himself in a Chamber which was near to that in which she lay. AS soon as he was come back, the Servants who had the care of shutting up the Gates, lock'd them immediately after they had seen him come in. Sefuseo having found them shut when he came up to them, was put to a strange plunge; but he got them to open 'em again, as if he had come just then from their Master Bazugen, who was gone into his Wives Chamber im∣mediately after our bold Adventu∣rer was got out of it. Bazugen having heard the Gates opened a∣gain, just as he was going into Bed, the next day ask'd his Ser∣vants whom they had opened them to: whereupon they told him what
the Ingenious Sefuseo had said to them; and that not any of them could tell who he was, nor indeed so much as give a description of him; he presently began to have some suspitions, which filled his head with a thousand disquietudes. As he might question whether his Wife loved him when he married her, so he did still, whether he was beloved by her or no, which kept his satisfaction from being altoge∣ther so free and peaceable, and made him very inclinable to Jea∣lousie. IF Sefuseo had abundance of joy that he had in part appeased Ora∣zia, that Charming Fair One was not in such a satisfied condition; the weakness she had been guilty of, gave her all the confusion ima∣ginable. She made to her self a thousand reproaches, as if she had been guilty of the most unpardon∣able Crimes: and afterwards, re∣flecting
upon the sufferings and dangers that such an Ingagement would expose her to in all appea∣rances, she took up resolutions ca∣pable to defend her against Love it self, and believed that her Reason would quickly reassume its Chair and former Empire. She disavow∣ed the sentiments of her heart, and only accused the disorder she had been in, of the frailty she had com∣mitted. SHE was after this almost two Months before she had done taking the Bath, and reposing her self af∣ter she had taken it. During that time, she strengthened her self in her resolutions, but yet she could not keep from thinking sometimes on the handsom Sefuseo. But the little trouble those thoughts awa∣ked in her breast, made her greatly believe that his Idea was not alto∣gether defaced there, at least it was never able to cause in it any great disturbances.
AT last she returned to Spira, more beautiful and fair, through the effect that her Bath and the Country-air had produced. Her Husbands house was near the deli∣cate Garden where all the Gallan∣try used to come and appear in their greatest Glories, and Bazugen's Lady went frequently to walk in that pleasant place. She was very much surprized a few days after her re∣turn, to see the accomplished Sefu∣seo there, who had not missed a day coming into it ever since he first had cast his eyes upon her, not doubting but that was the most likely place to meet with her soon∣est. Perceiving her to be all a∣lone, he went and addressed him∣self to her; he told her, that he had waited the happiness of see∣ing her with an impatience worthy the passion that he presumed to make her a Declaration of; and that if during the time wherein he
could not enjoy that infinite bles∣sing, she had done him the Grace now and then to think on him, he did believe he should never have the power to render his acknow∣ledgments to her for those unspeak∣able favours, in that glorious man∣ner they deserved. AT first she pursued the resoluti∣on she had taken up; maugre all the Emotion that the sight of the Charming Sefuseo made her sensi∣ble of: She answer'd him in an af∣fected angry tone, that if she had said such things to him as had a∣ny ways flattered him, when he had hardened himself so far as to come into her Chamber, it was on∣ly to oblige him to retire without making any noise; and that she did extreamly wonder at him, to per∣ceive that he so little did fear or va∣lue her Resentment, and that he still had the Confidence to make his Applications to her.
Sefuseo was strangely surprized when he received this unexpected answer: Ah! Madam, said he, af∣ter some pause to her, with a terri∣ble sadness, wherefore did you not give me my death that night in which I came out of your Cham∣ber? I should at least have thought I had died without all your ha∣tred, and therein to have died hap∣py. Those words, accompanied with an Air that was the most passionate in the world, absolutely renewed in the heart of the tender Orazia her Inclination for the brave Sefuseo: She could not any longer dissem∣ble her tenderness, but acknow∣ledged the favourable esteem she had had at first for him, the Efforts she had made to overcome it, and the condition into which her Soul was fallen again now she saw him. But she conjured him afterwards by the sincerity which she had te∣stified
to him, and by all the kind∣ness he could have for her, not to persevere in giving to her any pub∣lick marks of his passion which might in the least reflect upon her Reputation, and assuredly trouble the repose of her Life, if her Hus∣band should but once come to have never so little suspition of him; and to which affection, she told him, with all the resolution her Soul was then capable of, that she was fully determined never to hearken. The at first happy Sefuseo had a most unconceiveable joy to hear that he had been able to make any impression upon that Heart that was so considerable to him, and for his Soul could not conceal it from Orazia. But that which after∣wards she demanded of him afflict∣ed him even to the last degree, not being able to conceive that he could live any longer than she did permit him to love her; and he
was as it were struck with a Fatal Dart. That grief of his was observed by Orazia to be far greater than the joy had been: He raised in her breast a pity, against which she made but small resistance; the in∣clination she had for the Graceful Sefuseo taking away from her all power of doing it. He represented to her so admirably, and with so much love, that his passion not ha∣ving any thing in it but what was full of an extream respect, could not detract from her Merit; and that he knew very well how to conceal from all the world his Love, and his Happiness, and keep all persons from so much as in the least to suspect it, if she would but once condescend to receive his Vows and Submissions. Yet after she had made a thousand scruples to him about it, and had told him, how that she greatly apprehended
the consequences of that weakness which she had, there was establish∣ed between them a very pleasant and obliging Commerce. Bonnellvie, of whose Fidelity O∣razia was absolutely assured, took the Letters from the Gallant Sefu∣seo, and gave him those of her Mi∣stress. Although they did not see one another in publick Companies where they might have been, for fear lest any one should take notice of their Loves, by observing their actions; yet the happy Sefuseo had the good fortune to spend many a swift hour, or at least they were so in his apprehension (for hours fly away like Lightning among Lo∣vers when they lye bathing them∣selves in one anothers Imbraces) at her own House, and that too ve∣ry frequently: for that Ingenious Love-Factress, her Confident, so admirably improving the time of the young Bazugen's absence, that
there was scarcee a Week passed them, but she found out some way to bring them together, let what, or who would part them. About that time, one of her Hus∣bands most Intimate Friends, na∣med the Baron of Franchvill, who was newly come back from his Travels, came to see him. Bazugen had been married since they had seen one another; and he could not let him know it, without carry∣ing him up into his Wives Cham∣ber. The Baron of Franchvill was ab∣solutely confounded with the sight of so Illustrious a Beauty. He made her afterwards many Visits, in which she appear'd to him so Charming and Amiable, that in a little time he was struck with the same Disease as Sefuseo was. The Victorious Orazia quickly percei∣ved it, and was infinitely displeas'd at it, through the consequences she feared it might produce.
SHE apprehended that this new passion would hinder her Com∣merce with her belov'd Sefuseo, ei∣ther by the jealousie of her Hus∣band, who would thereby become more mistrustful of her; or by that which she might give to the passi∣onate Sefuseo; or by the care that the Baron of Franchvill would take for the future, to search into all her actions, through the interest of his Love. Wherefore when the prudent Orazia next saw the ignorant Sefu∣seo, she sincerely acquainted him with the thoughts of the passion of the Baron of Franchvill; and at the same time assured him, that she thought him only worthy of her Esteem, and that she never was ca∣pable of having a sensibility for a∣ny other than himself; and repeat∣ed her Commands to him, that he should for the future take more cir∣cumspect measures than he had
done thitherto, especially to be more observing as to what respected her. Sefuseo was extreamly surprized at what Orazia told him, but her generous procedure re-assured him in part. He answered her, that without the Grace she did him in the assurance she made of being in∣capable to change, he should be the most wretched Man in the world: that he knew very well by the effect of her Beauty upon him, that with∣out that Grace, he should not only have feared the Baron of Franch∣vill, but all the men upon Earth; but that he presumed to conjure her to believe, that none could ever have for her a greater Admiration than he had; and in a word, that he should be more grieved than her self, if the goodness she had for him, in permitting him to adore her, should be the cause of any trouble and disaster. THE Baron of Franchvill still
became more passionate, and conse∣quently more assiduous in his Ad∣dresses. He very seldom miss'd being in all Companies, wherein the Powerful Orazia ever used to go, where he rendered her all the submissions and respects that possi∣bly could be given by a person who perfectly doated on her, but he could not pay her those duties without being taken notice of by several persons, and without ha∣ving it come to the knowledge of her Husband. Bazugen was pre∣sently stung with a strange Jealou∣sie towards his Wife, though she by many things discovered, that the passion of the Baron of Franchvill was extreamly displeasing to her. THIS unhappy Lover did a long while unprofitably complain of her rigour and cruelty to him. She gave to the Generous Sefuseo an ex∣act account of the troubles he pro∣cured her; not but that she knew
very well she had Merit enough, but her heart would only suffer her to think of Sefuseo. THE Baron of Franchvill loving her very violently, and finding still that his Submissions were to no purpose in the world, but to exas∣perate her the more against him, he thought with himself, that if he could but ingage Bonnellvie in his Interests, his Fortune possibly would change. In a little time he so insi∣nuated himself into the breast of her Woman, who was interessed, that she promised to serve him in all she could, and perswade her La∣dy not to be so cruel to him, and acquainted him with what had past between her Mistress and the Gallant Sefuseo. This Intelligence at first filled him with an outragious despite, but afterwards he began to draw some hopes from it. He thought he had made a pretty good begin∣ning,
to have discovered that that stubborn Fair One to all his Orato∣ry, was not to all the world insensi∣ble; and that if he could but set the too happy Sefuseo and she at a∣ny variance, possibly he might find her less rigorous. HE communicated his design to Bonnellvie, who told him, that knowing the humour and the de∣licacy of her Mistress, she thought, for her part, that there could be no surer way to bring it about to a successful issue, than by some turn or other to make her question the fidelity of her Gallant. After a tedious while was spent in pumping for some way to put this design of theirs in execution, they resolved to make use of the Picture of a very fair Lady, whom the Baron of Franchvill had for∣merly been an humble Servant to, and to make it be found by Bazu∣gen's Wife.
That Artifice had its wished suc∣cess. A few days after the Favou∣rite Sefuseo obtained of Orazia the favour to wait upon her at her own house; and as soon as he was gone, she found much about the place where they had sate, that Picture which Bonnellvie very cunningly had laid there. SHE presently, upon the taking it up, conceived a most terrible mi∣strust, and opening the Case in which the Picture was, she no lon∣ger questioned the Crime of Sefu∣seo, when she beheld there the Por∣traict of an extraordinary beautiful Person, Young, and Charming to a Miracle: She thought she should have died with regret, for having been able to love a Man who could be guilty of so great an infidelity towards her. He had given her a thousand marks of his Love, which now appeared to her no otherwise than meer Cheats, and she took
up a resolution never to see him more. IT was just about that time of the year which is spent in all manner of Divertisements and Sports of Gallantry, and the next day the brave Sefuseo, being at a Ball in Masquerade, where she chanced to be, had a great mind to speak to her. If I thought all my resent∣ment, said she to him, beginning the discourse her self, was full e∣nough of despite, I would o're∣whelm you with reproaches, and put you into the last confusion; but I will have only that of ha∣ving loved you, too happy by be∣ing delivered through your fault, from the weakness I had, and of which you have rendered your self so unworthy, that I should think my self dishonoured for the future, if I did so much as look upon you. The astonished Sefuseo could not give her one word of answer, be∣cause
she did presently remove her self from him: And besides he was so surprized at words that were so strange to be understood, that it was a long time before he could be∣lieve himself to have heard them, being prick'd to the quick with those reproaches, and quite over∣whelmed with an unexpressable grief. HE examined himself a little af∣ter, and all his conduct; at last he remembred himself that he had got a Rival, and that remembrance augmented his grief, not any longer doubting but that that was the cause of his ill fortune. He fanci∣ed that Orazia had changed her sen∣timents in favour of the Baron of Franchvill, and that her Choller was only a blind and artisice of hers to break off with him; he was ter∣ribly afflicted at it, as if he had cer∣tain proofs and evidences of it, and suffered all that jealousie could in∣spire
him with that was most cruel and tormenting. HE afterwards sought out all oc∣casions to speak to, as he imagined, his faithless Orazia, and to complain to her of her inconstancy, without being able to get one word of au∣dience from her: yet she could not totally drive him out of her re∣membrance, but she sometimes re∣gretted the loss of a heart which she had esteemed worthy of her af∣fections; but still she remained stedfast in the resolution she had ta∣ken up. IN the mean while Bonnellvie told the Baron of Franchvill to what an extremity Orazia was in∣raged at the false and treacherous Sefuseo, which made him to re∣double his diligences and respects to her, and to do what ever he could to endeavour to make her cast Se∣fuseo out of her remembrance, in perswading her that he had a real
and tender Passion for her. But yet Orazia was never the more fa∣vourable in her treatments to him: she looked upon all the Testimonies he gave her of his Passion, but as second Snares, and Nets, that the perfidiousness of Men had laid for her. Those different thoughts joined to the jealousie of her Husband which she perceiv'd to increase, gave her incessantly most grievous afflictions. One thing troubled her extreme∣ly, and that was a Brother she had, who was brought up in Arms, and in a Duel killed one of the most considerable Persons in the Pro∣vince where he then was. The Relations of the Defunct, by the credit and great acquaintance and love they had in the Country, got him to be arrested; and immediately aid∣ed by the rigor of the Laws against those Crimes, which by many
Persons are accounted honourable, used their utmost indeavours to bring him to his Tryal, with all the speed they could. That business made a great deal of noise in the World, and the va∣liant Sefuseo heard of it as well as the rest, but with an extreme dissa∣tisfaction, for the interest that Ora∣zia had in it. HER procedure against him con∣firmed his jealousie. He doubted not, but that if she could make him any just reproaches, and on the contrary, if she had not appre∣hended those which she knew he could make her, she would not have so obstinately refused to hear; and it was that which gave her the most desperate disquiet. HIS Love inspired him with a design to save her Brother, hoping that that service might justifie him in her Breast, or at least traverse the happiness of his Rival.
A little after he had formed this design, he was resolv'd once more to address himself to the indiffe∣rent Orazia, desiring to know be∣fore he departed, if she truly thought she had reason to accuse him, or if he had not more to doubt her inconstancy. He thought that he should be much less wretched, if she had any suspitions against him, how criminal soever she ima∣gined him to be; but if the hap∣piness of the Baron of Franchvill was the cause of his condition, which he looked upon to be so cru∣el, he thought that what he had resolved upon, would appear to O∣razia of quite another value; and that if he perished in the attempt; he should at least have her regret. But he found her just as she was before; that is to say, as resolute not to speak a word to him, as she was not to hear any thing from him.
Not being any longer able to be Master of the movements of his jealousie, No, no, Madam, said he to her, with a mortal grief, you cannot through the confusion you will have, confess to me what it is that makes my unhappiness; your beauty has had its effect upon other hearts as well as mine, which could not be made sensible but for you; and yours has been capable at last to receive other vows than mine: but what I am going to un∣dertake will make you see that I was not unworthy of that honour, and that I always place all my hap∣piness in adoring you, and in giv∣ing you the Testimonies of it, not∣withstanding your injustice, and your inconstancy; and at last, see∣ing she refused to answer him, his sorrow redoubled, and it made him go away but with a greater despair. HE learnt as soon as he came to
the place where the Brother of Ora∣zia was Prisoner, that he was in a few days to be transmitted into a more secure Prison. He resolved to lay hold upon that occasion to procure his deliverance. In short, he did with so much vigour set up∣on those who led him along, though they were several more in Number than those of his own Retinue, that he rescu'd him without being known either by him, or any of his, having caused them all to wear Masques. Afterwards he conducted him himself, in that con∣dition, to a place which the Bro∣ther of the slighting Orazia told him of, where he should for cer∣tain be in safety, and where he u∣sed to him all imaginable importu∣nities to oblige him to let him have the honour to know his Deli∣verer. IF the ravished Orazia had a great deal of joy to hear that her Bro∣ther
was rescued, she was not in any less surprize about the man∣ner that she had learnt it had been effected. A few days after she had receiv∣ed that News, she saw the brave Sefuseo at the Church where she was used to go, as sad as ever, but yet who seemed to regard her with a great deal more of attention. She remembred then that she had not seen him since she had made him those Reproaches, and that he had thought her inconstant, and said other things to her which she un∣derstood nothing of: She made Re∣flections upon it, and as she was then considering with her self of some Circumstances betwixt them, she could not keep her self from ad∣miring the Action of the generous Sefuseo, not any longer doubting but that it was he who had rescued her Brother, and from making him see her in that manner as she look∣ed
upon him. He received more presumption for it, because he thought they were not taken no∣tice of by any body, he addressed himself to her as she was going out; and after he had made her to know that she had not deceived her self in having that thought, he told her, that what he had done was not an effect of his Despair but of his Love; that he should have done the same thing, if he had still in her heart the same place, he thought he had once the happiness to pos∣sess: but that in truth he was very glad, that Fortune gave him an oc∣casion to render her a little piece of Service, which she had not receiv∣ed from his Rival. He could not refrain discovering to her the great∣ness of his jealousie, and that he thought she only treated him so un∣worthily through the change of her heart, in favour of the Baron of Franchvill; and at last he com∣plained
to her of her unjust carriage towards him, whether she thought him culpable, or else that her in∣clination for him was much abated: and conjured her to be pleased at least to let him hear his Crime, or his unhappiness; adding with an extreme submission, that if he could not justifie himself, he would ac∣knowledge himself unworthy of her favours, and never present himself again before her; and that if he was not any longer to her what he had been, he would obey her orders, how cruel soever they might be, not being willing to de∣serve her by those importunities; although he did really think he should not long survive them. Orazia, who saw what the gal∣lant Sefuseo had newly done in her Service, could not speak to him in the same bitter manner she had done formerly; but likewise not being able to remove his infidelity out of
her thoughts, she could not speak to him in any soft and tender way. After she had undeceived him of the reason of his jealousie, and had told him what it was that had made her think him guilty, of which he could not justifie himself, she ad∣ded that she should never forget the Service he was then come from do∣ing her; that he knew her suffici∣ently, not to doubt of her grati∣tude, and that she should be eter∣nally obliged to him, but that that Service was not her fault, that there was no return in such things, his procedure testifying a natural levi∣ty and fickleness; that he would be always ready to do as much, and that she could never look upon him, but as a Man capable every day to receive new Idea's. and at last that she had some joy that he had himself extinguished in her heart an affection which she had frequently condemned, but which
she had not been able to vanquish, and that what he was come from doing had without doubt augment∣ed it. THE despairing Sefuseo was e∣ven ready to expire at her Feet with grief at the Sentiments of his fair, but cruel and unjust, Orazia; he told her then several things to in∣deavour to make her know that he was not guilty, but all signified no∣thing: nothing could make her doubt the proofs which she thought she had of his Crime. Not being able to justifie himself towards her, he could not absolutely accuse her for it, and remained in a most dread∣ful perplexity. Orazia, on her part, had no slen∣der trouble. What the generous Sefuseo had so lately come from do∣ing seemed so valuable to her, that she almost repented her having spoke so to him as she had done. She had still for him the same in∣clination,
and would have given all the World to have seen him in∣nocent. There was nothing but her delicacy which opposed her in her heart from believing him absolute∣ly, or at least from pardoning him. THE next day having her head full of these thoughts, being in a visit, and placed near to a Look∣ing-Glass, the Company being then just removed to the other-side of the Room, she cast her Eyes upon it to see how she lookt, and finding in her Face sufficient Charms to give her that day content, she pul∣led that fatal Picture out of her Pocket which she always carried a∣bout her, as they do most com∣monly those things that are dearest to them, or that their minds are most upon, to see if her Rival was as fair as she did fancy her self that day to be. WHILST she was standing before the Glass, and charmed at
the advantage she thought she had over that Portraict, two Ladies of the company came up towards her, and perceived her to hold a Picture in her hands, they all began to be very pleasant upon her, saying, it was without all dispute that of one of her Admirers. She assu∣red them that it was not the Picture of a Man; but seeing that they would not give any credit to what she told them, and besides conside∣ring that there was no danger for her to shew them the Case with what was in it; but on the con∣trary that it might make them re∣main in the belief they had taken up, she shewed it them. THE Baron of Franchvill, who was also acquainted with these La∣dies, had several times shewed it to them, as being a thing which was not then of any consequence; the Person whom it represented being dead. Those Ladies, who knew
the Passion of that Baron for the fair Orazia, told her, in continu∣ing their raillery, that he sacrificed to her what had formerly been the Idol of his heart; and Orazia, not being able to apprehend them, af∣ter many discourses, they gave her the explication of what they had before told her; and informed her how that he had shewed them that Picture, and told them whose it was, and that it infallibly must come from him. Orazia had a great deal of diffi∣culty to conceal the trouble that that conversation raised in her Breast. Yet she had no mean joy to hear those things, which might make her question whether her Gallant Sefuseo was guilty. She began to think it might be so, that the Baron of Franchvill, who had been to see her a few days before when she found it, had dropt it there; and not daring to demand
it of her, would rather lose it; but yet she durst not hope so hap∣py a change. THE Baron of Franchvill knew also that Lady at whose House this dispute hapned, he came just at that time to see her, and was forced to make there a full discove∣ry of it, which was the cruellest affliction to him that ever he had met with in the World. Those Ladies made him acknowledge that Picture, and obliged him to con∣fess whose it was: wherefore he added, to keep the innocent Ora∣zia from having any suspicion of the trick he had put upon her, that he perceived very well he had lost it, but he could not remember where it had been; and afterwards would fain have perswaded her that the little care he shew'd to in∣deavour the recovery of it, was a sign that he thought no longer of the Person whom it represented,
but that she had absolutely effaced the remembrance of her in his Breast. THE transported Orazia aban∣doned her self wholly to her joy, She told him railingly, without pretending to understand what he said to her, that he ought to be very much obliged to her for ha∣ving conserved for him so precious a Relique. THE Baron of Franchvill, who saw from whence Orazia's joy pro∣ceeded, was greatly troubled at it. It had been to him some time of consolation in the ill treatments he met with from her, to see the now favoured Sefuseo in some mis-un∣derstnading with her; and he did not doubt but that e're long she would give him a perfect account of all that had hapned, and that he would be a great deal more hap∣py than ever. On the other side he could not see, without being
the most miserable of all Men, that he himself was the Instrument that served to his justification; and he Prophesied thereby all that an af∣flicted and despairing Lover could imagine that might be most cruel for him, and most advantageous for his Rival. THAT Conversation had dis∣covered to the overjoyed Orazia the justification of Sefuseo's con∣stancy, and she no longer doubted but that she had always been faith∣fully beloved by him. Having a few days after addressed himself to her, he found her the same she had been, before she thought he was unfaithful to her. She told him how they were indebted to Fortune, how that the vexation she was in to believe that another should di∣vide his heart, had been the cause of her coming to find out his in∣nocence, and the joy she received thereby; and so they both mutu∣ally
admired the strange error that had for so long a time embroiled them. THEY afterwards tasted all the pleasantness that it was possible for a perfect and happy intelligence to give them; what the generous Sefuseo had done for Orazia, in re∣scuing her Brother, had fully made her sensible of the greatness of his Passion; and that new reconciled Gallant received from her such marks of a delicate tenderness, that gave him no room to doubt of his being possest of all her affection. Besides, thinking that their com∣merce was known to none, having the happiness to see one another with so much facility, nothing was wanting to their satisfaction. THE Death of the Father of Bazugen for some time separated them: For her Husband was obli∣ged to make Journeys into several Provinces, where he had left him
considerable quantities of Land. He carried his Wife with him, whom he loved as tenderly as though it had still been Honey-moon with them, and they but lately Marri∣ed; together with the jealousie he had of the Baron of Franchvill, which likewise contributed to the making of him take that resolu∣tion. Although Orazia had much de∣sired not to go that Journey, yet the great fortune that Bazugen had on his side, in comparison of that which she had brought him, obli∣ged her to so great a complaisance. IF the faithful Sefuseo and she were deprived of seeing one ano∣ther, they endeavoured to comfort themselves by writing the oft∣ner. Bonnellvie received the Let∣ters from Sefuseo, and sent him those of her Mistress. THE passion of Sefuseo, which was very violent, made him, a lit∣tle
after Orazia was gone, de∣sire that he might come and see her; and he prayed her, by one of his Letters, to permit him to wait upon her in some place which she must of necessity pass through. She could not refuse him a kindness, wherein she was sensible that she should have part of the content∣ment. SHE told Bonnellvie the place, who acquainted immediately the Baron of Franchvill with it, who was resolved to trouble them there, and to try if he could prevent it. For he thought that if he was at the place where the obliging Ora∣zia had appointed Sefuseo to be, he could hinder them from seeing one another, as also that he might have himself the pleasure of seeing O∣razia, with whom he was still most desperately in Love. HE pursued the resolution he had taken, and was at the place at
the time that the adorable Orazia had appointed her Gallant to be there; and having pretended some business further, he told her suspi∣cious Husband, that he did think himself extreme happy in ha∣ving overtook him upon the Road; and that his Journey not requiring great haste, he would tarry with him there, till he was resolved to set out further. THIS Rencounter did perfect∣ly confirm the young Bazugen in his jealousie. Neither of them could scarcely believe that such a thing happened by Accident, and according to their different inte∣rests they were both extremely troubled. THE Baron of Franchvill kept himself very close to the fair Ora∣zia: and her Husband not being able to endure that great correspon∣dence, he obliged the Baron of Franchvill to go along with him to
see a Person of his acquaintance, who lived within four or five miles of the place, whom he had not yet been to visit, only upon the consideration of removing him from his Wife. Whilst they were making this Visit, where they were necessitated to tarry some considerable time, and where the young Bazugen kept him as long as he could, his Wife Ora∣zia had the pleasure of seeing her dear Sefuseo. Their Conversation was such as may be immagined without my declaring it. The ra∣vished Sefuseo gave unspeakably kind Orazia all the Testimonies she could desire of the continuation of his love, and she did discover to him that she was not in the least be∣hind hand with him in affection. Bonnellvie acquainted the Baron of Franchvill that they had in the mean time seen one another. He was almost dead through despair,
that he had done so much to pre∣vent it, without being able to ef∣fect it successfully; and possibly al∣so for having facilitating to them the occasion of it, seeing clearly that he had been the cause of young Bazugen's having made that Visit. Scarcely did his jealousie afford him so much moderation as to keep him from pointing out his rage at the fair Orazia. He went his way back again after he had taken his leave of her; and her Husband then tarried two days longer in that place, be∣fore she could contrive a way to give her Gallant hopes that he should see her any more there; yet he could not for his Soul go away from thence, so long as she made that place her residence. BUT at last his hour did come to part, although it was with a great augmentation of Love from either Party, the tender Sentiments in which he had found her, and a
thousand new Charms he fancied he had discovered in her, rendered his passion one of the greatest that ever had been. THERE was well near two years run out in young Bazugen's Journey, although he did what∣soever he could to shorten it. That time seemed as I do not know how many Ages to the mutually amo∣rous Sefuseo, and Orazia; for she was in no little desire to see the end of them. The Letters they wrote were but a feeble and languishing consolation to them, under so tedi∣ous a separation, and served only as Oyl to invigorate and strengthen the flame of their passionate ear∣nestness to see one another again. AT last Bazugen, having dis∣patched his business, returned to Spira, and brought back his Wife along with him. Sefuseo, you may easily guess, had all the joy imaginable at her return. At
that time there was an Ambassa∣dor to have entrance, and the pre∣cogitating Sefuseo presuming that Bazugen would not fail to be at the Ceremony, sent a Letter to his dear Orazia, to desire her that she would pretend some indisposition that day in which he was to pass through the City; and also to per∣mit him to come and wait upon her, where he might have the hap∣piness to be at her Feet all the time that Ceremony should last, and to tell her the torments that that tedi∣ous absence of hers had procured him. Orazia easily inclined to prefer the pleasure of seeing him, to all the sights of the World, and much more to that: so that she feigned an indisposition from the precedent day. THE Baron of Franchvill had been sick, before her return for some time, and he was not yet very well recovered from that sickness. The
young Bazugen not being perswa∣ded that his Wife did find her self really ill, fancyed she only dissem∣bled so, to give the Baron of Franch∣vill an opportunity of seeing her, who might very easily decline go∣ing to be a Spectator of that Cere∣mony, because of the ill estate of his health. In that suspition he was resolved not to go and see the entrance, except the Baron of Franchvill went likewise along with him. Curiosity and Complaisance made the Baron of Franchvill for∣get the weakness he had upon him, he ingaged himself to be one of the Company; and the next day Bazugen and he, with some more of their Friends and Ladies, went to the place they had taken up, to see the Show go by. THE eager Sefuseo was not ve∣ry long before he went to console his beautiful Orazia for the diver∣tisement
which she deprived her self of upon his account. He found her with infinite Charms, and in such a conquering conditi∣on, that never in the least was seen in any Person who had been ever so little sick. He gave her a thou∣sand thanks for the grace she had bestowed upon him; and fancy∣ing themselves to be secure from a∣ny ones interrupting them, they let their hearts run out to one another with the greater liberty, and they enjoyed a real satisfaction from the freedom they had of so long a Conversation, which was without all manner of fear. IN the mean time the Baron of Franchvill, through the inconveni∣ence of the place or his own dispo∣sition, found himself extreme ill a little after the March was begun, he did what he could to overcome it; but fearing lest his sickness should grow upon him, he judg'd
it his best course to retire before he was worse; and therefore without speaking a word to any Person, for fear of troubling the Company with whom he came, he went out, and return'd to his own Lodgings. A little while after Bazugen, look∣ing about the Balcony, perceived he was gone: he doubted not then but that his Wife Orazia had feign∣ed her self sick on purpose to give the Baron of Franchvill an oppor∣tunity of coming to see her; and that he could not let so fair a one slip a∣way, after he had hoped and sighed for it so long; and therefore he was certainly gone to wait upon his Wife. HE could not get the mastery over his jealousie, but away he went without taking leave of any Person, transported with rage and fury, and came to his House with most dreadful resolutions. Bnnellvie, who was accidently
at that time looking out of a Win∣dow, where one might see every body that came into the House, was extremely surprized, when she per∣ceived him coming back so soon: she ran in a great confusion into her Mistresses Chamber, and told her that Bazugen was just at the Door. Orazia stood like a Statue, and was not able to utter a word, she was so astonished; and Sefuseo, to speak the truth, was not in a much less surprize than her self, not believ∣ing that they could find out a way to keep the netled Bazugen from seeing them together, there not being any other way to get out of the Chamber, than that by which he must of necessity come in. THEY were all three so seized with fear and amazement, that Ba∣zugen was even just at the Cham∣ber before they had ever thought of a way to avoid this disturbance, which without doubt would be ve∣ry
terrible: At last Bonnellvie hear∣ing him ready to come in, went to the Windows, and drew the Cur∣tains, which were ordinarily wont to keep the light too much from coming into the Chamber: which by reason also that it was already pretty forward in the Afternoon, made it to appear very dark; and when Bazugen came in, she stood before the guilty Sefuseo, that so her cornified Master might the less perceive him; and whilst that in his transport of fury, he was go∣ing to open the Curtains, which caused that obscurity, and hinder∣ed him from discerning things he was jealous of, she took the false Baron of Franchvill, and made him slip out of the Chamber. THE surprized Orazia, who was well-near half dead, had flung her self down upon her Bed: and her Husband, as soon as he had let in the light, came up to her; al∣though
he could see no body, nor had heard the slippery Sefuseo get himself out of the Chamber, yet the trouble which he observed she was in, did extremely increase his suspicions; and he thought, with∣out the least doubt of it, that all those things were not without some particular Mystery: but not having any proof of it, he would not make a noise to no purpose. Sefuseo was still miserable, under an extraordinary disquiet, to know how the rest of this strange adven∣ture past: being in the greatest fear that the Linx her Husband had perceived him, either in his Wife's Chamber, or in the Street. BUT yet he could not quickly be informed of it: Bazugen made his Wife sensible of his suspicions through the ill humour he was in for several days together; and she had much ado to know how to car∣ry her self towards him during all
that time: which made her appre∣hend how miserable she should have been, if he had at last found out what he had been so near the disco∣very of; and made her take up the resolution of forbidding her dear Gallant ever to see her more. BUT a few days after perceiv∣ing him very sensibly concerned at the danger she had been in, and knowing by his trouble how dear she was to him, she had not the power to make him that prohibiti∣on: She told him only the appre∣hensions she had, and prayed him not to demand things of her for the future, where she might be so ex∣posed: telling him that she per∣ceived her self too weak to refuse him any thing, and that for cer∣tain it would be the death of her, if the unhappiness she feared should befall her. Bonnellvie, who was always in the Interests of the Baron of Franch∣vill,
told him how she had deliver∣ed the insnared Sefuseo and her Mistress Orazia. He was mad in his mind, that the fury of the in∣raged Bazugen had not light upon his happy-Rival; and wished with all his Soul he had been exposed to it, though indeed his charming Orazia must of necessity have been also folded up in the same, if not worse, circumstances; seeing her still insensible of all his re∣spects and devotions, he was high∣ly exasperated against her, con∣sidering how kind and obliging she proved to the fortunate Sefuseo: and in the jealousie which those re∣flections increased, he would have rejoiced to see himself revenged, by that means, of a cruel Mistress, and a happy Rival. BEING carried away with those Sentiments, he told Bonnell∣vie, that he could not any longer live in that condition; and that if
she did not attempt something for him, he should not have any fur∣ther consideration, but should do whatsoever his Passion should in∣spire into him; and prayed her to indeavour to remove the setled Se∣fuseo, without which he should be for ever miserable. Bonnellvie was extremely put to it to find out a way to raise an evil understanding between Sefuseo and her Mistress; not being willing to do any thing which might offend the latter. Seeing her self prest by the Baron of Franchvill to do some∣thing, she at last told him that she thought there was but that one only way which she had already made use of to effect it; that knowing the curious delicacy of Orazia's heart, there was, according to all appearances, but a powerful doubt and suspicion of the fidelity of her Gallant, which could loosen her from that affection she had for him;
and that she hoped, in giving her some new doubts of it, to do him the Service he demanded. IN short, a few days after, she told the innocent Orazia, pretend∣ing too that she was grievously troubled at what she was going to relate to her, that two Persons that waited for her Master Bazugen, had been entertaining themselves with almost all the particularities that had passed between the brave Se∣fuseo and her self; and that it ap∣peared by their discourse, that they came to know it no other way but from himself, who had told it them as a thing of which he made no great matter; that she had over∣heard them from a place that was near to that where she told her they spoke, and from whence they might clearly over-hear them: and at last she supposed to her, that they had said so many particularities of what had truly pass'd between the impru∣dent
Sefuseo and her, and which could not be known but by them and Bonnellvie, whom she did not in the least doubt of perfidiousness to Sefuseo, and that she thought him to be such a one as could not see himself beloved by a Person like her without crying it at the Cross. SHE complained of that pro∣cedure which she thought surpassed all baseness, unto Bonnellvie, of whom she was far enough from ha∣ving any mistrust. IT was then that she took up a resolution to break off with her faithless Sefuseo, and never to re∣member him more. As she loved him to the highest extremity, be∣fore Bonnellvie had made that Story of him to her, she could not but feel a cruel affliction in being obli∣ged to take up that resolution. But imagining her self so mightily inju∣red, her resentment easily vanished
all the inclination that she had had for him. When she had thought that he had loved another besides her self, and that his heart was divided, she had not been sensible of half that grief which the thoughts of her condition at present gave her. SHE could not refrain re∣proaching him for his perfidious∣ness: they saw one another the next day in the Garden where Sefuseo first saw the fair Orazia after she was returned from the Bath, and where they had often seen one ano∣ther since. She went thither not to defer, at least, the only venge∣ance which she could take of him: and when he was going to make his addresses to her; It is a base Action, said she to him, with an extraordinary resentment, to go to ruine me to satisfie your vanity. Such an ingratitude cannot be look'd upon with horrour enough; for at last the weakness which I
have had is known, and it could never have been so but only by your means: but, added she, I will extinguish it, even out of my me∣mory; and you ought not any more to regard me, than as a Per∣son who shall detest you whilst I have a day to live. And immedi∣ately she went away from him, and joined to some Ladies of her ac∣quaintance, who then came in, that she might not be obliged to hear a∣ny thing he should offer to say. IF she had stayed to hearken to what he could have answered her, the marks of that grief which she had seen her self to be the cause of, might have served in part for the justification of the innocent Sefuseo. He was so o'rewhelmed with those reproaches, that he stood mute a long time in the place where she had spoke to him before the company came in. He had always taken heed, with the greatest care imagin∣able,
that none should have the least suspicion of their Intelligence; because loving and esteeming that beautiful Person to the last degree, her Reputation was very dear to him; and yet then he saw himself accused of want of secresie and fi∣delity: and that which afflicted him as bad, was that he could not imagine she should ever think him capable of so unworthy an Acti∣on. AS the credulous Orazia was fully perswaded that he had betray∣ed her, it was impossible for him to obtain of her the favour to let him know the particularities of that Crime she accused him of; and that he would indeavour to justifie himself; though he several times conjured her to remember that she had already believed him guilty of another almost as great, of which she her self had seen his Justificati∣on; and that he demanded of her
with a great deal of grief, if she would wait until time and hazard made her see his innocence, which possibly he might never be so hap∣py as to have it. The grief in which he was, made her abandon the pursuit of a Charge which he solicited. The Court was at that time at Belaufontaine, and he could not there resolve to quit the Interest of his Love for that of his For∣tune. IN the mean time the Baron of Franchvill, to whom Bonnellvie had told what she had perswaded her Mistress to believe of her Gallant, and the resolution she had taken, forgot nothing to procure to himself all the advantage which he thought he might hope for from it. He re∣doubled his Assiduity to her, as he had done when she had been first incen∣sed against the as innocent Sefuseo; and applied himself with an ex∣treme care to shew her more Love
and Zeal, which he every day dis∣covered to her by a thousand things how wretched he was in not ha∣ving the good fortune to be grate∣ful to her, and how redevable he should be to her good Graces, if she would at last be pleased to hearken to him. BUT nothing from his part could affect her, since she was then uncapable of having any other thoughts, than those which the baseness that she thought the un∣worthy Sefuseo had used towards her, had inspired her with, which extremely afflicted the Baron of Franchvill. Moreover she would not indure that Sefuseo should so much as offer to justifie himself; and indeed, for fear of provoking her the more, he durst not address himself to her. In a word, it was impossible for one to see any Senti∣ments that were more confus'd, and cruel, than those of these three Per∣sons.
Bonnellvie, about that time, chan∣ced to receive some Letters, by which she understood that a Bro∣ther of hers, to whom she was an Heiress, was dead; which obliged her to beg leave of her Mistress to go away immediately to possess her self of what he had left her. Her departure was fatal to the Baron of Franchvill; he despaired, seeing himself deprived of the only Per∣son that had buoyed him up till then with some hopes; he was resolv'd to put an end to his Courtship, one way or other; to see if any thing could make him be beloved by the hitherto obstinate Orazia; to con∣tinue his Passion for her, or to a∣bandon her for ever. Having found an opportunity to speak with her, so as he desired, he pressed Orazia at such a violent rate, and told her several things that were so extremely displeasing to her, that she did not observe any
measures in her carriage towards him, but abused him most unmer∣cifully. Not being any longer Ma∣ster of himself, he was thinking to revenge himself of those treat∣ments, to reproach her in all he knew of the Commerce betwen her and her Favourite Sefuseo; and he had presently given her that cruel displeasure if the sight of what he was still charm'd with, had not ta∣ken from him the power of doing it. BUT he could not refuse him∣self that satisfaction; after he was return'd to his Lodgings he wrote a Letter to her, in which he told her all that Bonnellvie had acquaint∣ed him with, about the Amours of the prosperous Sefusco and her, and all that he had done, to make her break with him; that notwith∣standing that ingagement, he had religiously adored her, whilst she had only unsupportable severities
for him; but that her last treat∣ments had procured his repose, and he was now perfectly cured of the Passion that he had had for her: yet nevertheless he could not for∣bear reproaching her of injustice, of which what he told her was a certain proof, since she then could acknowledge that he had been the object of her Husband's jealousie, whilst that the successful Sefuseo was beloved by her without the least murmur or repining at it; and that he had had in his hands an infallible way to revenge him∣self of her rigours, without ever be∣ing desirous to make use of them; and that, in a word, he should find other hearts besides hers, who would be both more just and grate∣ful. WHEN Orazia first received that Letter, she fell into an asto∣nishment and affliction not to be conceived; she saw in an instant all
that she might apprehend from him. She did not think that the Baron of Franchvill would easily forget her severities towards him, and did not doubt but that her Hus∣band would in a little time be told that which would make her mise∣rable all her Life. YET, in so great a trouble, she had the consolation once more to find the Innocence of the wrong'd Sefuseo. As she had not extin∣guished her affection for him, but because she accounted him guilty, she felt it immediately kindling a∣gain in her, and that with a greater accession; as soon as she perceived he was innocent, she could not de∣fer letting him know that he was justified, and all that the Baron of Franchvill had written to her: though she saw very well that they could not continue their seeing one another as formerly, without ex∣posing themselves to greater dan∣gers,
and therefore that they must of necessity forbear having the plea∣sure of it for some time. But she was extremely troubled to imagine how she might find out some way to see him, without having it come to the knowledge of the Baron of Franchvill. IN the place of Bonnellvie, she had made a confidence in another of her Women, named Trofilena, whom she knew to be wholly dis∣interessed. She gave her a Letter for the re-installed Sefuseo in her affections, by which she appoint∣ed him to be the next day at a Ball in Masquerade, where she would give him a meeting. THE joy of the transported Se∣fuseo resembled that of his grief, and both were in their excess. That mark of goodness from his dear O∣razia in a moment effaced in his mind whatsoever he had suffered. Without ever examining what it
was that might be the occasion of that change, it seemed to him suf∣ficient to see his miseries at a clo∣sing period. BUT if the next day he present∣ly felt his joy meet with new ac∣cession by the sight of his charm∣ing Orazia, who received him in a very tender and affectionate man∣ner, which confirmed him that she had once more found him innocent; he was strangely surprized when she told him what the Baron of Franchvill had related to her in a Letter; nor was he in any less af∣fliction, when she afterwards told him that they must of necessity be some time without seeing one ano∣ther. Having been deprived so long a time from that happiness, that command was as a new stab at the heart which gave him a more piercing torture: Besides, she then appeared to him so glorious and shining in her Charms, that it made
him find her orders the more severe and shocking. Nevertheless, the Interest of the fair Orazia made him resolve upon all that she desired upon that ac∣count, finding himself at least most happy in knowing that he was still most passionately beloved. Besides, Orazia, to take away from him all thoughts which he possibly might have, that she did not speak to him with sincerity, and that she would deprive him of the pleasure of see∣ing her without an absolute neces∣sity, gave him the Letter of the Baron of Franchvill. THE next day the generous Sefuseo returned the Letter to Tro∣filena, to whom Orazia had bid him give it: Trofilena gave it to her Mistress, at the same time as there was given to Orazia another for her Husband; and Bazugen hapning to come up just at the same time to them, and having known
that his Wife had a Letter for him, and demanding it of her; she think∣ing to deliver him that which he ought to have, gave him instead of it that of the Baron of Franch∣vill. THE astonishment of Bazugen was not less in reading that Letter, than had been that of his Wife O∣razia, when she had received it. He several times looked upon his Wife as he was reading it, and finding in that Letter a little Note which Sefuseo had wrapt up in it, and that was full of a passionate tenderness, having read that also; See there, Madam, said he to her, with a most terrible Choler, the reproaches and thanks of one of your Lovers: Is there in all the World a Husband that is more mi∣serable than I am? and a Wife more guilty than your self? For, in short, are these the Sentiments that ought to inspire in you your du∣ty
and my Love? But I will ap∣ply the last remedies to them, and possibly all your Life long you shall repent that you have ever done me this offence. When he had spoken those words to her, he made her all the Menaces that could proceed from a breast so full of fury as his was: and afterwards he forbid her ever seeing again her so much be∣loved Sefuseo, or speaking to him. THE desolate Orazia fell upon the Chairs, almost dead, some∣times looking upon her Husband, with Eyes in which her confusion was painted; and sometimes pou∣ring out a torrent of tears, and fetch∣ing afterwards most heavy and heart-breaking sighs; so strange a condition of hers brought pity in∣to the heart of the tender Bazugen, and awakened that love he former∣ly had for her; and looking upon her with less severity, he seemed to wait till she would defend her
self. But feeling her to be more than convinced in all appearances, and besides not being able to sup∣port the sight of her angry Hus∣band, she made use of that little strength that was remaining in her, and went into her Chamber, o're∣whelmed with a mortal grief. IT was then that all the mise∣ries she had so often feared present∣ed themselves before her Eyes, and that she had the most dismal thoughts that could be conceived. She was for several days in an un∣expressable confusion, and under most dreadful sufferings of mind, which made her often to wish for Death, as the only remedy to all her calamities. She could not con∣sider what a difficulty she should have to make her Husband forget the suspicions he might have of her Vertue, without despairing e∣ver being able the rest of her Life to have any true repose with him,
or to put an end to his reproaches. Those thoughts which were the first she had, did immediately get an absolute possession of her, and kept her from making any reflecti∣ons upon her Sentiments for the now to be deserted Sefuseo; when she was a little recovered from her great trouble, and that her inclina∣tion for him would represent it self to her imaginations, she condem∣ned it with all possible rigour, and took up for the future such resolu∣tions as she thought were by no means to be shaken. Sefuseo, who had understood of Trofilena what the Letter of the Baron of Franchvill had caused, re∣solved to testifie to her how much he was troubled at it; and wrote several times to her of the grief it made him to resent: but she would not receive his Letters, but at last forbid Trofilena ever again to pre∣sent any of them to her, nor so
much as to speak any thing to her, that might make her have any oc∣casion to remember him. BUT yet her heart often made her think of him contrary to her in∣clinations; the marks he had given her of as pure and great a Passion as ever had been in the World, combated with all that she could bring to oppose it; and sometimes the resolution she had taken never to see him more, became one part of her sadness. SO many occasions of grief in a little time brought her into so deep a Melancholy, that the Phy∣sitians after they had unprofitably prescribed several things for her, advised her Husband, who was al∣so very much afflicted to see her in that condition, to carry her into the Country, and try if the Air would not do her good, it being then the beginning of the Spring, the days of that Season being so
pleasant, possibly might contribute something to the recovery of her health. HER compassionate Husband hearkened to that Counsel with a great deal of approbation, being in∣deed glad to find any pretence to remove his Wife as far as he could from her beloved Sefuseo; and be∣sides hoping the more easily to gain her kindness in a place where she should have the sight of none but himself. And as for her, grief and sadness had so absolutely freed her from all manner of Divertisements, that when she saw the intention of her Husband was that she would indeavour to cure that melancholy Distemper she had upon her, she immediately testified to him that it was the greatest of her desires to do so. THE Place and the Business of Bazugen was such, that it obliging him to be often at Spira, they went
to that House they had nearest to it, and where the now remov'd Gal∣lant, Sefuseo, had first seen Ora∣zia. THEY lived there at first, to all appearances, in a perfect good un∣derstanding betwixt each other. As Bazugen had designed to regain himself in the mind and affection of his Wife, and to imploy all things to that end, he forgot nothing that might perswade her that he had not had any criminal suspicions of her, nor had ceased a moment from con∣serving for her all the love and e∣steem that one was able to have. Orazia, on her part, who had made the same design, and who saw how much interest she had to hinder her Husband from believing that ever she had any thoughts which were blameable for the amo∣morous Sefuseo, concealed her true Sentiments, and shewed an abso∣lute contentment in appearance,
which in reality she never had; for seeing her self in a place, where she had beheld the handsome Sefu∣seo the first time, she thought the more of him; and she had no plea∣sure, whatsoever she did to put him out of her remembrance, than that which those thoughts gave her. IN the mean time Sefuseo was the most miserable Man in the World, since that his only happi∣ness, the beautiful Orazia, was gone, she would receive none of his Letters: and that which redou∣bled his wretchedness, was, that Tro∣filena told him, in such a manner as gave him no further room to doubt, that in all probability she would think of him no longer. YET he found some consolati∣on in giving every day his Letters to Trofilena to deliver to her; think∣ing that at least she would by his perseverance observe the constancy of his love.
Trofilena put up those Letters in a little Cabinet of hers, in which she ordinarily lock'd up several o∣ther things. Orazia being one day in the Chamber where that Cabi∣net stood, having took notice that it was unlock'd, had a Curiosity to see what she had in it; she was strangely troubled, when she per∣ceived there those Letters, and at first had a most extreme regret that she had met with them. After∣wards she look'd upon them as things coming from Sefuseo; and at last suffered her self to be over∣come by a Curiosity to read some of them. THEY appeared to her so full of passion and respect, notwith∣standing her continued resolution to make him suffer, that she quick∣ly perceived her first Sentiments to renew again most powerfully. Ha∣ving read them several times over, with extraordinary emotions, she
could not withstand the move∣ments of her heart, but strait for∣got all the resolutions she had taken; and suffer'd Trofilena from the same day forward to deliver her the Let∣ters of the assiduously devout Se∣fuseo. HE could scarce believe so great a happiness could befall him, when he was only filled with a mortal de∣spair. His Letters were for the me∣lancholy Orazia such a Remedy, as none was like it in the World: It restored her, in a few days, all her Charms again; which made the Ex∣tasied Sefuseo compose these Verses upon that Recovery, and veiled her under the Name of the adorable Lucanthe. Stanza 1. AH! now Lucanthe 't may be said, The Winter's gone, it's Spring again, So long, my fairest, have you lain Under afflictions, buried:
And by a Miracle you come To us anew embellished, From the retirement of your Tomb. 2. Ev'n as the Rose, which a fierce storm With sharp and rude assault did shake, Its former beauty does retake, When it perceives the Sun shine warm: So do the glories in your Face Again their brightest lustre make, And look with a renewed Grace. 3. Amidst all your bewitching Darts, A very pleasing paleness lies; And you so languish with your Eyes, That those, who see you, lose their Hearts. None dares 'gainst you maintain the Field; All own themselves your Captive Prize, And strait fall down, & humbly yield. 4. All your great Charms are come again; Love, that bewailed your loss of Rayes,
Their pointed influence displays, And ceases further to complain: Your Eyes have made me deeply sigh, But there's such pleasure in that pain, As makes my great'st felicity. THERE was hardly a day pass'd wherein they did not write to one another, and that thereby their Passion became much more violent. THE earnest Sefuseo at last conjured his dear Orazia to permit him to come and wait upon her: although she saw a thousand diffi∣culties that opposed her finding out a way for it, in a place where her Husband was scarce ever out of her sight: yet the desire she had to see the importunate Sefuseo, after that so many things had hapned to them, made her at last to think upon one. Bazugen was obliged to keep his Chamber, through some indispo∣sition.
She sent to the Gallant Se∣fuseo that she would go the next day and see the fair Lulevinda, who was then at that House which her Husband had there, and that he might see her there, coming thi∣ther under a pretence of giving a Visit to that Lady. THE overjoyed Sefuseo did not fail coming early, to a place, where he was to meet with his in∣dearing Orazia. They had an e∣qual joy at their seeing one another again, and were in no small impa∣tience to have a little private di∣scourse together. But Lulevinda, who thought her self obliged to keep them company, without anydesign, at first hindred them from having o∣ther Conversation but about things in general. And when, after the first Complements and Civilities were o∣ver, she had asked them leave to go and write a Letter to send by one of her Relations Servants, who waited
for it, and that they had begun to entertain one another in a more close Commerce, News was brought them that her Husband Bazugen was coming. HE having that day found him∣self a little better, and knowing that his Wife was also at Lulevin∣da's House, thought it might do him good to go and take the Air; and afterwards upon his return, be∣ing melancholy and all alone, he sent one of his Servants thither be∣fore, out of civility, to give them notice that he was not very far off. THERE was never any con∣dition resembled that which the a∣stonished Orazia, and Sefuseo were then in. Orazia was quite over∣whelmed with it, as with the worst stroke of misfortune, which was in∣evitable, not being willing to do a∣ny thing which might discover her fear to the ignorant Lulevinda; and
as for Sefuseo, he was filled with an extraordinary grief, considering what danger he had caused the Per∣son whom he adored, to be exposed to. SEEING that Bazugen must of necessity find him with his Wife, if he did not go out immediately, he took leave of Lulevinda. Ba∣zugen, who was almost upon the back of him whom he had sent, was within less than a stones-throw of that Ladies House, when the plung'd Sefuseo was coming out of it. The trouble in which he was, redoubled when he beheld Bazu∣gen, who was for his part infinite∣ly surprized, which made him pre∣sently turn his astonishment into fu∣ry. If he had had any Weapons, he would have indeavoured, at the peril of his own Life, to revenge himself of the hardy, and daring Sefuseo; and had then a most sen∣sible regret that he had taken up a
Profession, which made him be found at that time out of a condi∣tion to satisfie himself. BEING transported with a most incredible rage, he returned back to his own House, and went to his Wife's Chamber, where he made a thousand threatnings, and burst out into expressions of a cruel resentment, as if she had been pre∣sent. Orazia had had an extreme ap∣prehension, when she had seen the dear Sefuseo go out: and seeing her Husband not come in, her fear began to change into a certainty of what had hapned. Perceiving that if she should tarry any longer at Lulevinda's House, she should fall into such a condition as would have discovered that of her Soul; and being at her wits-end, and not knowing in the World what course to take, she took her leave of her, and so went home.
Having found her Husband Ba∣zugen in her Chamber, it was the very Top and Complement of all her unhappiness. No, no, Madam, said he to her, all on fire with his rage and fury, and supposing she was come now to excuse her self: Do not hope any more for pardon from me, I am capable of nothing but revenging my self of your trea∣cheries; for now at last all things are permitted me when I am thus offended, and I can never find any thing too cruel to punish you with. After that, he gave her a thousand dreadful Menaces, and being so highly transported with rage, he threatned her several times that he would run her through, or poison her. IN the mean time the expiring Orazia, who was more than half dead, fell down into such a swound, as every body thought her in a con∣dition little different from that of a
Person that was at their last breath. Bazugen, searing lest that sight should melt him, withdrew himself into another Chamber, being filled with all the most violent Passions, as it was possible for a spirit to be troubled with. Orazia's Women hearing the noise that the outragious Bazugen had made, came running in imme∣diately, and did what they could to retrieve her, and bring her to life again. But grief had so strongly took possession of her heart, that af∣ter, by their assistance, she had be∣gun a little to recover her senses, she immediately fell again into a new swoon; and her Women ha∣ving once more got her pretty well out of it, after she fetched a few ve∣ry deep sighs and groans, she sunk again into the same condition; and at last that same grief, which had be∣fore been repressed, growing stron∣ger upon her, on a sudden she open∣ed
her Eyes with a mortal paleness, being over-whelmed with a most terrible Feaver. IT was then that she began tru∣ly to suffer, her spirits having reco∣vered some liberty, the thoughts which her Husband had, caused in her Imagination a trouble more cruel than that which then was up∣on her. After some time she made Reflections upon Sefuseo, but they were with such a melting tender∣ness, as the estate in which she was, did not seem to be able to permit her to do it: although nevertheless with some sighs which made it be discoverable that she acknowledg∣ed him to be the cause of all these miseries she indured: but her heart was then so filled with her passion, that she could not any longer strive to drive it away from her, nor con∣demn the Sentiments that it had inspired into her. Those various, and so confused,
thoughts had such a powerful ef∣fect upon her, that her life was pre∣sently in danger, never having been before sensible of so violent a sickness. Sefuseo, who had feared all things from the time that he had met with Bazugen, and who had learnt the cruel effect of it, before he returned back to Spira, was in such a despair as is beyond all ex∣pression. All the way he was go∣ing, he was several times thinking to return again, and to go offer himself up a Sacrifice to the rage of the cruel Bazugen. BUT his grief met with a ve∣ry heavy accession, when he heard two days after how that Orazia was fallen very sick. That News made him forget all that could be dear unto him. He resolved to go out of the Country, and to expect his death in some other place of the Earth, and to pass away the re∣mainder
of his life, which he fore∣saw could not but be very miserable; not being willing to be the cause that if Orazia should recover from her sickness, she should ever expose her self to any resembling miseries for him. And although his passi∣on had often made him desire to know whether she was likely to be restored, before he went his way, yet he resolved to be gone first for fear, lest if she should begin to re∣cover upon it, he should not have the power to execute his resoluti∣on. AND to conclude, after he had told it, and after he had learnt what he could of Trofilena, to whom he found a way to speak, and had desired her with a World of Tears to let Orazia know it, that he was now like to hate his life more than any Person upon Earth had done, and that in what condi∣tion soever she should be, she would
be still less miserable than himself, he went away with an illustrious Person who was turned out of fa∣vour, and departed the Kingdom. Bazugen, for his part, had not any less afflicting thoughts. Some few days after the first transports of his resentment, learning the extreme danger that his Wife was in, he was very deeply troubled at it, and that same love which had inspired him with such strange Sentiments of jealousie and rage, made him be in∣teressed in her Cure. Besides all the Remedies possibly to be prescri∣bed her, which he took a very great care that she should use; he several times appeared before her more like a Gallant, who trembles for the life of his Mistress, than a provoked Husband, and one who thought he had just ground of complaint. He indeavoured as often to per∣swade her, that the fury which he had came from the excess of his affecti∣on,
that the grief she had resented for it, should absolutely assure him for the future, and that he should be incapable ever to testifie to her any suspicions which might displease her. BUT all those cares and satis∣factions were to no purpose. She said very little to justifie her self to∣wards him, and made him also to understand that her death ought not to be disagreeable to him. SHE could do nothing else but think upon the generous Sefuseo; what he was then doing appearing to her so great a Sacrifice, and a thing that was so extraordinary, that in the midst of her Distemper she had some joy at it, knowing how worthy he had been of the Inclina∣tion she had had for him; and that strong Passion took away from her all desire of finding any cure. She thought she could never drive away that Passion from her Breast, and
that if she did survive the know∣ledge that Bazugen had of it, be∣sides the terrible constraint, with which she should be obliged to con∣ceal her Sentiments, she should be e∣very day exposed to all the vexati∣ons that he would make her suffer, and that he would have himself a continual disquiet. NEVER was any Person be∣fore seen so sick, and so troubled in her spirit: also though she had se∣veral intermissions, still presently re∣flecting upon all those things, and imagining new ones to her self, she immediately fell again into a worse condition than the former; and her strength being at last utterly ta∣ken away by her sickness, she ex∣pired in those confused Sentiments, without ever shewing any Regret for Life. FINIS.
