P2027 13069989 97108
THE INTEREST OF ENGLAND In the PRESERVATION of IRELAND. Humbly Presented to the PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND. By G. P. Esq Nam tua Res agitur, Paries cùm proximus ardet, Et neglecta solent Incendia sumere Vires. Licensed, July 15th. 1689. J. Fraser. LONDON, Printed for Rich Chiswell at the Ros and  St. Pauls Church-Yard, MDCLXXX.
TO THE HONOURABLE THE Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses IN PARLIAMENT Assembled. I do not in the least presume to inform Your Judgments, or to supplicate your Charity by the Boldness of this Dedication. The Wis∣dom of the Nation cannot be Ignorant of all matters Foreign or Domestick, that concern the Ho∣nour, Safety, and Advantage of it. And you have already exprest such a feeling Commiseration of the Calamities of Ireland, that it would seem an Offence unpardonable, to solicit your Compassi∣on by an immodest Importunity.
You have Testify'd your Tenderness, in promo∣ting the Brief, and General Collection, for the Relief of the Distressed Protestants of Ireland. You have Signaliz'd your Zeal to the Protestant Interest, by a deliberate Contrivance, and a ready Expedition of the Pole-Bill, appropriated, and ap∣pointed only for the Reduction of Ireland. You have Published your Resolution to inte∣ress your selves in the Cause of Ireland, by a No∣ble Promise to supply the KING with what shall be further requisite for the Recovery of it. You have Vouchsafed a Generous Regard to a multitude of Exiled Gentlemen (of whom some sea∣sonably and prudently withdrew, others with great Hazard and Difficulty escaped; but all Voluntarily dssierted then Houses and Estates, because they would not strengthen the hands of the Papists, or contribute to a French Ʋsurpation or the Exclusion of the English Right and Title) by designing some competent Provision for their necessary Support pro∣portion'd to their respective Sufferings; and by so affectionate and repeated Addresses to His Majesty in their Favour (who tho he needs no Interces∣sion for the Care of His Subjects, yet He loves and delights to seem perswaded by His Parlia∣ment) you have made them your Votaries, you have obliged them by everlasting Bonds of Gratitude, and they shall be recommended to Posterity as the first that ever went under the Honourable Character of Pensioners to the Parliament.
You have demonstrated your Abhorrence of all clandestine Practices, by a strict Inquisition after the Authors and occasions of the procrastinated Relief of Ireland. and the Miscarriages of particular Men in their Trusts, and Imployments: Whereby England, is put to an After-game, and obliged in their own Defence to retrive that Kingdom, at the hazard of many Lives, and the Expence of a vast Treasure, which by the very Countenance, and appearance of a small Succour had been easily, cheaply, and safely assured and preserved Nay under your Protection, I will speak out the Truth: When London Derry had shut their Gates against the Irish, and Iniskillin soon after refused to admit a Popish Garrison; when the Protestants in Dublin were Numerous, Rich and Stout; when in Munster, the Earl of Inchiquin (with many others) was very apprehensive of the im∣minent danger, and ready with the least Assistance from England, to secure the Protestant Interest there: When the Lord Kingston in Conaght out stript the Deputy, and made up his Musters of Horse and Foot before him: when forty thousand brisk men were upon Watch and Ward in Ulster; and the Earl of Tyrconnel (utterly irresclute what Measures to take) said to a Person of Honour (who urged him to lay down the Sword, and Submit to the English Govern∣ment) What would you have me do? I see no Commission to demand the Sword, would you have me cast it over the Castle Walls? I say in this Juncture, any one eminent Person, attended with a small Party, and furnished with a reasonable Pro∣portion of Arms and Mony, had without blows, or
slaughter, secured the Kingdom of Ireland, in their Allegiance to the present King and Queen; and with much Ease prevented, and curbed the insultory Insurrections in Scotland. But alas! while the Parliament are busie in dis∣coursing, and debating the Business of Ireland, the Clergy are for the most Part silent; the one Votes for them, but I do not hear, that the other Prays for them; the miseries of Ireland are Remembred in the Parliament-House, but Seldom mentioned in the Pulpit; being omitted in their Addresses to the Throne of Mercy, by a very regardless Pre∣terition. For my Part, I had neither taken upon me the Confidence to make this Address, nor given the world the Trouble of this undigested Pamphlet (hudled o∣ver in hast, and without the Advantages of Study, Books, Advice, or Retirement) but that a sort of Men no way considerable in number, or Interest, per∣verse in their Humor, as Flattering in their judg∣ments, assume a Liberty to retail their raw and un∣concocted Notions in Cossee-Houses (where Men pre∣tend a Priviledge, to say any thing but their Pray∣ers) and with as little Charity as Discretion, to arraign the Judgment, and censure the Actions of the Irish Protestant-Refuges, and severely to up∣braid them with their Banishment and Poverty, as the disserved Effects of their own Perversness, in not Submitting to him; who deserted the principal Kingdom, and restless himself in that which is Sub∣ordinate. Nay, some have proceeded to that degree of uncharitable Frenzy, that they have belched out
their balsphemous Curses on poor bleeding Ireland: Sinking it into the Sea with their Execrations, and disparaging it as an incomber'd Estate, not worth the Redemption. Would God! it might please the King to undeceive this murmuring Crew, by Commanding them on the Expedition with Duke Schomberg, or Count Solmes; that they may see the Country they so much despise, and be convinced how little Reason they had to undervalue it. And I am humbly of Opinion, that it would conduce much to the regaining that Kingdom, if the King would think it fit, to imploy the Gentlemen of that Country upon that Service. It is not to be imagin'd, how far Loyalty, whetted with self-Interest, will go, or what Exploits may be performed by such as fight with a double Courage, to serve the King, and to recover their Own. Thus far I have pleaded for my Country, let me now be a Suitor for my self. If a glowing Zeal, for Religion; an anxious Sympathy with my Friends; and a pungent sense of my own Sufferings have transported me into any Impertinency: I humbly implore Pardon from the Honourable House of Commons, for the Rudeness of this Address. George Philips.
The Interest of England in the Preserva∣tion of Ireland. From these Considerations. I. The Advantage to the Kingdom of England in general. 1. By the Revenue. 2. The Fertility, and Plenty. 3. The Number. 4. The Religion. 5. The Consanguinity, and Assinity. 6. The Imployments Ecclesiastical, Ci∣vil and Military. II. The Advantage to the Trade of England. 1. By the Scituation. 2. The Exportation. 3. The Importation. 4. The Ingenuity of the Inhabitants. 5. The Benefit to the KING. III. The Danger of falling into the Hands of the French. 1. By Ingrossing all Trade. 2. By Intercepting the Trade of Eng∣land. 3. By Interrupting the Peace of Eng∣land.
THE Interest of ENGLAND, IN THE Preservation of IRELAND. The Introduction. THERE were two things which mainly con∣tributed to the Ruine and Desolation of Ireland, and reduced it to that deplorable Condition, under which it now languish∣eth; Resistance, and Non-Resistance. The latter sprung from a fond and tame submission to the Arbitrary Government in Ireland; the other was occasion'd by a vain and fruitless Expectation of Relief from England. If the People of that Country had not been over-lavish in their Loyalty, they had not been so unfortunate in their Opposition. In the Reign of King JAMES, they were unreasonably passive; in the Reign of King WILLIAM they have been unprosperously active. Strange Fate! To be Losers by the One, and not to be Gainers by the Other! To be possest of their Estates under a Popish Prince; and to be kept out of them un∣der a Protestant! Had they been independent, and trusted to their own Legs, possibly they had stood firm
at this Day: but they are miserably overthrown, by leaning too much on their Supporters. If there were any room in our Church for Merits, the Protestants of Ireland would be intituled to a great Stock, for suffering under King JAMES; and for acting under King WIELIAM: but alas! they are despised for the one, and derided for the other: so difficult a mat∣ter it is to walk steddily upon the uneven surface of sublunary Places; here you encounter a Precipice, there a Quagmire: That very way which seemed the direct Road to Safety and Tranquility, may perhaps lead you into inextricable Troubles, and often ends in certain Misery and Destruction. When the Late King (in pursuance of his Design to subvert that Church, which He complemented with the Character of Loyalty, and as solemnly promised to defend and support it) was so far distracted by per∣nicious Counsel, to prostitute the Kingdom of Ireland to the licentious Will of a Jesuitical Tyranny; and to make an Essay of setling that Idolatrous Worship there, which was too early, and unseasonable for Him to at∣tempt in England: when the Sword was put into the Hands of a bigotted Zealot, and more than a million of British Protestants subjected to the Dominion of an Irish Papist; there was no Murmur heard, no muti∣nous Whispers spread abroad to discompose the People, or affront the Government: men sigh'd, and submit∣red; they groaned, and gave Obedience, with a pa∣tient Resignation to the Will of God, and the Com∣mands of the King: The Protestants through the King∣dom were disarm'd; the Officers of the Army were divested of their Commissions; the Soldiers disbanded and cashier'd, stript and disarm'd, without demanding a Reason for such unwarrantable Dealings, or dispu∣ting
the Pleasure of their Superiors: the Papists were obtruded into the Privy Council, and Chief Ministry of State; all Justices of the Peace were superseded, who did not carry the Mark of the Beast: the Publick Revenue committed to such Hands, as would surely imploy and improve it to the sinal extirpation of Here∣ticks; yet all things proceeded in a silent Calm, with∣out Noise, or Grumbling: where Mass houses were erected, and publickly frequented; no man offer'd to pull down their Altars: where the Fryers walk'd the Streets in their uncouth Habits; no man threw Dirt at them: the Popish Religion was prohibited by Law; yet never contravened by Force: The People abomina∣ted that Superstitious Way; yet never exprest their Resentments by Rage, or Discontent: The Charters of their Towns and Corporations were condemned and vacated; yet no spark of Sedition was kindled among the Inhabitants: The famous Act of Settlement was daily eluded; Possession and Property were no suffi∣cient Guard against Irish Incroachments; yet no man incurr'd the Penalty of a forcible Deteiner: the Do∣ctrine of Non-resistance (which was so frequently preach'd in other Places) was there actually and re∣ally practised; and Obedience) if there be not a Con∣tradiction in the Terms) was truly passive. Thus post∣ing themselves under the Covert of Privacy, and Retirement, they silently expected a Day of Delive∣rance from the Appointment of Heaven, without the interposition of any Humane Machinations. In this Posture Affairs stood in Ireland, during tho short (if it had not been sharp) Reign of King JAMES: and so probably they had continued, at least for some time, after the miraculous Revolution in England. But He, having Abdicated the Government, and deserted the
Throne, and unnaturally truckt One Kingdom with that Christian Monster of Turkish Barbarity, for the empty Hopes of re-possessing the other Two; it seem'd convenient to his Irish Bashaw, and the Jesuitic Cabal, to make sure of a retreating Place, and that of Ne∣cessity must be Ireland; which having formerly been given to the Pope, and by him transferred to the King of Spain, must now be sold, or mortgaged to the French Usurper; to facilitate whose Entry by remov∣ing all Obstacles, the present Possessors must be put out of Doors, that so Livery and Seisin might be gi∣ven, in imitation of the due Form of Law. Hereupon Plots were invented; several Protestant Gentlemen were committed to Prison, Indicted, and Tryed for their Lives; abundance of Commissions were issued, and the Army multiplied into many Regiments of Horse and Foot; for whose Entertainment, there being no Fund of a growing Revenue, the Goods of the Protestants were consigned to their subsistence; which they did not pilfer by Night, but drove away whole Flocks and Herds at Noon-day; and in case of Resistance, securing their Prey by the Murder of the Owners. Thus the Province of Munster was exposed to a Military Execution: Conaught was entirely plunder'd; and had not the Gates of London∣derry been opportunely shut, when a Regiment of Irish were ready to enter it, all Ʋlster had been un∣der the same Fate, and probably had been followed by an Universal Massacre. But the surprizing News of the Prince of Orange's Adventure, and the total Exclusion of Popery and Arbitrary Government in England, awakened the Protestants in Ʋlster to stand upon their Guard; and animated them with an Assurance, That their Redemption was drawing nigh; flattering them∣selves
with a Confidence, That as they were under the Laws of England, so they should be no less under their Protection. They firmly believed, that the same methods would be taken in Ireland, which had been so successfully practised in England; every puff of a fair Wind, revived them with a smiling expectation of Succor; they were eager to retrieve their droop∣ing Religion from the Jaws of Death; and ready to rally under a Protestant Standard; their Numbers were very considerable, and their Courage great; but they were naked and undisciplin'd, they wanted an Expert Leader; and no Aid appear'd to support them: The Deputy having too sure and quick Intelligence of the Transactions in the Court of England, and the dilatory Proceedings there, poured a mighty Army into the Bowels of Ʋlster, who rifling the deserted Houses, seizing and carrying away all portable Goods, and exercising all Cruelty on such as did not submit to their Protection, they marched (or rather chased the affrighted People) without Interruption, till they received a slight Check at Colrane, and were shameful∣ly bafled at Londonderry. But all the Towns and Forts through the Kingdom (except that sturdy place, and its neighbour Eniskilling) being Garison'd by Papists, no Arms nor Horses permitted to remain with any Protestants, (whose enjoyment of their Lives was wholly precarious, and reversible at the will of merciless men); all things concurred to advance the long-hatch'd Design, which now began to ripen; and King James, with a Rabble of French Reformers, intermixt with a sew Renegado-English and Scotch, landed among his dearly-beloved Irish Catholics, where he remains under Pupilage to the French; He the Reputed King, and Monsieur d' Avaux the Pro∣tector.
I need not place any Remarks upon the supine Negligence and fatal Indifferency demonstrated by Eng∣land in their cold Concernment, and slow Motions toward the Recovery of Ireland; it is obvious to eve∣ry eye; and if any have been wilfully accessory to the Ruin and Depopulation of so flourishing a King∣dom, everlasting Vengeance will pursue them: I wish the good People of England may see in the Mirror of our Misfortunes, that Scheme of Misery and Confusion which was prepared for them, and which assuredly will be re-acted on their Theatre, if ever the French and Irish be permitted to tread the Stage. To unde∣ceive that giddy sort of men, who think to gather Grapes from Thistles; to enjoy the Profession of the Protestant Religion under a Popish Ring, and the Ad∣ministration of Jesuits; to continue in Peace and Safe∣ty in this Kingdom, if the other be torn from it; I offer the following Considerations; which, weigh'd impartially, may help to convince all sorts of men, That it is not only the Interest of England to preserve Ireland, but that it is necessary for their self-preserva∣tion to use all imaginable Industry and Expedition to reduce it to its former State and Condition.
I. The Advantage to the Kingdom of ENGLAND in General. I Expect to be absolved from the Imputation of Flat∣tery and Partiality, when I take upon me to make this asseveration; That nothing out of England doth, or can rationally conduce more to the Ho∣nor, Wealth, and Prosperity of that Kingdom, than the Addition and Conjunction of Ireland: A Country abounding with all things that contribute to Pleasure and Comfort, and richly endowed with the Blessings of Heaven and Earth; scituated by Nature as a Po∣stern-gate to England; by which she may discharge all manner of Commodities which are supernumerary or unnecessary, to the great encouragement of Naviga∣tion and Trade; and through which an entrance is given for a continual supply of such things as the One may stand in need of, and the other may conveniently spare. I shall endeavour to make good this Assertion, by subdividing this Consideration into the following par∣ticulars. 1. The Revenue. 2. The Fertility and Plenty. 3. The Number. 4. The Religion. 5. The Consanguinity and Affinity. 6. The Employments Ec∣clesiastical, Civil, and Military. I propose these as so many irrefragable Arguments, to convince the World, That the Kingdom of Ireland has not only a Self-sufficiency within it to subsist without dependency, and to grow rich by its own
peculiar Traffick; but also, that by being annexed to England, subjected to the Government, and incorpo∣rated into its Religion and Laws; it extends the Do∣minion, strengthens the Hands, and augments the Wealth of that happy and renowned Nation. First, let us take notice of the Revenue. I. The REVENƲE. The Revenue of Ireland was under a sensible decli∣nation from the commencement of the late King's Reign, occasioned by the daily Decay of Trade, and that by the discouragement given to Protestants, thro' whose hands almost the whole Commerce and cur∣rent Money was wont to circulate; and at length was so visibly impaired, that in the year 1688. the Publick Treasury was utterly exhausted; and I have no reason to believe that it has since that time been recruited by any considerable Imbursements, (for I suppose the French Money is in a Treasury distinct, and issuable only at the discretion of the French Dictator, whose Orders are not to open his Treasure, till they land in England:) Therefore I deduce my Remarks from the latter end of the Reign of Charles the Second, about which time the Publick Revenue was managed by Commissioners ap∣pointed by the King, by whose Diligence and Applica∣tion it was notably improved; and it consisted in di∣vers Branches, as, Crown-Rents. Quit-Rents. Customs and Excise. Inland-Excise. Hearth-Money. Wine and Ale Licenses. Fines and Forfeitures. First-Fruits, &c. of the Clergy. All which did amount, communibus Annis, to about Three Hundred and forty thousand Pounds.
Out of this Fund was derived the Maintenance and Pay of an Army, consisting of seven Regiments of Foot, three of Horse, and one of Dragoons: Exhibitions to the Judges sedent, and itinerant, and to all other Officers of the Civil List: a noble Allowance to the Chief Gover∣nor, a competent Salary to the Lord Chancellor, and all the Officers of State: a large Provision for all other Charges necessary, or contingent: and upon the Audit of the whole Receipts and Disbursements, a very consi∣derable sum remain'd, most of which was remitted into England, some disposed of in Ireland, for Pensions, Secret Service, and other Occasions, at the King's Will and Pleasure. II. The Fertility, and Plenty. Ireland doth abound with an Exuberance of Plenty in all things conducing to a pleasant, and comfortable Living. The Ground, without the Midwifery of hu∣mane Art, brings forth Grass for the Cattel, and Herbs for the use of man in great Abundance; but where the Husbandman hath clubb'd his Invention and Labour, it is rather luxuriant, rendring a mighty Increase of all sorts of Grain, very sound, and very good Indeed, Na∣ture hath open'd her Stores, and, like a kind Mother, hath liberally bestow'd her Blessings on that Island; The Earth seems to stand in Competition with the Water for the Pre-eminence: the one overloaded with its own Pro∣duct; the other, overstockt by its proper Inhabitants: the infinite Store of Corn of all sorts, the pleasant Studds of Horses and Mares, the numerous Herds of Cattel, the vast Flocks of Sheep (in most Places exceeding those of England in their Size) is even to admiration: neither do I brag, when I say, that the best Parts of Ireland are in every Respect (except the Improvement) equal to the best Parts in England; and that the worst Parts of it are
not so bad and barren as the worst Parts of the other: Or when I challenge England it self to shew so vast a Tract of rich and excellent Land lying together, as is to be seen from Carlingford all the way to Dublin, from thence (excluding the Mountains of Wicklow) to Carlow; from thence through part of Queens and Kings County, so cross the Shannon, and round by Longford to Roscommon: in which vast Tract of Land, at least fourscore Miles square, there is not so much barren Land, as is to be found in two Shires only in England (and not far from London) Berkshire and Surrey. The Seas are plentifully stor'd with Fish of all Kinds, and the Markets supply'd with such Plenty and Variety, as might satiate the Luxu∣ry and Prodigality of Lucullus: the Loughs are fill'd with Pike, Breme, Pearch, Roach, and Trouts; but the Fresh Rivers swarm with stupendious Quantities. If men (as justly they may) shall become doubtful, scrupulous, and incredulous, when I make mention of the extraordinary Pilchard-Fishings in the South, and the Herring-Fishings in the North; my Credit will certainly run a great Risque, and my Veracity be suspected, when I relate the Won∣ders of the Deep, and come to speak of the Prodigious Fishings for Salmon and Eels in the Rivers of Lough-foyl, and the Bann. If men will startle at the Report of six thousand Barrels of Pilchards made in one year upon the Coast of the County of Cork; or to hear, that in some Parts of Conaught they take so great Draughts of them, that, not being provided of Salt to cure them, they lay them in heaps, and manure the Land with them: that (beside the plentiful Fishing of Herrings in and about the Bay of Dublin, the Skerryes, Carlingford, and all the Nor∣thern Coast) they have usually made and sent away in one year two thousand Tuns of Herrings from the single Fish∣ing at Dunfanaghan: then undoubtedly they will smile, and ridicule me, when I tell them, That there is made
commonly five hundred Tuns of Salmon in a year, in Loghfoyl, and the Bann, and other Rivers in the Coun∣ty of Londonderry; that besides the Royal Piscary of the Bann, there are between Colrane and Loghneagh seven∣ty Salmon-Fishings; that there are the same round about that Lough, which is sixty Miles in Compass; that at the Leap of Colrane, ten Tuns of Salmon have been ta∣ken at one Draught of a Net: That the last year at the Grebbin, twelve Miles beyond Londonderry, two and thirty Hogsheads of Salmon were taken at once, and for want of room in their Boats, a great part of them thrown again into the River: That in the Eel-weres, in the River of Bann, fourscore thousand Eels have been catcht in one Night. But I have spoken modestly, and within compass, and there are too many Witnesses (much against their wills) now in England and Scotland, who can confirm the Truth of what I have declared. I am loth to pass by the Salmon-Pound (commonly call'd the Cutt) near Colrane, because, as I conceive, such ano∣ther thing is not in the World: It is a great Trough, made like a Tanner's Vat, about fifty foot long, twenty foot wide, and six deep; a Stream of the River of Bann runs through it, and at the Place where the Water en∣ters, a row of Stakes are placed very near together, like a Rack in a Stable; at the other end of the Cutt a parcel of sharp Spikes are clustered together, very close at the Point, and wide at the Head, so that the Salmons (who always swim against the Stream) and other Fish, may get in at pleasure, but can neither return the way they went in, nor get out at the other end; whereby it hap∣pens, that on Monday morning (there being a respite to Fishing all Sunday, and none taken out of the Cutt with their Loops) a Stranger would be astonish'd to see an in∣numerable company of Fish riding on the backs of one another, even to the top of the Water, and with
great ease, and pleasant Divertisement, taken up in Loops. All these prodigious Quantities of Fish are but collected for the Use of England; to whose Ports, or to whose Or∣der, they are yearly consigned, and distributed. III. The NƲMBER. Having had no Business, or Imployment, which might administer an Opportunity to inspect the Catalogues and Returns of Parishes and Counties, or to view the Poll-Books; it will not be possible for me to make any other than a conjectural Calculation of the Number of Prote∣stant Inhabitants in Ireland. But by a modest Computa∣tion I may adventure to aver, That at the beginning of the Reign of the Late King, there were in the City of Dublin, and the Four Provinces, above a Million of Bri∣tish Protestants. I am confirm'd in this Supposition by a sad Reflection upon the Passages in the Year 1641. at which time the Number of the Protestants was very in∣considerable in comparison with the Natives; and possi∣bly did not amount to the Half of what they were in 1681. yet even then above two hundred thousand, naked and defenceless People, were massacred in cold Blood, and barbarously murther'd without Provocation, or Resi∣stance. I reckon, that when the late Revolution hap∣ned, there were two hundred thousand men fit to carry Arms, bound to the Interest of England by the Obliga∣tions of Religion, Love, Loyalty and Blood; who may be beneficial in their Service and Aid, when it shall be re∣quired; though of late (by the apparent Judgment of God) they have been terrified by them, on whom they alway had an awe; routed by such, whose Strength they ded; and dispossest of their Estates, without strugling for their Property.
IV. The RELIGION. Among all the pressing Motives, that recommend the Care and Conservation of Ireland, there is no one more cogent, than the Consideration of the Religion there esta∣blish'd by Law: which reasonably ought to interess all good Christians in a feeling-Sympathy and Concernment for them; and thereby the People of England have a fit Opportunity, at once equally to exert their Duty to God, and Charity to their Brethren. It is true, the Protestant Religion was not universally profess'd through the King∣dom, neither were all who were distinguish'd by that Character, perfectly cemented; the Papists were nume∣rous in every County, (tho least of all in Ʋlster); yet Popery seemed to be rather Hereditary than Elective; to be more the Result of Education, than Judgment; inso∣much, as it became like a Logical Property to the Natives, and Papist and Irish man were Terms convertible: So great an Influence has Custom over all the Faculties of Mind and Body; they put on Religion as a fashionable Garment, the Dictate of the Priest warranting the mode; and thick Ignorance inflames their Devotion. Nevertheless the Protestant Religion was predominant; Popery sneak'd to the Mountains, and squatted behind the Bushes; the Mass was not known, nor a Fryar seen, till by the Influence of the Late King, and the furious Zeal of his Deputy, things were changed as it were in a moment, and all Commands Civil and Military, committed to the Hands of Papists. But when, by the Blessing of God, and the Assistance of England, that poor harassed Country shall be restored to its former State and Condition, it will be a joyful Reflection for their Brethren and Benefactors, to hear of so many Thousand Persons united with them in the same Religi∣on, as in all other Respects and Concernments.
V. The Consanguinity and Assinity. The Inhabitants of Ireland, (excluding the Natives of the Land, who always were, and ever will be Thorns in our Sides; and who, since the first Conquest of them, were never able to accomplish that Design which was bequeath'd from Generation to Generation, till this late unhappy Juncture) do not derive their Pedigree from Strangers; they are the legitimate Offspring of England and Scotland; there is scarce a Man there of British Extraction, except such as by very long continuance are degenerated into mere Irish, but in one of those King∣doms will Challenge a Father, Brother, or near Kinsman. They are not estranged in their Language, Habit, Man∣ners, or Customs; they retain the natural Propensions disseminated from their respective Families, and own a filial Reverence to their Countries, as to their lawful Pa∣rents (not their Step mothers) who not being able to make a competent Provision for all their Issue at home, have sent some of their Children abroad, to seek for their Livelihood on the other side of the Ferry; where in their Manners and Humour, they bear an exact Resemblance to that Original, whereof they are the Transcript; ex∣cept only in their profuse Hospitality, and luxurious Con∣sumption of Meat and Drink (to which, perhaps, they are inclined by the Constitution of the Air, or disposed by the Genius of the Country, or tempted by the incre∣dible Plenty and Cheapness of all sorts of Provisions) yet in their Language they have gone beyond their Teachers, having refined the English Tongue from the odd Tones, and uncouth words used in several Counties distant from London; and reformed the Scotch from the Clownish Dialect spoken by the vulgar People. So that the People of England are bound in Conscience and com∣mon Reason, to regard the English in Ireland, as Bone of their Bone, and Flesh of their Flesh; and the Scots as na∣turalized
and incorporated with them, to sympathize with them in their Sufferings, to participate in their Ad∣ventures, and from the Principles of Generosity, as well as the Impulse of Nature, and a prudential Foresight of the same Calamities hovering over their Heads, to use their utmost Effort to re-assure that Kingdom in its Ap∣pendage to England, and absolutely to eradicate the Irish Papists and all French Intruders. VI. The Imployments, Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military. Since England is bounded by the Sea, and cannot be inlarged by the Discovery of any Newfound Land; since the Inhabitants are as fruitful as the Soil, Prolific, and continually multiplying and increasing; since the Vigor and Generosity of their Temper, spurs them on to Busi∣ness and Activity; and that the List of Places, Offices and Preferments in Church and State, do bear no Proportion with the number of Competitors, Candidates, and Preten∣ders: It is an unexpressible Benefit and Advantage, that they can so easily inlarge their Quarters, and spread through a Kingdom in Polity Subordinate, but in natural Fertility no way Inferior to that from whence they sprang. I think it very well worth the Observation, That among all the Bishops, Deans, and Dignitaries in the Church of Ireland, (in the first year of the late King) so very few were born in that Kingdom, but almost all of them transplanted from England; so were the Lord Chancellor, Lord Chief Baron, Attorny General, and many of the Judges and Officers in the Civil List; by such also, was the Revenue managed. And for the Army, it was per∣fectly a Detachment out of the several Shires in England. In a word, there did Divines and Scholars get Prefer∣ment; Lawyers, Attornies, and others of the Long Robe, met with Practice and Promotion; Clerks, Accountants, and Men of ingenious Education, were gratified with Imploy∣ments;
the younger Sons of the English Nobility and Gentry, were honoured with Military Commands; and thousands of the meaner sort train'd up in the Discipline of War. All which must have met with a Check in their Fortunes, and been subjected to a less generous course of Living, and remain'd as Shrubs in their own Soil; while by this Transplantation they grow up to tall Trees, shoot out their Branches, and bring forth abun∣dant of Fruit. The Advantage to the Trade of England. Hitherto I have endeavoured by a few short Hints, to represent the many valuable Benefits and Advantages ac∣cruing to the Kingdom of England in general, by the Conjunction and Preservation of Ireland. I shall now proceed to set down how palpably and remarkably it doth contribute to the Advancement of Trade, which is the Glory, Strength, and Security of the English Nation; the Fountain and Source of the Riches, Wealth, and Plenty, which render it the Envy and Astonishment of all the Neighbouring Kingdoms: and without which, it were impossible to provide Sustenance for the innume∣rable Company of Inhabitants, wherewith the Country is sufficiently furnished, and the Cities and Towns are ab∣solutely crowded. It is Trade that preserves the Body Pe∣litick in health, by Recreation and Exercise; by Evacua∣tion and Repletion, carrying off such Things as are un∣necessary and redundant, and bringing in a constant sup∣ply of whatsoever is useful and profitable. It is Trade that ransacks the Indies, joins remote Islands in an ima∣ginary Contiguity with England, and makes the whole World but a large Mart for Negotiation and Traffic. Trade is the Blood that Circulates in the Veins and Arteries of the Commonwealth, and disperseth the animal Spi∣rits to all the Limbs and extreme parts of the Body.
This so necessary an Ingredient to the Honour and Felicity of England, has been signally augmented and improved by the Trade of Ireland co-incident with it, will suffer a mighty Detriment by the present Obstru∣ction of Commerce, and will as eminently gain by its Revival and Recovery. The Advantage to Trade arising from Ireland is demonstrable by these Particulars. 1. The Scituation. 2. The Exportation. 3. The Importation. 4. The Ingenuity of the Inhabitants. 5. The Benefit to the King. I. The Scituation. In the Description of Ireland I might expatiate in recounting the many Benefits and Advantages which it enjoys in Common with her Neighbour Coun∣tries, and the several Immunities which God and Na∣ture have indulged to it in peculiar above other Pla∣ces; in its exemption from poysonous Insects, and noxious Vermin, as Frogs, Toads, Snakes, and Ad∣ders, Neuts, Effs, and hurtful Spiders; but above all, in the Freedom from Moles, which are the Epidemical Nusance of England, and are so sensibly injurious to Orchards, Gardens, Medows, and Pastures; in a temperate and benign Air; in an infinite number of Fountains, Springs, Loughs (or Lakes) and fresh Ri∣vers; in an incredible store and variety of Land and Sea-Fowls; (among which I would mention the incre∣dible Number of Woodcocks, and how the Parson of Clownish farms the Tyth of the Woodcocks catcht in
his Parish at thirty Pounds per annum; where they are generally sold at Twelve-Pence per dozen; the innumerable Flocks of Swans and Barnacles that haunt the River of Loughfoyl, but that it would ex∣clude the wonder due to the rest.) But because these Priviledges are inherent to the Soil, and not commu∣nicable to the Use and Benefit of the Neighbours, I shall pass over the further commemoration of those Matters, and apply my self to the Rehearsal of such Particulars only, as render Ireland in its happy Scituati∣on a most desirable Countrey, and highly advantageous in its Accession to the Crown of England. Possibly there is not a Country in the whole World so admirably accommodated with convenient Bays, safe Harbours, large Havens, and useful Creeks; and that not only in some Sides and Corners, but quite round the Island. To describe the Harbours of Carlingford, Strangford, the Lough of Carricfergus, Donaghadee, Loghlern, Raghlin, Portrush, Lough-foyl, Lough-swilly, Sheep-Haven, Castledow, Killebeggs, Ballyshannon, Sli∣go, and Black-Sod in the North and West Parts; Gal∣way, Lymerick, Trallee, Dingle, Kilmar, the Great Bay of Bantry, (including Bere Haven, and many others) Ship-Haven, Crook-Haven, Baltimore, Castle-Haven, Castlemain, the matchless Haven of Kin∣sale, the noble River of Cork, Yoghal, Dungarvan, Waterford, Slade, Wexford, Arclo, Dublin, &c. in the South and Eastern Parts; beside almost innumerable Creeks, Ports, and commodious Landing-Places, would take up more room than I have allowed to the dis∣charge of this brief Narration; my Purpose is only to mention them, referring the Account of their Beauty, Strength, Security, and Conveniency, to Hi∣storians and Geographers. I shall only take notice, that as they are most advantageously placed for the pro∣per
Trade of that Kingdom; so they are upon many Accounts a secure Refuge and Safeguard to their Friends and Allies, which is briefly demonstrated in this, that none of the Neighbouring Countries can manage a Trade into the South, North, or Western Seas, but they must be under great Danger of Ireland, if they be Enemies to England, or be beholding to it if they be in Amity; where upon every Turn they may meet with a safe Retreat from Storms and Tempests, and a ready Protection from Pirates and Robbers; it being set as a Watch-Tower in the Sea, within whose view all Ships must come that sail and trade that way to any part of the World; an Island commodiously seated for the Dominion of the Seas, so long as she is in one Interest with England. It is beyond the Power of Expression to repeat the Advantages arising to the English Trade by the relief and shelter of the Irish Harbours, where the several Fleets bound for the Streights, and for the East or West Indies, or returning from thence, meet with Refresh∣ment and Security from all sorts of Danger. This the Merchants find in their daily Voyages: This the Com∣manders of the Kings Ships can evidence upon frequent Experience; but I shall produce only one undeniable Instance, how highly and indespensably it imports the Safety, as well as Trade of England, to preserve Ireland to themselves: That in the time of King Charles II. when England was imbroyl'd in an unlucky War with the States of Holland, not only a Fleet of Merchant∣men, consisting of an hundred Sail or thereabout, bound homeward from the West-Indies and the Streights, but also forty Men of War (under the Com∣mand of Sir Jeremy Smith) after that unfortunate Business at Chatham, came all into the Habour of Kinsale, where they continued in that Safety and
Security, which they could not promise to themselves in any Harbour or Port of England. 2. The Exportation of Irish Commodities. As Ireland is placed as an Out-guard to watch all Interlopers in the Trade of England, so lately it was a Store-house and Magazine to furnish it. It sent over yearly vast quantities of Wooll, shipt from the se∣veral Ports in Munster and Lemster, which mightily supported the Staple in England, by the old and new Draperies, and other woollen Manufactures wrought and made in the West Countrey: whereby not only a numerous Train of Families were fed and maintained, but an extraordinary addition was made to the Kings Revenue, by the Importation of it, when raw and unwrought, into England, and the Exportation of it, after it was wrought, into several Countries, to the great inriching of Merchants and Adventurers. The Islands and Plantations in America are in a man∣ner wholly sustain'd by the vast quantities of Beef, Pork, Butter, and other Provisions of the Product of Ireland: from whence an unspeakable Benefit redounds to England by the vast Cargoes of the Goods of the said Plantations returnd thither, and the Great Con∣sumption of those Goods being shipt out of England into Ireland, than which nothing more evidently tends to the inriching the Merchants who trade into those Parts, or to the increase of Shipping, or encou∣ragement to Navigation. The mighty Quantities of Tallow, Hides, tann'd Leather, Skins of several sorts, Yarn, Hemp, Linnen-Cloth, Cony-Skins, and other Furrs, yearly shipt from Ireland, and exported into England, supply that King∣dom with the said Commodities at very reasonable
Rates (which otherwise would prove excessive dear) to the great conveniency of the Inhabitants in general, and the particular Advantage of the Merchants and such as trade in them. The Cargoes of Salmon, Herrings, Pilchards, (and those the best and fairest to be had in any Part of the World) Eels, and other Fish made up yearly in Ireland, and transported into several Parts in Spain, to Venice, and all the Ports in the Mediterranean Sea, would startle common Belief. I have heard from faith∣ful Relation, and I spoke of it before, that in the South of Ireland, they have made in a year near Eight hun∣dred Tuns of Pilchards: A Person of great Quality, (whose Judgment and Credit no man will dispute) did aver to me, that in one Season 16000. l. was paid for the Pilchards taken on the South side of Cork, and the most of it by Sir John Frederic of London. That in one Port in the North, called Dunfanaghan, they have made in one Season Two thousand Tuns of Herrings. And I was told by a very honest and intelligent Person, (who in the Reign of Charles the Second was Collector of the Port of London-Derry) that in that one Place there was shipt off in one Season 450. Tuns of Salmon, 400. Tuns of Herrings, and 80. Tuns of Eels: The Be∣nefit and Profit of all which accrues to the Merchants of England, on whose sole Account almost all the fore∣mentioned Commodities are shipt off and sent away, to the great increase of their Shipping, and the mani∣fest incouragement of Navigation, These things being undenyable, and perfectly true in matter of Fact, and which I am constrained by the necessity of the Argument to mention over again, it is evident beyond Contradiction, that the Trade of Ire∣land is of inestimable Advantage to the Trade of Eng∣land, highly contributing, if not wholly subservient to it.
3. The Importation of English Commodities. The great multitudes of Goods and Commodi∣dities continually exported out of Ireland into England, did not more apparently tend to the Advan∣tage of Trade there, than the continual Importation of all kinds of Wares and Merchandise from thence. The People of Ireland did not deal like Niggards, or Rooks, to vend and put off the Product of their own Coun∣try, and not be instrumental to promote the Consump∣tion of what their Neighbours had to spare; on the contrary they maintain'd a constant Correspondence, and an universal Commerce, and hugely advanced the Trade of England. The Wooll which they from time to time sent into England, they received again (and perhaps with it much of the growth there) transformed into the old and the new Drapery, and all sorts of Woollen Manufa∣ctures, and thereby doubly advanced the English Trade, by the Outlet, and by the Return, by selling the one, and buying the other Silks wrought, and un-wrought; Gold and Silver Lace; Buttons; Ribbands, &c. all sorts of Grocery, Spicery, Haberdashers and Milliners Ware; Beavers and other fine Hats; Tobacco cut and dry'd, in Rowl, and in Leaf; white Salt; Coals; and many foreign Commodities, were daily and hourly brought in∣to all the Ports of Ireland, being purchased by the Merchants there from the Merchants of Lon∣don, Bristol, Chester, Leverpool, Plymouth, and other Towns and Cities in England; the Quantities whereof must be prodigiously great, to supply not on∣ly the Necessities, but the Vanity and Luxury of so po∣pulous and opulent a Kingdom, (the Rate of whose Expences was no way regulated by the instinct of
Thrift, or Parsimony) and consequently the Gains and Profit redounding to the English Merchants must in rea∣son bear some Proportion with the Vent and Consumpti∣on; the estimate whereof in a few years is beyond Credit, if not past Numeration. I could appeal to particular Men by Name, whose Books and Accounts will justifie my Position, that England received incredible Advantage by their Trade with Ireland, and their sensible disappointments in the present Cessation of Trade from thence, do too unhappily confirm it; but I will not do that pre∣judice to them, to discover the Secrets of their Deal∣ing, or raise a Spirit of Envy at their prosperous Proceedings: I honour them for their Ingenuity; I applaud their Industry, and heartily wish them rein∣stated in their former Course of Traffick, that all Men may be convinced by their Experiment, how advantageously the Trade of Ireland co-operates to the Advancement of the Trade of England. 4. The Ingenuity of the Inhabitants. I am now brought to a hard Dilemma; I must ei∣ther renounce the Country, from whence I came, or retract my Assertion: For when I go about to il∣lustrate the Ingenuity of the Inhabitants, I confute my self, by a Discourse so void of it. But there is no ge∣neral Rule without some Exceptions; and I hope that my particular Defects shall not be imputed as a dero∣gation from the Credit of the rest. It is an ungrateful Imployment to make Compa∣risons, and I do not in the least intend any unkind Reflection upon the Common People of England, when I alledge, that the ordinary and vulgar sort of the British Inhabitants in Ireland are much more In∣genious and quick, more docible, more intelligent in
the Laws and Customs of the Country; more active, sedulous and inquisitive; disposed to handle the Sword as well as the Plough, and notably capable to serve upon Juries, and to discharge the Duty in∣cumbent on them at Assises and Sessions. But I shall only insist on that Qualification which is more proper and pertinent to the Argument in hand, viz. their na∣tural Disposition to Trade, and an undefatigable In∣dustry in promoting it, and all for the advantage of the Trade of England. For the Petty Chapmen, Tra∣ders in small Towns, and Country Dealers, are only Hawkers, Procurers, and Brokers for the greater Mer∣chants in Cities and big Towns; and they ordinarily make themselves Factors for the Merchants in Eng∣land; sending over to them the most Part of what they gather; or bringing back from them the Com∣modities of England in return of what they adven∣ture, and gain upon their own Account. Thus I have observed the Chapmen in a small Village (belong∣ing to my self) with great Art and Ingenuity ne∣gotiating with the Neighbours about them, making up many Tuns of Butter, and Tallow, gathering great quantities of Yarn, Linnen cloth, Salt, Hides, and Tann'd Leather; which soon after they sell to the Merchants in the next City or Sea-Port, who ei∣ther deal by Commission from the Merchants in Eng∣land, or export them on their own Account, but cer∣tainly bring home the Produce, in the Wares and Merchandise of England, (and I know one particular Man, who in one Town in one Season, made up Ele∣ven hundred Tuns of Butter by Commission, and as a Factor for some Merchants there) but which way soever it be, the Ingenuity and Diligence of the Inhabitants of Ireland does indisputably advance the Trade of England, and the whole Labour of the one centers in the Benefit of the other.
5. The Benefit to the King. Tho' I propose the Kings Benefit in the last Place, yet it is not the least of my Care and good Wi∣shes; and I perswade my self that the Loyal and Lo∣ving Subjects of England will on that very Considera∣tion (if there were no other Motives to incite them) account Ireland worth the keeping, and accordingly will employ their Wealth, and exert their Courage and Strength for the speedy Reduction and Restitution of it. To inforce this, I need produce no other Argu∣ments, than the repetition of what was before remon∣strated; That the annual Revenue of Ireland coming into the Treasury and the Kings Coffers, amounted to Three hundred and forty thousand Pounds, out of which, beside the necessary Exhibition; for supporting the State and safety of the Kingdom, a very considerable Sum was yearly laid at the Kings Feet, therewith to gratifie such Servitors and Favourites in England, as the Revenue there would not reach to supply. To which let me add, that though under Charles the Second, the protestant Interest in Ireland received as little Incouragement as could be expected under a Protestant King; yet thriving by their Pruning, ta∣king deeper Root by their being shaken, and growing more strong by their Depression; they had, beyond all Doubt, added before this time a very valuable Aug∣mentation to the Publick Revenue, by their Trade and Improvements, had not Popery nipt them, and Ar∣bitrary Power blasted them.
3. The danger of falling into the hands of the French. Let us now reflect upon what has been said, and Re capitulate the skatter'd Arguments hinted in this abrupt and immethodical Discourse. If neither the sense of Shame, the Pursuit of Fame and Glory, the Influence of Brotherly Charity, the Sympathy with Blood and Kindred, the Respect to Religion, the Ac∣quisition of Wealth, the Support of Trade, the Increase of the Publick Revenue, nor the irresistible motive of Self-Preservation, can prove Inducements sufficient to dis∣pose the People of England to a hearty, affectionate, and vigorous espousing of the Protestant Cause in Ire∣land, by a timely Prosecution of a War there, and root∣ing out the last Remains of Popery; let us change the Scene, and suppose Ireland subdued by the present In∣vaders, and become a Province to France, (which God of his infinite Mercy avert) then without all per∣adventure these mischiefs will inevitably ensue. 1. The French King having an insatiable Thirst af∣ter the universal Monarchy of Europe, and retaining an implacable Resolution to destroy all sorts of Prote∣stants, and utterly to root out that Pestilent Northern Heresie; abounding in Wealth and Treasure, follow'd by mighty Armies, strengthned by a numerous Fleet of Ships; as nothing in humane Probability can de∣feat his execrable Designs of Aggrandising himself by the Ruin of his Neighbours, but the scarcity of con∣venient Ports and Havens in any of his Dominions; so it must be his Principal Aim and endeavour to be Master of Ireland; whereby he will be sufficiently ac∣commodated with excellent good Harbours, in which he may securely place his Fleet, to extend his Soveraignty over the Seas, and opportunely annoy his Enemies.
2. This being accomplish'd, not only the Revenue and Trade of Ireland will be utterly lost, the Auxili∣ary Aid of two hundred thousand Protestants diverted and taken away, and many thousands of them for∣ced to depend upon the Charity of England: the Trade to America, and all the Western Islands will not only be intercepted, but in a short time those Countries be wholly conquered and reduced to the Possession of the French, and annexed to his Dominion, and made a Prey to glut his restless Ambition. 3. The French King will make Ireland a Maga∣zine and Store-house for the victualling His Ships, and the Harbours as so many Docks to shelter them, where his Fleet riding in safety, an Opportunity will be gi∣ven him, not only to ingross all manner of Trade, but that of England will be intirely interrupted, if not infallibly destroyed; since no Ships can peep out from thence in their Navigation toward the Streights, or to the Indies, but they must pass within view of some Ports of Ireland, or very near them, and consequent∣ly must be exposed to the Attacks of that rapacious Leviathan, or be necessitated to sail in great Fleets, and very strong Convoys under Frigats and Men of VVar, to the inestimable charge of the State, and detriment to the Merchants of England. 4. Let it be consider'd, that since VVooll and VVoollen Manufactures are the ancient Staple of England, and a main support to their trading into all Foreign Coun∣tries, if it should so come to pass, that Ireland be aliena∣ted from it, which abounds with that Commodity, and from whence it may be exported at far cheaper Rates than can be afforded in England; how unspeakable a Prejudice will it be to the Trade? How will it impo∣verish the People, and bring an unavoidable ruin on many Towns and Families?
5. Tho it is to be hoped that the Power of France, with the Addition of Ireland, shall never be able to make a Conquest of England; nevertheless by such an unwelcom Neighbourhood, it is more than probable the French King may discompose the Peace and Quiet of Great Britain, when at any time of the year he can transport an Army from Ireland, or land small Forces in North VVales in six hours time, in South-VVales in twelve, or in the space of four Hours in the VVest of Scotland: And this not to be prevented by the English Fleet, or by all the Art and Contrivance of Mankind. The CONCLƲSION. I wish the People of England may see now in this their Day, what belongs to their Peace, before it be hid from their Eyes; That they may not be deluded by false Glosses, and sinister Interpretations of Pub∣lick Acts, nor be cajol'd by jealous Misprisions and groundless Censures on private Councils: That they may understand, and consider how much their safety and the Interest of the Protestant Religion is concern∣ed and involved in the Fate of Ireland; and that if the Enemy chance to possess the Out-works, the City will be in great danger: That they may not be abu∣sed by Chimerical Notions of Obeying without Reserve, or being destroyed without Resistance: That they would rest contented with obtaining their Desires, in being happy under the Establishment of a Protestant King and Queen, and not hanker after a Change, or be bewitched to make a wanton Experiment of Indul∣gence and Protection under a Popish Government.
FINIS.
