P3816 12349173 59930
THE PROTEST OF THE City of Amsterdam, In Opposition to The States of Holland: Who Pretend to raise 16000 New Levies, by Plurality of Voices, CONTRARY TO The Immunities and Priviledges Granted Them By MARY Countess of HOLLAND, BEING A MANIFEST VIOLATION OF THEIR Vndoubted Liberties. THE Burgomasters and Council of Amsterdam, being informed by their Deputies belonging to the Assembly of the States Provincial, that the 31th of January last, by Plurality of Voices, notwith∣standing their Deputies Opposition; The said States Provincial had formed a pretended Conclusion, as if that Province had consented to the Raising of 16000 Men; are Necessitated to declare against such Irregulari∣ties, both in matter and form, having often declared the contrary, and shewn Reasons for their Dissent; Alledging it better to Obtain a speedy Ac∣commodation between France and Spain, for the Repose of Europe: especi∣ally, Considering the most Pagan Enemy Advancing to revenge the Affronts of the last Campagn, and that the raising of new Levies can no ways Faci∣litate an Accord between the two Crowns; but rather be a Means to cause his Catholick Majesty to rely the more thereupon, and his most Christian Majesty to be Exasperated, and thereby not only engage the States General, and by Consequence, England, into a most bloody War.
That they were refused a Conference, May 15. 1683. although they had declared their Intentions, not only to the Court of Spain; but also, to the House of Austria, that the States Provincial proceed to a Conclusion without any Regard to the Fundamental design of the Government, conformable to which all the Antient Mazerines and Customs in the time of the Earls Go∣vernment, were with the greatest Zeal put in Execution against such as In∣fringed the same. And among the Resolutions of the States Provincial, March 11. 1681. It was Concluded, That no Member whether of the Nobility or Gentry, should be Concluded by a Plurality of Voices, against their Wills, in Mat∣ters of concern, which Resolutions are pursuant to the Rights and Pri∣viledges Confirmed to Holland in the time of the Earls Government. But, by raising of New Levies thus, the lesser Number will stand equal with the greater; especially, in matters of Taxes, which always was by their Predecessors lookt upon to be a thing of so great Impor∣tance; that they could never be perswaded to admit thereof, though in the greatest danger of this Republick, and Concurrence of two Thirds of the States in the same. They also declared that they could not hold their Sessions in that Ho∣nourable Assembly, if they might not remain Unmolested in their An∣tient Liberty, and have an Intire Freedom, to consent or not, in matters of Taxes, upon which the Welfare of their Cities depended, and of which none but themselves could be Competent Judges, and if Plurality of Voices could carry it, it was the only way to ruine them. Upon Conclusion, in the year 1681. 'twas Corroborated by a Declara∣tion of all the Members of the States, the second and third of October 1671. That it was not in the Power of a Plurality of Voices (with Right) to con∣clude a matter where the Plurality of Voices cannot take place, which if they should allow, it would Alter and Subvert the Fundamental Constitution of the Government, and thereby raise Taxes at their Pleasure, which not in the least is to be Admitted. For which Reasons, the present Burgo-Masters and Councel, Declare the aforesaid Conclusion, of the Provincial State, to be Null and Void; and Declares, That they will Adhere to this Sentiment, and not Contribute any thing towards the Charge of the said Levies, of 16000. Done in the Councel of AMSTERDAM, this 26th of March, 1684 An Historical Account of the Life and Actions of the Invincible and Victorious Prince, John the Third, the present King of Poland, in Twelves, Price Bound One Shilling. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Malthus, at the Sun in the Poultrey. 1684.
