q188 13206290 98488
FORTUNE IN HER WITS, OR, The Hour  all Men. WTEN In Spanish the most Ingenious Don Francisco Quivedo Villegas, Author of Visions of Hell. Translated into English BY CAPT. JOHN STEVENS. LONDON, Printed for R. Sare at Gray's-Inn-Gate, F. Saun∣ders in the New-Exchange, and Tho. Bennet in St. Paul's Church-Yard. 1697.
TO Mark ArundellEsq SIR, THere are three Faults, which I have observed in many Dedications, and which I have resolved care∣fully to avoid. The first is, the Choice of an Unworthy Person to Dedicate to. The second, the servile Flattery be∣stowed on him. And the last, the Tediousness of the Epistle. The two last seem to be neces∣sary Consequences to the first; for when an Author has made
choice of a Vile Patron, he is obliged to turn Parasite in his own defence, and to defile much Paper, as well as nauseate the Reader with a multitude of Fawning Sentences, stolen out of ancient Panegyricks spoken to Wicked Heathens, who yet were better Men than those pre∣tended Christians to whom the same Praises are now applied. I believe Envy it self cannot find place to censure the Choice I have made, and only Envy is capable of attempting it, which if it should, there is yet this Satis∣faction, that we know this Vice, tho aiming to devour and tear others, only gnaws and wounds it self. Good Men, who are the true Judges of Merit, know yours to be far above all I can offer; and yet I make no doubt but
you will look upon this as wor∣thy your Acceptance; for Gene∣rosity regards not the Gift, but the intention of the Giver. Da∣vid not only accepted of the Water brought him by the Three Worthies from the Cistern in Bethlehem, but also offered it to our Lord, because those Men had brought it with the hazard of their Lives. It was not the Water that was of such value, but the Zeal of those Men to serve him that made it precious. Accept, Sir, in like manner here∣of, and regard not the value of the Offering, but the Will of him that offers. Where Merit is, there can be no Flattery, and therefore should a better Pen than mine under∣take to make your Character publick, it might find Subject
enough to employ it self with∣out falling into that Vice. It is peculiar to the Unworthy, only they delight in it, and yet it is that which most exposes them to scorn. To commend Wicked Persons, by attributing to them Virtues they are wholly void of, is no other than to extol the Whiteness of an Ethiopian; for the Vices of the former are no less visible than the Blackness of the latter, and to commend them, for what is not in them is rather a reproach than a commendati∣on. But those who like you are truly Virtuous, are also free from the vanity of taking delight in publick Praises, because no emi∣nent Virtue can be long conceal∣ed, its own lustre will attract the Eyes of all Men, and therefore it needs no foreign helps to make
it publickly known. Virtue car∣ries its Reward and its Honour with it. It is better to say no∣thing, than to fall short in a wor∣thy Character. Yours, Sir, is above all Flattery, and since it can receive no accession by a just Praise, ought to receive no di∣minution through the fault of my Pen. Sir, I am obliged to draw to a conclusion, lest I should be con∣demned for incurring the same Fault I blame in others, which is Tediousness. It will be needless to give you an account of my Author; he is well known to the World, and, I doubt not, but to you in particular. As for the Tran∣slation, it is exposed to every Mans Censure, yet if you approve of it, I shall not question but it may please; and if it please such
as are Competent Judges, it is no matter for the rest. I think, Sir, I have avoided those three Faults I mentioned at first, by choosing you to Dedicate to, by forbearing your just Commendations, lest Malice should call them Flattery, and by reducing all I had to say to this small compass. All that re∣mains is once more to beg a fa∣vourable Reception and kind Ac∣ceptance for this small Offering, which comes not alone, being well attended by the good Wishes for your Prosperity and Happi∣ness, of, SIR,  Your most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, JOHN STEVENS.
THE PREFACE. DON Francisco de Que∣vedo Villegas, the Au∣thor of this small Work, has been a Person so famous in this Age, among all those who understand the Spanish Tongue, that it is much to be admired that England should still be so great a stranger to his Talent. Nothing of his has hi∣therto appeared in English but his Visions, and how general an ac∣ceptation they have met with every Man is sensible. Being Encou∣raged thereby, I take the Liberty to present the Publick with ano∣ther small Piece of the same Au∣thor, nothing inferior in it self to
any of the Visions, unless it has sustained loss in the Translation, which must be left to the Judgment of Judicious, and Ʋnbiassed Rea∣ders. I cannot but lay hold of this Op∣portunity of undeceiving those who look upon my Author as only a Faceti∣ous sort of inconsiderable Satyrist. As to his Birth he was a Man of good Quality, and Born to a good Estate being as he is Stiled in the Title of his Works, Knight of the Order of Santjago, or St. James, and Lord of the Town called Villa de la Torre de Juan Abad, which is somewhat more than a Lord of a Mannor with us in regard that in Spain such Lords have the power of Life and Death wihin their Lord∣ships, and are therefore called Se∣nores de Horca y Cuchillo, that
is, Lords with power of Hanging and Beheading. His Parts are too great a Subject for my intended brevity, only this must not be passed in silence, that he was the Spanish Ovid, for Wit flowed naturally from him without Study, and it was as easie to him to write Verse as Prose Besides he was well Versed in the Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and Ita∣lian Languages, and had imbibed the Marrow of the best Authors in them. But his Works will be a lasting Monument of his great A∣bilities. All of these, that is ex∣tant, is contained in Three large Vo∣lumes in Quarto, two whereof, con∣tain his Works in Prose, and the third his Poems. These are all the Poems of his that have hither∣to been committed to the Press, but a Friend of his, who was fami∣liarly acquainted with him, affirms
in the Preface to that Book, that they are not the twentieth part of what he writ. We have also ano∣ther Proof that more might have been expected, which is, that this Volume is divided into Six Muses, the other Three being designed to compose another. Thus much may suffice as to the Author and his Works in general. Now as to this in particular, I will not give any Character of it, lest it should seem designed to pre∣possess the Reader, and I hope it will appear beautiful enough of it self without the help of any bor∣rowed Ornaments. It was writ a∣bove Fifty years ago, as may appear by several Passages in it, as parti∣cularly where speaking of the French he mentions Cardinal Richlieu as Prime Minister; Treating of the
Dutch, he urges their incroach∣ments in the East and West-In∣dies; and in his Discourse con∣cerning England, he hints at the Rebellion then about breaking out. As I have said nothing in Com∣mendation of the Original, so nei∣ther will I say any thing in Vindi∣cation of the Translation. If good, it needs none, and if otherwise, it deserves none. Only the Reader may observe, I have followed the Spanish as close as the difference of the two Languages could bear, which I did to preserve as near as possible the Authors Sense entire, without intruding any Notions of my own. My Design is not to make up this small Volume with a long Preface, for this has already extended far∣ther than I had proposed to my self.
I will therefore conclude, advertis∣ing the Reader, that according to the Acceptance. I shall sind this meets withall, I will proceed to give the Publick a farther Taste of the Works of Don Francisco de Quevedo.
FORTUNE IN HER WITS, AND THE Hour of all Men. JOVE in a Splenetick Rage rent his very Throat, and pierced the Earth with his Bawling; for to say it only pierced the Heaven, where he resided, had not been an Expression emphatical enough. He summon'd all the Gods in great haste to as∣semble before him in Council. The first that appeared was Mars, that Celestial Don Quixot, armed Cap-a pee, with his Spear advanced, and making Passes in the Air. Next to him came the Platter-faced Deity Bacchus, with a Periwig made of Vine-Branches, his Eyes overflowing, his Mouth like a Wine-Press belching out Liquor at second-hand, his Speech Stammering, his Steps Reeling, an his Brain
entoxicated with the Juice of the Grape. On the other side appeared Hobling Saturn, that Bugbear, Child-eating Deity, gorging himself with his own Sons. With him came Drip∣ping Neptune, the Watery God, that bears an old Woman's Jaw-bone instead of a Scepter; for that is the English of a Trident; about him hung the Sea-weeds like Rags, clung to∣gether with the Spawn of Fish, smelling strong as of a Friday Dinner, and with the Water that ran from him laying the Dust of the Char∣coal raised by his Follower Pluto, a God of Devils, with his Head and Face powder'd with Soot, perfum'd with Brimstone and Gun∣powder, and Cloathed in such profound Dark∣ness, that he was scarce discernable, tho close followed by the Glaring Sun, with his Brazen Face and Tinsel Beard: That Fox-coloured rambling Planet, that winds up the Threads of all Lives, affects being close Trimm'd, doats on the Guitars and the Lute, and yet is employed in tacking of Days one upon the back of ano∣ther, and heaping of Years and Ages, having conspir'd with Cares and Apoplexies for the Peopling, of Church-yards. Venus, as she came, filled the Heavens with the vast Circumference of her Fardingale, hiding the Five Zones under her Petticoats, her Face but half lick'd, and the Tower that was to cover her bald Skull hang∣ing all awry for haste. After her came the Moon with her Face cut into Quarters, the Night-walking Lady that only serves to save Candle and Lanthorn. The God Pan rushed in with a great noise, being followed by two
vast Herds of Sylvans, Faunes, and other Hairy and Cloven-footed Gods of the Woods. All Heaven swarm'd with Manes, Lemures, Lares, and other little Deities, who all took their Chairs, the GoddessesIn Spain the Women do not sit on Chairs, but on Cushions upon the Ground. squatting down like Taylors upon their Legs, the whole As∣sembly attentively fixing their Eyes upon Jove. Mans ratling his Armour like the Harmony of a Tinkers Kettle, started up, and looking stern as a Bully after a Beating, thundred out these Words: Open thy Mouth with a Vengeance, thou mighty Hector of this upper Region, open thy Mouth, I say, and prate, for you seem to be in a Dream. Jove thus accosted in so rough a Dialect, whilst, tho it was Summer, he held the sparkling Thunderbolt, (when it had been much properer to have cooled himself with a Fan) raising his Voice, that it might sound the greater, answered: Keep your Prating Tongue betwixt your Teeth, and let us call Mercury. In the twinkling of an Eye Mercury dropt be∣fore him, holding his little Wand like a Juggler; his Heel fledged, and his little Hat in the shape of a Mushroom on his Head. Then Jove said, Thou Ubiquitary God, shoot thy self into the World, and in a trice drag Fortune hither by the Ears. In an instant the Spright of Olympus, clapping Wings instead of Spurs, to his Heels, vanished with such swiftness, that the sight could not distinguish between his departure and return. He returned like Lazarillo leading Blind For∣tune, who with a Staff in one Hand felt out her Way, and in the other held a String, which was a Bridle to a little Dog. She stood a tip∣toe
upon a Globe, in the midst of a Wheel wound with Threads, Breads, Ribbans, Cords, and Ropes, all which, as it moved, knit them∣selves together, and unknit again. Behind, as her Maid, came Opportunity, a Broad-faced, Flat-nosed, Bald-pated Wench, only on the top of her Forehead was one single Lock scarce big enough to make one good Whisker. This Lock was as slippery as an Eell, and played in the Air, being moved at the breath of every Word. By her Hands it ap∣peared that Opportunity lived upon hard labour, and doing all the Drudgery of Fortune. All the Gods appeared disgusted at the sight of Fortune, and some of them made signs as if she had turned their Stomachs, when she in a squeeking Tone, and speaking at a venture, said; My Eyes being in their Swadling Clouts, and my Sight in the dark, I cannot discover who you are that make up this Assembly; but be you who you will, my discourse is directed to you all, and particularly to thee, O Jove, who spittest thy Thunderbolts after the drippings of the Clouds; tell me what Whimsey came into thy Head to send for me, whereas for so many Ages past thou hast never so much as thought on me: Perhaps thou and the rest of thy Mob of Godlings have forgot how great the extent of my power is, and that I have tossed about both thee and them no less than I do poor Mortals. Jove swelling, and looking stern, replied; Thou Sot, thy Extravagancies, thy Follies, and thy Wickedness, are so great, that Mortals believe, since we do not curb thee, there are no Dei∣ties, that Heaven lies waste, and that I am a
poor insignificant God: They complain, that thou givest to Villanies those Rewards which are due to Merit; that Virtue is unregarded, and Vice encou∣raged; that thou placest those in the Judgment-Seats, who ought to be preferred to the Gallows; that thou bestow'st Dignities on those whose Ears should be Nail'd to the Pillory; and that thou oppressest and impove∣rishest those thou oughtest to raise and enrich. Fortune looking pale with anger, and chafing, said; I am no Fool, I know what I do, and all my acti∣ons are guided by Prudence: You who call me rash Sot, remember you Kackled like a Goose to Leda, that you played the false Coiner with Danae, that you Bellowed and acted the Bull for Europa, and have been guilty of a thousand other Roguish mad Pranks, and that all those who attend you have been only Crows and Magpies; None of which Fopperies can be laid to my charge. If Per∣sons of Merit are laid aside, and Vertuous Men pass unrewarded, the fault is not altogether mine; many despise what I offer them, and their Modesty is laid at my door as a Crime; Others rather than stretch out their hands, let slip what I tender them; Others snatch it from me without my consent; More Men are enriched by forcing it from me, than by my free gift. There are more that steal what I refuse, than that keep what I give them; Ma∣ny receive of me that they know not how to pre∣serve, they lose it and pretend I take it from them; Many accuse me for misplacing Gifts on others, which would be much worse employed on them∣selves; There is no Man happy without being en∣vied by many, and no Man is miserable without being contemned by all; This Maid has always
served me, without her I have never done any thing; her Name is Opportunity, hear her, and learn of a Drudging Wench how to judge of things. Then Opportunity letting her Tongue run for fear of letting her self slip said; I am that sort of good natured Female that offer my self to all Men, many find but few enjoy me: I am a Female Sampso∣ness, for all my strength lies in my Hair, he that can hold fast by my Lock need not fear to be thrown by my Mistress: It is I that manage, I that di∣stribute her, and when Men know not how to pur∣sue their own interests, and make their advantages, they lay all the blame upon me: Folly and igno∣rance have furnished Men with these Hellish Sen∣tences, Who would have believed? I did not think. I did not reflect on it. I did not know. It is well enough yet. What matter's it. It is neither here nor there. To morrow will do. There's time enough. There is no wanting an Opportunity. I slipt my time. I know my own business. I am no Fool. Let not that trouble you. I am bound to see it. That's a Jest. Never believe it. I'le do my own bu∣siness. I shall not want. God will provide. All days are not alike. If one thing fails, ano∣ther hits. 'Tis well enough. What is that to him? It is my Opinion. It cannot be. Do not tell me. I can see into it. Time will shew it. Let the World run. It is I that am to answer for it. I am no such Man. Very lively. Let them talk as they please. Over Shooes over Boots. I understand Trap. Time will shew, they say, and But, and Perhaps, and the Conlcusion of all positive Blockheads, Come
what will. These Follies make Men Conceited, Sloathful and Careless; These are the Gaps that I slip out at; These are the Rubs that overset my Mistress's Wheel; and these the Gusts that split her Sail. Then if the Fools let me slip by them, what fault is it in me to be gone? If they lay the Rubs in the way of my Mistresses Wheel, why do they com∣plain of its jolting. If they know it is a Wheel whereof every part is sometimes up and sometimes down, and that each part descends in order to rise, and rises in order to fall again, why do they en∣tangle themselves in it? The Sun has stood still, the Wheel of Fortune never did. Whosoever has thought to fix it, only gave it a check that it might whirl again with the greater fury. Its motion like that of Time puts a period to all Worldly Felicities and Calamities, to all the Lives in the World, and by degrees to the World it self. This, O Jove, is matter of fact, let who will oppose it. Fortune encouraged at these Words, and turning on all hands like a Weathercock, said; Opportunity has discovered how unjustly I am accused; however, I am resolved my self to con∣vince thee, thou Supream Thunderer, and all thy Company, carrousing in Nectar and Ambrosia, notwithstanding that I always had, now have, and shall ever continue to have as much power over you, as over the meanest Rabble in the World. I hope to see your Divinities starving with Hunger and Cold for want of Victims, and that not so much as a black Pudding shall be sacrificed to you, but you shall only serve to fill up Ballads, and be brought in for Rhime sake in Love Songs for the Diversion of the Mob, and Encouragement of Hawkers.
A Curse light on all thy Designs (quoth the Sun) for so impudently blaspheming against our Power. Were it permitted me, as I am the Sun, I would swelter thee with Heat, scorch thee with my Rays, and make thee run mad with the Head∣ach. Go dry up the Dirt (said Fortune) ripen Cucumbers, furnish Plagues for the good of Phy∣sicians, and assist those that louse themselves at thy light; for know I have seen you keep Cows, and run after a Wench, who, tho you was the Sun, left you in the dark. Remember your Son was burnt to death like a Heretick, therefore be silent hereaf∣ter, and let those speak to whom it belongs. Then Jove with all his gravity utter'd these Words; Fortune; both you, and that impudent Wench thy Servant, are much in the right, in many things you have said; however, for the general satisfacti∣on of all People, it is irrevocably decreed, that on the same day and hour throughout the whole World every Man be put into those Circumstances he justly deserves. This must be, therefore appoint the day nd the hour. Fortune replied, To what purpose is it to delay what must be, let it be to day, let us know what time of the day it is. The Sun, who is the Standard of Clockmakers, an∣swer'd; This is the 20th of June, as to the time of the day, it is Three and three quarters and six minutes after Noon. Mind then (quoth Fortune) and as soon as it strikes Four, you shall see how affairs go upon Earth. Then falling to work, she began to greaze the Axletree of her Wheel, to settle the Spokes, remove the Nails, and entangle several Cords, slackning some, and straining others, till the Sun cried out, and
said; It is just Four, neither over nor under, for this very instant I have brought the shade of the Gnomons of all Clocks upon the fourth Postmeri∣dian Line. No sooner had he uttered these Words than Fortune, as if she had been play∣ing on a Cymbal, began to unwind her Wheel, which whirling about like a Hurrican, hudled all the World into an unparallelled confusion. Fortune gave a mighty Squeek, saying, Fly Wheel, and the Devil drive thee. The Phy∣sician.That very moment, a Physician riding along on his Mule, a Snails Gallop, in pursuit of Diseases, was surprized by the wonderful in∣fluence of that Hour which was to give all Men their due, and on a sudden he found him∣self in the posture of a Hangman, with his Legs a-cross the Shoulders of his Patient, cry∣ing, Credo instead of Recipe, as if he had been going to turn him off the Ladder. The Al∣guazil.At a small distance followed in the same Street a Criminal that was Whipt, the Cryer before proclaiming his Misdemeanours, the Hangman behind lashing him, he riding upon an Ass, and naked from the Waste upward like a Galley Slave. This was his posture at the Striking of the Clock, which was no sooner over, but the Horse theAlguazil is an Officer in Spain that apprehends Cri∣minals, and attends the Exe∣cution of Justice. Crimi∣nals in Spain are carried to the Gallows, and Whipt upon an Ass. Alguazil rid on threw him, and the † Ass the Criminal; The Horse took up the Criminal, and having changed Stations, he be∣gan to be lashed who before at∣tended the Execution, and he to attend who
before was lashed. TheThe Scribe, in Spanish Es∣crivano, is a sort of Clerk al∣most inse∣parable from the Alguazil. Scribe alighted to set all again to rights, and taking out his Pen it grew out into a Galley Oar, and instead of Writing, he began to Row. The Apo∣thecary.The Scavengers Carts passing through another Street at the first moment of the Hour, stopped before an Apothecary's Shop, and on a sudden all the Dirt began to fly out of the Cart into the Shop, whence the Pots and Glasses leaped out into the Carts with won∣derful noise and confusion. But the Dirt and the Pots meeting, as the one went in and the other out, it was observed, that the Dirt very squeamishly cried out, Keep off. Mean while the Dust men were not idle, but with their Brooms and Shovels swept together and threw up into the Carts heaps of Painted Whores, Pocky Beaus, and Powdred Fops. The Cheat.A certain notorious Knave had built a sum∣ptuous House, not much inferior to a Palace, with a stately Porch, and over it a Noble Coat of Arms cut in Stone, and an Inscription as if he had been of some considerable Family. The Owner was an errant Thief, who under the shadow of his Employ had stole the whole Cost of the Fabrick. He was then in the House, and at the Door was a Bill signifying three Apartments were there to be let. The Hour came, O good God, who can express such a Prodigy? Every Stone, every Brick in the whole Structure, fell asunder, the Tiles flew some to the top of one House, and some to another, the Rafters, Doors and Windows hurried into several Houses, to the terrour of
the Owners who looked upon this Restitution as the effects of an Earthquake, and thought it was the end of the World. The Iron Bars and Grates walked about the streets seeking whom they belonged to. The Armes that stood over the Doores posted away to a Coun∣try Gentleman's seat, whence this Cursed Villain pretended himself to be descended, The Rogue himself stripped of his Fabrick, was left alone at the corner of a Street, with only the Bill upon him which had been at the Door, but that so changed, that whereas before the purport of it was, This House is to be Lett unfurnished, inquire within of the Landlord: Now it was, This Thief is to be Lett unfurnished, whosoever will hire him may come in without knocking, since the House does not hinder it. Opposite to this Man lived a Pawnbroker,Pawn-Bro∣ker. who seeing his Neighbour's House vanish, thought to secure himself, saying, the Houses remove from their Landlords, this is a base in∣vention. But tho' he used the utmost diligence to secure himself, the hour was come, and on a sudden an Escritore, a Silver Table and, a rich Hanging which he kept in Captivity be∣ing Pawned to him, flew from the Walls with such violence, that a piece of the hanging in its way to the Window wound it self about him, and carried him through the Air above an hundred paces, where he dropt on the top of a House, not without some bruises. From thence to his unspeakable Grief, he saw all he had hurried away to the right owners. After all
the rest came out the Letters of Nobility,In Spain Gentlemen take out their Let∣ters of No∣bility, which who∣soever can show, is free from Ar∣rests. up∣on which he had lent a Sum of Mony to the Gentleman they belonged to for two Months, on condition to receive five and Twenty per Cent. Interest for that short time. These Let∣ters to his astonishment, as they passed by him, said, Thou Barbarous Tyrant over Pawns, if our Master for our sake cannot be arrested for Debt, what reason can you show, to keep us in Prison? This said, they leaped into a Cooks shop, where the Gentleman that owned them sate with a hungry Belly envying every bit he saw another put into his Mouth. The Talker.An Eternal Talker, who lavished as many words, as would have furnished half a score in∣tolerable Bablers, and whose Tongue seemed to be the perpetual motion so long sought af∣ter, was busy confounding his whole Neigh∣bourhood with the overflowing of his clack; when, on a sudden, the hour being come, his Tongue was tied up, and he strugling to run on, only stutter'd and stammer'd the same syllables over without end; and finding his mouth stopped, his very Eyes and Ears seem∣ed to forget their own Office, and burst out into talk. The JudgesFive Judges were sitting on the Bench upon a Tryal; one of them meerly out of ill nature was projecting how he might cast both parties. Another being a meer Ignoramus, and under∣standing nothing of the matter, was resolved to give his opinion, as all Blockheads do, at a venture. The Third a doating old Fel∣low who had slept most part of the Tryal, gi∣ving
Judgment like? Pilate's Wife, by Dreams, was considering with which of his Fellows he should close in opinion at random. The Fourth who was a Learned and Upright Judge, sate like a Cypher next to the last, who be∣ing corrupted with Bribes, strained the sense of the Law, and drew over to his Party the other three; but at the very instant of giving Judgment the hour commenced, and instead of saying, The Court is of opinion, that such a one is Cast and Condemned, he said, The Court does award, that we be Damned, and accordingly we are Damned. Be the sentence fulfilled said an unknown Voice. In a mo∣ment their Gowns were converted into Snake∣skins, and they falling together by the Ears, soon stripped one anothers Faces, every one carrying away his Neighbours Beard, to show that their Judgment lay in their Fingers, and not in their Heads. A Match-maker.A Match maker was busie intoxicating an Honest Man's Brain, who being weary of a quiet Life and a good Estate, was thinking of Marrying; he proposed to him a consummated Jilt, and set her off in this manner. Sir, I will not commend her Birth, because, God be prais∣ed, you have quality enough to bestow on her; as for Riches, you are plentifully provided; Beau∣ty in a Wife is a thing of dangerous consequence; as for matter of Judgment it is you that are to govern her, and you do not take her for a Councellor; ill humours she is not troubled with, her Years are but few, (yet he meant she had but few to Live) she has all the other
good qualities you could wish. The poor Man in a passion cried out, Thou accursed Divel, what other good qualities can she have, since you own she is neither well Born, Rich, Beautiful nor Discreet; and all you can say for her is, that she is not ill-natur'd. Scarce had he done when the Hour began, and the Cursed Match-maker, who acts the Taylor at Weddings, Stealing, Lying, Cheating, Patching and Piecing, found himself Married to the Monster, he would have vamp'd upon the other Man; and the new Couple falling upon one another, went off Kicking and Scratching, and Crying by turnes, Who are you? What Fortune did you bring, you are not worthy to wipe my Shoes. A Poet.A Poet having seated himself among an Assem∣bly of Wits, was reaing to them a Pedantick obscure Poem of his own composing, so stuf∣fed with Latinisms, so cramp'd with Syncopa's, so entangled with Parentheses, and so perplexed with Similies and Allusions, that none of the Company could find either head or tail to it. Upon the turn of the Hour he had gone halfway through his Jargon, or Confusion of Langua∣ges, and all the hearers pressing upon him, to pick out, if possible, some meaning from that Chaos of hard Words, one of them who held a Candle in his hand to inform himself the better by over-looking the Paper, put it so close that the unfortunate Poem took Fire. The Poet stamp'd and tore his hair seeing all his labour condemned to the Flames; but he that had fired it pacified him, saying, These
Verses are like old tarnished Silver Lace, they must be first burnt, and then perhaps you may separate the pure Metal from the Dross. The Whore.A Topping Whore sailing out of her Lodg∣ing with a mighty Fardingal, so large she could scarce crowd through her narrow En∣try, and filled both sides of the Street with the vast compass of her Coats, was overtaken by the first minute of the all-ruling Hour, and on a sudden being set upon her Head, ap∣peared like a Bell inverted. Here was dis∣covered a vast Fardel of Rags that composed a Rumprowl, with a Piece of Tapestry Hang∣ing rowled up to set out her Hips, which in the turn loosening, and falling over her Belly, there appeared at the bottom of it an Holo∣fernes's his Head. The whole Street was alarm∣ed with the Shouts of the Rabble that beheld her. She Skreiked, but her Voice being drowned in the labyrinth of her Petticoats fallen about her Head, the noise sounded as if it came out from a deep Cavern. She had certainly been stifled in the Crouch, but that at the same time a Beau strutting along the Street with false Calves, and three false Teeth; and two Dotards with their grey Hair, and Beard coloured black; and 3 old Bald pated Fellows that wore Periwigs; They were all surprised by the Influence of that Hour. The Beau feeling his Calves slink away, thought to cry for help, believing his Legs would be stolen; but at the first motion of his Tongue, out drops his Teeth. The Dotards Beards and Hair became as grey as a Badger, so that
they scarce knew one another; and the Bald Fellows Periwigs flew away with their Hats, leaving them nothing differing from bare Skuls, but that they wore Whiskers. The Noble∣man.A certain Nobleman had a Favourite Do∣mestick who devoured his Substance, this Do∣mestick was cheated by his Servant, the Ser∣vant by his Man, the Man by his Friend, the Friend by his Wench, and the Wench was deluded by the Devil. Now the Hour being come, the Devil who seemed to be at such a distance from the Lord, seizes upon the Whore, the Whore on her Spark, the Spark on the Man, the Man on the Servant, the Servant on his Master, and the Master on his Lord, and the Devil possessing him, after run∣ning the Gantlet through the Whore, the Bul∣ly, the Man, the Servant and Domestick, in a Hellish Rage he falls upon his Domestick, the Domestick on his Servant, the Servant on his Man, the Man on his Friend, the Friend on his Whore, and she layed about upon them all; and thus exagitated by Furies, they tore one another to pieces, all their Frauds and Villa∣nies were laid open, and the Devil who had managed the whole Contrivance without dis∣covery, swept them away all in a Cluster. The Rich Wife.A Rich Married Woman sat at her Dressing Table, plaistering up her Wrinkled freckly Skin, sleeking her Weatherbeaten Forehead, draw∣ing Eyebrows with a Pencil, colouring her decayed Cheeks with Spanish Wooll, and dy∣ing her pale Lips of a lively Cherry colour. By her, as an Assistant, kneel'd a Decrepid
old Governant like a Skeleton, Drest up, hold∣ing a Tour of an extraordinary magnitude. Next to her stood a young Chambermaid, yet a Novice at the Trade of Daubing, and in her Hands a pair of Iron Bolster'd Bodies, contriv'd to rectifie two mighty Excrescencies that discomposed the figure of the Body. In this posture sate the Lady confounding and shaming her very Looking-glass, when the Hour commenced, and she led by the power∣ful influence thereof, began to lay about her, applying the White-wash to her Hair, the Black Lead to her Teeth, the Red to her Eyebrows and Forehead, clapping the Tower on her Jaws, and lacing on the Bolstered Bo∣dies the wrong way. Thus in a moment she was converted into a Skarecrow, with a curled Beard, and four Hunches more gastly and frightful than an Hobgoblin. The Go∣vernant thinking she was distracted, started up, and fled with might and main; the Cham∣bermaid sounded away as if she had seen the Devil, and the Lady enraged in that horrible posture scoured after the Governant. The noise brought the Husband, who seeing his Wife, thought she was possess'd by some Ma∣lignant Spirit, and ran with speed to call a Priest to apply Exorcisms to her. Abuses in Goals.A Sovereign Prince resolved to be present himself at a Goal Delivery, being informed that his Officers made the Prison their Mar∣ket, where they bought and sold Crimes and Criminals at all sorts of Rates and Prizes, ex∣changing Robbers for Gold, and Murderers
for ready Money. He ordered the Prisoners to be brought before him, and found they had been apprehended for the Crimes they had committed, but were detained through the Avarice of their Keepers, who computed what some had and might have stolen, and what others had or might have of their own: so that their Cause was depending as long as their Stock lasted, and the day it expired was the day they were punished; it being plain they were apprehended for the ill they had done, and executed for what they had not. Among the rest were two condemned to be Hanged the next day. One of these having compounded with his Adversary, was kept as a Prisoner at large. The other they designed to Hang for Robbing, after having been three years a Prisoner, during which time they had devoured all he stole, and all he, his Father, and Wife, by whom he had two Children, were worth. Thus far had this Prince pro∣ceeded when the Hour commenced, and he turning pale with anger, said; This Man you disigned to discharge because he has compounded with his Adversary, shall be hanged to morrow; for the contrary would be exposing of Lives to Sale, and the Price of buying off an Appeal would prove the purchase of a Husband's Blood from the Wife, of the Father's from a Son, and of a Son's from the Father; so that Pardons for Murder being to be bought, a Rate would be set upon every Man's Life, and thus all Examples of Justice would cease, it being an easie matter to perswade the Ap∣pellant, that a Thousand or Five hundred Crowns
will do him more good, than the Hanging of his Enemy. There are two Parties concerned in all publick Offences, viz. Justice and the Person Of∣fended, and it is no less necessary that the former should punish, than that the latter should forgive. This Thief, whom after three years imprisonment you intended to Hang, shall be sent to the Galleys; for as it had been justice to Hang him three years ago, so now it would be a Barbarous Wrong, be∣cause in him you would hang his Father, Wife, and Children, who are innocent, and whose Sub∣stance by these delays you have devoured. I re∣member a Story of a Man, who enraged that the Mice gnawed his Papers, Crusts of Bread, Par∣ings of Cheese, and old Shooes, took in Cats to destroy the Mice; but perceiving the Cats not only eat the Mice, but stole his Meat out of the Pot, and tore it off the Spit, that one day they spoiled a Fowl, and another a whole Joint of Meat, he kill'd the Cats, and said, The Mice for my Money. Do you apply she Moral to this Fable, since you like Devouring Cats, instead of cleansing the State from Vermin, do catch and eat the Thieves, who are little Mice, that Pick a Pocket, Cut a Purse, Snatch a Hat, or Steal a Cloak, and at the same time you waste the Country, con∣sume Estates, and destroy whole Families. Infa∣mous Wretches, I will rather endure Mice than maintain Cats. This said, he ordered all the Prisoners to be discharged, and the Officers to be apprehended. There was a wonderful Noise and Confusion, those lamented who before were inexorable; and the Prisoners loaded those with Fetters and Chains, who before had Fetter'd them.
Old Women hiding their Age.Several Women appeared in a Street, some of them a-foot, and tho many were well stricken in years, they tript it along like young Girls, proud of their little Feet and white Petticoats. Others were pack'd up in a Coach, dissembling their Age with their Coy Looks, and playing with their white Hands. Others Dress'd like Bartholomew Babies, and afraid the Air should discompose them, were set up in Glass Cupboards or Sedans, carried by greasy Fellows, the farthest prospect of the Lady's Eyes being the neighbouring Haunches of the foremost, and the next Per∣fume to their Noses proceeding from his sweaty Feet, which being free from the en∣cumbrance of Socks sent it up the fresher. All of them were as gay as young Girls, striving to be taken for such, concealing their Age as they would their Shame, and Ogle∣ing with those Eyes that were ready to sink into their Heads. Upon the very entrance of the Hour they were met by Maximus, Origa∣nus, Argolius, and a pack of other ancient Astrologers, with their Ephemerides in their Hands, who presently attack'd them, to fix upon every one the date of her Life to the very year, day, hour, minute, and second of their Nativity. These Conjurers set up a Cry, Own your Age, ye Wretches, since it is your Doom, you are Forty two years old, 2 months, days, 2 hours, 9 minutes, and 20 seconds, says one of the Astrologers to one of the Ladies. Good God! who can express the terrible Shreiks she rais'd; all that could be understood
was, you Lye, it is false, I am not Fifteen; Lord, what a Rogue this is to say such a thing! Ano∣ther cryed, I am not Eighteen; a Third, I am but Thirteen; I am a mere Child, an Infant, crys another. Origanus was writing her Age upon the Back of one, as if it had been a Bill up∣on a Door, and it was to this effect; This Wo∣man was deliver'd into the World in the Year 1629. She perceiving by this means, it would appear she was 67 Years of Age, all in a rage cryed out, Thou Old doating Emblem of Death, I am but just come into the World, my Teeth are not all cut▪ Thou decayed piece of Antiquity, re∣plied Origanus, Teeth will never spring under old Stumps, look upon your Date: I'll own no Date, quoth she, and thus falling together by the Ears, the controversie ended in a wonderful confusion. After a sumptuous Dinner a mighty Poten∣tate sate sate lulling his Pride with the false Flatte∣ries that fell from the mouths of his Servants.Sycophants. A grumbling noise resounded from his cram'd gutts, which could not agree in the Cooks∣shop of his Belly, with the strange medly of varieties he had devoured. He foam'd at the Mouth, the Wine boiling over, and his whole Face was inflamed and bloated with the exha∣lation of his Stomach. At each word he ut∣tered, tho' never so stupid, the standers by like Men in a Frenzie poured out Superlative Encomiums: An admirable sentence crys one, nothing could be exprest finer says another, most incomparable words says a Third; and lastly, a Parasite who laboured to out-flatter
all the rest, straining a lye to the utmost pitch exclaimes, Learning it self stands ama∣zed to hear you, and even admiration is out∣done. The great Man strutting, and fetch∣ing up two or three Gulps, the fore-runners of a Vomit drivelled out these words, I am much concerned for the loss of my two Ships. Immediately the Parasites renewed their Flat∣teries, and Romancing without measure, one of them replyed, That that loss redounded to his Honour, that it fell out as could have been wished, and nothing could have happened more opportunely, since it administred an opportunity of falling out with his Neighbours, from whom he might take Two Hundred in lieu of these two, which might easily be compassed. To prove this, the, false Flatterer produced many examples. Ano∣ther said, That loss was the greatest testimony of his Grandeur, for only he was a great Prince who had much to lose, that losing was a better demon∣stration of Power, than gaining and acquiring, which were the Practice of Pyrates and Robbers. That damage sustained, he added, would be the enriching of him; and then began to fill his Ears with sentences out of Tacitus, Salust, Po∣libius, Thucidides, and other Authors; repre∣sencing the vast losses of the Greeks and Ro∣mans, and a Thousand other extravagancies▪ The mighty Glutton who only studdied how to excuse his sloath, took these falshoods as full satisfaction for his loss. The Devil him∣self could not have contrived a better way to infatuate him. At this time the crudity of his Stomach for want of digestion cast up a Belch,
which made the room to Eccho No sooner had the Cursed Parasites heard it, than kneel∣ing down to make him believe he had sneez∣ed, they unanimously said, God bless you. That very minute began the Hour, and the great Man raving as if exagicated by furies cryed out, Villains, since you would impose upon me so far as to make a Belch pass for a Sneeze, tho my Mouth and my Nose are so close together, what can I expect you would do in those things I neither see nor smell. Then shaking his Hands about his Ears as if he were driving away their Lyes, he ran at them and kick'd them out of the Palace, saying. Had these Fellows come upon me when I had a Cold, they had utterly undone me; one sense that was left me proved their ruin, their is no greater happiness than Smelling. The Cheats.The Misers warned by costly experience separated themselves from the Cheats, and these rather than lose their Trade attacked one another, disguising their Words and coun∣terfeiting Plain Dealing. Says one Cheat to another, Sir, having paid dear for dealing with Sharpers who have been my ruin, I come to you who are no stranger to my Honesty, to desire you will lend me 3000 RoyalsThere are such quan∣tities of Coper-Mo∣ny in Spain, that great Sums are often paid in it, and great Consi∣deration is allowed for Payments in Gold or Silver. in Brass, upon a Bill which is accepted and payable in Silver within two Months; the party the Bill is drawn upon is so re∣sponsible, the Money is as good as if you had it in your Pocket, and you will have no further trou∣ble than telling of it. But the Man upon whom he gave the Bill was the very sink of Fraud and Deceit. The Sharper who hear'd the o∣ther Sharper commending the Third, preten∣ding
not to be acquainted with the qualifica∣tions of either, and arming himself with his own Weapons, with a doleful deliberation answered, That he was just then come abroad to borrow 4000 Royals upon A Pawn that was worth Eight. They all accosted one another with gilt Chains that were to past for Gold, coun∣terfeit Bills that were accepted, sham Securi∣ties, false Notes, Plate they had borrowed for a Feast, and bits of Glass and Bristol stones under the title of Diamonds. It was wonder∣ful to hear the discourse that passed betwixt them. One said, Honesty is the best Policy, and plain dealing is a Jewel. I had rather die in a Ditch than do a base thing. I stand upon my Re∣putation, 'tis a great blessing to be afraid to show ones Face; this has been my Education from my Cradle. Another of the Cheats answered. There is nothing like keeping touch, an honest Man's Word is as good as his Bond, I never de∣sired ill-gotten Riches, I will have nothing that way require restitution, my Soul is more precious to me than all the World, I would not be guilty of one Cheat for all the Riches in the Earthy, I value my conscience above all the Universe contains. Thus were these Dissemblers disguising their fly designs with fair Speeches, when the Hour came upon them, and every Sharper believing his companion, they all ruined one another. He that had the false Chain gave it for the counterfeit Bill, he that showed the Glass Di∣amonds exchanged them for the borrowed Plate. The Three ran to the Goldsmith, the other with his Bill to the Banker to compound
for half in ready Money before the Cheat of the Chain was discovered. The Banker told him the Bill was not his, neither did he know any such Man, and seat him away with a Flea in his Ear. Away slunk the Sharper with-his Bill instead of his Tail betwixt bis Legs, say∣ing, O Dog, what a trick had he served me, but that the Chain was made of old Iron. He that parted with the false Diamonds for die Place being at the Goldsmith's selling it for lest than the weights, rejoyced to think how he had bubbled the other with bits of Glass. In comes the right Owner, and seeing his Plate swing in the Scale calls an Alguazil and seizes the Cheat for a Thief, and they fell together by the Ears. At the noise out runs he with the false Diamonds: He that was selling die Plate cryed out, That Rogue sold it to me; The other answered, He lyes, he stole it from me. The Goldsmith cryed, That Scoundrel would have sold me pebbles for Diamonds. The owner of the Plate was for seizing them both; The Scribe was for securing all three till the mat∣ter were decided. The Alguazil seized the two Cheats, and the Scribe led the owner of the Plate by the Cloak; after the Rogues had well buffeted one another, and thus well-atten∣ded by the Mob, they were led to Goal, and there put into custody of the Hangman's Master of the Wardrobe. There is a small Island on the Coast of Denmark, in which there are Five Towns. The Lord of this place was very poor, ra∣ther because he coveted much, than that he
wanted for any thing. God had afflicted the Inhabitants with a general inclination in them all to be Projectors, so that the Land seem'd to be infested with as many Monsters as there were Men. All the Neighbouring People shunn'd these Islanders as they would the Plague, for the very Air that came from them was so contagious, it consum'd their Stocks, blasted their Fields, wasted their Treasure, and ruin'd their Trade. So prodigious was the natural Proneness to Projecting in that Country, that the very sucking Babes instead of Daddy and Mammy, cryed nothing but Project. The whole Island was a confused Chaos, for Man and Wise, Father and Son, Neighbour and Neighbour, were ever jang∣ling and bawling about their Projects, and they were as intoxicated with them as if they had been drunk with Wine. The Lord of this place, (Avarice, which is one of the worst Devils that distract the World, having gain'd the ascendant over him) ordered a general gathering of Projects. Legions of Projectors assembled before his Palace, with Skrips and Scroles of Paper stuck in their Girdles, run through their Button Holes, and peeping out of their Pockets. The Lord having made known his Wants, demanded their Assistance, and they all at once laying hold of their Pa∣pers, and crowding till they had almost stifled one another, in an instant heaped up four Tables with their Memoirs. The hurry be∣ing somewhat over, he began to look over them. The first Paper he opened was En∣tituled
to this effect: A Project for getting an in∣finite quantity of Silver and Gold, without ask∣ing, or taking it from any body. A difficult proposition in my mind, says the Lord. The second: How to gather unmeasurable Treasure by taking what they have, from all Men, and en∣riching them by taking it away. The first part, quoth the Lord, of taking from all Men, I like; put as to the second, which is to enrich them by taking it from them, I am dubious, yet let them look to that. The third: An easie, pleas∣ing, and just Project for amassing of many Mil∣lions, in such manner, that they who are to pay them shall not miss them, but rather shall think they are bestowed on them. This I approve of, leaving the persuasive part to the Projector. The fourth Project undertakes to make what is deficient to superabound without adding any thing, or taking away, and without giv∣ing any Body cause of Complaint. A Pro∣ject so inoffensive can have nothing of truth in it. The fifth, which offers to furnish all that shall be desired, directs to take by fair and foul Means, and to ask of all Men, and they will give themselves to the Devil. This Project having to do with the Devil, seem'd practicable. The Author encouraged by this Approbation, added: And I propose, that those who levy it, shall be a comfort to them that suffer by it. The Devil put it into his Head to let slip that Word, Furies possess the Projectors, who thunder out Reproaches against him, cal∣ling him, Sot and Dog, and crying, Thou Scoun∣drel, Hell it self could never have proposed a Com∣fort
fort in Tax-gatherers, they themselves being the greatest of Grievances. They call'd one ano∣ther Sons of Projectors, as it had been Sons of Whores, condemning one anothers Proposals, and each approving only of his own. In the height of this Fray, many of the Lords Ser∣vants came running, and crying the Palace was a-fire in three several places, and the Wind blew high. Just then began the Hour, the Smoke was great, and the Flame ascended. The Lord in that Consternation knew not which way to turn himself. The Projectors bid him sit still, and they would set all to rights in a moment; and rushing out from his presence, some laid Hands on all they found in the House, casting the Cabinets, Tables, Glas∣ses, and all that was of value, out at the Win∣dows; others with Sledges overthrew a Tower; others saying; the Fire would cease as soon as it had vent, uncovered a great part of the House, breaking down the Rooss, and destroying all that stood in their way. None of them, went about to quench the Fire, but all were employed in pulling down the House, and confounding all that was in it. The Lord seeing the Smoke decrease, went out, and found, that the Common People with his Of∣ficers and Servants had overcome the Fire, yet at the same time perceiv'd the Projectors were tearing up the very Foundations, had demolish'd his Palace, and spoil'd all his Fur∣niture: Incensed and raging at this hideous sight, he cryed out, Dogs, you are worse than the Fire, and such art all your Projects, it were
better I had been burnt, than to have given ear to you, so destructive are all the Remedies you apply. You overturn a whole Heuse for fear a Corner of it should fall, and throw the best Goods into the Street pretending to save them. You feed a Prince with his own Limbs, and pretend to maintain him, when at the same time he is devouring him∣self. If the Head devours its whole Body, it will remain a Cancer and not a Man. Villains, justly did the Fire come to burn me for gathering and suffering you to live, but when it perceiv'd me in the power of Projectors it ceased, concluding I was already consumed. Fire is the most Merciful of Projectors for Water quenches it, but you in∣ctease in spight of all the Elements. Antichrist will be a Projector, and shall burn you all alive, and keep your Ashes to make Lye to wash out the Stains of all Commonwealths. Princes may be Poor, but when once they have to do with Projectors, they cease to be Princes to avoid being Poor. Bauds and Jiles.The Bauds and Whores had gathered a wicked Councel, where they railed at the Purses they could not come at, and spoke ill of Money that was out of their reach. The ancientest of the Baudes, mumbling her Words betwixt her Gums with a hollow Tone, pro∣ceeding from, the want of Teeth, grunted out these Words to the Assembly; The World is now at the last gasp, it is a starving Age, things are at the worst, Fairings and New-years∣gifts are long since out of date, Love-Offerings are searce remembred, Money is come to that pass no body knows it, and it is vanish'd from our sight, a Grown Piece is shewn about as if it were an Ele∣phant,
and Guinea's are Stiled of Blessed Memory Promises have succeeded in the place of ready Coin. A Compliment, with, You may rely upon my Word; is the common Stop-gap, and an empty Note passes for current Cash. Your Spruce Beaus with Bushy Wigs and long Sword-knots, will reduce you to a Morsel of Bread. Our business is to have and to hold, to seize the ready Rino, and to be payed be∣fore-hand, I recommend to you certain Men that are half rotten, that live in the space betwixt Do∣tage and the Grave, that trim up a walking Ske∣leton, and lay up for no Heir bat their Luxury; paying well for the weakness of their Limbs. In∣terest takes away all squeamishness, shut your Eyes, and stop your Noses, as if you were swallowing a Purge; a Bitter Draught  sometimes a whole∣some Medicine. Make account that you burn old Lace for the Silver, or suck a Bone to get out the Marrow. I have half a dozen of dry old Dotards. who spit Pieces of Eight for every one of you. I do not desire a third, but shall be satisfied with some small Allowance to keep up that Reputation I have preserved all my Life. She said, and closing her Chin with the tip of her Nose, made a Face like a Nutcracker. One of the young Harpies replied; Thou Antiquated Con∣triver of Delight, Coupler of Male and Female, Tacker of Nations, Joyner of Giblets; and Coun∣terfeiter of Faces, consider we are too young to be sold to impotent Curmudgeons, make use of your Rhetorick among the decayed Governants, who are but Walking Carcasses playing about the Grave, at Butterflies do about a Candle, till they drop into it. Young Blood is more inclined to the Flesh than to
Money, and prefers pleasure before Riches, there∣fore let me advise you to choose some other Trade, for Quality bos now taken up that of Bawding, and I hope to see rotten Eggs thrown at their Coaches instead of the Pillory. Scarce had the Night-walker spoke the last Word when the Hour began, and a whole Shoal of Creditors rushing in fell upon them. The Landlord seized the Beds and Hangings for House Rent, the Upholsterer their Cloaths for the Hire of his Goods, till both with a hideous Noise sell soul of each other. At the same time a Broker puts in for his Cloaths, The Wenches they Shreiked, calling them, Rude unman∣nerly Fellows, threatning what they would do, and swearing they would never put up such an Affront. The damn'd old Baud bless'd her self with both Hands, and roared as high as the loudest. In comes a Bully to one of the Jilts, and without asking Questions draws his Sword, and falls upon the Credi∣tors, calling them Thieves and Robbers. They drew, and in the Fray overturn'd and broke all the Goods in the Room. The Wenches ran to the Windows, crying, Help, Help, Murder, Murder. At this Summons up comes an Alguazil with all his Retinue, bid∣ding them keep the Kings Peace. The Broil grew hottest upon the Stairs, till out they rusht into the Street, some Wounded, others with their Cloaths rent. The Ruffian with a broken Head, but without Hat or Cloak, took sanctu∣ary in a Church. The Alguazil entred the House, and seeing the old Woman, laid vio∣lent
Hands on her, saying, Art thou here still, old Beelzebub, after having been thrice banish'd? Thou art the Ringleader of all this Mischief. Then seizing her with the young Fry, and securing all they had, he drove them away half Naked, with their Hair about their Ears, to Goal, all the Rabble attending and shout∣ing, Away with the Whores. The Law∣yer.A Councellor at Law whose greatest Learn∣ing lay in his grizly Beard, like Sampson's Strength in his Hair, sate in a Room better furnish'd with Books than he was with Con∣science. His whole Study was how to em∣broil his Clients, not to consult his Authors, and yet was so proud of his Library, that being a meer Ignoramus, it might truly be said, he knew not the value of it. He had gain'd a great Reputation by his Roaring Voice, his moving Gestures, and a wonderful fluency of Tongue, wherewith he bore down all other Lawyers. His Chamber could scarce contain his Clients, every one pressing for∣ward to lay his Case open, and empty his Purse. All his Answers were: I am fully in∣formd. I have Studied the Case. Your Right is undeniable. It agrees with the express Letter of the Law, It is as clear as the day. There is no difficulty in this Suit. It is a Case adjuged. The Law is directly on your side. It will easily be de∣termin'd. The Judges are for us. Your Adver∣sary has nothing to say for himself. All that has been done is void in it self. That judgment must be Reversed. Be Ruled by me. Some he order'd to Petition, others to Appeal, others
to Demur, others to put in their Interroga∣tories, others to bring their Writ of Error, and others to Suborn fresh Witnesses. All that immense number of Volumes was turn'd over, and nothing resounded but an unintel∣ligible confusion of Law Gibberish. The Councellor demanded his Fee, the Sollicitor His due, the Attorney his Reward, the Clerk his Perquisites, and the Scrivener his Pay. Whilst they were in this Debate the Hour began, and the Clients unanimously, as if it had been one Man, cried out; Good, Mr. Ser∣geant, in all Suits the Adversary is the least of Evils, for he Sues at his own Cost, and you Plead for us at our own, and you, the Sollicitor, the Clerk, and the Attorney, run away with our Money. The Adversary waits for Judgment, and pursues upon an Appeal, but you and your Adherents give a definitive Sentence in your own behalf. Our Suit may go for and against us, but in the follow∣ing of it we must of necessity be cast four times a day, so that in the end we may obtain our Right, but have lost our Money. All those Authors can∣not perswade us, but it is a madness to spend what we have, to get what another Man has, and per∣haps be at last disappointed. We had rather have one Adversary than five, for supposing the Suit should go on our side, it will be when it has ruin'd us. Lawyers defend their Clients, as Seamen do their Ships in a Storm; throwing over all they have, that if it be Gods will they may be brought into their Port empty. The best Advice is to agree amongst car selves, for by agreeing we shall save what you take from us. We are all going to Com∣pound
pound with our Adversaries. Your best Revenues arise out of our Obstinacy, and if we by Com∣pounding should lose all we sued for, at least we shall gain all that you lose. We would advise you to put a Bill upon your Door, for we think it bet∣ter to spend our Money upon Whores than Lawyers; and for your part, since your only Business has been to set Men together by the Ears, it will be your best course to turn Soldiers or Statesmen. The Vint∣ners.The Vintners, a perverse Generation, who raise the Price of their Wine, at the same rate that they Brew, Water and Debase it, selling the Rain disguised and discoloured with Sloes, and the Dregs of their Hogsheads, for the Juice of the Grape, were met in a Ta∣vern to the number of 6 or 7, with as many Bullies and Highwaymen, and a Quorum of Draggle-Tail Jilts newly whipt out of Bride∣well, who Danced themselves Dry, and Drank to Dance again. The Bumpers flew about like Lightning, to the Tune of Three in a Hand. Delicate Wine, quoth one of the Sparks, perceiving the Cheat, and winking upon the Knave that was to Pledge him. The other, who feared it would breed Frogs in his Belly, rather than fend Fumes into his Brain, replied, This is truly a Rich Wine, and we Poor Rogues, for the Waters belong to the Rich and not to the Poor. The Vintner hearing their Flouts, call'd them Sots, bidding them Drink and hold their Peace. Drink and Swim you should have said, replied one of the good Fellows. This minute began the Hour, and the whole Company growing Mutinous, threw
the Pots and Glasses at the Vintner, crying, Inhuman Water-seller, we are more like Drown'd Rats than Drunkards, thou makest us pay by the Quart for the River Water thou bringest in by the Hogshead, and would put the Fox upon us when thou hast made meer Geese of us. We should wear Jack-boots to drink in your House, that we might keep the Water from our Legs. The Vintner having nothing to say for himself, cryed, Wa∣ter, Water, as if his House had been a-fire, and rouling his Hogsheads into the Street, knock'd out the Heads of them, letting the Liquor run down the Channel. Pretenders to an Em∣ployment.A Swarm of 32 Candidates, all aiming at one Employment, were waiting to speak witn the Nobleman in whose Gift it was. Each of them fancied himself as deserving, as the rest unworthy of it. Every one bless'd himself and admir'd at the Madness and Impudence of the rest, for pretending to what he ima∣gin'd to be due to him alone. They beheld one another with Evil Eyes, and Hearts full of Malice, and Meditated how to Slander and Defame. Their Looks were Sower and Starch't, but their Joints in continual Motion. Every time the Door creak'd they made a thousand Bows on all Hands, and as many Submissive Grimaces. Not so much as a Page could pass by without a Loving Salute and kind Look. The Secretary happening to rush through the Room, their Submissions were so profound, as if they would have kiss'd the Ground he trod on. He casting a Glance like a Shame-faced Girl, press'd through,
saying, Excuse me, Gentlemen, I am now in haste. The Nobleman call'd for his Desk, and sate to Dispatch Business, when upon a false alarm thinking themselves summon'd to appear, one of the Candidates cries, It is I, another, I come, and others, Here I am, crouding them∣selves to death against the Door. The poor Lord understanding what a Peal of Petitions attended him, knew not which way to turn himself. He silently cursed himself, saying, It was one of the greatest Blessings in the World to have to give, provided there were none to ask; and that Favours, that they might not be a plague to him that bestows them, ought to be freely of∣fered, and never sued for. The Dunners im∣patient of delay, wasted inwardly, consider∣ing there was but one Employment, and the Candidates were many. They Calculated the Account Arithmetically, dividing one betwixt 32, and then says they, What comes to every Mans share? Then would they have substract∣ed 32 from one, but that could not be, there∣fore every Man supposed himself that one, and applied, it cannot be to all the rest. The Lord considered, he could please but one, and must disoblige 31, however to be rid of them, he resolved they should be admitted, and in order to it put on a stern Countenance, and looked like a Statue, that he might appear with more Majesty. In they rushed in a Croud, and he perceiving they would all Tongue-pad him at once, said; There is but one Employment, and you are a Number, I would gladly bestow the place upon one, and stisfie you
all, As he had dropt the last Word the Hour commenced, and the Lord bestowing the Em∣ployment upon one, entailed the Reversion of it upon them all one after another, World without end. The wretched Presumptive Heirs, began to wish one another dead, pray∣ing for Plurisies, Asthma's, Consumptions, Plagues, Apoplexes, Fluxes, sudden Deaths, and all manner of Disasters. Scarce Were two Minutes past since the Entail, when every Man thought his Predecessor had liv'd to the Age of Methusalem; and though the, Tenth Man computed his turn could not come till 500 years after, yet every Man was pleased to wait the death of his Predecessor. Only the 31th finding by his reckoning that his turn fell out exactly with the end of the World, and after the coming of Antichrist, said; My Possession and the general Conflagration hit exactly together, I shall make a fine Business of my Em∣ployment; when I am burnt the day of Judgment, who will oblige the Dead to pay me my Wages? For my part, I wish the 30th Successor a long Life, for when the Employment comes to him, the World will be at the last gasp. The Lord left them striving to outlive and destroy one another, and went himself away in a passion to see them protracting their Ages beyond Dooms∣day, and even coping with Eternity. He that had carried the Employment stood amazed to consider what a long succession of Heirs he had got, and at last slunk away, resolving to eat light Suppers, and prevent taking Cold. The rest looked upon one another as so many
mutual Plagues, and reciprocally cursing their Lives, each fancied Diseases in the other, and added to the number of his years, every Suc∣cessor threatning his Forerunner with Death, giving him over as a gone Man, and wishing him in the Hands of Physicians; which is the same as to be delivered up to the Hangman. Mumpers that bor∣row, never to pay.A sort of Men that borrow after the man∣ner of the day that is past, never to return again, who snap at a Purse as a Spider does at a Fly that's entangled in her Web, lie tumbling in Bed till the Evening for want of Rags to co∣ver their Nakedness. Among them they had laid out Half a Crown they had Mumped, in Wafers, Ink, Pens and Paper, all which they had consumed in begging Letters all to the same effect, expressing how urgent the Oc∣casion was, their Reputation lying at stake, and even their Life, with Assurances of a speedy Return, and Professions of Eternal Acknowledgment. However in case they should not meet with Money, they concluded with the Ne plus Ultra of impudent Beggary, desiring in case there was no ready Cash, they would be pleased to send them something of value to pawn, which should be most care∣fully secured. By way of Postscript they begged Pardon for the Boldness, protesting they would not be so free with any other Per∣son. They had drawn about an Hundred of these Notes to be dispersed in all the Corners of the Town, whither they were conveyed by one of the Fraternity, a notable Spunger that had a Tongue well hung, and with his
grave Beard and long Cloak not a little re∣sembled a well travelled Mountebank. The Herd of Letter Beggars remained computing how much Money the Messenger would bring, and a cursed noise there was about the Sum. Nor did it stop here, for they wrangled about the laying it out, and having given one ano∣ther the Lye, at last they leaped out of their Beds, with such Fragments of Shirts that there was no occasion to take them up to discover their Lower Parts. In came their Mumping Post with an Air that spoke no Relief; both his Hands were at liberty, and his Arms open, which foreboded Emptiness. All that ap∣peared was a great Bundle of Notes. They all stood amazed, seeing their Contrivance had ended in empty Answers, and in a dole∣ful Tone said, What have we got? No Money, (replied the poor Scoundrel) you may divert your selves with Reading, since you have no occa∣sion of Telling. They began to open the Notes. The first was to this Effect; I was never so much concerned at any thing in all my Life, as my not being at present in a condition to serve you in a matter of so little value. He might have served me (quoth the Reader) and have had more cause to be concerned. The Second Note; Sir, had I received yours yesterday, I could have obliged you, and been proud of the Occasion. A Curse of yesterday, (says he) that is the daily Plague of all Mumpers. The Third Note; It is such a miserable time. O Damned Almanack∣maker, (cries the Shark) we ask for Money, and you tell us what Weather it is. The Fourth
Note; Sir, your want cannot be so grievons to you, as to me it is that I cannot relieve you. Who the Devil told you so (exclaims the poor Wretch) dost thou pretend to Divination thou Miser, and Prophesy when you ought to give. No more read∣ing (they all cried) and making a Hellish Charm they added; It is now night, to make up what has been expended let us gnaw the Wafers of the Letters for our Supper, and sell these and two other Parcels of Notes we have by us to the Con∣fectioner, who will give at least four Royals for them to Paper up Comfits, wrap Sugar, and lay under Biscuits in the Oven. Says the Letter-Carrier, This Trade of Borrowing has been out of the World these ten years. A Man had better give what he asks, than endure the Gestures and Scurvy Looks of those he Accosts; and if you cal∣culate the whole, the Expence of Paper and Shooes is greater than the Profit, your only way is to look cut sharp. In this posture were the Paper-Mumpers when the Hour began, and the lighest of Equipage said; We are very Cere∣monious with other Mens Money, and if we expect it should fly in at our Windows we may die in a Ditch. Rhetorick is no good Picklock, and fine Words reach the Ears, but not the Pockets, to listen to one that begs is the Devil. It is much easier to take than to ask. When all Men board, it is no time to wait their generosity. Our busi∣ness is to steal bare-faced, and with consideration, that is, considering we must steal in such manner, that there may be enough for the Accuser, for the Glerk; for the Constable, for the Attorney, for the Sollicitor, for the Councellor, for the Jaylor, for
the Judge, and for our selves, for when what is stolen ends, the Hangman begins. My Friends, if they banish us, it is better than that they should bury us; if they Pillory us, it breaks no Bones, and as for the shame of it, none of our Spectators have any; if they whip us, we may be content, for Beggars must not be Choosers, and at least we shall have the satisfaction of hearing our white Skins com∣mended, and as soon as the shew is over, the Doublet bides the Lashes. If they put us upon the Rack we are in no danger, for all they endeavour is to make us speak the truth, which we never do, therefore let us be like the Taylors, and we are safe enough, To be sent to the Galleys is only going into the Kings Service with aThe Gal∣ley Slaves have al∣ways their Heads Shav'd. bald Pate, and Galley Slaves serve only to supply the want of Sails. If they shall Hang us, Which is the utmost extremity, that day twelve-month Will be a year, and every Man that is Hanged honours his Parents, for tho he be never so mean a Scoundrel, the Blockheads of the Spectators say, He is very well born, and of a good Family. Nay, if it were only for the pleasure of chousing the Doctor and Apothecary at ones death, a Man might be well enough pleased to dye of the Hempen Disease. Gentlemen, mind your Hits. Scarce were the last Words out of his Mouth, when wrapping the Sheets about them, and swallawing the Oil that was in a Lamp, they let themselves out of the Window with a Blanket into the Street, and away they all scoured to search Chests, Pick Locks, and Dive into Pockets. Ruffians and physi∣cians.Two Ruffians were brought to the Gallows for half a dozen Murders. One of them had
already taken his swing, and the other was mounted on the Ladder with the Hangman astride over his Shoulders. Among the Croud of Spectators two Physicians riding after Fe∣vers and Plagues, made a halt, and behold∣ing the Criminals began to weep like Chil∣dren with such a Deluge of Tears, that the People about them asked, Whether those that suffered were their Sons. They answered, They did not know them, but wept to see Men dye with∣out paying any thing to the Faculty. That mo∣ment began the Hour, and the Criminal spy∣ing the Doctors said, Gentlemen of the Faculty, here is room for you if you please, for you have killed enough to deserve my place, and your skill in dispatching Men renders you worthy of the Hang∣man's. Galen and Hippocrates must not send all to the Grave, Hemp is as effectual as an Aphorism. Those Mules that carry you about to commit so ma∣ny Murders, are no better than Ladders to mount you to the Gallows. This is a time to speak truth, had I used the Recipe instead of the Dagger, I had not come to this end, tho I had massacred all the Spectors. I beg a dozen Masses for my Soul, which you may easily foist into one of the Wills you forward. A lean ragged Chymist,The Chy∣mist. who looked as if he had extracted the Juice out of his Flesh, and calcined his Cloaths, had wheedled a Miser to give Ear to him, as he stood at a Fellow's Door that sold Charcoal, and was telling him, I am a Natural Philosopher, and by the Grace of God a Chymist. I have found the Philosophers Stone, which is a Medicine of Life,
and produces a transcendent Transmutation infi∣nitely multiplicable; for with the Powder of this Stone by Projection, I turn into the purest and most refined Gold Quicqsilver, Iron, Lead, Tin, and Silver. I can make Gold of Grass, Egg-shels, Hair, Blood, Piss, and of the very Dirt. This I can do in a few days, and with small Expence. I dare not discover my self to any body, because, if the King should hear of it, he would clap me into Gaol to save India Voyages, and the trouble of digging in the Mines. I know you to be a Per∣son of Discretion, Quality and Worth, and there∣fore have resolved to trust you with a Secret of such importance and so admirable, that in a few days it will make you Master of many Millions. The Miser listned to him with a greedy Ear, and so wrapt in Contemplation of the Mil∣lions, that his Fingers wagged for eagerness of telling them. His Avarice could not contain it self within bounds, but gusht out at his Eyes, and he had in his imagination already converted his Frying-Pans, Spits, Kettles, and Candlesticks into Bars of Gold. He asked, what would be the Charge of the O∣peration; The Chymist replied, Little or no∣thing, for 50 Crowns was enough to convert all the World into Gold and Silver, because the great∣est Expence would be in Lymbecks and Crucibles, for the Elixir, which is the vivifying Spirit of Gold, would cost nothing, and might be had gra∣tis every where; neither should a Farthing be spent in Charcoal, because he sublimated, digested, separated, rectified, and circulated all with Lime, and Dung. The Coal man was, listning to this
Tale of a Tub, fretting to hear him say he would use no Charcoal, but just then began the Hour, and the Coal-man well powder'd with Charcoal Dust, and smelling of the De∣vils Perfume, falls upon the Chymist, saying, Thou Vagabond, Scoundrel, Rascal, why dost thou feed up that honest Man with imaginary Gold? The Chymist in a fury gave him the Lye, which the Coalman so readily answer'd with a Cuff, it was scarce discernible which was first. They both fell to Loggerheads, and in a trice, the Chymist's batter'd. Nose ran like a Lymbeck. The Miser could not part them, not daring to meddle because of the Dust and Smoot. They stuck so close to one another, it was impossible to discern which was the Coalman, or who had smooted the other. At length they were parted by the People that passed by, but in such a condition, they look'd as if they had been rowl'd in Lamblack, and trimm'd with Snuffs of Candles. Says the Charcoal-man, This poor Devil tells thee he'l make Gold of Dirt and old Iron, and at the same time his Cloaths are all in tatters, and he looks as if he had been robbing the Rag-woman. I know these Fellows, for one of them cheated a Neigh∣bour of mine, and made him lay out at my own House at least a thousand Crowns in Coals only, and that in the space of two months, telling him he would make Gold, and he only made Smoak and Ashes, but at last ran away with all he had. But I (quoth the Chymist) will perform what I undertake, and since you make Gold and Sil∣ver of Coals, and of the Stones, Dirt and Rubbish
you throw among them, and of the Cheats of your Weight, why may not I with my Art, and the Assistance of Rualdus, Geber, Avicen, Morie∣nus, Hermes, Vulstadius, Crolius, Libavius, and Hermes's Smaragdine Table, make Gold as well as you. The Charcoal-man in a Fume replied, Because all those Authors make you mad, and you make him that believes you a Beggar. I sell Coals, and you burn them, which is the rea∣son I convert them into Gold and Silver, and you turn them into Soot. The true Philosopher's Stone is to buy cheap and sell dear, and a Pox on all your Catalogue of hard Names. I declare, I would with more satisfaction freely give my Coals to burn you with all your Papers, than sell them for ready Money. As for you, Sir, you make account, that this day you became Master of your Money, and if you desire to increase it, Trade is the only thing that multiplies Coin, and makes one Pistol in a month produce another. But if you are weary of your Bags, empty them into a House of Office, and whensoever you repent you may take them out with more ease and cleanness, than ever you will recover them from the Bellows and Distillations of this miserable Wretch, who being himself a meer Ragamuffian, pretends to out do, the Treasures of India, and defie the Mines of Potosi. The French Pedlars, and Proud Spaniard.Three Frenchmen were travelling into Spain over the mountains of Biscay; one of them trundled before him a Wheel with the imple∣ments for grinding Knives and Scissers; ano∣ther carried before and behind two great far∣dles of Bellows and Moustraps, and the third had a Box of Combs and Pins. A Poor Spa∣niard
who was travelling into France a Foot with his Cloak on his Shoulder, met them a∣bout half way in the ascent of a scraggy steep hill. They sate down to rest in the Shade and began to confer notes. The Spaniard being asked, whether he travelled, Answered, He was going to France, being fled from Justice for some unlucky pranks; that thence he would go into Flanders to appease the Judges, and gain Honour in his Kings Service, because a Spaniard out of his own Country could not serve any other Master. Being again asked, how it came he had no Trade or Handicraft to maintain him in that long Jour∣ney. He replied, The Spaniards had no Trade but War, that those who were poor and honest bor∣rowed or begged by the way, and those that were not so, Robbed, as they did in all other Countries. Moreover, he said, He admired they travelled from France through strange Countries and deso∣late Mountains with their goods, being always in danger of falling into the hands of Highwaymen. He desired they would inform him what moved them to leave their Country, and what profit they could propose to themselves in that lumber they were loaded with, which at a distance made them look frightful, and put Travellers into a quandary to de∣termine what they were. The Grinder who stammered the best Spanish of the three, said, We are Gentlemen disgusted at the King of France, and have lost our Fortunes by being Malecontents, but I have made three Journeys into Spain, where with this Wheel and these Stones I have gathered many Spanish Pistols, which you call Doblones. The Spaniard with a sour look
replied, Much good may do the King of France with his faculty of curing the Evil, if he suffers Grinders and Pedlars to be Malecontents. Quoth the Grinder, You ought to look upon us Grinders as a Land-Fleet, for with these Stones we sharpers and wear away your bars of Gold more than your Knives and Scissers; take notice of this cracked pot that drivels out the Water; this serves us to convey home our Plate, without being exposed to the Troubles of the Sea, and Dangers of Storms; these Wheels instead of Sails carry us into all parts, and being dispersed through all Countreys with our Grind-stones, Combs and Pins, we gently draw after us the Revenues of your Indian Mines; and you may be assured it is no small Treasure that France catches in its Mouse-traps, and sucks in with its Bellows. Swoons (saith the Spaniard) tho I knew not all this, yet I could easily perceive your Bellows blew away our Money, and your Traps increased your Stock, but diminished not our Mice; and I have observed, that ever since you sell Bel∣lows, we spend more Coals, and our Pots boil ne∣ver the better; that since you bring us Traps, we are devoured by Traps and Mice; that since you grind, all our Tools rust, wear, notch, and grow dull; and that in grinding our Knives you spoil them, that we may have occasion to buy more of you. I am now convinced you Frenchmen are the Lice that devour all parts of Spain; that you bite us with the Teeth of your Combs, and grind us with your Stones; nor do I think that scratch∣ing is any remedy against this itching, but that it increases it, and makes us tear onr selves to pieces with our own Fingers. I hope in God I
shall soon return, and then will make it known there is no remedy against this itch, but picking you out, and pressing you to death. What shall I say of your Combs, but that they have made it fashion∣able to be bald, by wearing all the Hair off of our Heads. I will make the Spaniards more chearly of their Mice, their Dandruff, and their Rust, that you may go to Hell to vend your Combs, Bellows, and Moustraps. At this moment be∣gan the Hour, and the Spaniard foaming with Passion, said, The Devil is at my Elbow, tempt∣ing me to Murder you all, and make these Moun∣tains as famous as formerly Roncesvalles, for the overthrow of Charlemaign. The Pedlars see∣ing him change Colour, and Rave, rose up gabling amain, crying, Mon Dieu, and calling him Coquin. In an ill hour did they name it, for the Spaniard drawing his Dagger, and running at the Grinder, made him quit his Wheel, which receiving the Stroak, tumbled down the Rocks, and was beaten to shivers. Mean while the Trap Merchant threw a Pair of Bellows at him, but he falling on with his Dagger cut all the rest, and clove the Traps. The Comb Pedler laying down his Box, be∣gan to throw Stones, the other two followed his Example. All three plied the Spaniard, and he answered them all, there being such plenty of that sort of Ammunition in the place that they stumbled upon it. The Frenchmen kept their distance for fear of the Dagger. The Spaniard guarded himself with his Cloak, and giving a Kick to the Pin-Box, it tumbled down the Rocks, and flew open, strewing
the Mountain with Pins and Combs; he see∣ing the Merchandize confounded, cryed out; I have already begun to do my King good service; and seeing some Passengers on Mules come up and part them, desired they would give him a Certificate of the Victory he had ob∣tained over the Vermin that infested Spain. The Passengers laught, understanding the cause of the Fray, and carrying away the Spaniard behind one of them, left the French∣men busie stopping the Holes in the Bellows, patching together the Mouse-traps, mending the Wheel, and picking up the Pins that were scattered about the Clifts. The Spaniard being at a good distance, cryed out to them; If you were Malecontents in your own Country, ye Scoundrels, thank me for making you so in mine. Italy Dancing on the Rope, France and Spain watching to catch her if she falls. Italy once the Mistress of the World, and now only retaining the Memory of its former Grandeur, seeing its vast Monarchy cut out into so many Parcels, to enlarge the Domini∣ons of several Princes, and its Territories rent asunder to patch up many scattered States, was now at length convinced how easie it was for others to take from her all that she alone had with wonderful felicity taken from them all. Now therefore finding her self poor, and extreamly light, as being eased of the Burden of many Provinces, she resolved to turn Rope-Dancer; and for want of Ground to walk upon, exercised her self upon the Sreight Rope, to the astonishment of the whole World. She fixt the ends of her Rope, the one at Rome, and the other at Savoy. France and
Spain were the Spectators. The two Kings kept a watchful Eye upon her, observing to which side she inclined as she Danced, each striving to be ready to catch her if she fell. Italy perceiving what they aimed at, laid hold of the Republick of Venice, and grasping it with both Hands as a Pole to poise her, leap'd and skipp'd at a wonderful rate; sometimes making as if she would fall to one side, and sometimes to the other, diverting her self with the eagerness of both Parties stretching out their Arms to catch her, and surprizing others with her Skill in recovering her self, and deceiving them both. As they stood thus upon the catch, the Hour began, and the King of France seeing no probability of laying hold on her, began to loosen the end of the Rope which was six't in Savoy, that she might come tumbling towards him. The Spanish Monarch perceiving it, clapt in the State of Milan and Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily as Supporters. Italy skipping in the Air, discovered that Ve∣vice, which she used as a Pole to poise, at the same time, crucified her, and therefore casting it from her, and laying hold of the Rope, she said; So much for Rope-Dancing, for it is not for me to rise high, when the Lookers on wish I may fall, and the Pole that should poise crucifies me. Then suspecting the support of Savoy, she betook her self to Rome, saying, Since all are for seizing me, I'le take sanctuary in the Church, where; if I chance to fall, I shall not want some body to absolve me.
The King∣dom of Naples, and Duke of OsunaThe Neapolitan Courser, from whom some have stolen his Oats, and others drawn away his Hay, while some strove to make of him a Geld∣ing, others a Mare, and others a Post-Horse, perceiving, that whilst he was in the keeping of that incomparable Viceroy and invincible Captain General the Duke of Osuna, he could cope with Bucephalus, his Furniture, being composed of the Treasures of Venice and Brindisi. That he had made him a Sea Horse by his many glorious Naval Victories; that he had turned him to Grass in Cyprus, and Water'd him at Tenedos, when he dragg'd af∣ter him the mighty Ship Sultana from Thessa∣lonica, for which Action Neptune own'd him for his first begotten Son, brought forth in op∣position to Minerva. He remembred that Great Duke had shod him with the Turkish Half Moons, and that kicking up his Heels he had dashed out the Teeth of the Venetian Lion at the prodigious Battle near Ragusa, where with only 15 Sail he defeated 80, o∣bliging them shamefully to retire with the loss of many Galleys and Galleasses, and of the best of their Men. Calling to mind these Triumphs, and considering he had not now so much as a Horse-Cloth, but was gaul'd, and Snuffled because they had thrown Fea∣thers into his Manger; and that he was now put to draw a Coach, having been once so Mettlesome, that die Frenchmen, tho good Jockeys, could never sit him; The Miserable Condition he saw himself reduced to, drove him into a desperate Melancholy, and that
into raving Madness, so that Neighing fiercely, and Breathing Fire, he thought to have imi∣tated the Trojan Horse, and kicking and plunging to have overthrown the City. At the Noise, in came the Magistrates of Naples, who throwing one of their Gowns over his Head blinded him, then stroaking and speak∣ing him fair, they put on his Collar and Fet∣ters; but as they were tying him to a Ring in the Stable, the Hour began. Two of them that were farthest off said; It was more con∣venient and cheaper to give the Courser at once to the Pope, than every year to send him a Nag with a Purse, for by their Malicious Eyes it might be judged the Popes Nephews would some time over∣look him. The others surprized at this Mo∣tion, answered; That the King of Spain had secured him against that Distemper, by placing three Castles on his Forehead as a Spell, and that they would sooner cut off his Legs, than see him serve like a Mule under long black Trappings re∣sembling a Pall. The two first replied, They talked like Hereticks in refusing to be Papists, and that no Saddle would fit the Courser like that of St. Peter. The others in a Passion said; That to prevent the Hereticks making the Pope loose his Stirrups in that Saddle, it was convenient only the King of Spain should mount the Horse. Some were for the Mitre, others for the Crown, and Words passing, at last they came to Blows, so that a terrible Havock had been among them, but that the Elect of the People came in in the Godspeed, and understanding the cause of the Quarrel said; This Horse, tho
hard Mouthed, has had many Masters, and for the most part has gone to them of his own accord, and not suffered himself to be led. It is requisite he be carefully looked after, for there are in Italy many a-foot that look for Baggage Horses, and Jockeys ready Booted and Spurred, and the old Horse-stealer who catched him sometimes before, and has now got a back Door to the Stable. Nei∣ther is it convenient any French Groom should Curry him, for they tickle and do not make him slick, and pray look to the Monsieurs who wear the Canonical Robes that they may have the better op∣portunity to throw their Leg over him. The Czar of Mosco∣vy consults about rais∣ing Taxes.The Great Czar of Moscovy being exhausted by the continual Inroads of the Tartars, and frequent Incroachments of the Turks, found himself necessitated to impose new Taxes upon his Subjects. To this effect he summon∣ed his Favourites, Servants, Ministers, Coun∣sellors, and the Commons of his Court, and spoke to them to this effect; That they could not but be sensible of the great Expence he was at in maintaining an Army to protect them against the Malice of their Neighbouring Enemies; That no State could subsist without Taxes; That those which were imposed in pressing Necessities were al∣ways just, and must be accounted no burden, be∣ing employed in the defence of those that pay them, who purchase their Security, Lives, and Estates, with that small Pittance, which in a moderate and well regulated Tax falls to every Mans share to be disburst; That he had assembled them to consult their own conveniency, and therefore expected their Answer would be suitable to their Common Interest.
The first that spoke were his Creatures and Ministers, saying; The Proposition was so good and just, it carried along with it its answer and concession; That all was due to the support of the Prince and Defence of the Country, and therefore he might contrive according to his pleasure, to lay whatever Taxes he thought fit upon his Subjects, because all that they payed was for their own In∣terest and Security; and consequently the greater the Burdens he laid upon them, the more he would convince them of the confidence he reposed in their Loyalty, and the greater would be their Honour. The Czar heard them with satisfaction, but not without some mistrust, and therefore or∣dered the Commons to answer for themselves. They, whilst the Courtiers Harangued, had privately whispered about, and pitched upon one to be their Speaker, and deliver their Sentiments. He haying taken a convenient place, said; Great Sir, your Dutiful Subjects, whose Mouth I am, render you their most humble Thanks for your Care in Protecting and Defending them; They yield a blind Obedience to your Will, and wholly submit themselves to your Pleasure, as becomes a People born under your Jurisdiction, who have ingrafted in them an hereditary Love and Reverence for you, and they beg Leave to put you in mind  is their Glory, they have made this ap∣pear during your whole Reign, which God long con∣tinue over us; They are sensible you make their Protection your Care, and that it is that which makes yon descend from being a Sovereign over  and their Fortunes to become a Father to every one, a Testimony of your Goodness which
they infinitely value; They are not ignorant of the many pressing and unexpected Aceidents which bring upon you unavoidable Expences, not to be spared with Honour to you or Safety to them, and they are convinced you are too far exhausted to defray them. I, in the Name of all your Sub∣jects, do freely offer all they possess without reserv∣ing any thing, but must also offer two things to your Consideration. The one is, That if you now take all your Subjects have, you will drein that Source which is always to supply you and your Heirs; and if you undo them, you do that which you fear your Enemies should do, and the Conse∣quence is so much the more fatal to you, by how much their being ruined by the Enemy is dubious, and by you certain; and they who advise you to destroy your self, to prevent being destroyed, are rather Pensioners to the Enemy, than faithful Councellors to you. Remember the Countreyman (in Aesop) to whom Jove gave a Hen that every day laid an Egg of Gold for his maintenance; He suffering himself to be deluded by avarice, fancied, that a Fowl that laid every day a Golden Egg must have rich Mines of that Metal within her, and therefore thought it better to seize all at once, than receive it by little and little. The Gods ha∣ving so ordered it, he killed the Hen, and was left without the Treasure or the Egg. Do not you, Great Sir, verifie this Fable of the Philosopher, for if you do, you will become a Fable to your People. A Prince of a poor People, is rather a Poor Man, or Poverty it self, than a Prince. He who enriches his Subjects has as many Treasures as he has Sub∣jects, He who empoverishes them has so many
Hospitals, he has as many Terrors as Men, and fewer Men than Enemies. Riches may be for∣saken at any time, but Poverty cannot. We sel∣dom endeavour to quit the former, but always the latter. The other thing I offer to your Consideration is, That your present Wants proceed from two Causes. One, the immense Frauds and Depredations of those about you. The other, the present extraordinary Emergencies. There is no doubt but the first named is the foremost as to time, and whether it be not the greatest, belongs to you to examine. Divide therefore the Supply you require as you shall think fit, laying one part on those who have made a property of your Revenues, and the other as a Tax upon your Subjects, and then none but a Traytor can complain. Thus had he spoke when, the Hour began, and the Czar rising up said; Let them that have taken it from me restore what is wanting of what I had, and what is wanting after that let my People pay; and that this may not be delayed, all you and your Friends, who at a distance like Spunges have sucked my Revenue, shall be left as you were when you came to my Ser∣vice, only allowing your Salaries. So great and universal was the Joy of the Commons hear∣ing this just Decree of the Czar; that they unanimously gave him the Title of Augustus, and kneeling before him said; As an Acknow∣ledgment we agree to pay whatsoever you shall im∣pose upon us, and that done will of our own accord double the Sum, and ordain, that this Free Offer∣ing may remain as a perpetual Duty payable every time you shall resume what has been taken from you, whereby it will come to pass that Covetous
Men will be afraid to receive what you freely give them. The Dutch their Rise and Growth.The Hollanders, who are beholding to the Sea for the Ground they live on, which is only some scraps of Land they have stolen from it, under the shelter of heaps of Clay they call Dykes; having quelled their intestine Broils by an universal Trade, after they had surrep∣titiously erected themselves into a Free State, and extended their Territories by Treachery, pretending to be the first-begotten of the Ocean, and conceiting, that the Sea, which gave them the Land it once covered for their Habitation, would not refuse them that which compasses it, having covered it with Ships and Peopled it with Pyrates, resolved at once in several places to encroach upon the East and West. They go to our Fleets for Gold and Silver, as our Fleets go for it to the Indies. They look upon it as the cheaper and shorter way to take it from those that bring it, than from the Earth that produces it. The negli∣gence of an Admiral, or the favour of a Storm, furnish them, with Plate at an easier rate than the Mines could do. In these Un∣dertakings they have been forwarded, fauour∣ed and assisted by all the Princes of Europe, who behold the Grandeur of the Spanish Mo∣narchy with envious Eyes. Encouraged by these powerful Supports, they have establish∣ed a Trade in India, settled Commerce in Japan, and still persisting after many Disap∣pointments, have at length possest themselves
of the best part of Brazil,This was writ before the conclu∣sion of the Peace be∣twixt Spain and Holland, when the Dutch stood posses∣sed of a great part of Brazil, and in∣vaded the Portu∣guese Con∣quests in India. where they have not only the power of Government, but the Profit of the Sugar and Tobacco, which en∣riches them and beggars us. In this place, which is the in-let to the East and West-Indies, they reside like Cormorants, ready to swallow Ships and whole Fleets, alarming Peru and Potosi; for that it appears by Geography, that they may gradually, without wetting their Feet, steal to those Mountains, if weary of the Sea, they should think much to creep a∣long the Coast down to Rio de la Plata, and Buenos Ayres, and to secure to themselves the Streights of Magellan. That World Devour∣ing Assembly sate consulting over a Terrestial Globe, and Sea Chart, with a pair of Com∣passes, leaping over Climes and Countreys, and making choice of Provinces that were none of their own, and among them the Pen∣sioner with a Pair of Scissers in his Hand. ready to cut out the World according to his fancy. In this posture they were when the Hour began, and a decrepid Old Fellow snatching the Scissers out of his Hand, said; Gluttons, who are greedy of Provinces always dye for want of Digestion, no Surfeit so dangerous as that of Dominion. The Romans, from a narrow spot of Ground too little to Sow half a Bushel of Corn, swallowed up all their Neighbours, and ex∣tending their Avarice brought the whole World under the Yoke of their first Plough; and it being certain, that whosoever pours himself out, wastes as much as he extends, so they no sooner had much to lose but they began to lose much; for Ambi∣tion
gathers more than Force can preserve. Whilst they were poor they conquered the rich, who mak∣ing them rich and being left poor, took to them∣selves the Customs inherent to Poverty, infesting them with those of Riches and Luxury, and by that means destroyed them, revenging themselves on them with the very Riches they gave them. The Assyrians, Greeks, and Romans are so many Skeletons to instruct us; it is fitter for us to take warning by, than to imitate those ruined Monar∣chies. The more we raise our small Weight, and the nearer we bring it in theThe Stil∣yard, which weighs great or small things by putting forward or drawing back the weight up∣on the Beam. Roman Ballance of Power to the great Mass we would outweigh, the less we shall appear; but the more we draw it back, the better our small Portion will turn the vast weight that stands against it; and if we draw back to the last Notch, one Pound of ours will poise a thousand of theirs. Traiano Bo∣calini hinted at this Secret in the Weight of his Politick Touchstone, and it is verified in the Monarchy of Spain, from which we aim to draw away Weight, which added to ours will diminish it by the addition. Of Subjects to become a Free State was prodigious; to keep our selves so, is a Work that requires all our application. France and England, which assisted us to cut off from Spain that part of its Dominion which was for∣midable to them, will not for the same reason per∣mit us to swell to that greatness they may have cause to fear us. The Ax which joins to it self all it cuts off from the Tree, will not be esteemed a useful Instrument, but rather an Encumbrance. They will bear with us as long as they think we stand in need of them, but if once they imagine
they can have occasion for us, they will meditate our Ruine and Destruction. He who sees a Beg∣gar on whom he has bestowed Alms grown rich, either asks him to refund, or lend. We can gain nothing, but what the Princes who look on will covet for themselves. As they despise the Neigh∣bour that is upon the losing, so they fear him that is upon the getting hand. We by dispersing act for the King of Spain against our selves, for should be to divide and weaken us, wilfully lose the Coun∣treys we take from him, it were in him a Stra∣tagem and no Loss, and he will never be so able to take what we have, as when he has suffered us to take what he has so far from him and us. Brazil rather sucks and unpeoples Holland than strengthens it. It is enough for Thieves not to re∣store what they have stolen, without continuing their Thefts for ever, which sooner prefers them to the Gallows than to the Throne. The Pensio∣ner snatching back the Scizars in a Pet, said; Tho Rome lost it self, yet Venice holds out, and was at first but a Town-stealer as we are. The Gallows you speak of is oftner the Lot of the Un∣fortunate than of Robbers, and all the World over the great Thief hangs the little one. He that Picks a Pocket is ever a Thief, he that stole Pro∣vinces and Kingdoms was always a King, the Right of Monarchs is in the longest Sword. It is natural for one to be engendred out of the Cor∣ruption of another, he that is Corrupted is the Cause of him that is Engendred. A Carcass complains not of the Worms that eat it, because it breeds them. Let every Man look to himself that he does not putrifie, otherwise he will be Father to
his own Worms. All things consume, but the small sooner than the greater. When it shall come to pass that they fear who pitied us, we will pity them we feared, which is a good exchange. If we can, let us be what they are, who were what we are. All the hints you have given are good, let not the Kings of France and England hear of them, but do you put us in mind hereafter, for that is an Obstacle in the beginning, which proves good Advice when well advanced. The Duke of Tusca∣ny his Fa∣vourite's Advice.The Great Duke of Tuscany, who by ad∣ding five Letters, which compose the Word Great, to his Title, has gained the ill will of all other Princes, was private in his Closet with a Servant whom he intrusted with his greatest Secrets. They discoursed of the Beauty of his Cities, the greatness of his Territories, the Trade of Leghorne, and the Victories ob∣tained by his Galleys. From this they changed Subject, and fell upon the great Honour his Family had attained to, being Allied to most Monarchs and Princes of Europe by its Matches with France, whereby the Kings of France, Spain, and Great-Britain, were by the Mothers side descended from it. Thus were they discoursing when the Hour began, and the Servant, as it were in a Prophetick Rap∣ture, said; Sir, Your Highness of a Private Ci∣tizen was made a Prince: Memento, Homo: Whilst you were content to be a Prince, you was the richest among them, and now you look upon your self as Father in Law of Kings, and Son in Law of Emperours, Pulvis es: and if you hap∣pen to be Father in Law to France, and the Cures
of Match-making fall upon you, In pulverem reverteris. Your Country is Fruitful, your Cities Wealthy, your Ports full of Trade, your Galleys successful, your Alliances great, and on all these accounts your State is truely Regal; but this mi∣nute I have discovered in it such Stains as sully and lessen the value of it, which are these; The Remembrance the Subjects retain that once they were Equals; The Repubick of Luca which started up in the midst of us; The Garisons the King of Spain has in Tuscany; And the ad∣dition of the Title Great to that of Duke, which all your Neighbours envy. The Duke, who be∣fore had not reflected upon any of these things, said; What Method shall I use to take out these Stains? The Servant answered, They are so grounded in, it is impossible to take them out without cutting off the Piece, which is a Remedy worse than the Disease, because it is better to be Stained than Ragged. If the Stains I speak of be taken out with the Piece, your Highness will scarce have a Rag left, but will be rent to tatters. The nature of these Stains is, they are cleansed by sinking in deeper, and not by being taken out. Your Highness must make use of Fasting Spittle, and suck in by little and little, and what you now spend in Portions for Queens, lay it out in stopping the Eyes and Ears of those who observe you, that they way not perceive you suck. The State of Venice its Policy.The most Serene Republick of Venice, which in regard of its great Wisdom and Prudence, is as it were the Brain of Europe where the Judgment resides, was assembled in full Senate. That Assembly was Composed of several
Sounds, some more solid, others more quick, the common difference betwixt old and young, yet all Skilfull, some by Experience, and others by Information, making together such a Harmony, that all the Princes in the World dance to their Musick. The Doge Crowned Head of that powerful Free Nation sate on a high Throne with three Counsellors on each side; on his Right was one Chief of the Quarantie, and on the left two; next these were the Secretaries who count the Balls, and in their places stood two Officers whose bu∣siness it is to gather them The Silence was stupendious in so numerous an Assembly, and so far exceeded that of a Desert, it was hard to perswade the Eyes, but that the Audience was made up of Statues and not of Men, so very mute were the very Diseases in the old, and so bridled the fierceness of the young. At length the Doge broke the Silence with these Words; Malice brings Discord into the World, Double-Dealing continues it, and Dissimu∣lation makes him that sows it beloved even by him that suffers by it. The Wars we have occasioned among our Friends, not those we have made with our Enemies, have given us Peace and Victory. We shall be free so long as we employ others in sub∣duing one another. Our Light springs from Dis∣sention, we are like the Spark that is produced from the collision of the Flint and Steel. The more Monarchs batter one another, the more we shine. Italy, since the decay of the Empire, is like to a Rich and Beautiful Heiress, who, her Parents dying, was left to the Care of Guardians
and Trustees, and desires to be Married. But the Trustees having divided her Fortune between themselves, and being loth to restore, and cove∣tous to keep what they have, some of them misre∣presents her to the King of Spain who courts her, and the others to the King of France who asks her in Marriage, at the same time finding those Faults in the Suitors which they see in themselves. These false Trustees are the Princes of Italy, and among them it is not to be denied but that we also have seized a great part of her Fortune. The two Suitors now press hard to carry their Mistress. We have made use of the King of France to put by the Catholick King, who being so near a Neigh∣bour in Naples and Milan, makes signs to her, and from his own Windows overlooks her. The most Christian King, who being at a distance could not gallant, nor so much as see her, and therefore made Love by Letter; now by the as∣sistance of Savoy, Mantua, and Parma, and his approach to Pignerol, he Ogles and Courts her, and this obliges us to cheat him of her. This is easie to do, because there is less trouble in casting out the French, than in bringing them in; they expel others with their Fury, and themselves with their Haughtiness. However this Snare must be so laid, that at the same time we break the Match, we may receive Thanks for promoting it. The Most Christian King has bent his thoughts upon Lorrain, his Success in Germany is dubious, and Subjects poor, which things discourage his Partisans in Italy, so that we shall not find any great diffi∣culty in attaining our ends, for his own Motions will disguise ours, and we need not raise Jealousies in
those that have confided in him, since their repen∣tance saves us that labour. It is my Opinion we shall subdue the King of France by encouraging him to go on in his great Undertakings, and by heightning his credulity. Our utmost endeavours must be used to raise the Esteem he has of his Fa∣vourite, for this Man who takes from him all that he adds to himself, lessens him as he grows great. As long as the Subject has the ascendent over his King, and the King is subject to his Servant, the Subject will be hated as a Traytor, and the King undervalued as of a mean Spirit. The way to destroy a King publickly with safety is to stand up for his Favourite. I know not whether Ravilliac was more fatal to his Father than Richlieu has been to him. This I know, that betwixt them they have robbed him of both Parents, the first of his Father, the second of his Mother. May Richlieu continue, for he is like a Disease which by continuance either consumes it self, or him that endures it.Lewis the 13th had at that time no Is∣sue, and consequent∣ly it was supposed the Crown would de∣volve to his Brother, the Duke of Orelans▪ It is requisite we cast an Eye upon the Succession of the Crown of France, which is like to fall to the Kings Brother, whose generous Nature we have reason to hope we may impose up∣on. He is like a Fire that may be blown away, yet kindles it self. He is disobliged at the Fa∣vours he receives, whereby he has offended the King of Spain, and sowen the Seeds of Dissention, which we may improve to our benefit. France is dissatisfied at the Prime Minister's, pretending to be of the Blood Royal, which he claims by forged Genealogies, and is disgusted to see all Places of Profit and Trust in the Hands of his Kindred and Friends They remember the Beheading of
Montmorency, and the Banishing so many great Men and they suspect that Violence and not Right will take place in the Succession to the Crown. The Affairs of Germany are past composing, the Palatin being dispossessed, the Duke of Lorrain outed, and the Duke of Saxony and other Pro∣testants of the Empire conspiring against the House of Austria. Italy seems to despair of Peace by reason of the Garisons the French have within it. The King of Spain has his hands full with the Dutch, who have taken what he had in Holland, and aim to rob him of what he has, being already possessed of the best part of Brasil, which furnishes their Fleets with the Trade of Sugar, Tobacco, and Brasil Wood, and having fortified themselves in one of the Leeward Islands. Besides all this he is engaged to support the Emperor and maintain the State of Milan against the French. We, like the Spring in a Striking Watch, must move these Hands every hour and every moment without be∣ing perceived, continually sounding abroad with∣out ever turning back. Our Politicks work like the Glass-makers, who blow things into form, and we sow Fire to produce Ice. Hither was he come when the Hour began, the wonderful influence whereof inspiring the Politick Brain of a Republican of the Capi-Duchi, made him Discourse to this effect. Venice is the very Figure and Resemblance of Pontius Pilate Probo. Pilate out of meer Policy condemned the Just and washed his Hands: Ergo. Pilate dismissed Bar∣rabbas, who was Sedition it self, and appre∣hended Jesus that was Peace it self. Igitur. Pi∣late positively said, What I have written, I
have written. Tenet consequentia. Pilate delivered the Peace and Safety of the World to Mutiniers, to be crucified. Non potest negari. All the Assembly lifted a Cry, and fell into Confusion, the Doge ordered the Republican, Nemine contradicente, to be put into Irons, and that his Genealogy should be enquired into, for that it was visible he was some way defended from some body that depended on another, who was a Friend to some one that was ac∣quainted with some Person that came from another that had something of a Spaniard. The Ger∣mans, Lu∣therans, and Calvi∣nists.The Heretical Germans, among whom there are as many Heresies as Men, who consume themselves in supporting the Tyranny of the Swedes, and the Treachery of the Electors of Saxony, and Brandenburg, and the Landtgrave of Hesse, perceiving themselves infected with the French Disease, resolved to cure themselves at once. Considering that the Salivation of so many past Calamities, nor the Flux they were put into at Norlinguen, nor the many Bleedings, Usque ad animi deliquium, of so ma∣ny overthrows, had availed nothing, they gathered all the Physicians, Chymists and Mountebanks they could find, and having made known to them their Distemper, asked their Advice thereupon. Some were of Opi∣nion, that the only Remedy was to Purge out the French Humours that were crept into their Bones. Others affirming the Distemper lay altogether in their Heads, prescribed Me∣dicines to carry off the Humour, and dis∣charge them of dull Notions, by the Help of
Hypocrates his Tetragonum so much applauded by Galen, to which the smoak of Tobacco exactly answers. Others more Superstitious, and Magically inclined, affirmed it was no Natural Disease they were troubled with, but were exagitated by Evil Spirits, and that as Persons possessed they stood in need of Ex∣orcisms. In the midst of the Learned Dis∣pute the Hour began, and a Physician of Prague with an Audible Voice said; There is no Cure for this Disease of the Germans, because all their Maladies and Distempers are only to be Cured with a Regular Diet, and as long as Lu∣ther and Calvin keep their Taverns open, and they have thirstty Throats, and as long as they do not abstain from French Cooks Shops and Bawdy∣houses, they will never be so temperate as they ought to be. The Grand Sgnior, the Advice given him  a Spa∣nish Mo∣risco, re∣fd by Sinon Ba.The Grand Signior or Emperor of the Turks, a Monarch raised by the Forgeries and Deceit of Mahomet to a vast Dominion, sum∣moned together all his Vissers, Bassas, Begler∣begs, Generals, and other Eminent Men of his Mighty Port, all or most of them being Re∣negadoes, as also the Christian Captives, who lying in perpetual Slavery, suffer a lingring Death in the Seven Towers of Constantinople, without hope of Redemption by reason of the Pride of that Haughty Monarch, who looks upon it as a Diminution of his Gran∣deur to Ransom Slaves, and deems that Hea∣venly Vertue of Mercy as proper only to the the Vulgar. The Concourse was therefore extraordinary, and greater the Expectation of
all Men, because there had been no Precedent of such an Assembly in the Memory of Man. The Grand Signior looking on it as too great a condescension that his Voice should be heard, or his Person seen by his Subjects, being feat∣ed on a lofty Throne behind a Curtain which allowed only some scant passage to the sight, made a sign to the Assembly to give Ear to what things one of theThe Mo∣riscoes were the Race of the Moores in Spain, most where∣of were counterfeit Christians, and con∣spired to bring in the Moors again, for which rea∣son they were all expelled by King Phi∣lip III. Moriscoes, who had been expelled Spain, offered to him by way of advice. The Morisco, after prostrating himself at the Emperor's Feet, sacrilegiously adoring, arose again and said: We the true and constant Mahometants, who through the course of a tedious Captivity in Spain, have for many years privately entertained in our Hearts the Law of the Prophet descended from Agar, hum∣bly acknowledging the unparallelled goodness of the Almighty Monarch of the World, the Great Em∣peror of the Turks, in receiving us the miserable Relicks of that Expulsioh, have resolved among our selves to do his most Potent Majesty some con∣siderable Service, which must be grounded on our Knowledge and Experience, having no Fortunes to offer, as being a Multitude stripped of all we po∣ssessed. To this effect, the first thing we propose is, That for the Honour of our Nation, and as a Reward to our invincible Generals and Comman∣ders, in continuing the Memory of their Exploits, it is convenient, that after the manner of Greece, Rome, and Spain, Colledges and Universities be erected, aad Rewards be assigned to Learning, for by it, after the Death of the Monarchs, and Extir∣pation of the Monarchies, the Greek and Latin
Languages still gloriously survive, and in them in spight of Death, do still flourish their Heroick Actions, Virtues and Names, being rescued from the Oblivion of the Grave by those Studies which enriched their Minds, and made their Nations cease to be Barbarous. The second Proposition is, That the Laws and Customs of the Romans be received, so far forth as they are not directly op∣posite to our Law; to the end that Policy may be advanced, Disorders suppressed, Virtue Rewarded, Vice punished, and the Distribution of Justice may be so established, that neither Affection, Malice, nor Bribery may have place, but a sure and uni∣versal Method be settled in all parts. The third is, That for our greater Benefit in Fight our crook∣ed Cimiters be changed for Spanish Tucks, because they are more handy either to defend or offend, the great circular motion of cutting being saved by thrusting, by which means whenever we have come to Handy-blows with the Spaniards, we have sustained unspeakable Loss, that Nation exceeding all others in handling their Rapier and besides the Swords are lighter of carriage, and easier to weild. The fourth, That to preserve Health, and recover it when impaired, the use of Wine be by all means allowed, because moderately taken it is the best Ve∣hicle of Nutriment, and most Efficacious Medi∣cine. It is also a rich Fund to increase the Grand Signior's and his Subjects Revenues, there being several Liquors produced by the Grape which create a considerable Trade. Nay, it is more powerful and effectual than Opium to raise the Spirits and excite the Blood to bold Undertakings. Neither ought the prohibition in our Law which has been
already partly dispensed with, to be any hindrance, for a proper interpretation to our purpose may be found. For the putting all we have proposed in execution, we offer to furnish Schemes and Di∣rectors, who shall carry it on without any Charge or Trouble to the Publick; and are assured it will add much to the grandeur and glory of all the Great Emperor of Constantinople's Dominions. Scarce had he uttered the last Word, when Sinan Bassa, a Renegado, started up, foaming with rage, and said; If all the Devils in Hell had conspired against the Turkish Monarchy, they could not have invented four such cursed Plagues as have been proposed by this Morisco Dog, who among Christians was an ill Mahometan, and would be an ill Christian among the Turks. These Fellows would have rebelled in Spain, and here they would destroy us. The reason for expelling them there was not greater than this, it will be convenient we revenge our selves on those who sent them among us by returning them back. Don John of Austria had not more destructive Designs a∣gainst our Power, when at Lepanto opening the Veins of so many Janisaries, he caused the Fish to swim in Blood, and made a new Red Sea not in∣ferior to the old. The Persian Green Turbant doth not more maliciously aim at the overthrow of our Empire; Nor did D. Peter Giron Duke of Ossuna, and Viceroy of Naples and Sicily, with his Fleets and Land Forces, and Terrour of his Name more fiercely endeavour to obliterate the Memory of our Half Moons, whose light he often sullied, when our Vessels scarce thought themselves secure of him at Pera and Constantinople, than
thou infernal Dog with those four Proportions hast laboured to do. Helhound, Monarchies are upheld by the same Arts that erect them. They have al∣ways been raised by Souldiers, and always corrupted by Pendants. Kings hold their Dominions by the Sword, not by their Books. Armies gain and defend them, not Universities. Victories make them great and formidable, not Arguments. Battles bestow Kingdoms and Crowns, Learning Caps and Degrees. Whenever a State begins to assign Rewards for Learning, Dignities are con∣ferred on Drones, Craft is honoured, Subtlely ex∣alted, and Favour Rewarded, and then the Con∣queror depends on the Doctor, the Soldier on the Scholar, and the Sword on the Pen. The igno∣rance of the People is the greatest security of Princes, Learning which instructs makes them mu∣tinous. Learned Subjects rather conspire than obey, rather examine their Soveraign than respect him. No sooner they understand, but they despise him. No sooner can they know what liberty is, than they desire it. They can judge whether he that Reigns is worthy to Rule, and then begin to Reign over the Prince. Learning is the cause that Peace is sought after, because it stands in need of it, and Peace that is sought after draws on the most dangerous War. No War is so destructive as that he endures who seems to covet Peace; The latter sues with Words and Embassies, and the former makes its advantage of the fear that ap∣pears in the Intreaties. When a Nation affects Scholars and Writers, Gooso Quils place of Swords and Muskets; Ink in writing is more me∣ritorious than Blood spilt; a Sheet of Paper signed
is of more force than Armour proof against Shot; and the Hand of a Coward by virtue of the Pen extracts from the Inkhorn Honours, Revenues, Titles, and Grandeur. Many Vile Wretches wear the Black Robe. Many raise Estates by their Writings, and many great Men are desended from Scriblers. Rome, when beginning in a small circumference, scarce big enough to sow two Bushels of Corn, it grew to a vast Commonwealth, used neither Doctors nor Books, but Souldiers and Wea∣pons. All there was Violence and no Study, they ravish't the Women they wanted, subdued what was near, and aimed at what was farther off. No sooner did Cicero, Brutus, Hortensius, and Caesar introduce Harangues and Declarations, than they began Seditions, and conspiring destroyed one another, and others themselves, and even the Commonwealth. The Emperors and the Empire were destroyed, and overthrow by the ambition of the Orators. Even among Birds only those suffer imprisonment in Cages which talk and sing, and the more perfectly they do it the closer they are kept. Then the Schools were made the Magazines against Arms, Orations sanctified Crimes and con∣demned Virtue, and whilst the Tongue reigned Triumphs were subject to the power of Words. The Greeks suffered by the same itch of Learning, they were proud of their Academies which vied with their Armies, and their Philosophers were a plague to their Generals. Wit became the Judger of Va∣lour, and they grew rich in Books and poor in Triumphs. You say their Heroes still live in their famous Authors, and their Language still survives tho their Monarchy be extinct. The same happens
to a Dagger which wounds a Man, which conti∣nues when the Man is gone, and yet that is no sa∣tisfaction to the dead Man. It were better the Monarchy survived, tho dumb and without a Lan∣guage, than that the Language should last without a Monarchy. Greece and Rome are become Ec∣choes, forming in the hollow emptiness of their Majesty, not whole sounds, but the very extremi∣ties of absent Words. Those very Authors that extolled them could allot themselves but so short a Life at the pleasure of the Reader, that in some it reaches only the Understanding, in others goes not beyond Curiosity. Spain, whose People in danger were always prodigal of Life, covetous of Death, and impatient of Age, when with unparallelled Resolution it raised its Head out of ruin, grew to a mighty Flame from scattered Embers, and be∣came a prodigy from a Skeleton, rather attended to furnish Matter for Writing, than to Write, and to deserve Praises than to Compose them. Their Drums and Trumpets spoke for them, and all their Speeches were repeated Huzza's before Battle. They furnished the World with Subject of Admi∣ration under Viriatus and Sertorious; they gain∣ed glorious Victories for Hannibal; they obliged Caesar, who till then every where fought for Ho∣nour, to fight for his Life, and they exceeded Va∣lour and Resolution it self at Numantia. Yet of these and many other their Brave Actions they writ nothing, all was Recorded by the Romans. Their Valour made use of Foreign Pens, they thought it enough for them to Act, and for the Latines to Write. As long as they knew not how to be Historians, they deserved tm. Artillery
was not long since invented to take off Lives before secured by distance, to overthrow the strongest Walls, and to bestow Victories by aim, not by true Courage; but presently after was Printing in∣vented in opposition to Cannon, it is, Metal against Metal, Ink against Powder, and Letters against Bullets. Wet Powder takes no effect, there is no doubt but it is moistned by the Ink that sends down Orders to provide and dispose it. There is no doubt but there is a scarcity of Lead to make Bullets, ever since it is consumed in casting of Letters. But it was Battles that gave us Em∣pire, Souldiers gained the Victories, and the Victo∣ries the Rewards, which ought always to be be∣stowed on those who always made us Triumph. They who called Letters and Arms Sisters, knew nothing of their Pedegree, for no Families are less of Kin than Saying and Doing. The Steel is never joined to the Quill but to cut it, but the Quill with those very Wounds it receives from the Steel revenges it self. Most contemptible Mo∣risco, it is our desire that among our Adversaries there be many Learned, and among us many Vi∣ctorious, for it is Victory over our Enemies that we covet, and not their Practices. The second thing you propose, is to receive the Laws of the Romans, which if once you had compassed you had ruined all. Our whole Empire would run into confusion betwixt Plain∣tiffs and Defendants, and Inferior and Superior Judges, and the People would be all taken up in the Employments of Councellors, Sollicitors, Atturneys, Clerks, Apparitors, Serjeants, and other Pepen∣dants of Courts. Thus War which now makes choice of Men will be forced to take up with the
Refuse of the Embroilers of the Nation, and there will be more Suits, not because there will be more occasion, but because there will be more Laws. Following out own Methods, we enjoy as much Peace as we stand in need of, and as much War as we please to Make with our Neighbours. The Laws in themselves are just and good, but where there are Lawyers they are dull and senseless. This cannot be denied; since the Lawyers themselves own it as often as they impose what sense they please upon the Law, supposing of it self it has none. E∣very Judge affirms he is an interpreter of the Law, and by giving a meaning to it, supposes it has none. I for my part am a Renegado, and was a Christian, and do avouch as an Eye Wit∣ness, there is no Law eitheir Civil or Rational but what has as many meanings as there are Lawyers, Commentators, or Judges, who give it so many that it proves at last to have none at all. When then there is no reason to dispossess a Man of his Estate, there never wants a Law, which being either strained, or ill interpreted, is ground enough for a Suit, and both the Plaintiff and Defendant are in the end Sufferers. Consider now what Two wholesome Propositions have been made by this thankful Morisco. The third thing is, that we should change our Cimiters for long Swords. In this particular, as there is no considerable ill co∣sequence to obstruct, so I can find no great advan∣tage to encouraging us to put it in execution. The Half Moon is our distinctive Character, and that we always brandish in our Cimiters. To take up the Fashions and Customs of Enemies is a Cere∣mony proper to Slaves, and a Ga for Conquer'd People or at least it is an men or forerunner of
both. If we are to be permanent, let us stick to the old Proverb, which, says, Let that ever be done, which was always done; for by keeping to it we shall be free from Novelties. Let the Christian thrust and the Turk hew, and let this Morisco expelled by the former be impaled by the latter. As to the fourth and last point, which relates to the use of Vineyards and Wine, let thirsty Souls agree about it with the Alcoran. No small toleration has been given in this case long ago. But I must observe, that if there be an universal Toleration of Wine and Taverns, it will only serve to enhance the price of Water, and to make us buy Rain by the Quart. My Opinion is therefore, weighing what has been proposed, that this Cur is a greater Enemy to those that harbour, than to those that expelled him. All the Assembly heard this Discourse with profound silence. The Morisco looked pitiously, a cold sweat running down his Forehead. Then Hali, the Prime Visier, who stood next to the Curtain that was before the Grand Signior, after consult∣ing his Looks, said; Christian Slaves, what say you to what you have heard? They seeing the blindness of that deluded Nation, and per∣ceiving they loved their own barbarity, and placed their Security in Tyranny and Igno∣rance, abhorring the light of Learning, and the Justice of Laws, caused a Spanish Gentle∣man who had been 30 years in slavery, to an∣swer for them all, which he did in these Words. We Spaniards shall not advise you to any thing that is for your good, because it would be a piece of Treachery against our Monarch, and an Of∣fence against our Religion; neither will we de∣ceive
you, because we do not stand in need of frauds to defend our selves against you; therefore we Christians have resolved thus silently to wait our doom. The Grand Signior influenced by the Hour, and drawing the Curtains before his Throne, (a thing never before seen) with an angry Voice, said; Let those Christians be set free, their generous goodness shall be their Ran∣som, Cloath and furnish them plentifully for their Voyage out of the Estates of the Moriscoes. And let that Dog be burnt alive for proposing of Innova∣tions, and all that shall follow his Example shall suffer the like pain. It is my choice to be called Barbarous Conqueror, rather than be Learned and overthrown. All our knowledge must be to know how to overcome, for an ignorant People is the safe∣ty of a Tyrant. I command all here present to forget what they heard from this Morisco, the powers of the Soul shall obey my Orders, as well as the Corporal Senses, therefore let your Memo∣ries dread my Anger. Thus the Hour gave to every one what they deserved, the Barbarous Infidels were hardened in their Ignorance, the Christians obtained their Liberty, and the Morisco was punished. The Dutch Proposals to the Indians of Chile, and their An∣swer.A Dutch Ship by stress of Weather was forced into one of the Ports ofChile is the Coast of America on the South of Peru. Chile. The Indians, guarded that Harbour, being a People who in that Harbour, being a People who in that Conquered World Man∣fully defended their Liberty, to the damna∣tion of their Souls in their Idolatry, with Wea∣pons in their Souls in their Hands attack'd the Ships Crew, thinking they were Spaniards, whose Domi∣nions enclosed them, and from whose Sub∣jection
they have still exempted themselves. The Captain pacified them, saying, They were Hollanders, and came as Ambassadors from that Commonwealth with a Message of importance to the Caciques and Chief Men. Then sweetning these Words with rich Wine brewed after the manner of the North, and mollifying them with Butter and other Rari∣ties, they were admitted and caressed. The Indian who commanded gave an account to the Magistrates of the new People that was arrived, and of their Intentions. All the Prin∣cipal Men and a great number of People as∣sembled with their Weapons in their Hands. This Nation is so provident against Possibili∣ties, and so jealous of Appearances, that they receive Ambassadors with the same precaution as they meet an Enemies Army. The Captain of the Ship came before them, attended by 4 of his Men, and a Slave serving as an Inter∣preter; They asked of him, Who he was? Whence he came? To what purpose? And, From whom? He answered, not without some dread of the Warlike Audience. I am a Dutch Captain, and come from Holland, a Com∣monwealth in the West, to offer you our Friendship and Trade. We live in a Land which the Sea from above looks down upon with indignation to see it dry below its billows. We were not long since Subjects, and part of the Dominion of the Great Monarch of Spain and the New World, where only your Valour has exempted it self from his Crown, which like, the Sun extends its compass round the Earth. We gained our Liberty with
immense labour, because the Severity of Ring Phi∣lip the Second preferred the Bloody Execution ofThe Two Counts, Horn and Egmont. two Noblemen, before the Sovereignty of so many Provinces. Revenge inflamed our Courage, and carrying on a War which lasted above 60 years without interruption, we have sacrificed Two Mi∣lions of Men to those two Lives, and made the Fields of the Low-Countreys an universal Burial∣place to all Europe. Our Success has made us absolute Masters of half those Countreys, and not so satisfied we have taken many strong Holds in the other Provinces, have gained large Dominions in the East, and in Brazil have Conquered Per∣nambuco and Paraiba, enriching our selves with Brazil Wood, Tobacco, and Sugar; And to con∣clude, of Subjects that we were to the King of Spain, are become his most implacable Enemies. We have taken it into our Consideration, that the Spaniards have not only subdued these Provinces, but that in few years they have destroyed in them many Towns, peopling them again with Strangers, so that there scarce remains the Memory of the Natives in their Tombs, and that the mighty Empe∣rors, Kings, Caziques, and other Princes, are so wholly extinct and buried in Oblivion as if they had never been. We perceive that you alone (either that you are Wiser, or warned by the Fate of others) main∣tain an Hereditary Liberty, and by your Valour the American Race is preserved from slavery. It is natural for every Creature to love its likeness, and since you and our Commonwealth so much resemble one another, it was decreed to send me through such vast Seas, and such dangerous distance, to tender you their sincere Amity and Friendship, and
to offer not only for your Defence, but to promote your further Designs to furnish you with Ships, Cannon, Officers and Souldiers, who are such as are praised and admired by all by whom they are not feared. By way of Trade they offer you free Commerce in their Dominions, with a Brotherly and perpetual Alliance, desiring for themselves the freedom of your Ports, and the settlement of a League Offensive and Defensive upon equal Terms on both sides. And the more to express their Af∣fection, by their great Interest they will secure you▪ the Friendship of many Kings, Princes and Com∣monwealths their Confederates. The Indians re∣turned a courteous Answer, telling him, That to receive his Proposals it was enough to hear him, but in order to give their Answer they must consult in Counsel, and the next day at the same time would give him their Resolution. It was so agreed, and the Dutchman, know∣ing the Indians are naturally inclined to Toys and Curiosities, the better to gain their Af∣fections he presented them with Barrels of Butter, Cheese, Casks of Wine, Swords, Hats, and Looking-glasses, and lastly a Tele∣scope, highly extolling the use of it, saying, By the help of it they might see Ships at Ten or Twelve Leagues distance, and discover by their Colours whether they belonged to Friends or Enemies, that the same they might do by Land. He added, that with it they might find Stars in Heaven which they had never seen before, nor could not be discerned without it; That through it they might plain∣ly discover th spots in the Face of the Moon,
which look like Eyes, and Mouth, and might perceive a black spot in the Circle of the Sun. That it wrought these Wonders by drawing with those two Glasses close to the Eyes things that were at a vast distance. The Principal Man among the Indians asked for it, and the Dutchman having opened it to the due distance, and instructed him how to use it, delivered it to him. He clapt his Right Eye to it, and le∣velling it towards the Mountains, set up a Cry that testified his Admiration to the rest, telling them, He had at four Leagues distance plainly seen Men, Beasts and Birds, and the Rocks and Shrubs, so near at hand that they seemed bigger than natural close, to the farthest Glass. Here the influence of the Hour affect∣ed them, and they having gabled in their Lan∣guage some Discourses in appearances passio∣nate, he that took the Glass holding it in his Left Hand directed his Discourse to the Dutch∣man in these Words. An Instrument that finds a Spot in the Sun, proves the Moon a Lyar, and discovers what Heaven hides, is a mischievous In∣strument, a Glass Pickthank, and cannot be grate∣ful to Heaven. Its attracting things at a great distance, is a sufficient cause to raise a Jealousie in us who are far removed from you. With this doubtless it was you discovered us so remote, and through it we have descryed the design you labour to hide under your Specious Offers. By this Artifice you pry into the Elements, and thrust your selves in∣to Sovereignty. You, as you say, live dry below the Water, and wrest your Land wrongfully from the Sea. We shall not be such Fools to take those
for our Friends who could not be good Subjects, nor shall we trust them with our Habitations who have stolen theirs from the Fishes. You were Sub∣jects of the Kings of Spain, and having usurped his Dominion, value your selves upon being Re∣bels, and would have us through a fond credulity become a Prey to your Treachery. Neither is it true that we resemble you, for in maintaining that Native Country which Nature gave us, we only defend what is our own, we preserve our Liberty, but do not steal it. You offer to assist us against the King of Spain, yet confess at the same time you have taken Brazil from him, which was his; if you take the Indies from him who took them from us, how much more reason have we to be afraid of you than of him. You must observe that America is a rich Beautiful Harlot, and since she was false to her Husbands, she will never be true to her Bullies. Christians say Heaven pu∣nished the Indies because they adored Idols, and we Indians say, Heaven will punish the Christians because they adore the Indies. You think you carry Gold and Silver, and you only carry well coloured Envy and precious Misery. You take from us, that you may have for others to take from you. That which makes you our Enemies, makes you Enemies to one another. Be gone then within two hours out of this Port, and let us know if you want for any thing. If you have a mind to gain our good will, since you are so good at Invention, invent an Instrument to remove what is by us at a great distance, for we promise you we will never look upon your Country nor Spain with this that attracts things hat are far off. Carry away this
Glass Spy, this Discoverer of the Firmament, for we have no need of it, being able with the help of our Eyes only to discover more in you than we like; and let me tell you, the Sun is beholding to it for shewing you the black spot in his Circle, or else for the colour sake you would have endea∣voured to cut out and stamp him into Money. The Blacks consult how to deliver themselves from Sla∣very.The Blacks assembled in mighty numbers to consult about obtaining their Liberty, a thing they have often earnestly sollicited. The nu∣merous Concourse being seated and silent, one of the chiefest among them, who in that swarthy Audience appeared blacker than the rest, and had proposed this Affair in the Court of Rome, spoke to this purpose. There is no cause for our slavery but our colour, and co∣lour is an accident, not a crime. Yet certain it is, those who Lord it over us have no colour for their Tyranny, but our colour, which is produced by the presence and nearness of the greatest Beauty, to wit, the Sun. Flocky Heads, and clotted Hair, squab Nses, and Blubber Lips, are no better grounds for our Captivity. Many Whites might be Slaves if thse three things carried is, and it were more reasonable they should be so who are hi∣deous with their mighty Nses like Rudders in their Faces, and snivle through Elephants Trunks, than we who have nothing to loose by the Pox, and are the very Opposites to the Snouts. Why do not the Whites consider, that if we look like Blots among them, one of them looks like a Stain among its. Did they make Slaves of the Mulattoes, it were more excusable, for they are a Rabble with∣out a King, a Compound betwixt Light and
Darkness, Wainscot Paces compared with White Men, Foils to the Brown, the next degree to the Blacks, and the very Picture of Soot. In all Ages there have been Men of our Complexion Fa∣mous for Martial Exploits, Learning, Virtue, and Sanctity, it is needless for me to repeat a Ca∣talogue of them, for they are sufficiently known. Nor can it be denied, that we are preferable to the Whites for not endeavouring to disguise the co∣lour Nature gave to our Skins. Among them the Women that are swarthy or brown, plaster them∣selves like Walls to become White, and they that are White never satisfied with Whiteness wash to encrease it. Only our Women contenting them∣selves with their Natural Complexion, are beauti∣ful in the dark, and the whiteness of their Teeth shining the brighter through their blackness, when they smile they sparkle like the Stars in the night. Neither do we bely our Age, dye our Hair, or wear false Locks. Why then are we contemned and chastised. This is it I offer to your Conside∣ration, that you may consult what Means may be usd for obtaining our due liberty and rest. The Hour prevailed, and a Black whose Head through Age was become grey, contrary to the received Opinion, that Black takes no co∣lour, rose up and said. Let Ambassadors be immediately sent to all the Kingdoms in Europe, with Two Proposals. The first, That if Colour be the cause of Slavery, they will take notice of the Red Beards for the sake of Judas, and pass by the Blacks on account of one of the three Kings that came to Bethlem. And since Cats and Dogs of that colour ar hateful, it will be but rea∣sonable
there be no Men nor Women of it, and let him in our Name propose means for the speedy destruction of all Fox heads with their Appurtenan∣ces. The second Proposal is, that they mix their Breed with ours, and blending their Brightness with our Sootiness, produce a mungril Race, that so Swarthi∣ness may become Fashionable; being sufficiently war∣ned by the clearness of the Garmans and Flem∣mings, who have Embroiled and Distracted the World, stained so many Fields with Blood, and filled so many Nations with Rebellions and Here∣sies; but particularly let them remember the French∣mens yellow Beards.It is a cu∣stom in Spain to Sneeze at the Blacks by way of contempt. England in the year 1640. This was spoke in the Person of K. Ch. the I. in whose time it was writ. As for our Ambassadors, let them take this Advice along with them, that if the * People Sneeze at them they may take Snuff for their comfort and shall answer, God Bless us; bestowing the Prayer upon themselves. The mighty Monarch of England, whose Island is the most Beautiful Mole upon the face of the Ocean, having Assembled his Par∣liament, spoke to them as follows. My Do∣minions are encompassed by the raging Sea, hemmed in and defended by the Waves; my Kingdomes, as to the Publick Worship are of the Reform'd Religion, but in their hearts they are Catholicks. I have engraft∣ed the Papal power upon the Regal, wear at once the Crown and Miter, and have two Heads, the Spiritual and the Temporal. I suspect, tho it is not visible, as Spiritual Schism among my Subjects, and that the City which holds St. Peter's Keys influen∣ces the private Councels in London. This is of so much the more dangerous conse∣quence
by how much it is the more Pri∣vate. It is a great Eye-sore to me to be∣hold the Rebellious Hollanders grown up in∣to a Common-wealth. I confess, mine and my Ancestors jealousie of the greatness of Spain, has raised them from a contemptible Spawn to a Bulk that exceeds the British Whale. I see them daily encroaching upon the East and West-Indies, and am devoured by the Lice I bred. I know, most years they have rich Fleets from their stolen Do∣minions, and sometimes they snap all, or a considerable part of those that belong to the King of Spain, which brings them in inestimable Treasure. By Land so many years continual exercise has made them Sol∣diers, with the reputation of innumerable Victories; and their experience in obeying has rendered them fit to Command. By Sea their Ships are not to be counted, their Fortune is matchless, their Conduct not to be Paralelled, and their Reputation above their Neighbours. On the other side, I see my Neighbour the King of France (whom I hate upon antient grudges) aspire to the Empire of Germany and Rome, hav∣ing already got footing in Italy, being pos∣sest of Towns, favoured by some Princes, and in all appearance countenanced by the Pope. He is a Youth born and grown up amidst Armes, and gain'd Triumphs with them when he was fitter to have played with Toyes. I now look upon his Subjects to be wholly united, since he has demolish∣ed
all the strong holds of the Huguenots, Luthe∣rans, and Calvinists, and vested the power of the Government in the Catholicks alone: Neither do I on this account esteem him the better Catholick, but believe him a crafty Polititian, and am perswaded, he is in him∣self a Time-server, that he only aimes at his Interest, and believes in what he would have, not in that he adores; a Religion many fol∣low under the name of another, yet he dissembles, because his design being to work himself into the possession of Naples and Milan, he thought it convenient to favour the Catholicks, as being infinitely the stron∣ger party; They are beholding to their num∣ber, not to their Doctrine. He pretends a Catholick zeal because it is the best colour to disguise his ambition of enlarging his Do∣minions in Italy, and he is a much behold∣ing to his Hypocrisie as to his Valor for his Conquests. In Germany by calling in the Sweeds, and stirring up the Electors of Sax∣ony and Brandenburgh, and the Landtgrave of Hesse, he has sworn In verba Lutheri He laid hold of Calvins Conscience to seize the Duke of Lorrain's Dominions; and thus he is a Janus in Religion, looking upon the Turk with one Face, and upon the Pope with the other; Cardinal Richlieu being made his instrument to wind him into that Court. This causes my Nose to swell at him, because I consider, that for the com∣passing his ends he has made no account of power, but h taken  up with the for∣tune
of the Hollanders, despising England as if he were furnished with another wonder∣ful Joan of Are, or Maid of Orleans. I have so ill a relish of all these actions that they set my Teeth on Edge, and the very air I breath is nauseous; to which, adding the success of the Isle of Rhe, it causes a loath∣ing in my Memory. It occurs not to me with whom I can join in Confederacy to clip the Wings of these two Neighbours, unless with thePhil. the 4th then young. King of Spain, who is a Great, Rich, and Mighty Monarch, being Lord of the most Warlike Nations in the World, and in the prime of his Age; yet I cannot but take notice, that my Honour and Reputation are ingaged in restoring the Palatine; and I cannot expect it from the Catholicks, and consequently must not hope it from the Imperialists and Spaniards, by reason of the difference of Religion, and that the Protestants are already sick of the House of Austria. Besides, I guess the King of Spain has not forgot my Journey to his Court, since I have not forgot my return to my own, the memory whereof is renew∣ed by the attempt of my Ships upon Cadiz. I would willingly reduce the Most Christian King to his former bounds, for like a Flood, he is swollen above his Banks, and has spread himself over all Europe; and at the same time would pull back the Dutch to what they were. It is your parts to advise what methods will be most proper for this under∣taking; but at the same time you are to un∣derstand,
that I am not only resolved, but eager to go my self in Person, because I am of opinion, that a Prince who being en∣gaged in a necessary War, does not himself lead his People, rather condemns his Sub∣jects to carry Armes, than makes Soldiers of them, and they being thus drove like Cri∣minals, suffer more then they Act; whence it comes, they expect their Liberty, and re∣venge no less by being overcome than by overcoming. There is as much difference betwixt leading and sending of Armies, as betwixt jest and earnest, as appears by ex∣perience. Answer in relation to the Public without medling with my safety; and let me hear nothing in your opinions that looks like Self-Interest. Inform my understand∣ing, do not perplex it. This said, they all looked upon one another with an awful silence, and after consulting together in private, the Speaker returned this Answer. Your Ma∣jesty, Great Sir, has contrived so to place your Question, that you have taught us how to Answer; an Art highly to be valued by Kings, because it creates perspicuity and a good understanding. Truth is but one, it is plain and clear, few words express it, multiplicity confounds it; it breaks little si∣lence, falshood leaves none unbroken. The Reflections you have made on the King of France and the Hollanders are worthy your Royal consideration. The imminent dan∣ger requires a manly and speedy resolution. The King of Spain is at this time the only
Confederate can promote your designs, and will be the more effectual if you joyn with him in Person to crush these two troublesome Neighbours. And your Majesty may ob∣serve, there is as great distance betwixt Acting and Commanding, as is betwixt Words and Deeds. I confess your Heirs are too tender to be forsaken. But it is a less evil to leave them young, then Childishly to bear them company being a Father. Scarce had he uttered these Words, when an old decrepit Senator, whose grisle clotted Beard covered all his Breast, his head hang∣ing down, and the hunch of his back through Age rising above it, lifting himself up by the help of his staff said. There is no doubt but it is a great rashness to▪ advise his Kingdoms swarm with concealed Catholicks, whose number is known to be great, but suspected to be much greater. Your Majesty has Sub∣jects fit to be entrusted with such an under∣taking, let an Army of our own Religion be sent under the Command of the Chief Men who are suspected to be Catholicks: Thus their Allegiance will be secured abroad, and fewer Enemies will remain at home. Do not venture your Person in which we venture our all, and which alone secures all; for, from the Speakers opinion I gather he Plots like a Papist, and does not advise like a Councellor. The whole Assembly fell into confusion, and in this disorder the Hour began, and the King changing colour
said: You two instead of Advising have Di∣stracted me. One says, if I go not abroad in Person my Enemies will deprive me of my Kingdom. The other, that if I go it will be taken away by my Subjects, so that you will have me stand more in awe of my Sub∣jects than of my Enemies. The Condition I am reduced to is Deplorable. It remains, that every one of you within 24 hours, lay before me by whose and by what means I am reduced to this pass▪ naming Persons and Causes without sparing one another; other∣wise I shall suspect you all, for the blame lies only among you that advise me; for I am now resolved to attend my Affairs both at home and abroad. The King of France goes abroad without having Issues or hopes of it, and leaves a Kingdom divided on se∣veral accounts, the Nobility stained with the Blood of Montmorency, the Huguenots supprest, but not without thoughts of revenge, the Country eaten up with Taxes, and the whole Kingdom groaning under the Oppression of the Prime Minister; and you would have me who have Issue, and less Obstacles to ob∣struct me, stay to rock and play with my Chil∣dren. France and Holland are become formi∣dable because I have lived at home at my ease, if I appear not abroad they will be my ruin. If I stay for fear of my Subjects, I encou∣rage them to contemn me. If once my Enemies are assured I cannot go abroad, I shall not be able to secure my self against them, and if I go abroad and perish, at
least I shall gain the Honour of the Attempt, and prevent the Scandal of Cowardice. That King who acts not himself in defence of his Crown, furnishes them with an Ex∣cuse who do not assist him. It will be un∣just to punish those that follow his Example, for he cannot be Judge of the Crime he taught, nor condemn what was learnt of him by those who imitate him in forsaking the Defence of their Country. Be gone all of you immediately, and consult accord∣ing to your Duty what is best for my Ser∣vice, preferring it before your own Lives, and my Quiet, for I promise the more sharp the truth you deliver shall be, the better I will look upon it; and do not perplex me with the pretence of carrying all the Nobi∣lity along with me, for Experience demon∣strates, that no Man ever assembled them in an Army, but he lost them and himself. The Rings measured by the Bushel at Can∣nas testifie it to the unspeakable sorrow of Rome. So the Wood of Pavia made the Sepulcher of all the French Nobility, and of their Kings Liberty. So the Spanish Armada under the Duke of Medina Sidonia, which coming to invade this Kingdom, enriched the Shoars with its Wreck. And so King Sebastian who lost his Nobility, his Crown, and his Life in Africk. The Nobility united causes Confusion, and occasions Ruin, be∣cause they know not how to Command, and will not Obey, and consequently their Pride breaks an Military Discipline. I will take
with me a few that have gained Experience, the rest shall stay to be a Check to the Li∣centiousness of the Multitude, and a Curb to Mutiniers. I have Occasion for such Men as think they cheat me in exposing their Lives for Six-pence a day, not for those who having exhausted my Treasure that they might go, claim a Title to my Re∣venue because they went. It were good that all the Nobility were Trained, yet it were not safe. Private Persons must not Arm Madmen, nor Kings the Nobility. Take this along with you by way of In∣struction, and there will be the less to di∣stract your Consultations, and my Resolu∣tion will the sooner take effect. The Jews and Mo∣nopanti in Councel for embroil∣ing Chri∣stendom, and drain∣ing its Wealth.At Thessalonica, a City of Macedonia, seated at the bottom of the Gulph to which it gives its Name, and subject to the Emperor of Constantinople, by the appointment of Rabbi Saadias, Rabbi Racabarbaniel, Rabbi Salomon, and Rabbi Nisin, was held a general Assembly of the Deputies of all the Jews in Europe. Thither resorted for the Synagogue at Venice Rabbi Samuel and Rabbi Maimon, for that of Ragusa Rabbi Abenezra, for that of Constanti∣nople Rabbi Jacob, for that of Rome Rabbi Chaminiel, for that of Leghorn Rabbi Cersonni, for that of Roan Rabbi Gavirol, for that of Prague Rabbi Mosche, for that of Vienna Rabbi Berchai, for that of Amsterdam Rabbi Mier Armaac, for that of Oran Rabbi Asepha, for the Jews in Masquerade, who Trade under
the disguise of the Christian Habit and Lan∣guage, Rabbi David Bar Nachman. With these joined the Monopanti, a Republican People inhabiting certain Islands, who lying in the Black Sea, betwixt Moscovy and Tartary, are politickly maintained against their fierce Neighbours, rather by Cunning than force of Arms or strength of Fortifications. The Na∣tives are Men of inextricable Subtlety, tho∣rough-paced in Hypocrisie, absolute Masters of Dissimulation, and of so deceitful a Pre∣sence, that all Religions and Nations take them for their own. Trade gives them mul∣tiplicity of Faces, and charges their Counte∣nances, and Interest shifts their Souls. They are Governed by a Prince called Pragas Chin∣collos. By his Order there came to this San∣hedrim Six of the most Learned Men in the Doctrine of Raking and Griping, the first was called Philorgiros, the second Erictotheos, the third Danipe, the fourth Arpi Trotono, the fifth Pacasmazo, and the sixth Daper Bazalas. The Assembly seated themselves orderly, ac∣cording to the Preheminence of each Syna∣gogue, giving the First Seat to the Monopanti in Courtesie as they were Strangers. After Silence was made, Rabbi Saadias having re∣peated the Psalm, In exitu Israel de Egypto, made the following Speech. We the first Gene∣ration of the World, who are become the Offcast of all Ages, and dispersed Multitude, living in Captivity and miserable Contempt, perceiving the whole World entangled in the inextricable Snares of Discord, have assembled our selves together to
consult our Interest amidst the present Tumults, that we may raise our selves upon the Ruines of all others. I confs Captivity, Plagues, and Obsti∣nacy are our Inheritance. Fears and Jealousies are the first begotton of our Understandings, and we were ever Malecontents against God, ever valuing the Diety we made, before that which made us. From the first beginning his government was irk∣some to us, and we followed the interpretation of the Devil in opposition to his Law. When his Omnipotency governed us, we rebelled, when he gave us Governours we disobeyed. Samuel who governed in his Name was thought burdensom, and we gathering an ungrateful Assembly, though God was our King, asked of God another King. He gave us Saul, and him a Tyrannical Right over us, declaring he would make Slaves of our Children, and take away our Estates to give to his Servants; and he aggravated this punishment, saying, he would not take him from us tho we should beg it of him. He said to Samuel, that it was him they despised, not the Prophet, or his Sons. To fulfil his Curse, that Saul continues among us at all times, in all Places, and under se∣veral Names. Since then he oppresses us with in∣famous and miserable Thraldom in all Kingdoms and Commonwealths, and God permits every King should be a Saul to us who left God for Saul; Our Nation remained Criminal in the sight of all Men, all cast it from themselves, all retain, and all are ashamed of retaining it. We reside not in any place, but whether we came expelled from another. We rest no where, but where they are desirous to cast us out, and all dread we should be drove
upon them. We cannot but own there is no con∣gruity between our Words and our Actions, and that our Mouth and our Heart never were united in adoring the same God; our Mouth always cal∣led upon the God of Heaven, our Heart ever gave Idolatrous Adoration to God and Usury. Being under the conduct of Moses, when he went up to the Mount for the Law, we made it appear, that the Religion of our Souls was Gold, and any Creature framed thereof. There we adored our own Jewels in the Calf, and our Avarice took for its Deity the resemblance of the sucking Cattle. We admit not of God in any other Metal, and in this we receive any Insect for a God. He well understood the Disease that caused our insatiable Thirst, who made us drink up our Idol reduced to Powder. A mighty Vengeance followed this Crime; yet tho it slew many thousands, it was a warning to few, for whereas God afterwards did for us all that we could ask, still he did nothing but what we grew weary of. He stretched out the Clouds like a Canopy to cover us in the Desert from the scorching heat of the day. He strengthned with the fiery Pillar the weak light of the Moon and Stars, that they assisted with its glittering motion might overcome the darkness of the night, and re∣present the Sun in its absence. He commanded the Wind to shower down our Harvest, and disposed the Regions of the Air into wonderful Barns, powring thence our Sustenance ready dressed in the Manna with all the seasoning every Pallat could desire. He caused the Quails descending like Rain to become Game and Nets for our Entertainment. He dissolved the immovable Rocks into running
Streams, and caused Springs to gush from the Stones to recreate our Thirst. He dried up the bottom of the Sea into an easie Road for our Feet, and raised the Waters perpendicular, heaping up their smoothness into Liquid Walls, detaining in a secure Structure the Waves and Billows, which became a streight way for our Forefathers, and a Sepulchre to Pharaoh and his Army. His Word raised a Vermin, and listed Frogs, Flies and Lo∣custs in his Army for our service. There is no∣thing so weak, whereof God doth not make up invincible Hosts against Tyrants. With such small Souldiers he vanquished the formidable Enemies Squadrons, glittering in their Steel Armour, vain∣glorious in the bearings of their Shields, and flou∣rishing in the Feathers of their Crests. These wonderful Mercies which our King and Prophet David celebrated in the 105th Psalm, which be∣gins Horula Adonai, were requited by our Obsti∣nacy and Ingrtitude with a loathing and dislike of our Food, and with Oblivion of the Way open∣ed through the Waves of the Sea. Many times God chastises with what he gives, and rewards with what he refuses. Such Forefathers are a scandalous Genealogy of our Perversness. We are generally looked upon as obstinate in endless hopes, whereas in reality we are the most desperate People in Nature: We are the Ne plus ultra of Incredulity; and hopes nor is any thing to be hoped of us. Because Moses stayed a little on the Mount, we despaired of him, and asked a God of Aaron. The rea∣son why it is said we are obstinate in everlasting hope is, because we have so many Ages expected
the Messiah; but neither did we receive him in Christ, nor do we expect him in any other. The cause of our saying always, that he is to come, is not that we desire him, or believe it, but by these delays to disguise our being the Fool that begins the 13th Psalm, saying in his Heart, There is no God. The same says he, who denies him that came, and waits for him that is not to come. This is the Lan∣guage of our Heart, and rightly considered it is the Quare of the 2d Psalm, Fremuerunt gen∣tes, & populi meditati sunt inania adversus do∣minum, & adversus Christum ejus. So that we say we always hope, to conceal our always de∣spairing. Of the Law of Moses we retain only the Name, giving it to the Exceptions the Tal∣mudists, have forged to belye the Scripture, dis∣guize the Prophecies, invalidate the Precepts, and dispose Consciences to Worldly ends, instructing our Atheistical Inclinations with Seditious Politicks for the conveniency of a Civil Life, and adopting us of Sons of Israel Sons of Mammon. When we had a Law we kept it not. Now we keep it, it is no Law, farther than in the very sound of the three Letters. It was necessary to declare what we were, to excuse what we are, and to promote what we aim to be, advancing our selves upon the wild Extravagancies, which like a Frenzy possess all the Earth; for now not only the Hereticks rise in Arms against their Enemies the Catholicks, but the Ca∣tholicks themselves in hostile manner invade one another. The Protestants of Germany for many years past have strugled for a Hretick Emperor, and in this they are favoured by the most Christian King, who acts as if he were not so, and connives
at Calvin and Luther. The Catholick King op∣poses them all, to keep in the House of Austria the Supream Dignity of the Roman Eagles. The Hollanders encouraged by being successful Traitors, aspire to raise their Treason into a Monarchy, and of Rebellious Subjects to the King of Spain, dare presume to become his Competitors. They wrested from him what he bad in them, and they proceed rob him of what is so far from them, as Brazil and India, designing to extend their Conquests over his Crown. We have been no small Instruments in promoting these Usurpations, by means of the Sham Christians, whom under disguise of the Portuguese Language we have applied to undermine him, upon pretence of being his Subjects. All or most of the Princes of Italy have harboured the French in their Dominions, pretending they read the Popes inclinations in his Looks, and interpreting his silent Toleration for a positive Command, Ex motu pro∣prio. The King of France has practised an un∣beard or Stratagem against the Monarch of Spain,The Duke of Orleans, and Queen Mother of France, upon dis∣gust went into Flan∣ders, where they had Pensions from the King of Spain, who entertained them to breed Di∣visions in France. discharging upon him all his Family under the Title of Malecontents, that he might consume the Pay of his Army in Pensions and Prosents. When was it ever known that a King made Ammunition of his Mothers and Brothers Teeth against another, that they might eat him up by morsels. It is a beggerly invention, and yet most pernicious. To wage War by Mumping, looks more like jest than earnest. We have Synagogues in the Dominions of all these Princes, where we are the principal Element in composing of this Confusion. At Roan we are the Purse of France against Spain, and of Spain against France. In Spain, disguising our Circum∣cision by our Habit, we su that Monarch with
the Stock we have at Amsterdam amidst his Ene∣mies, who make a greater advantage by ordering us to delay the payment of the Bills, than he does by receiving them. This is indeed an extra ordi∣nary Riddle, to wit, to serve and ruin Friends and Enemies with the same Money, and to cause him that pays it to make his advantage over him that receives it. The same we do in Germany, Italy, and Constantinople, and we have knit this indissoluble knot by placing the supply every one expects in the hands of his greatest Enemy. For we furnish Money, as he that lends upon Interest to one that plays and looses, that he may loose the more. I do not deny but the Mono∣panti are the Boxkeepers of Europe, who furnish Cards, Dice and Candles, and at length the Box runs away with all the Gold and Silver, leaving the Gamesters nothing but Noise, Ruine, and a de∣sire of Revenge, which they encourage, that their Gaming House, which is the end of all Men, may never have an end. Thus far they are the true Copies of our Original. True it is they have much the advantage of us in the manner of worming themselves in, because they are the Jews of the New Testament, as we are of the Old, for as we did not believe that Jesus was the Messiah that came, so they believing that Jesus was the Messiah already come, they let him slip through their Con∣sciences in such a manner it seems he never came to, or for them. The Monopanti believe him, as a grave Author says we expect him: Auream, & Gemmatam Hierusalem expectabant. A Hierusalem of Gold and Precious Stones. Both we and the through differing Principles and un∣like Means tend to the same end, which is to de∣stroy
Christianity which we would not receive, and they after receiving have rejected. And this is he reason we have met to join a Confederacy of Malice and Deceit. This Synagogue has taken it into consideration, that Gold and Silver are the true Sons of the Earth which make War against Hea∣ven, not only with an hundred hands, but with as many as dig, cast, coin, gather, tell, receive, and steal them. They are two Subterranean De∣mons, yet beloved of all Mortals. Two such Me∣tals, that the greater Body they have, they have also the more Spirit. No Estate or Condition de∣spises them, and if any Law condemn, the Lawyers and Interpreters of it bring them off. He that thinks it an undervaluing to dig them, values him∣self upon gathering them. He who is too great to ask of him that keeps, courteously receives them of him that offers. And he who thinks it too great a labour to earn them, esteems it an art to steal them. He that says, I will not have them, at the same time means, Give me them. And he who cries, I receive nothing, speaks truth, because he snatches all. As it were a falshood should the Sea pretend it does not swallow up the Springs and Brooks, since drinking up the Rivers which suck them up, it also licks up Brooks and Springs; so great Men prevaricate when they say they do not receive from the Poor and Beggars, whereas they devour the Rich, who swallow up the Poor and Beggars. The Premises being granted, it will be most proper to level the Stroaks of our Interest at Kings, Commonwealths, and Prime Ministers, in whose Stomachs all the rest cause a Surfeit, which being by us stirred up will prove a
Lethargy, or Apoplexy in their Heads. Let the Monopanti have the preheminence of giving their Opinion first, what method they judge most proper for our advantage. They having buz∣zed about their sly thoughts from one to ano∣ther, agreed that Pacasmazo, as the most fluent of Tongue, and abounding in Words, should speak for them all, which he did in this man∣ner. The Goods of the World belong to the In∣dustrious, and Fortune follows the Dissemblers and the Bold. Crowns and Scepters are sooner usurped and snatched, than inherited or deserved. He who in Temporal Preferments is the worst among the Wicked, is the most deserving without excep∣tion, and grows till he suffers himself to be out∣done in Villany, for in all Ambitious Attempts, Justice and Honesty make Tyrants Criminals. No sooner these begin to use moderation, but they depose themselves. If they will continue their Tyranny, they must not suffer any signs to appear abroad that may prove them so. The Fire that burns a House, casting out the Smoak, calls People to quench it with Water. Let every one take as much of this Discourse to himself as suits with his purpose. Money is the true Circe, which changes into sundry forms all that come near or fall in love with it. We our selves are the Example. Mo∣ney is a disguised Deity, which in no place has any publick Altar, but is privately adored in all parts. It has no particular Temple, because it slides into all Churches. Riches is an universal Sect, in which most Souls agree; and Covetous∣ness is an Arch Heretick beloved by all Politicians, and the Reconciler of all Differences in Opinion
and Humour. We therefore perceiving he is the most wonderful Magician and Negromancer, have chosen him for our North Star, and make him our Loadstone to point to that Pole that we may not stray from our Course. This we perform so artificially, that we leave him to the end we may have him, and despise him that we may gather him. This we learned of the deceitful Pump, which by being empty fills it self, with what it has not; attracts what others have, and easily sucks and dreins the full with its own emptiness. We are the very resemblance of Gunpowder, which being small, black, and close rammed, gathers vast strength and swiftness from its close impri∣sonment. We do the mischief before the noise can be heard, and as we open one Eye and shut the other to take aim, we carry all before us in the twinkling of an Eye. Our Houses are like the Barrels of Guns, they are discharged at the Keys, and charged at the Mouth. Yet though we are such, we have Countenances and Manners that suit with all Men, and therefore we seem not Strangers to any Sect or Nation. The Turk takes our Hair for a Turbant, the Christian for a Hat, the Moore for a Cap, and you for a Veil. We admit not of the Name of a Kingdom, Com∣monwealth, or any other, but only that of Mo∣nopanti. We yield all Titles to Kings and Com∣monwealths, we take from them the power ab∣stracted from the Vanity of those noisy Words. We lay our Design that they may be Lords over the World, and we over them. To attain so glorious an end, we have not found any to with in Confederacy on equal Terms, like you,
who are at present the sharpers of Europe; you only want our quality to compleat the subverting of all, which we offer you entire, by way of Conta∣gion or Infection, to be transmitted by means of an infernal device found out against Christians by us here present; which is, that as Treacle is prepa∣red with the sharp poison of the Viper, because it is the moisture that goes the quickest and most di∣rectly to the Heart; for which reason being com∣pounded with many Simples of Efficacious Virtue, it conveys them to the Heart to defend it against Poison, which is the design of the Medicine; so we have invented a counter-Treacle to convey Poi∣sons to the Heart, by falling upon the Vertues and good works that go to it, and to carry to the Soul the Vices, Abominations and Errors, which on these Vehicles will slip into it. If you resolve upon this Alliance, we will give you the Receipt, with the weight and number of Ingredients, and fur∣nish Apothecaries well versed in the composition, in the contriving whereof, Danipe, Alkemiastos, and I, have taken great pains, and our labour is nothing inferior to the Trochisks of the Viper. Be ruled by our Pragas, for you need not cease to be Jews, and at the same time will learn to be Mono∣panti. At the very uttering of these words the Hour had its effect, and Rabbi Maimon one of those that came from the Synagogue of Venice rising up, and putting aside with his hand a Fathom and a half of Snout, that he might come the closer to the Ear of Rabbi Saadias, whispered these words Rabbi, I smell a Rat in that word, be govern'd, we must keep a sharp Eye upon these Fellows, for
to me they look like famely Pharaos and subtile en∣croachers. Saadias replied, Now at length I am convinced they are the very Manna of instru∣ction, for they tast as every one would have them. The best way is to say little, and give them a bait in the Trap as to Republican Mice. Christotheus seeing the numbling Dialogue, said to Philar∣giros and Danipe. I smoke the Jealousie of the wicked Jews: Let every Man of the Monopanti give himself a lick of the Golden Calf, and they will all fall upon their Knees. They all run up∣on Snares and Contrivances against one ano∣ther, and Rabbi Saadias, to amuse the Mono∣panti, said, We look upon you as discoverers of the Land of promise, and the true basis of our designs, that we may be united in a mischievous body, it will be requisite we consult the methods, and conclude and sign Articles at our next meeting, which we appoint three days hence. Pacasmazo covering his Snake Skin with Doves Feathers, said, The time was sufficient, and the resolution discreet; but that it was requisite, exact secrecy should be observed. Then taking out a Book bound in Sheeps skin with the Wooll on, which was curiously interwoven and wrought with Gold Thread, he gave it to Saadias, saying, This Jewel we give you as a Pledge. He took it, and asked, Whose works are these? Pacasmazo answered, The works of our words. The Author is Nicolas Matchiavel, who composed the thorough Base to our Trebel. The Jews at∣tentively looking upon them, and particularly observing the binding in Sheeps skin; Rabbi Asapha, who was Deputy for Oran said, This
is some of the Wooll the Spaniards tell us in their Proverb, which says, they that go to fetch it are fleeced before they return. Thus they parted, both parties contriving to meet again like the Steel and Flint for to batter, bruize, and beat one another to pieces, till they struck fire a∣gainst all the World, for founding the new Sect of Monetism, changing the name of A∣theists, into that of Moneymongers, or Mo∣netists. The general Assembly of all Nations for redress of grievan∣ces.The Subjects of Princes, Common-wealths, Kings and Emperors assembled together at Liege, a Neuter Country, to consult about their Affairs, redress their Grievances, vent their Spleen, and breath out their thoughts before stifled under the fear of Sovereign Pow∣er. There were people of all Nations, Con∣ditions and Qualities. The number was so great it looked more like an Army than an Assembly, for which reason they made choice of the open Fields to meet in. On the one hand it was surprising to behold the wonder∣ful variety of Garbs and Countenances; on the other the Ears were Confounded, and Attention it self deceived by the strange diver∣sity of Languages. The voices seemed to rend the Air, and resounded in the same manner, as when in the heat of harvest time, the Fields ring with the indefatigable noise of Grashop∣pers. The most piercing cry was, that raised by the Women tearing their Throats with Actions altogether distracted. All was full of tumultuous Madness, and raging Discord. The Republicans would be govern'd by Prin∣ces,
and the Subjects of Princes were for ere∣cting themselves into Common-wealths. This controversie set a Noble Savoyard and a Com∣moner of Genoua together by the Eares. The Savoyard complained, That his Duke was the perpetual motion, and consumed his Subjects with continual Wars, to hear up his Dominions which are ever ready to sink betwixt France and Spain. That his safety consisted in embroiling the two Kings at the Expence of his Subjects; to the end, that they two being employed against one another, neither of them might swallow him, since both those Princes alternatively, first one and then the other Conquer and Defend him; all which the Subjects pay for, being never allowed any respite to breath. When France attacks, Spain supports him; and when Spain invades, France defends him; and whereas, neither protects him for his sake, but to obstruct the others enlarging his Do∣minion by that accession, and becoming a nearer and more formidable Neighbour, the Defence is often as fatal, if not more to the Subjects, than the Invasion. The Duke retains a secret ambition to be thought the Founder of the Liberty of Itatly; bearing before him, the better to draw to his party the See of Rome. The History of Amadee, surnamed the Pacifick, because some Persons impi∣ously Malicious, have suspected he designs to reduce the Pope to his bare stock of Pardons in indulgen∣ces. The Duke is Disceased of the Distemper of King of Cyprus, is perplexed with the remem∣brance of having been Lord of Geneva, and grows sick with the desire of being Supream among the Italian Princes. All these motives are spurs
to his Ambition, which rather stands in need of a Curb; and for these Reasons, I come to propose, that Savoy and Piemont may be formed into a Common wealth, where Justice and Wisdom Govern, and Liberty Reigns. What Liberty Reigns? Quoth the Genoese, Damming himself to the pit of Hell. Thou art certainly mad, and having never lived in a Common-wealth, dost not know the misery and slavery that attends it. All the Politicks in the World will never make us set our Horses together. I who am a Genoese, Born under that Common-wealth, which by its nearness and the great contentions betwixt us is well acquainted with you, am come to perswade your Duke, with the assistance of us the Commons, to make himself King of Genoua; and if he accepts not of it, I will go make the same offer to the King of Spain; and from him to the King of France, and so from one to another till I find one that will take pitty on us. Tell me, thou un∣grateful wretch, to the goodness of God towards you, in making you the Subjects of a Prince: Have you ever considered how much easier it is to obey one, than many met together in one room, but as divided in Manners, Inclinations, Opinions and designs. Dost not thou observe, Monster, that in Common-wealths, the Government being An∣nual and Successive through several Families, it is consequently under an awe, and Justice is not free∣ly distributed, for fear least those who shall Govern the next twelve Months or three Years should re∣venge themselves on him that governed before? If a Republican Senate consist of many it is all confu∣sion; if of few, it only serves to corrupt the secu∣rity
and excellency of Unity. Nor is this remedied by the Duke, who either has no absolute Power, or lasts but for a time appointed. If the Govern∣ment be equally divided betwixt the Nobility and Commons, they make up an Assembly of Dogs and Cats; For the one part proposes Snaping and Bark∣ing, and the other answers, Scratching and Claw∣ing. If they be Rich and Poor, the Rich contemn the Poor, and the Poor envy the Rich. Consider now what will be the issue of Envy and Contempt. If the Power rest in the Commons, neither will the Nobles be able to endure them, nor they bear not being such. Now if only the Nobility rules, I can compare the Subjects to nothing but the Damned in Hell, and such are we the Commons of Genoa: Nay, could I say worse of our condi∣tion, I should think this too little. Genoa has as many Common-wealths as Nobles, and as many Slaves as Commons; and all these Common-wealths meet in one Pallace, only to reckon up our stock, that they may squeeze us either by enhancing or abasing the value of money, and as if they were informers against our estates, their continual study is to depress us into Poverty. They make use of us like Sponges, sending us abroad into the World, that plunging in Trade, we may suck Riches, and when they perceive us swollen with cash, they squeeze us out for their own use. Tell me then, thou Cursed abominable Savoyard, what it is you aim at by your Treachery, what can be your infernal design? Do not you perceive that the No∣bility and Commonalty transmit their Power to Kings and Princes, in whom being removed from the Prince of the former, and lowness of the latter
it composes a supream head, authorized by a Peaceful and disinteressed Majesty, over which the Nobility dares not insult, and under which the Commonalty does not groan. They had fal∣len soul of one another, had not they been prevented by the muttering of a drove of Le∣gislators, driven by a Rabble of Women, who with open mouths confounded them, Shreik∣ing, and threatned to fall on with their Teeth. One of them of such Transcendent beauty that it was increased by the hideousness of pas∣sion, which is an Affection that adds Deformi∣ty even to the fierceness of Lions, delivered her self in these words. Tyrants, for what reason have you alone made Laws against Women without their consent, according to your own fan∣cies, whereas they are an equal part of the two wherein Human Government consists. You ex∣clude us the Schools meerly through Envy, because we shall exceed you; and deny us the use of Arms for fear you should be Conquer'd by our Anger, as you are already by our Smiles. You have constitu∣ted our selves the Supream Judges of Peace and War, and we suffer under your extravagancies. Adultery in us is a crime punishable with Death, and among you it is a meer Jest. You will have us be good, that you may be wicked, and require us Chast, that you may be Lewd. We have not a sense but what you keep under hatches; you tye up our Feet, and Hoodwink our Eyes. If we look, you say we are impudent; if others look on us we are dangerous. And thus under colour of Modesty you Condemn us to forfeit our Reason and Senses. It is your Jealousie, you Scoundrels, not
our own weakness, that often perswades us to act that against you, for which you are most watchful over us. More are made wicked by you, than would be so of themselves. If you senseless Ras∣cals make your selves the forbidden fruit to us, it follows of necessity, we shall all become so many Eves against you. Very many are good when they are put into your hands, and you force them to be wicked; and you receive none so wicked, but most of you oblige them to be worse. All your Gravity consists in the wild hairiness of your Faces; and he who thinks his Beard will make the bigest brush, thinks himself the ablest Man; as if the strength of the Brain lay in long Bristles, which rather look like a Tail than a Head. This is the day these grievances must be redressed, either by allowing us a share in Learning and Government, or by giving us a hearing, and doing us right a∣gainst the Laws Established; Enacting some more favourable for us, and repealing others that are prejudicial to us. A Doctor whose beard hung in daglocks down to his Heels, seeing the Women in a croud and bent upon mischief, relying on his Eloquence, attempted to appease them with these Words, It is not without much dread I undertake to oppose your sentiments, consi∣dering Reason it self is oft overcome by Beauty, and Rhetorick is of no force compared with your Charmes. However, tell me, what law can you be entrusted with, since the first Woman proved her self such, by breaking the Law of God. With what safety can weapons be put into your Hands, since with an Apple, you struck to the ground all the generation of Adam, not so much as those
that were hid in the distance of futurity escaping? You say all Laws are against you, this were truth, had you said, you were against all Laws. What Power is there to compare to yours, for tho you do not judge according to the Laws studying them, you judge the Laws by means of the Judges cor∣rupting them. If we make Laws, it is you that break them. If Judges govern the World, and Women the Judges; it is the Women that govern the World, and debauch them that govern it; for the Women they love are more prevalent with many than the Laws they read. What the Devil said to the Woman took place with Adam, of that God said to him. The influence of the De∣vil is great over Human Hearts, if he speaks through the Mouth of one of you. Woman is a Rarity that ought to be feared and loved, and it is very hard to fear and love the same thing. He who loves only her, hates himself; and he who hates only her, hates Nature. What Law is there which your Tears will not blot out, and what Equity is of force against your Smiles? If we have Em∣ployments and Preferments, it is you that spend the Profits in your Dresses. You have but one Pre∣cedent to quote, which is your Beauty; When did you ever urge it that it did not take place? Or, Whoever saw it that did not submit? If we suffer our selves to be bribed, it is that we may bribe you. If we strain the Laws, and incline Justice, it is for the most part because we advise with your Charms; you run away with the Prize of the Villanies you command us to act, and we are left with the Scandal of Corrupt Judges. You envy us our Military Employments, whereas you are be∣holding
to War for the happiness of being left Wi∣dows, and we for being buried in Oblivion a∣mong the Dead. You complain that Adultery is a Capital Crime in you, and not in us. Why you Charming White Devils, if one slip of yours Dis∣honours Parents and Children, and stains a whole Generation, how can you fancy Death too servere a Punishment? whereas the Honour of many inno∣cent Persons is infinitely valuable above the Life of a Criminal. But let us judge by your Works how you value the Penalty. You cannot count the Adul∣teries you are guilty of, because they are innumer∣able, and among us they are so rare we have no∣thing to count. Death is a Punishment that de∣ters others from falling into the same Crime, but where does this appear by you? To complain of our guarding you, is to complain that we value you, for no Man takes pains to secure what he despises. By what I have said it appears you are absolute Ladies of all things, all things are subject to you; you enjoy Peace, and are the occasion of War. If you would aks that which many of you want, ask for Moderation and Brains. Scarce was the Word Brains out of his Lips, when all the Women together discharged their Fu∣ry upon the Wretched Doctor in the Storm of Blows, Scatches, and Pinches, and so out∣rageously did they pull his Beard and Hair, that they left him as smooth as if he had been new Shaved, and looked more like an old Woman, than the Reverend Interpreter of the Law. They ahd quite stifled him, but that a multitude of People came in hearing he Noise and Outcries. Among them a
French Monsieur, and an Italian Monseignor, had already made known to one another their Displeasure by some good Bangs, and saluted their Countenances with Cuffs, followed by Kicks and such like Familiarities. The French∣man fretted with Rage, and the Italian foamed with Anger. Italians and Frenchmen flocked to them on all hands, the Germans interposed, and having with much difficulty appeased them, asked the caused of their Strife. The Frenchman gathering up with both Hands his Breeches, which in the Scruffle were fallen over his Legs, answered: All Nations are met here this day, to redress their Grievances, and I among the rest was discoursing with others of my Coun∣trymen concerning the miserable condition France is in at present, and how the French are opprest under the Tyranny of Cardinal Richlieu. I was laying open with what art he pretends the Kings Service, at the same time he degrades him. How he covers the Fox under the Purple Robe. How by Embroiling all Christendom, he diverts all from looking into his Practices. How his Subtlety makes a Property of his Princes Favour. And how he had put the Power of Sea and Land, Govern∣ments, Preferments, Armies and Fleets, into the hands of his Kindred and Confederates, defaming the Nobility, and raising the Unworthy. I was putting my Countrymen in mind how the Mareschal D'Ancre was hacked and hewed in pieces, and called to their remembrance Monsieur de Luisnes, and how yet our King cannot rid himself of Prime Ministers, shewing how this last was the only Friend to the other two, whose Reputation he established
by blackning his own. I was discovering to them, how of late years, Traitors have hit upon the most pernicious Art that ever Hell invented, for per∣ceiving that to usurp Kingdoms is become Treason, and that he who attempts it is punished as a Trai∣tor, the better of secure themselves in their wicked Practices, they usurp the Kings, calling them∣selves Favourites, and thus instead of being pu∣nished as Traitors, they are adored as Kings of Kings. I was proposing, do now propose, and will again propose in the general meeting, that for the perpetuating the Succeession, establishing of Kingdoms, and extirpating this Sect of Traitors, an inviolable and indispensible Law should be en∣acted, ordaining, That whatsoever King of France shall subject himself to a Favourite, he and his Heirs shall Ipso facto, forfeit their Title to the Crown, and their Subjects be absolved from their Oath of Allegiance, for the Salique Law, which excludes Femanes, does not prevent so ma∣nifest a danger as this that cuts off Favourites. I added, that at the same time it should be or∣dained, That whatsoever Subject under the Title presumed to usurp his King, should suffer an in∣famous Death, and forfeit all the Estate and Honours be stood possessed of, his Name for ever remaining scandalous and execrable. Now that distracted Bergamasco never considering what was said by me, who never so much as once thought of the Nepotes of Rome, called me He∣retick, saying, that in detesting Favourites I de∣tested the Nepotes, for that Favourite and Ne∣pos re two Names, yet but one and the same thing; and tho I had not spoke a Word tending
to that mad Notion, he attacked me as you all beheld. The Germans with the rest of the Spectators were surprized and amazed. With much difficulty the directed each to his Post, and dispose the Multitude into a silent Auditory to hear the Propositions which were to be made in the Name of them all by a ruddy Lawer who had set them all a madding, and put into their Heads such wild and extravagant Demands. Two Trum∣pets gave the signal for silence, when he standing upon an eminent place in the midst of the Multi∣tude, which swarmed about, delivered himself in this manner. The thing we all aim at is the general Liberty of all, to be purchased by contriving how we may be subject to Justice not to Violence; That Reason may govern us, and not the absolute Power of the Will; That we may belong to those who Inherit, not to them that Ravish us; That we may be the Care of Princes, not their Merchan∣dize; and in Commonwealths, Companions not Slaves, Limbs not Lumber, Bodies and not Shadows. That the Rich Man hinder not the Poor from growing Rich, nor the Poor grow Rich by plundering the Wealthy. That the Nobleman despise not the Commo∣ner, nor the Commoner hate the Nobleman. And that the whole Care of the Government be employed in encouraging the Poor to grow Rich, and Honouring the Vertuous, and in preventing the contrary. Care must be taken that no one Man become greater and more powerful than all the rest, for he who excels all others destroys equality, and they that
suffer him to exceed encourage him to con∣spire. Equality is the Harmony in which con∣sists the Musick of the Commonwealths Peace, for when disturbed by any Excess it becomes Discord, and that before was Con∣sort becomes Noise. Commonwealths are to be so united with Kings, as the Earth (which represents the former) is with the Sea (re∣presenting the latter;) These always em∣brace one another, yet so as the Earth al∣ways defends it self against the encroachment of the Sea by its Banks, the Sea always threatens the Earth, wears and endeavours to overflow and swallow it up, and the Earth ever fixed and unmoved opposes the perpe∣tual motion and inconstancy of the Sea. The Sea swells with every Wind, every Blast makes the Earth fruitful. The Sea grows rich with what the Earth commits to it, and the Earth with Hooks and Nets drains and depopulates the Sea. Even as all the Security and Shelter against the Sea is in the Land, which fur∣nishes Harbours, so Commonwealths are a Refuge against the Revolutions and Storms of Kingdoms. Commonwealths ought al∣ways to make War with their Heads, sel∣dom with their Hands, they must have Ar∣mies and Fleets ready in the greatness of their Stock, which is the Celerity that lays hold of all Opportunities. They are to make War upon Kings by setting them one against another, for Monarchs, tho they be Fathers, Sons, Brothers, and Relations, are like Steel and the File, which tho not only near Allied,
but the same Substance and Mettal, yet the File always cuts and wears away the Iron. Commonwealths are to assist rash Princes so far as may serve to overthrow them, and the more cautious far enough to make them rash. It is their best Policy to Honour Trade, be∣cause it enriches and carries Men throughout the World, gaining them Practical Experience, by which they discover the Ports, Customs, Government, Strength and Designs of their Neighbours. The Study of Politick and Ma∣thematicks ought to be encouraged as advan∣tageous to the Publick, and nothing ought to be so much contemned as Idleness, tho un∣der never so specious a Title, or Riches de∣voted to Luxury. All Publick Sports shall consist of the Exercise of Fire-armes, and handling of other Weapons, as is used in Battle, that they may be at once Useful and Diverting; at the same time Sports and Exer∣cises, and then will it be decent to frequent the Theaters, when they are Academies. All Formality of Garb is to be absolutely con∣demned, and all the distinction betwixt the Rich Man and the Poor must be, that the former extend Relief, and the latter receive it; and Virtue and Valour shall make the difference betwixt the Nobleman and Com∣moner, for those Virtues were the foundation of all ancient Nobility. I will here drop a few words out of Plato, let him that has need of them gather them up, for I don't know to what purpose I bring them, but some body or other perhaps may know to what purpose he
spoke them in the 3d Dialogue, De repub. vel de Justo. They are these. Igitur rempublicam administrantibus praecipue, si quibus aliis mentiri licet, vel hostium, vel civium causa in communem civitatis utilitatem, reliquis autem a mendacio ab∣stinendum est. If it be lawful to any to Lye, it is chiefly allowable to them who govern the Commonwealth, either on account of the Enemies, or Citizens for the common advan∣tage of the City, all others are to abstain from Lying. I cannot but reflect, that where∣as the Catholick Church condemns this Doctrine of Plato's Commonwealth, yet there are many that value themselves upon being his Commonwealth. Let us now come to what is proposed by the Subjects of Kings. These complain, that they are all become E∣lective, because those who are and continue Hereditary, elect Favourites, who become Kings by their Election. This is that enrages them, because the French tell us that Princes, who for the better government of their King∣doms wholly give themselves up to their Fa∣vourites, are like Galley Slaves who travel by force, turning their Backs to the Port they go to; and that the Favourites are like Juglers, who the more they deceive the more they entrtain, and the better they conceal their slight from the Eyes, and baffle the Senses and Understanding, the more they are va∣lued and praised by him that pays for their Tricks to divert himself. Their chief Art consists in making him believe that is full which is empty, that there is something where
there is nothing, that those are Wounds in others which are but Bruises in his Armour, and that they throw away what they hide with their Hand. They say they give him Money, and when he looks upon it he finds Dirt or Rubbish. These Companions are vile, but these Men make use of them for want of better, and so they affirm those Kings are equally to blame who will not be what the great God made them, and those who would be what he made them not. They presume to say, that an absolute Favourite brings upon Kings the same that Death does upon Man, (i. e.) Novam formam cadaveris. A new Form of a Carcass, to which follows Worms and Corruption, according to the Opinion of Aristotle, in his Prince. Fit re∣solutio usque ad materiam primam, that is, there remains nothing of what was, but the bare resemblance. So much for this Point. Next let us go upon the Complaints against Ty∣rants, and the reason there is for them. For my own part I know not who I speak of, or who I speak not of, whoever understands me may explain me. Aristole says, He is a Ty∣rant who has more regard to his private In∣terest than to the Publick. Whosoever can tell Tale or Tidings of any who are not com∣prehended under this definition, may give an account of them, and they shall be well re∣warded. They complain more grievously against Tyrants who receive benefits of them, than they that are opprest by them; for the Benefits of Tyrants make Men Criminals and
Accomplices, and their Severity proves them Virtuous and Deserving. They are of such a Nature, that Innocence in their Dominions must he miserable that it may be happy. A Tyrant in respect of his Covetousness and Avarice is a Wild Beast, in respect of his Pride a Devil, and in respect of his Riotous∣ness and Luxury all manner of Wild Beasts and Devils. No body conspires against a Tyrant sooner than himself; whence it fol∣lows, 'tis easier to kill a Tyrant than to en∣dure him. The favour of a Tyrant is ever fatal, the greatest good he does him he fa∣vours most, is to delay doing him harm. Po∣lyphemus in Homer is the Emblem of Tyrants. He favoured Ulysses, discoursing with him, and enquiring into his Merits, he heard his Intreaties, saw his Distress, and all the Kind∣ness he offered him was, that after eating all his Companions he would devour him last. Let no Man hope more favour from a Ty∣rant that devours those under his power, than to be the last eaten; and it is to be observed, that tho the Tyrant grants it as a favour, he that is to be eaten takes the delay for an addi∣tion of Cruelty. He that is to devour you after all the rest, begins to eat you in all those he eats before you. The longer he delays feeding on you, the longer you have to la∣ment you shall become his Food. Ulysses was preserved by the Gyant as Sustenance, not as a Guest. To keep him in his Den in order to transfer him to his Stomach, was more like burying him alive than entertaining him.
Ulysses put him to sleep with excess of Wine. The Bane of Tyrants is sleep. You that are subject to them cast them into a sleep, harden your Spikes at the Fire, put out their Eyes, for that done it was no body did what every one desired should be done. The Tyrant Polyphemus cryed, Nobody had blinded him, because Ulysses with wonderful sagacity had told him his Name was Nobody. He named him with desire of revenge, and defended him by the double meaning of the Word. Tyrants themselves excuse those that kill them, or put out their Eyes. Ulysses made his escape disguised with a Sheeps Skin among the Sheep he kept. That which a Tyrant most care∣fully preserves, preserves his destroyer against him. Having premised thus much, it remains to tell you, that we Subjects are met here this day to consult how we may defend our selves against the Arbitrary Power of those who either mediate, or immediately govern king∣doms and Commonwealths▪ The chief Heads I have to offer to this purpose are these. That all Councellors be fixed for ever in their Posts, without hoping to rise a step higher, because there is no room for Application or Justice, where a Man has one Charge and aims at another, and the Ambition of ascend∣ing to another more eminent Employment makes him look upon himself as a Passenger not a Resident, so that his Charge serves only to purchase, that he aspires to, and being thus, distracted he attends neither, not that he has, because he designs to leave it, nor that
he desires because as yet he has it not. Every Man is useful in that Post where he has gained Experience; and troublesome where he learns the first Rudiments, because they remove from Business they were versed in, to that they do not understand. What Honours are confer∣red on them must still be such as are proper to their Profession, not mixing Civil and Military, lest the Sword and the Gown ren∣der the Habit disagreeable, for the Gown is cumbersom to the Sword, and the Sword dis∣dains to be hid under the Gown. The next thing is, that Rewards be indispensable, that is, not only that they be not bestowed on the unworthy, but that they be not permitted to pretend to them, for if the Reward of Vir∣tue be exhausted on Vice, the Prince or Com∣monwealth will be robbed of their greatest Treasure, and the Metal of which the Re∣compence consists will become base and con∣temptible. Neither the Deserving nor Unde∣serving must expect it, the former because it must be immediately given him, the latter because he must never have it. Gold and Diamonds were better employed in making Fetters to secure Criminals, than in Military and Honourable Ensigns bestowed on Vaga∣bonds and Vicious Persons. This Doctrine was well received among the Romans, who with a Branch of Lawrel or Oak rewarded more Wounds, and Victories over Cities, Provinces and Kingdoms, than it bore Leaves. Let only the Brave and Experienced be ad∣mitted to Counsels of State and War; let the
Blood they have spilt and their Qualifications, not the Pride of long Genealogies, be their Recommendation. The Brave and Fortunate are to be preferred to Military Employments. To be Fortunate as well as Valiant is a great addition. Lucan gives this advice, —Fatis accede, Deisque, Et cole felices, miseros fuge. I have always read these Words with de∣light, and this admirable Poet (let who will deny it) with attention as preferable to all but Homer for Politicks and Military Sence. The Courts of Justice are to be filled with Learned and Disinterested Persons. He who is not Covetous, is subservient to no Vice, because Vices induce the Interest for which they are sold. Let them know the Laws, but not more than the Laws. Let them cause them to be obeyed, not make them obedient to their Wills. This is the very Touchstone of Judgment. I have said, you may now say what occurs, and propose the most conve∣nient and practicable Redress against your Grievances. He ceased, and the Auditors be∣ing a multitude of several Nations and Lan∣guages, there ensued such a confused buzzing of unintelligible Jargons, that it sounded as if the whole Clack of the Tower of Babel had been turned loose in that place. They understood not themselves, nor one another. All was filled with Contention and Discord, and by their Looks and Actions they appeared
like an Assembly of People Distracted, or Possest. Then the Congregation of Shep∣herds, to whom the Sheepskins bound about with Slings are rather a reproach than a de∣fence against the Weather, said. They must be heard immediately before any others, be∣cause their Sheep had rebelled, saying, that they had kept them from the Wolves who eat them by one at a time, to the end they them∣selves might shear, flea, kill, and sell them all at at once. And that since the Wolves at most devoured, one, two, ten, or twenty, their de∣sign was, that the Wolves should guard them against the Shepherds, not the Shepherds against the Wolves. That they looked upon the Hunger of their Enemies as less prejudi∣cial to them, than the Avarice of their Guar∣dians, and had brought the Shepherds Dogs as Evidence against them. There was not one Soul but said, We guess what they would be at, the Sheep are no Fools if they bring this to pass. At this stand they were when the Hour af∣fected them, and being all enraged, some cryed, We are for the Wolves; Others, They are all Wolves; Others, It is all the same thing; Others, They are all bad; and many others contradicted them. The Lawyers perceiving them ready to fall to Loggerheads, in order to appease them said. It was a Case that re∣quired mature Deliberation, therefore advised to defer it till the next day, and to have recourse to the Churches to implore a Blessing on their Debates. The Frenchmen hearing that Word, cryed out, If there must be recourse to the Churches we are
undone, and we fear the same should befall us as did the Owl when she was sick. She advising about her Distemper with the Fox, whom she judged the most skilful among the Beasts, and also with the Rook whom she took for a Physician because she often saw him upon Carrion Mules, they told her there was no remedy for her but to repair to the Temples, The Owl hearing their Opinion an∣swered, Then my Case is desperate if the remedy is only to be found in those Holy Places, for I have left them all in the dark, sucking the Oyl out of the Lamps, and there is not an Idol that I have not be∣wrayed. The Italian hearing this Discourse, with all his might cryed out. The Comparison is allowed you, and we make bold to put you and all such as feed upon the Church in mind of what Homer relates of the Mice, when they fought with the Frogs, for then they having recourse to the Gods for their assistance, all the Deities excused themselves, some saying they had gnawed their Hands, others their Feet, others their Garments, others their Crowns, and others the Tips of their Noses, so that there was none but missed some part of his Image, and bore the marks of their Teeth. Apply this Fable you Calvinist, Lutheran, and Huguenot Mice, and then consider who is there in Heaven to relieve you. Good God, what a hideous Tumult and Hurlibury the Monsieurs raised against the poor Italian, the Confusion of Hell is nothing compared to it. The whole Multitude ran great danger in endea∣vouring to pacifie them. At length with held but no silence, they all parted, all complain∣ing of what they endured, and every one
raving, that he might change his Condition with another. The Hour expires, Jove stops further Proceed∣ings.As these things were in agitation upon Earth, and the Gods attentively looking on, the Sun said. The Hour is now at the last gasp, and the Shade of the Gnomon will in a trice touch the Number Five. Great Father of all, do thou de∣termine whether Fortune shall proceed before the Hour expire, or else wheel and rowl back as she used to do. Jove answered, I have observed, that during this Hour which gave to every Man what he deserved, those who because they were poor and despicable, were also humble, are become proud and intolerable; and those who being rich and respected were consequently vicious, perverse, arrogant, and wicked, seeing themselves poor and abject, are become penitent, bashful, and pious, so that the consequence is, that those who were good Men are become Knaves, and the Knaves good Men. This little time may suffice to satisfie the Complaints of Mortals, who seldom know what they ask of us, for such is their frailty, that he who does ill when he can, forbears when he can do it no longer, and this is not repentance, but a forced refraining from wickedness. Oppression and Misery curb, but do not correct them. Honour and Prosperity make them act, that which if they had sooner attained them they would always have acted. Let Fortune direct her Wheel and Globe in their former course, and cause Merits in the Wise, and Punishment to the Senseless, wherein our infallible Providence and Divine Presence shall always be assisting to her. Let all Men receive what she distributes, that is, either Frowns or
Smiles, since neither are bad in themselves, for patiently enduring the former, and magnani∣mously contemning the latter, they both become e∣qually advantageous. And let him that receives and makes his misfortune of what he takes to him∣self, complain of himself, and not of Fortune, who gives to all indifferently and without favour or affection. We permit Fortune to complain a∣gainst Men, who making a wrong use of their Prosperity or Adversity, defame and curse her. Fortune restores her Wheel to its former mo∣tion.At this time it struck Five, And the Hour of all Men was at an end. Then Fortune well pleased with what Jove had said, chang∣ing Hands, began again to ravel up the Cares of the World, and unwind what was wound backwards, which done fixing her Globe on the Regions of the Air, she slid down as if it had been upon Ice, till she found her self upon Earth. The Gods take leave, and break up the Assem∣bly.Vulcan, that Blacksmith God who keeps time with his Hammer, cryed, It is hungry Weather, and I being in haste to obey, left two Ropes of Garlick a roasting at my Forge, to break my fast with the Cyclops. All-ruling Jove ordered Meat to be brought, and immediate∣ly there appeared Iris (Chambermaid to Ju∣no) with Nectar, and Ganimede with a Plat∣ter of Ambrosia. Juno, who spyed him by her Husbands side, and had more mind to suck his Blood than to swill the Heavenly Liquor, spitting Fire, and hissing like an Ad∣der when his Tail had been trod, said, Either this Bardash or I must reign in Olympus, or else I will sue for a Divorce in Hymen's Court.
Had not the Eagle the Rogue bestrided slunk away with him, she had made Hawks Meat of him with her Nails. Jove began to blow his Thunderbolt, and she said, I will snatch it from you, to destroy that Sodomite Page. Mi∣nerva, the Product of Jupiters Noddle, who, had he been a Blockhead, could ne're have been born, with fair Words soothed Juno en∣raged with the sight of her Husbands Vile Cup bearer. But Venus in a sume heightned her Jealousie, scolding like a Butter-whore, and rated Jove as if he had been a Chimney-sweeper. Then Mercury letting loose his Clack, said, All would do well, and there∣fore desired them not to disturb the Heavenly Banquet. Mars seeing the Ambrosia handed about in China Dishes, like a roaring Bully Deity cried out; Dam your Coffee-Dishes, let the Moon and other Petty Goddesses drink out of them. Then mixing Bacchus and Neptune, he swallowed down both the Gods at two or three pulls, and laying hold of Pan he sliced him out, and cutting up his Flocks of Sheep, de∣voured them by Wholesale. Saturn stayed his Stomach with half a dozen Children. Mercury, like a true Spunger, stuck close to Venus, who was cramming her Chops with Biscuits and Sugar Plums. Pluto drew out of his Snapsack some Griskins, Proserpine had pro∣vided for his Journey; Vulcan, who stood gaping, perceiving it, came limping towards him, and courteously intruding himself with much Ceremony, began to lay on and swal∣low. The Sun, who is the Father of Jollity,
pulling out his Lute, sung a Hymn in praise of Jupiter, running division without end. Venus and Mars being offended at the gravity of the Tune, and seriousness of the Words, he to the harmony of a pair of Tongs roared out a Bawdy Song, and she rattling a pair of overgrown Castinets, danced a Jig as if she would have skipp'd over the Heavens, and shaken her self to Attoms, tickling with her wanton motions the Hearts of all the Gods. Her Dance set them all into such an itching, that they could not hold their Hands or Feet still. Jove, whose Mouth watered at the lend Motions of the Goddess, said; This is a Farewell to Ganimede, and no Quarrel. He gave them Leave, and they being all full and satisfied, slunk away, crying, The Devil take the hindmost; and the lot fell to the Eagle-striding Cup-bearer. FINIS.
