R2191 11893716 50505
A SPEECH CONCERNING A WEST INDIE Association, at a Committee of the whole house in the Parliament, 21. IACOBI. By Sir Benjamin Rudyerd. Printed in the yeare 1641.
A SPEECH CONCERNING a WEST INDIE Association, at a Committee of the whole House of Parliament. Sir Dudley Digs, I Doe professe, that as my Affection, my Reason, and my Iudgement, goe strong∣ly with the scope and drift of this Proposition; so shall a good part of my poore fortune, when it comes to execution. For to my understanding, there was never propounded in Parliament, a de∣signe more proper for this kingdome, nor of more pregnant advantage to it,
whether we consider the nature of our situation, or the quality of our Enemies Forces. As wee are an Iland, it concernes our very being to have store of ships to de∣fend us, and also our well-being by their Trade to enrich us. This association for the West Indies, when it shall bee regulated and establi∣shed by act of Parliament, and thereby secured from the violence and injury of any intruding hand, it will certainely give many men encouragement & con∣fidence, voluntarily to bring in large and liberall contributions, towards so noble, so profitable an Enterprise. So that in short time, we shall see many new ships built, many brave men employed, and enabled for the service of their country, none of this money shall be carried out of the kingdome, but laid out for ship∣ping, which is the defence of it, and be∣stowed upon our owne men, who must be fed and maintained, though they stay
at home. For this, wee shall reape the fruit of whatsoever benefit Plantation, Trafficke, or Purchase can procure us, be∣sides honour and security. Now, let us a little consider the Ene∣my wee are to encounter, the King of Spaine. They are not his great territories which make him so powerfull, and so troublesome to all Christendome. For it is very well knowne, that Spaine it selfe is but weake in men, and barren of na∣turall Commodities. As for his other Territories, they lye divided and asunder, which is a weaknesse in its selfe; besides, they are held by force, and maintained at an extraordinary charge. Insomuch, as although he be a great King, yet is he like that great Gyant, who was said to have 100 hands, but he had 50 bellies to feed, so that atably, hee had no more hands then another man. No Sir, they are his Mines in the West Indies, which minister fuell to feed his vast ambitious desire of universall Mo∣narchy:
It is the money he hath from thence, which makes him able to levy, and pay souldiers in all places; and to keepe an army continually on foot, ready to in∣vade and endanger his Neighbours. So that we have no other way, but to endeavour to cut him up at root, and seeke to impeach, or to supplant him in the West Indies. By part of which course, that famous Queene of most glorious memory, had heretofore almost brought him on his knees. And this our underta∣king (if it please God to blesse it) must needs effect it sooner and quicker: the whole body of the Kingdome being united and concuring in a perpetuall supply to this action, so that he wil have no free time given him to rest. Moreover, this will be a meanes not only to save, but to fill His Majesties Coffers, enabling the people to give him liberally, and often; the Kings ships will have little to doe, but to guard the coasts, for the Sea-warre will chiefly bee made
at the charge of the subject. Thus, (Sir Dudley Digs) I doubt not but that in short time, both King and people shall be safe at home, and feared abroad. To conclude, I shall be very glad to heare any man make objections against this Designe, so that hee doe it with an intention to refine and perfect the worke; but if any shall speake against it with a mind to hinder and destroy it, I must entreat him to pardon me, if I doe scarce thinke him to bee a good English∣man. FINIS.
