s1001c 99830608 35061
THE SCOTS COMMISSIONERS, Their desires concerning uni∣tie in Religion, and uniformitie of Church-government, as a speciall meanes for conserving of Peace, in his Majesties Dominions. Presented to the Kings Majestie, and both Houses of Parliament in England. MARCH. 1641. EDINBVRGH, Printed by James Bryson, 1641.
THE SCOTS COMMISSIONERS, their desires concerning unitie in Religion, and uniformitie of Church-government, &c. AS wee shall not make any pro∣position about the last Article, of establishing a firme and hap∣pie peace, but that which wee conceive to bee both expedient and just; So will your Lo. (we doubt not) in your wisedomes consider; that since that which is sought, is not a cessation of Armes for a time, but peace for ever, and not peace onely, but a perfect amitie, and a more neare union then before, which is of greater consequence, then all the former Articles. It is no marvell that a compo∣sition so excellent, and so powerfull, to preserve the whole Yland in health against all inward distempers, and in strength against all contagion and wounds from without, require ma∣nie ingredients, of which, if any one be wanting, wee may on both sides please our selves for the present, with the sweet
name of Peace, and yet for no long time enjoy Peace it selfe, which hath in it not onely sweetnesse and pleasure, but also much more profit and true honour, then all the triumphes on earth. As wee accompt it no lesse then usurpation and presump∣tion for one Kingdome or Church, were it never so mightie and glorious, to give lawes and rules of reformation to ano∣ther free and independent Church and Kingdome, were it never so meane: civill libertie and conscience beeing so ten∣der and delicat, that they cannot endure to bee touched, but by such as they are wedded unto, and have lawfull authoritie over them, so have wee not beene so forgetfull of our selves who are the lesser, and of England who is the greater King∣dome as to suffer any such arrogant and presumptuous thoughts, to enter into our mindes. Our wayes also are wit∣nesses of the contrare against the malicious, who doe not ex∣presse what we are, or have beene, but doe still devise what may bee fewell for a common combustion; Yet Charitie is no presumption, and the common duety of Charitie bindeth all Christians, at all times, both to pray, and professe thei desire: That all others were not onely almost, but altogethe such as themselves, except their afflictions and distresses And beside common Charitie, wee are bound as Commissio∣ners, in a speciall duetie to propone the best and readie meanes for setling of a firme Peace, as wee love not to be cu∣rious in any other Common-wealth, nor to play the Bisho in another mans Diocese: So may wee not bee carelesse an negligent in that which concerneth both Nations. Wee doe all know and professe that Religion is not onl the meane to serve God, and to save our owne soules, b
that it is also the base & foundation of Kingdomes, & Estats and the strongest band to tye the Subjects to their Prince in true loyaltie, and to knit the hearts of one to another in true unitie: Nothing so powerfull to divide the hearts of people as division in Religion, nothing so strong to unite them as unitie in Religion: And the greater zeale in different Religions, the greater division. But the more zeale in one Religion, the more firme union. In the paradise of nature the diversitie of flowers, and herbes is pleasant and usefull, but in the paradise of the Church, different and contrarie Religions are unpleasant and hurtfull: It is therefore to bee wished, that there were one confession of Faith, one forme of Catechisme, one directory for all the parts of the publick worship of God, as Prayer, Preaching, administration of Sacraments, &c. And one forme of Church-government in all the Churches of his Majesties dominions. This would. 1. Be acceptable to God Almightie, who delighteth to see his people walking in truth and unitie, and who would looke upon this Yland with the greater complacencie that wee were all of one heart and one soule in matters of Reli∣gion. 2. This unitie in Religion will preserve our Peace, and prevent many divisions and troubles. Of old (as Beda re∣cordeth) the difference about the time of observing Easter, although no great matter in Religion, and although in divers independent Kingdomes, had troubled their peace, if the wiser sort had not brought them to one uniformitie, where∣in they were so zealous, that they would not suffer so much as one small Yland, which differed from the rest to bee un∣conforme.
3. His Majestie and his Successours in their government shall be eased of much more trouble which ariseth from dif∣ferences of Religion, and hath beene very grievous unto Kings and Emperours; As Eusebius witnesseth in his third booke chap. 12. of the life of Constantine. Sedition begotten in the Church of God (saith Constantine) seeme to mee to con∣taine in it selfe more trouble, and bitternesse, then warre or battell. 4. Since by divine providence, his Majestie is King of di∣vers Kingdomes: It shall be much content both to himselfe, to his Nobles and Court, and to all his people: When his Majestie shall in person visite any of his Kingdomes, that King, Court, and people, may without all scruple of con∣science, bee partakers of one and the same forme of divine worship, and his Majestie with the Court may come to the publick Assemblie of the people, and serve God with them according to the practise of the good Kings of Iudah: As on the other part; difference in formes of divine worship divi∣deth betweene the King and the people. 5. This shall bee a great comfort to all his Majesties Sub∣jects, when they travell abroad from their owne Countrey, to any other place in his Majesties dominions, whither for commerce, or whatsoever negotiation and effaires: That they may with confidence resort to the publicke worship, as if they were at home, and in their owne paroch Church, and shall satisfie many doubts, and remove many excepti∣ons, jealousies, and scandals, which arise upon resorting to different formes of worship. 6. The names of Haeresies, and Sects, Puritanes, Conformists, Separatists, which rent the bowels both of
Church and Kingdome, are a matter of much stumbling to the people, and diminish the glorie of his Majesties reigne, shall no more be heard, but as the Lord is one, his Name shall bee one, and the name of the people one, in all his Majesties dominions. 7. Papists and Recusants shall dispaire of successe, to have their Religion set up againe, and shall either conforme themselves, or get themselves hence, and irreligious men shall have a great scandall removed out of their way, which shall bee a meane of great saftie and securitie, and of many blessings both to King and people: I am perswaded (saith Constantine) as Eusebius recordeth in his life lib. 2. cap. 63. Were I able as it is in my desires, to bind all the true worshippers of God, by the common bond of concord, all the Subjects of my Empire would quickly turne themselves to their pious ordinances. 8. This unitie of Religion shall make Ministers to build the Church with both their hands, whiles now the one hand is holden out in opposition against the other par∣tie, and shall turne the many and unpleasant labours of writ∣ting and reading of unprofitable controversies into treatises of mortification, and studies of devotion, and practicall di∣vinitie. This unitie of Religion is a thing so desireable, that all found Divines and Politicians are for it, where it may bee easily obtained and brought about, and as wee conceive so pious and profitable a work, to be worthie the best conside∣rations: So are we earnest in recommending it to your Lo. that it may be brought before his Majestie, and the Patlia∣ment, as that which doth highly concerne his Majesties ho∣nour and the well of all his dominions. And which with∣out
forcing of consciences, seemeth not only to be possible, but an easie work. But because the matter is of great weight and of large extent, Our desire is, that for the present some course may betaken for an uniformitie in government. 1. Because there can be small hope of unitie in Religion (which is the chiefe bond of Peace and humane societie) unlesse there be first one forme of Ecclesiasticall govern∣ment. 2. Because difference in this point hath beene the maine cause of all other differences betweene the two Nations, since the reformation of Religion. 3. Because (although it ought not to be so) we finde it true in experience, that Church-men through their corrup∣tion are more hotte and greater Zelotes about government, then about matters more substantiall, their worldly digni∣ties and wealth being herein concerned: As Erasmus render∣eth this reason of the animosity of the Church of Rome a∣gainst Luther, seeking after Reformation, that hee medleth with the Popes crowne, and the Monkes bellies. 4. It is observed by Politicians, and we have found it in experience, that Church-men doe not onely beare with dif∣ferent Religions, and suffer division both in Church and Po∣licie to rise and grow, but doe also foment and cherish the contrarie factions, that they themselves may grow bigge and swell to a greatnesse, while both sides have their dependance upon them; and hath their thoughts busied about other mat∣ters, then about Church-government, and the ambition, pompe, and other corruptions of Church governours. 5. None of all the reformed Churches, although in Na∣tions farre distant one from another, and under diverse prin∣ces,
and Magistrates are at so great a difference in Church-government, as these two Kingdomes which are in one Yland, and under one Monarch, which made King Iames (of happie memorie) to labour to bring them under one forme of government. But since all the question is, whither of the two Church-governments shall have place in both Nations (for we know no third forme of the government of a nationall Church di∣stant from these) we doe not presume to propone the forme of government of the Church of Scotland, as a paterne of the Church of England, but doe only represent in all modestie these few considerations, according to the trust committed unto us. 1. The government of the Church of Scotland, is the same with the government of all the reformed Churches, and hath beene by them universally received and practised, with the reformation of the doctrine and worship, from which so far as we depart: We disjoyne our selves as farre from them, and welosse so much of our harmonic with them: Whence it is, that from other reformed Churches, it hath beene written to the Church of Scotland, That it was a great gift of God, that they had brought together into Scotland, the puritie of Religion, and Discipline, whereby the doctrine is safely, keeped, praying and beseeching them, so to keepe those two together, as beeing assured, that if the one fall, the other can not long stand. Vpon the other part, the government of the Church of England, was not changed with the doctrine at the time of the reformation: The Pope was rejected, but his Hierarchie was retained, which hath beene a ground of jea∣lousie and suspition to the reformed Churches, of continuall
contention in the Church of England these foure-score years past, since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth her reigne, and of hopes, and expectation to the church of Rome, for saith Coulzen in his politicks, l. 2. c. 18. Were all England brought once to approve of Bishops, it were easie to reduce it to the church of Rome. But what one Prince hath begun, and by reason of the times, or of other hinderances could not pro∣mote or perfect, an other raised up by the mercie of God, may bring to passe, according to the example of good Iosiah, like unto whom there was no King before, which we hearti∣ly wish may bee verified of King Charles. 2. The Church of Scotland hath beene continually and sundrie wayes vexed, and disquieted by the Bishops of Eng∣land. First, by the continuall and restlesse negotiation of the prime Prelates in England, with some of that faction in Scotland, both before the comming of King Iames into Eng∣land (which we are ready to make manifest) and since his comming, till at last a kind of Episcopacie was erected there, by the power of the Prelates of England, against the confes∣sion of Faith, the Covenant, and actes of the nationall as∣semblies of the Church of Scotland. Secondly, the Prelates of England, without the consent or knowledge of the church of Scotland, gave Episcopall consecration, to some corrupt members of the Church of Scotland, and sent them home to consecrat others like unto themselves. And when some great men have beene for their obstinacie in papistrie excom∣municat by the Church of Scotland, they have been absolved from the sentence by the Prelates of England: So that they have usurped the power of that which indeed is the highest point of jurisdiction. Thirdly, they rested not here, but
proceeded to change the forme of divine worship, and for many yeares bred a great disturbance both to Pastours and people, by five Articles of conformitie with the Church of England. Fourthly, having in the former prevailed, and finding their opportunitie, and a rare concurse of many po∣werfull hands, and heads, readie to cooperate, they made strong assaults upon the whole externall worship and do∣ctrine of our Church, by inforcing upon us a popish book of common prayer, for making Scotland first as the weaker, and thereafter England conforme to Rome: And upon the con∣sciences, liberties, and goods of the people, by a booke of canons and constitutions Ecclesiasticall, establishing a tyran∣nicall power in the persons of our Prelats, and abolishing the whole Discipline and government of our Church, without so much as consulting with any Presbyterie, Synod, or As∣sembly in all the land, Fifthly, They procured subsidies to be lifted for warre against us, under the paine of deprivation to all of the Clergie who should refuse. Sixthly, They com∣manded both preaching and imprecations against us, as ene∣mies to God and the King. Seventhly, they have received into the ministerie, and provided place for such of our Mini∣sters, as for their disobedience to the voice of the Assemblie, and other faults and scandals, were deposed in Scotland. And finally they have left nothing undone which might tend to the overthrow of our Church, not onely of late by the oc∣casion of these troubles, whereof they have beene the au∣thors. But of old, from that opposition which is between E∣piscopall government, & government of reformed churches by Assemblies. Vpon the contrare. The Church of Scot∣land hath never molested them, either in the doctrine, wor∣ship,
ceremonies, or discipline of their church, but have lived quietly by them, kept themselves within the lyne, and would have been glad to enjoy their owne liberties in peace, which yet is, and by the helpe of God shall be our constant desire, yet can we not conceal our minds, but in our consciences, & before God, declare not frō any sassinesse, or presumptuous intention to reforme England, but frō our just fears & appre∣hensions, that our reformation that hath cost us so deare; And is all our wealth and glory, shall againe be spoiled, and defaced from England? That whatsoever peace shall bee agreed upon, we cannot see, nor conceive the way how our peace shall bee firme and durable, but our feare is, that all will runne into a confusion againe ere it be long, if Episcopa∣cie shall be retained in England, for the same causes will not faile to produce the same effects: Their opposition against, and hatred of the government of the reformed Churches; Their credit at Court, and nearnesse to the King living in England, the opinion they have of their owne great learning, and of the glory of their prelaticall church, joyned with the small esteem & disdaine of our Christian simplicity, the con∣sanguinitie of their Hierarchie, with the church of Rome, and their feare to fall before us, at last will still be working, espe∣cially now when they are made operative, and shall be set on work at the first advantage, by their vindictive disposition, to be avenged upon us for the present quarrell, which can ne∣ver be changed by any limitations. As on the contrarie, the cause being taken away, the effects will cease, and the peace shall be firme. It would seeme that limitations, cautions, and triennall Parliaments may doe much: But we know that feare of perjury, infamie, excommunication, and the power
of a nationall Assembly, which was in Scotland as terrible to a Bishop, as a Parliament, could not keep our men frō rising to be Prelates, and after they had risen to their greatnesse, their apologie was, Conditiones illa pro tempore magis quo con∣tentiosis rixandi ansa praeriperetur quam animo in perpetuum observandi acceptae. These other cautions or conditions were rather accepted of, for the time, to prevent all occasi∣on of jangling with the contentious, then out of any pur∣pose to observe them forever. Much is spoken and written of the limitation of Bishops; But what good can the limi∣tation doe to the Church? if ordination and Episcopall ju∣risdiction shall depend upon them, and shall not be absolute∣ly into the hands of the Assemblies of the Church? And if it shall not depend upon them, what shall their office be above other Pastours? Or how shall their labours be worthy so large wages? What service can they doe to King, Church, or Estate? Rome and Spain may be glad at the retaining of the name of Bishops, more then the reformed Churches, which expect from us at this time some matter of rejoycing. 3. The reformed Churches doe hold without doubting, their Church officers, Pastors, Doctors, Elders, & Deacons, and their Church government by Assemblies to be jure divi∣no and perpetuall, as is manifest in all their writtings: And on the other part, Episcopacie as it differeth from the office of a Pastor, is almost universally acknowledged, even by the Bishops themselves and their adherents, to be but an humane ordinance, established by law and custome for conveniencie, without warrand of Scripture, which therefore by humane authority may be altered and abolished, upon so great a con∣veniencie, and is the hearty conjunction, withall the refor∣med
Churches, and a durable peace of the two Kingdomes, which have beene formerly divided by this partition wall: Wee therefore desire that Ius divinum & humanum, con∣science and conveniencie, yea, the greater convenience with the lesser, and we may adde a conveniencie with a inconveni∣encle, may bee compared and equally weighed in the bal∣lance, without adding any weight of prejudice. 4. The Church of Scotland warranted by authority, hath abjured Episcopall government, as having no warrand in Scripture; and by solemne oath and covenant before, and now againe of late, hath established the government in the Church by Assemblies: But England neither having abjured the one, nor sworne the other, hath liberty from all bonds of this kinde, to make choyse of that which is most war∣rantable by the word of God. And least it be thought, we have wilfully bund our selves of late by oath, that we be not pressed with a change, We desire it to be considered, that our late oath is nothing, but the renovation of our for∣mer oath and covenant, which did bind our Church before, but was transgrest of many by meanes of the Prelates. 5. If it shall please the Lord, to move the Kings heart to choise this course, hee shall in a better way, then was pro∣jected, accomplish the great and glorious designe, which King Iames had before his eyes, all his time of the unitie of Religion and Church government in all his dominions, his Crownes and Kingdomes shall be free of all assaults and po∣licies of church-men, which whither in the way of Ecclesi∣asticall jurisdiction and Church censure; Or by complying with the Pope, the grearest enemie of Monarchie; Or by bringing of civill government into a confusion; Or by tak∣ing
the fatte of the sacrifice to themselves: When the people are pleased with the government, and when they are displea∣sed by transferring the hatred upon authority, which was never wont to be done by any good States-man; Which all these wayes have proceeded from Bishops, seeking their own greatnesse: Never from Assemblies, which unlesse overruled by Bishops, have beene a strong guard to Monarchie, and Magistracie, both the one and the other being the ordinance of God: The Church shall be peaceably governed by com∣mon consent of Church-men in Assemblies; In which the Kings Majesty hath alwayes that eminency which is due un∣to the supreame Magistrat, and by which all heresies, errors, schismes, before abounding under Episcopall government, shall be suppressed, and the State, and all civil matters in Parliament, Councell, and other inferiour Judicatories, governed by civill men, and not by Church-men, who be∣ing out of their owne element, must needs stirre and make trouble to themselves, and the whole State, as wofull expe∣rience hath taught. The worke shall bee better done, and the meanes which did uphold their unprofitable pompe and greatnesse, may supply the wants of many preaching mem∣bers to be provided to places, and without the smallest losse or damnage to the Subject, may be a great increase of his Majesties revenues, his royall Authority shall be more deep∣ly rooted in the unite hearts, and more strongly guarded by the joint forces of his Subjects, as if they were all of one Kingdome, and his greatnesse shall be enlarged abroad; by becomming the Head of all the Protestants in Europe, to the greater terrour of his enemies, and the forcing of greatnesse to his Posterity and royall Succession. All which we en∣treat,
may bee represented to his Majestie, and the Houses of Parliament, as the expression of our desires, and fears, and as a testimonie of our Faithfulnesse in acquiting our selves in the trust committted unto us: But no wayes for∣getting, our distance, or intending to passe our bounds in prescribing or setting downe rules to their Wisedom and Authoritie, which we doe highly reverence and ho∣nour, and from which onely as the proper fountaine, th Lawes and order of reformation, in this Church and Po∣licie, must proceed, for the nearer union and greater hap∣pinesse of his Majesties Dominions. FINIS.
