S187 99831258 35721
A YOKE For the Roman-Bulls. BEING A POEM written on the Royal Proclamation for Exiling Popish-Priests and Jesuits, &c. To which is added, A TELESCOPE For the New Astrologers: OR, A Looking-glass for the Staring Star-gazers. WHEREIN IS A Reply to the Libellious and Seditious Censurers of the late Fire in the City of London. By T. S. Licensed according to Authority, the 7th. of Decemb. 1666. Printed for S. Speed, at the Sign of the Rain-Bow in Fleet-street. 1666.
A YOKE For the Roman-Bulls. A POEM Written on the Royal Proclamation for exiling Popish-Priests, &c. before December the 10th. 1666. —Procul hinc procul ite nocentes. Statius. POpe ope thine Arms, and Rome make larger roome For thine own Darlings now are com∣ing home: So Fau'kners do receive their Birds of Prey, When at their Game they can no longer stay. Here is no room in England for your Breed, We'll send for 'um again when we have need. The awful voice is sent forth, and th'ad best Be from their Machinations represt. So Foxes when bold Trespassers they be Are ready at the Land-lords voice to flee. Our holy Faiths Defenders pious care Denies them here to fix their treach'rous Snare: So do the gen'rous Lions nobly chase Rapacious Vultures lurking in their Place.
And think ye not our Royal Lyons will From Wolves protect our Flock & Shepherds still? 'Tis not the roaring of a Roman-BƲLL Can scare those Royal Beasts, or disanul Their Sov'raign Right; No, no, go tell your Pope We are not to be bull'd by him; nor hope To build your Roman Church by horrid Plots, Perfidious as the Presbyterian-Scots: Your holy Water, holy as it is, Will never purifie your souls in this, Think ye that Heaven can in justice see And suffer with success such Villanie? No, for to sacred Truth 'tis as contrary, As to make Prayers unto the Virgin Mary. And 'tis as fruitless Labour I protest, As to adore St. Francis and the rest. I doubt not but your Cardinals will find They had as good their CAPS throw 'gainst the wind, Though to assist such impious intents, Ye had as many Popes as Sacraments. Prepare to march then, with your Romish-cheer, Ye must not think to keep your Christmas here. Y'are no fit Christmas-Guests for England, so When our blest Advent comes, then you must go: Make haste, and you'll come time enough (I hope) For New-years-gifts presented to the Pope. But if ye do exceed th'appointed time, 'Tis no Popes pardon can absolve your crime. Take with ye all your Reliques, let no more Your Romish-trumpery rest on our shore. (Nothing of Rome we need within our Land, Unless when Ladies write in Roman-hand.) Let Jesuitick Ginns no more be seen To gull the simple; root up all your green
Transplanted Innovations, don't ye know From the beginning (that) it was not so? Don't think to you so soon we will submit, For all your boasts of Learning and of Wit: Why mayn't a Person of mean document Pray be as prudent as Pope INNOCENT? I think upon Record it may be seen That half your Popes too Innocents have been. Then don't proud Empricks through the Ʋniverse No more your Epidemick drugs disperse. Go heal your Pope; ye can't deny I'm sure But that his Holiness doth need a cure. And (as for him) 'tis also thought I see That change of air is requisite for ye. Why then be gone, and think not to delay The Royal Mittimus to disobey, For 'tis as vain for Residence to plead As to make intercession for the dead. No Papal dispensation can obtain Connivance for ye longer to remain. Your ƲNIVERSAL VICAR's wrested stile Will finde but little Vigour in our Isle: For though he Lord it over OTHER KINGS, OURS are SACRED, and our sacred things, As also Persons are (as is most fit) Above his Ʋsurpation, though he sit As PETER'S (proud) SUCCESSOR by pretence, Our Divine His Majesties Royal Grand∣father, and our first Eng∣lish Monarch. JAMES his real one's immense And Royal Title to his Monarchy, The PAPAL INT'RST can and doth deny. O that our holy Vine were once but free From the dead Ivie of each Enemy. Those greedy Foxes seeking to devour With equal malice her divinest Power:
Leaving with horrour to succeeding Time, Novembers Plots and Januaries Crime: While both do madly loose by each extream The purest Church of Englands golden Mean. Be silent ye Impostors, then, by whom, Between the Church of England and of Rome Is judg'd so little odds; ye that wou'd fain Over that Gulph an easie Bridge maintain. Fie, don't demonstrate with so little sence Your ignorance as well as impudence. How many of her Sons (pray) for her sake Have gone to Heaven from the Flaming-stake? Don't so betray your malice then; 'tis true, They are as much Her friends, I think, as you: Though ye are more Ʋnnat'ral than the other, So Viper-like to tear your own dear Mother. Your bold Comparison is as uneven, As 'twixt such Saints as you, and those in Hea∣ven.
A LOOKING-GLASS For the Staring Star-gazers. Hoc faciunt siulti quos gloria vexat inanis SEctarian Sirs, who to the world declare How great your own Religiousnesses are, And are with Pharisean lips so free —Limis ocu∣lu in res alie∣nas inquirens. Hor. To cry Stand off, we're holier than ye; And, God be thanked, we are not so much Involv'd in sin as Publicans and such. Who like so many Popes do oft confess Such large dimensions of your Holiness; Who now can cry, These are your sinful crimes That cause such judgements on these wicked times. And e'en wou'd force the Planets too to be Predictive of a second Destinie. Who have your Faith and Doctrine from so high, Not from the holy Mountain, but the Skie. Whence had ye (pray) your learning, that so soon Your Study is as lofty as the Moon? Your Conventicles I did never hear At Gresham-Colledge ever did appear; Who made ye (pray) such mighty Censurers As if your They dropt about libels, therein pre∣tending the Planets did divine that Westminster & Southwark would be burnt in O∣ctob. &c. Libels were all falling-Stars? From whom (I wonder) do ye boast your Rise? From Mother Shipton? or was she too Wise
To be your Head? she doubtless too is staler; Perhaps ye onely rise from Saint James Nayler. Why then beware his destinie, while you Wish other men what to your selves is due, Lest like Perillus ye tormented are —Nec enim lex justior ulla, Quam necis artifices arte perite sua. Ovid. By that which ye for others did prepare; Or Thrasius-like become the Victim when Ye did design the Lot 'mongst other men. I fear 'tis not your Judgement, but desire We may behold a second dismal Fire. Or, is your wickedness so horrid, that What ye fore-tell, ye'd also perpetrate? Then don't (deluding Ones) pretend ye are Inspired by a Planet or a Star: While ye abuse (by your Hypocrisie) The noble Science of Astrologie. Do not, great Pseudo-Prophets, pray ye, fain Your selves to be of Sage who (as Homer in his Odysses re∣porteth) was as famous a∣mong the Grecians for Prediction, as Aesculapius for Physick. Melampus strain, While your inept inventions plainly plods, To make ye Psappho-like but airy Gods: Let not such whimsies mount ye up so fast, Owels that attempt to soar, will fall at last. Gaze in the Skies no more, nor madly prate; Look to the blazing-Comets in your pate, Keep off your saucy hands from Heavens Rod, As if ye wou'd usurp the Throne of God. Quae Deus oc∣culta esse vo∣luit non scru∣tanda sunt. (Such is your pride, your pride (I say) is such, Ye have been to usurping us'd so much.) Let not conceits so giddy and so vain Possess your factious, peace-disturbing brain. These your transcendent errours do declare Your minds as wand'ring as the Planets are? But what your selves cannot believe, you will (Seducers-like) affirm to others still.
Thus have we seen the Juglers often use To do, that they the People may amuse. You'll likewise Deifie your selves, Nisi quod fa∣ciunt nihil rectè judicant. and then You'd fain make Devils of all other men, As if to you that priviledge were given, Hugh Peters-like to see both Hell and Heaven. Popes have (ye say) no power to make a Saint, Nor ye to make a Devil, I'll maintain't; But onely thus far (sailing on such Shelves Of Errour) to make Devils of your selves. Then ben't so forward to condemn all those That are so honest as to be your foes. Judicet ille de alterius errore qui non halet in seipso quod condemnet. But while ye censure others, do but view What reprehensions to your selves are due. Look in your own hearts, and consider then Your self-exaltings 'bove your bretheren. Mistake me not, I go not to deny The Nations sins brings this Calamity: No, I avouch it, but I'd have unfurl'd Your own deluding Colours to the world. All Whoredom, Drunkenness and Swearing, I Abhor as much as you to justifie. Yes, but I'd have ye too, as well as these, Consider how your own may God displease. VVas Corah, Dathan, and Abirams Crew, then? Not such a kinde of Cattle (pray) as you? VVas not their crime Rebellion? 'gainst whom VVas Moses not, and Aaron (pray) the men? Don't ye the same in disobedience do Against your Lord the King and Bishops too? Are not your murmurings pray even such, The Bishops take upon them too too much? And (like that cursed Crew too) don't ye cry The Clergy they are lifted up too high?
And did not on those Rebels this provoke From angry Heaven a most hideous stroke? Come, —Sub dulci melle venena latent. Virg. In nomine Do∣mini incipit omne malum. —Rabido ge∣stans sub pe∣ctore Vulpem. Pers. Sat. 3. come, this wilful disobedience Masqu'd under Conscience is an high offence. Religion and Conscience often be Pretended in the worst of Villanie. To wave all others, and to quote the high'st, Did not the Jews in crucifying Christ Pretend the same as zealously as you Did in (next unto that) the highest too, VVhen ye did act that execrable sin On Martyr'd Charles, who's now as Cherubin? Come, Qui curios simulant, & bacchanalia vivunt. Juv. there's no sinner like the Hypocrite, The Proverb saies, No Devil like the white. I make no doubt ye all your selves suppose Shadrachs, and Meshachs, and Abednegos; But pray did none of ye that were possest Of Habitations, burn among the rest? I know your great pretence, forsooth, ye can Obey the VVill of God 'bove that of man; But what obeying God is greater than Th' obeying of just Authorized Men? Then while blind Zeal just duties thus controuls, Let not fond errours so seduce your souls. No Golden Gods are by a Heathen King Commanded now to worship, No, the thing Required now, is to obey (I'm sure) The living God in worship that is pure. Then what pretence is left? O Conscience! now These things ye can't by any means allow. Have ye forgot, when ye did scruple less Rebellion, Murder, and all wickedness? And does this Conscience still lack libertie? Pray what to do? To swallow up the Sea?
Contend not then so foolishly, who is Guilty'st of this sad Metamorphosis; But let us all reform; I'd need but say, Then let us but the King and Church obey: Their Laws command I'm sure, of me and you, Both What to Caesar and to God is due. (Hear what the holy Churches STARS divine, Fear not to what the others do incline; The Superstition's in observing those, When we imagine they so much impose.) As for the Consistory-courts, I'm sure Their Laws are wholesome, their due practice pure: But what's the reason ye will those despise? Because they punish your iniquities? I ne'er was question'd by 'um, but I must Confess, I think, th'are merciful and just: But ye're resolved onely to oppose Things legally ordain'd, and onely those. Come, come, obey, obey (I say) the King, And wave each frivolous and foolish thing. Ye cry down Bears; indeed 'tis too too true, The Land's too full of such like Bears as you; Ye blame the enmity between the Beasts, But greater enmity lurks in your breasts. Ye like no Plaies, but chiefly those that be Like unto Mass' annello's Tragedie. No, those unmasque Rebellious wickedness, And shew ye how your conscious souls transgress. To Theatres of blood ye can submit, But not unto a Theatre of Wit; And with an Hewson-ey'd Zeal you will report The sins not of the Country but the Court. Perhaps ye ne'r have been there, since White-hall Was made an Acheron by stinking Noll,
When Pluto there a hellish Court did keep, And cursed Hugh did preach his Imp asleep. And so ye think it still the same: but know, Now the just Steward's in't 'tis nothing so. Persons make places quite anew become, As Pompey's Residence made Africk Rome. Mrs. K. P. Pray if ye are such Courtiers that ye know In what the Courtiers sin, and what they do; Come once again to Court, and see a thing, Look on your gratious and indulgent King: See, see how much of Clemency and Grace Sits in his Royal and Majestick Face. See whom ye do offend, it wou'd convince A Scythian to behold so good a Prince; Perhaps your disobedient hearts will melt, Having the power of such an object felt. Remember his Amnestia, don't ye know To him your lives and liberties ye owe? Then ben't deluded (once again, I say, If ye wou'd Heaven please, the King obey.) Your Tub-invading Rabshakehs ne'er lack Tricks to seduce additions to the Pack; But though they Gowns refuse, yet be it spoke, 'Tis not the longest Presbyterian Cloak Will hide their knav'ry; that will be displaid, Though they're as flie as He that whipt his Maid. FINIS.
