S1661 13704286 101475
C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION, Anent the Earl of ARGYL. CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; To  Macers, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, and to all and sundry Our good and loving Subjects, Greeting. Forasmuch as Archibald Earl of Argyl, being (for a treasonable Paper, wherein he had defamed Our Parlia∣ment and Laws) found guilty, by the Verdict of an unanimous Jury, of leising-making betwixt Us, Our Parliament and People, of reproaching Our Laws, mis-representing Our Government, and of the crime of High-treason in usurping Our Authority; he was notwithstanding keeped at large, without any such restraints as are usual to persons so found guilty: And now he having, upon the twentieth day of December instant escaped, adding the breach of prison to his other crimes, and without waiting for that clemency which he might have relyed more upon, if he had not been conscious to himself of guiltinesse that required such an escape, We have by Our Royal Letter, ordained all execution to be sisted, untill We understood the nature of his crime; And our Privy Council having, after the Verdict, inter∣posed with Us, that notwithstanding he was found guilty, and that it was usual for compleating the Process, that sentence should be once pronounced, that yet We might in Our Clemency, ordain execution to be stopped during Our Royal pleasure. OUR will is herefore, and We charge you straitly and command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-crosses of Edinburgh, Strivling, Perth, Dumbartoun, and other places needful, and thereat, in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, command and charge all Our Sheriffs, Stewarts, Magistrates of Our Burghs of Regality and Royalty, and all others in Jurisdiction, to passe, pursue, take, apprehend, imprison and present to Justice, the person of the said Archibald Earl of Argyl, where ever he can be found within the bounds of their Jurisdictions: And if he happen to flee out of one Jurisdiction into another, that they pursue him within the same: And We hereby Require and Command all Our good and loving Subjects, to concur with, aid, fortifie, and assist our saids Magistrates in the prosecution of this Our service. And if the said Earl of Argyl shall happen to flee to Strengths, or Houses for Refuge, that Our saids Magistrates and others assisting them, assiege and take the same in by force of Arms: And if it shall happen, that the said Earl of Argyl, or any of his Complices (resisting to be taken) be killed, mutilate, or slain by Our saids Officers, or any assisting them, We declare they are hereby indemnified, and shall never be brought in question therefore, Civilly nor Criminally, in all time com∣ing. And farther, that ye, in Our Name and Authority foresaid, Prohibite and Discharge all Our Subjects of this Our Kingdom, to resset supply, or intercommune with the said Earl, or his Accomplices, or to furnish him Meat, Drink, House, Harboury, or any other thing necessar or comfortable to him, or to transport him to, or from Ferries, under the pain of Treason. Given under Our Signet at Halyrudehouse, the twenty one day of December, One thousand six hundred and eighty one. And of Our Reign the thirty three Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Concilij. God save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty. 1681.
