s2556 12261072 57900
THE SENTENCE OF THE COURT OF Holland, Zealand, and Friesland, AGAINST Mr. Simon van Halewyn, Burgher Master of Dort. AND Robert de Pille du Plessis, Emissary of the French King: Pronounc'd July the 31st. 1693. Containing a full Account of the whole Intriegue for the carrying on a Peace with France, and the Pro∣ject of it made by the said Halewyn. Printed at the Hague by Order and Authority of the States-General. Done out of the Dutch. London: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Ox∣ford-Arms in Warwick-Lane. MDCXCIII.
Mr. Simon Van Halewiin's SENTENCE. WHereas Mr. Simon van Halewiin, born at Dort, and Burgher-Ma∣ster Senior of the same place, at present Prisoner in the Gate∣house of the Court of Holland, has confess'd without torture, and being with∣out Iron-Fetters, that he went out of this Coun∣try last year about three Days after the Fight of Steenkirk, to travel into Germany and Switzer∣land. Partly (as he says) out of curiosity to en∣quire into the Present State of the Frontiers of Germany and France: And Partly to inform himself, if possible, by Mon∣sieur Amelot the French Ambassador in Switzer∣land, of the King his Master's Intention concerning a General Peace in Europe. That by both these Designs (as he farther says) he has had no other aim than to acquire
more Knowledge and Experience by which he might regulate his Conduct to the best advan∣tage of the Publick, and to a fuller discharge of his Duty in the administration of the Affairs of his Country. That the Prisoner, being arriv'd at Solethur∣ne in Switzerland, had address'd himself to the foremention'd Amelot; asking him, 1st. If he was able to give him any informa∣tion of the King his Master's Intention about a General Peace. 2dly. If his Master was inclinable to deliver up some considerable Frontiers to secure the Spanish Netherlands, and this Country. That the said Ambassador had answer'd him to both in the affirmative; but telling him also, that he was not able, nor impower'd to give him any Particular; that this was work for a Treaty; but yet if the Prisoner would be pleased to stay there some time, then he (the Ambassador) would write to Court, and give him certainly a positive Answer. That he had replied, That it was not conve∣nient for him to stay there any longer, to pre∣vent several Reflections. That the said Ambassador having ask'd him, Who he was, and if he had any Relations and
Friends in the Government; the Prisoner an∣swered him, That his Name was Simon van Halewyn; that he was Burgher-Master Senior of the City of Dort; and that he had a Brother who had yet a greater power in the Govern∣ment. That the said Amelot during their Conversati∣on, having ask'd him further, What success he thought that King James might have had in his intended Descent, in case the French had not been beaten at Sea? the Prisoner answer'd him, That it would have been a very weak Enter∣prize, considering the general aversion the Eng∣lish had for King James. That the Prisoner to refute some Arguments which Amelot had made use of to show how much this State ought to desire a Peace, told him; That it was true enough, that the most considerable Families of our Country suffered very much by heavy Taxes, as having great E∣states in Land, which carried the greatest Bur∣then; but that the Merchants were very gently treated for the benefit of Trade; that the Taxes on real Estates could cause at the worst but a change of their Masters, which did not at all concern the State in general, and considered in abstracto; adding withal, in order to the clearer
proof, that the present War did not lessen the Power of the State; that although there were some losses in Trade on one hand, yet that they were repair'd on the other, by a conside∣rable Sale of the Manufacturies; and that it was certain that there were much more Ships built now, than before the War. That even their Losses at Sea did not incom∣mode them very much, since the greatest part of their Ships and Cargo were insured; and that it was in vain to imagine that there was no dif∣ference if the Loss were sustained by the Pro∣prietors or Insurers, because the latter sufficient∣ly repairs it, by what they gain'd from Ships that safely arriv'd in the Harbour; and that the result of all was, that those who stood in need of the Goods, were to pay a greater price for them. These and several other Arguments the Pri∣soner avers that he made use of, in order to ex∣aggerate the power of the State. The Prisoner says farther, That the said A∣melot having ask'd him if there were some grounds to hope, that some of those that were at the Helm of the Government, were inclina∣ble to a peace? he answered him, that this did depend upon the particulars of the Proposals
relating to it; and that except some considera∣ble Frontier places were delivered up to the Spa∣nish Netherlands, there was no true Dutch man who would not rather sacrifice the last Slyver he had, than to think of a peace. That after some other Discourse, the Priso∣ner agreed with the said Amelot, that he the said Amelot was to send him some body to let him know by word of mouth an answer of the two above mentioned Questions, and that a printed Book should be sent to the Prisoner as a Token that the King did continue in his Inclination for a general peace, and that a Messenger should follow. That they had further agreed, that the Priso∣ner, as a Token that he had receiv'd the Book, should send a Letter of Trade to one Hande∣court, living at Paris in St. Honore-Street, at the Sign of the Arms of England, which should al∣so serve for an Advertisement that he was ar∣riv'd in the Country. That the Prisoner told the said Amelot, that whereas he might perhaps make a tour into Eng∣land, it would be necessary to let him know what time a Messenger would be sent him, for fear of his being disappointed; and that to assure him the Letter came from Monsieur
Amelot, a certain Mark should be put upon the outside of it. That according to these concerted Measures, the Prisoner receiv'd last Harvest the said print∣ed Book, with two Letters of a different date; one of which gave him notice, that he was to receive the said Book, and the other was ac∣companied with it. That the said Letters were sign'd Finberlon, which the Prisoner judg'd to be a fictitious Name; that he shew'd them to no body, and burn'd them a little time after the receipt of them. That the Prisoner had sent a Letter to the said Handecourt, of which the following Copy was seizd amongst his Papers. I'Ay bien receu vas deux lettres, datées de I' on∣zieme et quinzieme de ce mois, je tacheray a faire vendre vos actions de Novembre, selon les ordres que vous m'y donnez. Je voudrols que vous me pou∣viez envoyer au plutost mon conte, car il faut que l'ajuste icy mes Affaires, avant que je puisse faire mon voyage d'Angleterre, qui presse d'autant plus que les bleds montent icy àa un prix excessif, & si on y veut faixe le negoce, que nous avons prosetté, it faut qu'on le fasse au plutost, car pour faire un achapt vonsi∣derable
en detail it faut du temps pour prendre ses me∣sures, et si on ne le fait pas en detail, il n'y arien à gagner. The same in English. I Have receiv'd your Two Letters, dated the 11th and 15th of this Month. I'll endeavour to sell your Actions of Novembre according to your Orders; and I wish you would send me speedily my Accounts, for I would fain adjust my Affairs here before I go into England, which cannot be put off very long, considering the excessive Rate that Corn is risen to, and sold at here; and if we will trade in it according to our Project, we must do it speedily, because there is much time required to buy a considerable Quantity by Parcels, and if it be not done by Parcels, nothing is to be won. The Prisoner says, That he had disguis'd his hand in this Letter, and put a false Name to it, because he was willing to avoid the Offence, which in case of discovery it would have given to those that did not like he business.
He adds, That by these words in the Let∣ter; Je voudrois que vous me pourriez envoyer au plutost mon conte. (I wish you would send me speedily my Accounts). He understood the Person that was to be sent to him; and that by the following words, he did not understand the business of a Peace, the gaining of Friends, and the working out of that Peace. That afterwards, according to his agree∣ment with Monsieur d▪Amelot, a certain French-man, nam'd Roberti de Pillé du Plessis, being arriv'd at Dort, had met him there in an Inn, call'd the Logement van de heeren. That the said French-man askt the Prisoner, if he was the Man that had been with Monsieur d' Amelot in Switzerland, and whether he had receiv'd the formention'd Book; and he having assur'd him of both, the said Roberti discover'd himself to him, and acquainted him with the reasons of his coming. That the Prisoner having askt the said Ro∣berti what Conditions he had to propose for a Peace: The said Roberti answer'd him, That he had no orders to make any overture of it, and that at that time he was far from giving any Sa∣tisfaction about the Questions the Prisoner had proposed to Amelot: The said Roberti on the
other hand ask'd him, Whether the Prisoner had any thing to propose to him relating to a Peace with this State and its Allies? To which the Prisioner reply'd, he had not; that it was contrary to the Agreement made with Monsieur Amelot, who had promis'd to inform him what Sentiments the Court of France had about a Ge∣neral Peace; and that thereupon having prest the said Roberti to endeavour to see himself put in a condition of giving the Prisoner some sa∣tisfaction about the said point, the said Ro∣berti promised him, that he would not fail to do it. That after some time the Prisoner having askt the said Roberti whether he had receiv'd an Answer of a Letter which he had promised to write into France, in order to know the Propo∣sals the Court of France was willing to make for a Peace; the said Roberti answered him (as he says) that he had both writ, and received an An∣swer about it, which was, That the Court did not think fit to explain her self about the Particulars before she knew what succes Monsieur d'Avaux would meet with at the Court of the King of Sweden, whom he was to entreat to offer his me∣diation for a Peace between the Confederates and France. And that since that time the Prisoner
did remain in these Terms with the said Ro∣berti. That the Prisoner went afterwards with the said Roberti to a Countrey-house of his at Ab∣benbroeck, where they remain'd two or three days together. That during their stay there, the said Ro∣berti having told the Prisoner, by way of dis∣course, that he could not comprehend the form of the Government of this State; the Prisoner explain'd it to him, as also that of the City of Dort in particular, which the Prisoner said, was yet more intricate. That in recompence of it, the said Roberti in∣form'd the Prisoner of the present State of Af∣fairs in France. The Prisoner says, that he had no other De∣sign in carrying the said Roberti to his Country-house, but to discourse with him about the Ar∣chitecture of a House he was building there. He protests, that he had never askt any Mo∣ney of the said Roberti, but that riding from Abbenbroeck, and being near the Sluce, the said Roberti had offered him a considerable Sum for the better carrying on of his Building. That the Prisoner having refus'd the accep∣tance of it, by telling him: Que ses petites af∣faires
n'avoient pas besoin de ce secours, i. e. That his small Affairs did not stand in need of such a Supply, the said Roberti replied: Que si ce n'estoit pas pour le batimêt, que ce fut donc pour la petite oye, i. e. That if it was not for his Building, it should be for his little Pleasures. He further adds, That at the same time the said Roberti offered him this Money, the Pri∣soner told him, that he lookt upon it as a great piece of Villany to accept of any Bribe. That he had always wondered, that in the former Wars some had been found here, who had been so far warp'd and corrupted by it, as to abandon the general interest of Europe; and al∣though he had no aversion to the receiving of an honest Recompence from those from whom he might lawfully receive it, yet that he hated all Bribes. That since that time, the Prisoner has had several other enter views with the said Roberti, wherein he always told him, that whereas the Court of France might easily have imagined, that he had not desired any one should be sent him to treat about indifferent Matters, but a∣bout the agreement of some favourable Con∣ditions for a Peace, he was willing to let him know, That as soon as he should be assured of
the French King's Inclination for a Peace, he was inclinable to make an overture of it to the Ma∣gistracy of the City of Dort, who should afterwards propose it to the Assembly of the States of Holland, that so in due time it might be taken into their mature Consideration. And although the Prisoner confesses that he had perused the Articles of the Treaty conclu∣ded between this State and the Confederates, by which an Agreement was made, on what grounds a Peace was to be concluded; that no Treaty about it ought to be set on foot with∣out a general Concurrence, and that every one of them should acquaint the other with what might happen to them in particular, that should tend towards it: Yet he alledges in his De∣fence, That a Declaration of War does only pro∣hibit an unlawful Correspondency to the preju∣dice of the State. That it is agreed on all hands, That to en∣deavour to procure a Peace, is not at all pre∣judicial to the State; that it is so far from that, that those who employ themselves about some honest means of obtaining it, should be lookt upon as Criminals, that they rather de∣serve to have a Stature erected them, and that
he was willing to do it, tho it was at the peril of his Life. Afterwards having desired leave to speak with freedom, the Prisoner said, That being before the High Court of Justice of his Coun∣try, he had a great mind to convince them, that it was none of his fault, that Lives and Estates were sacrific'd to men; and that he would ra∣ther dye, than see it longer continued, and to play on dobbe dobbe dob, and fan fare for the King of England. Whereupon being ordered to retire, the words were recorded by the Clerk; and the Prisoner being call'd in again, and the words read to him, he was askt if they did not exact∣ly correspond with what he had said; to which he answered, That he was not able to repeat the very same words, which he had spoke in the heat of his Defence; but that his meaning was, That he thought it was so far from a man's being lookt upon as a Criminal to the State, for endeavouring by honest means to promote a Peace, that he rather de∣served to be commended for it; and that he should sooner wish to dye this very moment, than see things reduced to such Extremities.
That he had never had so ridiculous a pre∣sumption of his own capacity, as to think him∣self able, nor that indeed he had been wil∣ling to procure a Peace, a work of so great con∣sequence, against the general Opinion and the Sentiments of others; but that he thought that in case some solid and reasonable Proposals of peace should be offered, it being a thing so necessary and so salutary for this State, that every true Patriot would have readily, without any other reason, have embrac'd them; the Prisoner withal assuring his Judges, that what Steps soe∣ver he had made in this Affair, they were oc∣casion'd by nothing else but a sincere Inten∣tion of his to promote the true Interest of this State. That, in fine, the Prisoner at a time when some suspected persons, who were seized at the Hague, at the Sign of the King of Spain, had wrote a Letter to the said Roberti at Amsterdam without either Name or Date, and having his Hand disguis'd therein, with the following Con∣tents: On vient de me dire que l' hoste au Roy d' Es∣pagne & quelques Espions sont arrestez c' est à vous à prendre vos mesures. I am just now inform'd that the Landlord and several Spies, lodging at the Sign of the King of Spain, have been seiz'd.
It belongs to you to take your Measures accor∣dingly. That by this he would have given the said Roberti to understand, that possibly some search might be made after him too, and that he had endeavour'd to prevent the finding out of the Correspondency which he entertained with the said Roberti. The Prisoner confessing that he had under∣taken all this without giving notice of it to any body, and without being empowered by any of the Princes now in Confederacy with this State, either to make, or to receive any overture for a general Peace. All which being opposite to the Duty of a good Subject, much more to that of a Magi∣strate, and most of all directly contrary to the concluded Treaties, as also to the several Pro∣clamations of the State, which expresly had forbidden all Subjects whatsoever of this Coun∣try, to entertain any correspondency or com∣merce directly or indirectly, either by Letters or other means, tending to the prejudice of this Country, with France or its Subjects, upon pain of being proceeded against as declared E∣nemies of the State, and they being besides things of an ill aspect, and of a dangerous
consequence, deserving to be highly punish'd for the Example of others: For these Reasons, The said Court, after a mature deliberati∣on, and a full examination of all things rela∣ting to this Affair, administring Justice, in the Name, and by the Authority of the Supream Magistracy and Lordship of Holland, Zealand, and Friezland, has condemn'd the said Prisoner, and does condemn him by these Presents, To be carried to a secure place, to remain a Prisoner there during life, declaring also all his Goods and Estate to be confiscated for the use of the Supream Magistracy, and condemning him be∣sides to the payment of all Expences of Justice, according to the Estimate of the said Court. Actum in the Hague by our Lords and Masters, Matthews Gool, Benjamin Fagel, Seigneur Vander Weer, John Munter, Francis Keetlaer, Paul Andrew vandr Meulen, Charles Filips van Dorp, Iman Cau; Anthony Slicher, and Frederick Roosenboom, Sena∣tors of Holland, and pronounc'd July the 31st, 1693. Sign'd, Ant. van Kinschot. Robert
Robert de Pille du Blessis's SENTENCE, Pronounc'd by the Court of Holland, Zeeland and Friezland, July the 31st, 1693. VVHereas Robert de Pille du Plessis, se∣ven and fifty Years old, born at Clamsy in Burgundy, at present Prisoner at the Gatehouse of the Court of Hol∣land has confest without Torture, and being without Iron-Fetters, That he has been sent hither by the French King last Year, to treat about a Peace. That he has receiv'd some Instructions about it by the French King, but that having read them over and over again, and consequently knowing the Contents of it by heart, he had burnt the Written Copy at Mons, partly be∣cause he did not think it safe passing through an
Enemies Country, to keep it about him, partly to execute the Orders which he at parting re∣ceiv'd from that Court. That at Mons he had receiv'd a Pasport from the Elector of Bavaria, which the Governor of that place had obtain'd for him under the Name of Robert du Plossis, Picture Drawer. That he had also been provided with a Pass∣port from Monsieur dei Neuf ville Envoy of the King of Poland at the Court of France, con∣taining amongst other things, that he was a dealer in Pictures, going into Poland in order to carry to that King some Pictures, which he had bought for him by his Orders. That with these Passports he arrived in the Spanish Netherlands, from whence he came to the Hague in January last, without any Passport from this State. That according to his Orders receiv'd from the Court of France, he had address'd himself to the Burgher-Master Senior, Simon van Halewyn, asking him, If he was not the person that had been with Monsieur Amelot in Switzerland; and having afterwards told the said Burgher-Master who he was, and the reason of his coming, he had ask'd the said Burgher-Master, if he had not receiv'd a little Book as a Token that some body should be sent to him.
That the said Burgher-Master having an∣swer'd him in the Affirmative, the Prisoner had further ask'd him whether he had any Propo∣sals to make relating to a Peace. That the said Halewyn had answered him (as the Prisoner pretends) that it was not time yet, that the face of Affairs was chang'd, and that the Prisoner must allow him some time to take some new Measures. That he had thereupon ask'd the said Ha∣lewyn (as he says) if there was then no hopes left, and if it was fit for him to depart; Ha∣lewyn had answer'd him, No, but that he should wait some time to see if some favourable oppor∣tunity, and some good Disposition in the State should offer it self. That he had talk'd at several times and pla∣ces with the said Simon van Halewyn, and con∣certed within several Measures about this Affair. That after their first enterview, they had met at several times at the Voorhout, a place be∣fore the Court at the Hague; and that about a Month ago being come to the same place about Seven a Clock at Night, according to the said Halewyn's Assignation, the said Halewyn had told him, That he had a written Project about him, but that he had refus'd to deliver it
to him, nor to trust any body with it, because he had writ it with his own Hand. That the said Halewyn had carried the Prisoner to the Ouden doole, where he had dictated to him the said Project. That the said Halewyn had brought with him to that purpose some Paper, but finding no Ink there, the Prisoner had found himself oblig'd to write it into his Tables. That the said Halewyn after having dictated to him the said Project, had burnt the Original of it. That afterwards the Prisoner having told the said Halewyn, that tho they were in a Tavern that yet they had drunk no Wine, and that peo∣ple might very well suspect they were come thither for some other purpose than to drink, the said Halewyn had pour'd out some Wine upon the Floor, and into the Chimney. That the Prisoner has sent the said Project in a Letter into France the 19th of February last, the Contents of which are, That to prepare things for a Peace, it would be necessary to engage the King of Sweden to of∣fer his Mediation about it to his Majesty of Great-Britain and this State.
That there should by no means be made any Proposals of it, before they were assured that these Provinces were in a Humonr to accept it. That the means to bring them to it, were to endeavour secretly and cunningly to give a full prospect to those that had the greatest Interest and Authority with the Deputies of this State, of the sad Consequences that would attend a fur∣ther Continuation of this War, to all the States in General, and to each in Particular, mana∣ging every body according to his Humour and Inclination. That altho they were sensible enough of the Inconveniencies of the War, that yet this was not sufficient, but that it was necessary to gain some Deputies that would undertake to animate the rest by some bold Example. That no body was more proper for it than the two Brothers, Halewyn, as being Persons of great Credit, and of a competent Knowledge of Affairs. That over and above, the City of Dort, who had the first Vote of all other Places, might by her Advice, and manner of proceed∣ing, teach others that were more timerous to despise the hatred of those that were not pleas'd with it.
That after the Two Brothers had been gain'd, and the King of Sweden disposed to the offering of his Mediation, that then the Memorial which was to be presented about it to the States-General, should be concerted with the said Two Persons, who best knew how to humour it. That after this Memorial was presented to the States-General, and receiv'd by the said Provinces, and consequently brought into Holland, that then the respective Deputies should take it into their Consideration, except those of the City of Dort, who should instant∣ly declare that they had already embrac'd it, that the other Deputies might acquaint their Principals with it. That to this purpose, it was necessary to gain the Eldest of the said Brothers by some Interest of Family, and to render them Masters in the said City of Dort, which being govern'd by a Commonalty might be easily appeas'd with words alone. These the Prisoner says, were the Content of the Project, altho the said Simon van Halewyn expresly denies to know the least thing of it and that the Prisoner protests, That Simon van Halewyn has always told him, that his Brother
had not the least knowledge of it, nor that the Prisoner has ever talkt with the Eldest Halewyn, or any other Person. That the Prisoner has further declared to the Court, That he has sent several other Letters to the Court of France relating to this Affair, and especially one dated Febr. 13. 1693. by which he had inform'd that Court that Si∣mon Van Halewyn had told him, That the two Joint-Fleets were to be Reinforced by a Squa∣dron of Thirty Men of War. That altho the Prisoner had denied to have offered any Sum of Money to the said Halewin, yet that he has confest, That taking a walk with him at Abbenbroeck, and talking about his Building, he had said to the said Halewyn, up∣on his own account only, and by way of Com∣pliment, That the King his Master was rich enough to offer him a little Present to the pro∣moting of his Building, but that it seem'd the said Halewyn had made no Reflections on it. That nevertheless; the Prisoner had writ into France for Money, and that thereupon he had been imprower'd by the French King in a Letter dated the 4th of March last, (which was intercepted during his Imprisonment) to pro∣mise to Simon van Halewyn, the Sum of Twen∣ty
thousand Crowns, in case he could by his Credit, and that of his Friends, persuade the City of Dort, to give such an Example to tho other Cities in Holland, that thereupon a Peace might ensue. All which being, such Proceedings, as in no Country where there is any Justice, ought to be suffered, as tending to the Destruction of the General Quiet and Tranquility of the State, and the causing some Difference and Animosity (if possible) between the Confederates and this State; and consequently deserving Punishment for an Example to others: For these Reasons, The said Court, after a mature Deliberation, and serious Examination of all Matters relating to this Affair, administring Justice in the Name, and by the Authority of the Supreme Magistracy and Lordship of Holland, Zealand, and Friez∣land, has condemn'd the said Prisoner, and does condemn him by these Presents, To be carried to a secure Place, where he is to remain Pri∣soner during this War, and to be kept on his own Expences; and does Banish him out of Holland, Zealand, Friezland, and Utrecht, with∣out Liberty of returning thereto under pain of
a severer Punishment, declares all his Goods confiscated to the profit of the Supream Magi∣stracy, and condemns him besides to all the Expences of Justice, according to the Estimate of the said Court. Actum at the Hague by our Lords and Masters, Matthews Gool, Benjamin Fagel, Seigneur Van Fer-Weer, John Munter, Francis Keetlaer, Paul Andrew van der Meulen, Charles Philips van Dorp, Iman Cau, Anthony Slicher, and Frederick Roosenboom, Senators of Holland, and pronounc'd July the 31st, 1693. Sign'd, Ant. van Kinschot. FINIS. Books Sold by Richard Baldwin. A New, Plain, Short, and Compleat French and English Grammar; whereby the Learner may attain in few Months to speak and write French correctly, as they do now in the Court of France. And wherein all that is dark, superfluous and deficient in other Grammars, is plain, short, and methodically supplied. Also very useful to Strangers, that are desi∣rous to learn the English Tongue: For whose sake is added a Short, but very Exact English Grammar. The Third Edition, with Additions. By Peter Berault. A Brief Disquisition of the Law of Nature, according to the Principles and Method laid down in the Reverend Dr. Cumberland's (now Lord Bishop of Peterborough's) Latin Treatise on that Subject. As also his Confutation of Mr. Hobb's Principles put into another Method. With the Right Reve∣rend Author's Approbation. The Tragedies of the Last Age, consider'd and examin'd by the Practice of the Ancients, and by the common Sense of all Ages; in a Letter to Fleetwood Shephard, Esq The Second Edition.
A short View of Tragedy; its Original, Excellency, and Corruption▪ With some Reflections on Shakespear and other Practitioners for the Stage Both by Mr. Rymer Servant to Their Majesties. Travels into divers Parts of Europe and Asia, undertaken by the French King's Order to discover a new Way by Land into China; containing many curious Remarks in Natural Philosophy, Geography, Hydrography and History. Together with a Description of Great Tartary, and of th different People who inhabit there. Done out of French. To which is ad∣ded, A Supplement extracted from Hakluyt and Purohas; giving an Ac∣count of several Journeys over Land from Russia, Persia, and the Mogul Country to China, together with the Roads and distances of the Places. Liturgia Tigurina: Or, The Book of Common Prayer and Administrati∣on of the Sacraments, and other Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies, usu∣ally practised, and solemnly performed in all the Churches and Chappels of the City and Canton of Zurick in Switzerland, &c. Memoirs concerning the Campaigne of Three Kings, William, Lewis and James, in the Year 1692. With Reflections upon the Great Endea∣vours of Lewis the 14th to effect his Designs, of James the 2d to Remount the Throns. And the proper Methods for the Allies to take to hinder both. Bibliotheca Politica. Or, A Discourse by way of Dialogue, upon these Questions, Whether by the Ancient Laws and Constitutions of this King∣dom, as well as by the Statutes of the 13th and 14th of King Charles the II all Resistance of the King, or of those commissioned by him, are expresly forbid, upon any Pretence whatsoever. And also, Whether all those who assisted his Present Majesty King William, either before or after the coming over, are guilty of the breach of this Law. Collected out of the most Ap∣proved Authors, both Ancient and Modern. Dialogue the Ninth. Where are also to be had the First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Dialogues. An Answer to the Late King James's Declaration, dated at St. Germains, April the 17th. S.N. 1693. Licensed by Mr. Secretary Trenchard. Nevil Payn's Letter, and some other Letters that concern the Subject of his Letter. With short Notes on them; for the Clearer Information of the Members of Parliament. In Order to Nevil Payn's Tryal. The Charge of the Right Honourable Henry Earl of Warrington, Lord Delamere, to the Grand Jury at the Quarter-Sessions, held for the County of Chester, on the 11th of October, 1692. An Account of the late Terrible Earthquake in Sicily; with most of its Particulars. Done from the Italian Copy printed at Rome. Reflections upon the Late Horrid Conspiracy contrived by some of the French Court, to Murther His Majesty in Flanders: And for which Mon∣sieur Granvall, one of the Assassinates, was Executed.
