S2979 13785819 101798
The Reasonableness of Believing without Seeing. A SERMON Preach'd before the KING IN St. Iames's Chappel, On Palm-Sunday, MARCH 24. 1699/1700. By the Most Reverend Father in God, IOHN Lord Archbishop of YORK. Publish'd by His Majesty's Special Command. LONDON: Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Church-Yard: And William Rogers, at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet street. 1700.
The Archbishop of YORK'S SERMON Before the KING, On Palm-Sunday, March 24. 1699/1700.
St. JOHN XX. 29. —Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. THESE are our Saviour's Words to St. Thomas after his Resurrecti∣on. The occasion of them was this: The other Disciples had as∣sured Thomas, That our Saviour was risen from the dead, and that he had in Person appeared to them. Thomas would not be∣lieve this upon their report, but required farther Evidence. Except (saith he) I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe. The next time that our Saviour appeared to them, Thomas was in the Company, and then he was pleased to give him such a Proof of his Resurrection as he him∣self had stood upon; for he calls upon him, and bids him reach forth his finger, and behold his hands where the Print of the Nails was, and reach forth his hand, and thrust it into his side, and after this, not to be faithless, but believing. Hereupon
Thomas owns himself fully convinced, and in token thereof, he answered and said unto him, My Lord, and my God. Then come in the Words of the Text: Iesus saith unto him, Thomas, Because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. In which Words, as our Saviour tacitly re∣proves Thomas for his Incredulity, in not belie∣ving a matter of Fact well attested, unless he himself saw it: So he lays down an universal Proposition for the Encouragement of all Man∣kind in future Ages of the world, to believe in him, though they had not seen him. Our Saviour knew very well, that this was to be the Case of far the greatest part that were to believe in him. For it was only to the men of that Age in which he lived, and of that Coun∣try where he conversed, to whom it was given to hear from his own mouth his Divine Do∣ctrines, and to see with their eyes the Proofs that he gave of his Divine Mission, particularly that illustrious one of his Resurrection from the dead. But for all the succeeding Generations of men, they were to believe without seeing. Their Faith was not to be grounded on the Evidence of their own Senses, but on the Testimony of those that had had that Evidence. And therefore for the
obliging and encouraging all Mankind, in the Ages to come, to Embrace his Religion upon such Motives and such Evidence as this, he pro∣nounceth these words, Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. I doubt not but that all Christians are fully satisfied both of the Truth and Reason of this Proposition of our Saviour, and are convinced that they have Motives enow to oblige them to believe in him, and to own his Religion; though they never saw, nor were capable of seeing the Original Proofs and Evidence he gave for the Truth of it. Indeed if it were otherwise, none of us at this day could be Christians upon ratio∣nal Grounds. But this Doctrine will not pass among all men. On the contrary, By several, Their not Seeing, is made the great, if not the only pretence, for their not Believing. This be∣ing so; I hope it will not be time mis-spent, if I endeavour to answer this Plea of theirs; and I think I cannot to better purpose discourse upon this Text, than by doing so. The Case is this. Some there are among us that endeavour to run down all Reveal'd Religion. If you ask them whether then they are for any Religion at all; They will tell you, Yes, they are for that which Natural Reason teacheth. We wish
they were in good earnest when they say this. For then we should hope to be soon all of a mind. For we cannot doubt but that whosoever doth sincerely believe all that Natural Reason will teach him about Religion, and doth seriously endeavour to frame his Life accordingly; such a one will not fail to embrace Christianity, when∣ever the Doctrines of our Saviour, and the Proofs he gave for the Truth of them, are fairly represented to him. But in truth, these mens loose way, both of discoursing, and of living, renders it suspicious, that their Profession of Na∣tural Religion is not very sincere; but only for the sheltering them from the Imputation of Atheism, and serving other secular ends. For such a Scheme of Natural Religion have they fra∣med to themselves, as will not much trouble their Consciences, let them live how they will. But now the Christian Religion (which is that they chiefly oppose under the name of Revealed Religion) is a more Stubborn thing, and will not so easily be brought to Comply with their Humours and Inclinations. And That we fear, though they are loth to own it, is the secret rea∣son of their Grudge against it. The Gospel of Christ doth not favour such sort of Principles as these men have taken up, nor such a kind of
Life as they are engaged in; But on the contrary, severely declares against them. And therefore some colourable Reason must be found out, for the setting aside the Authority of this Gospel, which is so contradictory to their Interests. But how is this to be come by? To object against the Sufficiency of the Proof that our Saviour gave to the world of his being sent from God to teach this Religion to Man∣kind, That there is no colour for: For they are sensible that if his History, as it is related in the Gospel, be admitted to be a true History, so that one may depend upon the Matters of Fact there Recorded concerning him: If this, I say, be admitted, it cannot be denied but that our Sa∣viour gave abundant Evidence, that he was what he pretended to be, the Son of God, and the great Prophet whom all men were to be obedient to, if they meant to be saved. Since therefore they cannot fasten upon this, they pitch upon another Method. They endea∣vour to run down all our Evidence for the Truth of Christ's Religion, by making a Difference between seeing our Saviour's Miracles, and read∣ing them in a Book. They will allow, that if any man heard or saw Jesus Christ speaking those things, or doing those things, which are
Recorded of him; such a man would have suf∣ficient Reason to induce him to be his Disciple: But they deny that they have any such Reason to be so, because they neither heard nor saw any of those things; nor are they convinced that such things were ever done. They reproach us, that when they desire of us a Proof of the Christian Religion, all the Answer they can obtain of us is, that they must go to such a Book (which we call the Bible) and that will satisfy them. But why should they pin their Faith upon any Book in the world? This is what they urge for their In∣fidelity. This now being the State of the Controversy between Us and several of the Unbelievers among us, you see it turns upon this single Point that is now before us; namely, Whether a man that does not see, may not have sufficient Reason to believe at many hundred years distance? Or more particularly thus; Whether we in these days, who never saw our Saviour, nor his Mira∣cles, (particularly That of his Resurrection, with Reference to which these words were spoken) have not abundant Reason to believe in him, upon the Testimony of those that did see all these things. We say we have. They say we have not. Here therefore we join Issue.
Now for the making good our side of the Question, I proceed by these Steps. In the first place, We lay it down as a Principle, and I suppose every body will agree to it; That if Iesus Christ and his Apostles, when they first Preached the Gospel, did give sufficient Proof and Evidence that what they Preached was from God: And likewise if both the Doctrine they Preached, and the Proof and Evidence they gave for it, be faithfully transmitted to us; and with such Certainty likewise, that we cannot have any reasonable doubt that it is so transmit∣ted: Then I say, we can have no reason in the earth to complain, that we want Evidence for the Truth of the Gospel. I do not say yet, that we have as strong Proof, as if we had seen or heard those things our selves: But I say we have sufficient Proof to convince any reasonable un∣biassed man: This I presume no body will deny, and it is all that we ask at present. In the Second place; I believe none will deny, that what was once really spoken, or what was once really done, may be truly and faithfully put into writing. And it is possible likewise that those Writings may come so well attested, to them that live many Ages after those things were spoken, or done, that none in any Age can rea∣sonably
doubt that they give a true and faith∣ful account of the things therein reported to be done or taught. I say, I believe none will deny this; for if it be not admitted, we can give no Credit to any History that was written; nor con∣sequently to any Matter of Fact that was done in former Ages. It therefore will, I hope, be granted, that both the Doctrines of our Saviour, and his Proofs of them, might in this way, if God so pleased, be so faithfully transmitted to Posterity, that future Ages might certainly come to the knowledge of them. In the Third place we say, That it is obvious to all Mankind, that if ever there was any Af∣fair in the world, wherein the Providence of God was concerned, that there should be a faithful Conveyance of it made to all Generations to come, and carrying the Marks of its own Cre∣dibility; this Affair of the Gospel of Christ was such a one. Because the Importance of it to all the Children of men was such, that their Sal∣vation or Damnation to the end of the world, did depend upon the Belief of it, if the Author of this Gospel delivered a true Doctrine. And therefore we may certainly conclude, that if what Christ taught at the first, was from God; God would take care that what he taught, toge∣ther
with sufficient Proof of the Truth of it, should be conveyed to all the Ages of the world. And if all this was to be contained in a Book; we may likewise be assured, that Book should come to us, with such Evidence of its being true, that we could have no reasonable Suspici∣on concerning it. We are sure God's Provi∣dence hath taken care that Writings of an An∣cienter Date than the Gospel, that are of infinite∣ly less consequence to Mankind, should come down to us without any Suspicion of Impo∣sture: And can it be imagined then, his Provi∣dence should be unconcerned, in preserving and bringing safe to our hands, the Records of a thing, by the Belief or Denial of which, the Eternal State of men in the other world is to be concluded? In the Fourth place, having laid these Founda∣tions, we advance a Step higher. It is certain, that there was a timely and a faithful Record of all the things that Iesus Christ taught in order to Salvation, and of all the Proofs he gave for the Truth and Divinity of his Doctrine: And this Record is contained in the Books of the New Testament. That this is true Matter of Fact, we have all the Proof that a thing of this Nature is capable
of. These Books were written either by men that were Eye and Ear Witnesses of our Saviour's Miracles, and Doctrine, and Conversation: Or by such as Conversed with those that were. This appears not only from the Writings themselves, which carry in them all the Marks of their being written by Persons so qualified; but also from the constant Tradition that hath in all Ages gone in the world, about the Authors of these Wri∣tings. And you may with as much, or more rea∣son doubt, that those Writings among us, which go under the Name of Cicero, or Caesar, or Sene∣ca; or any other most unquestioned Author, were none of Theirs, but forged since their times; than you can doubt that the Gospels of St. Matthew, Mark, and Iohn, and Luke's both Gospel and Acts of the Apostles, and St. Paul's Epistles, were not writ by those Authors, or in the Age they pretend to be. I say, there is a great deal more reason to doubt of that, than there is of this: Because we have not only all the Proofs of the Genuineness of those Writings, that can be given for any other Writings, which are the most unquestioned in the world; but this over and above, which is compatible to none but these; namely, That the Matter of these Wri∣tings is of such a Nature, that all Mankind
were concerned to detect the Fraud and the For∣gery of them, if there had been any: But yet they have always passed under the Names they bear at this day; nay, and in every Age, from the first publishing of them, we have Authen∣tick Authorities in a continued Succession to vouch for them. Well, but supposing these men to be the Au∣thors of these Writings; yet how can we depend upon the Truth of what they have Reported? In answer to this, I say in the Fifth place; Let any man read them, and then speak from his Conscience, Whether he does not think that these men were in good earnest, and did really write according to their own inward sense? And yet the Matters they wrote were such, as it was not possible they could be deceived about them; because they were all plain Matters of Fact; things which their Eyes and Ears were witnesses of. But that is not all: They who lived in those days, and had full opportunities of exa∣mining the Truth of what they had written, gave Testimony to them; since they built their Faith upon the Matters of Fact they had delivered. If therefore you suppose these Writers to be sincere honest men, it is certain that what they record∣ed concerning our Lord Jesus, and his Doctrines,
and his Actions, must be true. On the other side, if you suppose them to have had Designs of imposing upon the world with a false Story; you must at the same time suppose a great num∣ber of People (of whom there is no ground for such a suspicion) to be perfect Fools or Mad∣men, who gave so much Credit to all that mat∣ter which they related concerning our Saviour, that they laid down their Lives to attest the Truth of it. I know nothing to be said against this, unless it be, That though they could not well be sup∣posed to be mistaken in the Matters of Fact which they relate concerning our Saviour, yet they might in the Matter of his Doctrines. These they might misrepresent, and consequently their Writings ought not to be of that Authority with us, as that we should be bound to believe all that they say. But to this I give a very short Answer; If we do admit them to be true Re∣porters of Matters of Fact, we must also of necessity admit them to be true Reporters, nay I say more, Infallible Reporters of our Saviour's Doctrine; so as that their Declarations of it must for ever conclude all Christians. And the rea∣son is this: The Authors of these Writings were either Apostles, or Apostolick Men, as has been
said before; and it is one of the matters of Fact reported in these Writings, that our Saviour did so assist these men with his Holy Spirit, that they were enabled faithfully and infallibly to Preach that Doctrine to others which he had delivered to them. Now if we be sure they were inspired in what they Preached; we may be as much as∣sured they were inspired in putting what they Preached into writing; since it was the same Do∣ctrine that they Preached and that they Wrote; and especially since after it was written it was to remain to all succeeding Generations, and to be a Rule of mens Faith so long as the world should last. And further, we are sure that all the Christians of those days did look upon those Writings to have a stamp of divine Authority upon them, and distinguished them from all other human Compositions. And to Evidence this, they made these Writings to be the Standard of their Belief; the Measure by which they tryed all Opi∣nions and Doctrines in Religion: So that what∣ever was not found in these Scriptures, was not accounted as necessary to Salvation; and what∣ever was found disagreeing from these Scriptures, was rejected as an Innovation, or an Error in Christianity. And of this we have sufficient Evidence from Antiquity. Well, but how shall we know whether these
Scriptures be faithfully transmitted down to us? How do we know but that they may have been corrupted since the time they were written, and made to speak different things now, from what they did at the first? This is the last Question upon this Argument; and in Answer to it, I say in the Sixth Place; If the Providence of God, as I told you before, was ever concerned to preserve any Writings from being depraved or corrupted; it was cer∣tainly more especially concerned to do it, as to the Writings we are now speaking of, they being of such vast Importance to all the Generations of Mankind. But I do not leave the matter so. There is Evidence of Fact as well as Reason to be offered in this Case. Let the Books of the New Testament, as we now have them, be tryed by the severest Rules of Criticism. Let the Copies both Ancient and Modern, which are extant of them, be compa∣red. Let the several Versions of them likewise that were made in the earliest times be examined. Lastly; Let all the Ecclesiastical Writers from the beginning of Christianity to this day, who have either commented upon them; or proved any Doctrine from them; or but occasionally quoted them in their Writings, be searched into: It will appear by all these ways of Tryal, that our Scrip∣tures
are the same at this day, that they were at the beginning, without any material difference. Indeed, considering the multitude of Copies that were taken of these Books, and the several Translations that were made of them into other Languages, even shortly after the time they were first published; we cannot imagine it possible, that in After-ages, any thing could be foisted into them, to serve the Turn of any Party, but the Imposture would have been presently disco∣vered. And accordingly we find, that when any Attempts of this kind have been made, there were not wanting those who took care to detect and expose them. I do not, when I say this, deny that there are ma∣ny differences and various readings to be met with, in the ancient Copies of these Books, occasioned by the negligence or mistakes of Transcribers. Nay, and some few Passages may be wanting in some Copies that are found in others: But then I desire it may be observed that these differences are of such small moment, that it is of no Impor∣tance to the Christian Faith, which of the Read∣ings be right, and which of them be wrong. For they all agree in all the Matters which con∣cern either our Saviour's Doctrines, or his Precepts, or the Proofs he gave of his Divine Mission. And farther agreement than this I think none needs to desire.
Indeed if slight and verbal differences in Copies be a good Argument against the Genuineness of a Writing; we have no Genuine Writing of any ancient Author at this day. For the same thing has happened to all old Books whatsoever, that have been often transcribed: And to suppose, that it should be otherwise in the Books of the Scripture, is to suppose, that God ought in every age, as immediately and infallibly to guide the Pen of every Transcriber of them, as he did the Minds of their first Authors. To make now a little Reflection on what I have said about the Scriptures of the New Testa∣ment. It is urged by our Deists, as a very hard thing, That whereas, when the Gospel was first preached, men had opportunities of being con∣vinced by their senses of the Truth of it; (or at least it is pretended they had such Opportuni∣ties) we now are only referred to a Book that gives us an account of these matters: Why, I desire to know, what other way they would have had an account of them but by Books? Would they have had our Saviour to come down from Heaven every Fifty or Threescore years, and to Preach the same Doctrine; and Confirm it by the same Miracles to the men of that Generation, that he once did among the Iews? Yet this it must be supposed necessary for
him to do, if Men cannot otherwise be convin∣ced of the Truth of his Religion, but by their Senses. Nay, that would not be enough: He must not only publish his Doctrine, and repeat his Miracles to every Age, but to every individu∣al Man of every Age: Otherwise All Men had not opportunity of being convinced by their Senses, and consequently could not upon reasonable grounds believe in him. But if this Supposition be absurd, as it certainly is; then we must be content (and there is all the reason in the world we should be so) with that sort of Evidence for the Truth of his Gospel, that other Matters of Fact, done at a great distance of time from us, are capable of: That is to say, Authentick Wit∣nesses of them at the first; and the Testimony of those Witnesses faithfully transmitted down to Posterity. And how any Testimony can be more faithfully transmitted, than by the way of Writing, let them shew us, if they can. And then, as for the Books or Writings that we refer you to in this Case, we ask no more for the gaining Credit to them, than only that it may be seriously considered, of what sort they are, and what Authority they carry along with them. We do not send you to Herodotus, and Pliny, or such like Writers; who, though they were very good Authors, yet took a great deal of what they said, from uncertain Reports.
Much less do we send you to a Golden Legend, or the Lives of the Saints, as they have been written of later days, by Men who took advantage of the Ignorance and Credulity of the Age they liv'd in, to obtrude what they pleased upon the World. But we send you to Authors who themselves knew, and were Witnesses of what they wrote. Who gave all possible proof of their Sincerity and Integrity, not only by publickly, in all places, asserting the Truth of what they had written, but some of them also sealing it with their Blood. Who were so assisted with the Divine Spirit, that they themselves wrought the same Miracles, for the confirmation of Christ's Doctrine, that they had recorded him to have done. And lastly, Who in all succeeding Ages were had in such veneration among Christians, that their Writings were esteemed the Platform and Standard of True Faith: And upon which they set so high a value, that they would keep them at the Peril of their Lives. And Instances we have of Multitudes, who rather chose Torments and Death, than they would deliver up their Bibles. Taking now all this together, can any thing like it be said for the Truth or the Authority of any other Book in the world? But this is not all. I desire in the Seventh and last place, it may be considered; That we do
not send you to a bare Book for the Proof of the Christian Religion, how much soever that Book may have the Marks, not only of a True and Genuine, but also of a Divine History. But we insist upon a great many other things for the Proof of the Matters contained in that Book, besides the Authority of the Book it self. If indeed nothing had followed upon Christ's publishing his Gospel, and we had never heard more of it, or him, save what we might happen to meet with in those Old Writings; I do not know how far their Evidence alone, now at the distance of near Seventeen hundred Years, would have prevailed with us to embrace his Religion: But now when we see and are convinced, that so many remarkable Effects ensued upon his Preaching in the world, and still continue visible at this day; which yet cannot be ascribed to any other cause, than to the particular Power and Providence of God, which was concerned to ju∣stify our Saviour, and his Pretensions to the world: This is certainly a new Evidence, and a standing one, both for that Book which mentions all these things, and especially for that Cause it maintains. The Case of the Christian Religion is plainly this. Iesus Christ, a mean Person as to his out∣ward Circumstances, sets up for a Preacher of a new Religion. And this, not in the times of
Ignorance, and Barbarism (when an Imposture might be supposed more easy to be carried on, and which Advantages Mahomet afterwards made use of) but in the Reign of Augustus Caesar, when Learn∣ing, and Arts, and Sciences were in the most flou∣rishing Condition, that ever they were known to be. He chuses a Company of very ordinary Un∣lettered Men, but very Honest Men, to be the Witnesses of his Conversation and Doctrine. And these he designs for the Spreaders of his Re∣ligion throughout the World. He neither makes use of Arts, nor Arms for the gaining Disciples to himself: only declares plainly, that he is the Person, whom God had long before promised to send, and whom he did now send, to publish Eternal Salvation to all that should believe in him. The Religion which he taught, and which all his Followers were to take upon them, was so far from gratifying Flesh and Blood, that it seem∣ed much better contrived, as the World then stood, for the frighting men from it, than for the alluring Proselytes to it. For there was nothing in it that ministred to any sensual or worldly purposes; nothing that tended to make a man either wise, or rich, or great, or happy, in the sense of this world; but all the quite contrary. He that would be
his Disciple, must quit all the popular Notions about Happiness. Instead of being thought wise, must submit to be counted a Fool for Christ's sake. Instead of getting Wealth, or Honour, or Preferment, must be prepared to part with all these things, if he was already possessed of them; must de∣ny himself, and all his Temporal Interests; nay must forsake Father and Mother, and his own Life also, whenever he was called to it. The way to Heaven, as he taught it, was by Humility and Meekness, and Contempt of the World, and all the Glories of it; by patient suffering Afflictions and Injuries, and an ab∣solute Resignation of our selves to God, to do and suffer whatever was his Will. And he himself, as he lived thus, so did he thus go off the Stage; being af∣ter Three Years preaching this sort of Doctrine, hanged up on a Cross, as an Impostor, and that by the Vote of his own Countrymen. Where now was the temptation to the generality of men, to own this Man as a Prophet sent from God to Mankind? Why, in truth, by what I have yet represented, there was very little: Nay indeed, to any one that considers these beginnings of the Gospel, it will be matter of Astonishment that any more came of it, and that it did not presently dye with the Author of it. But here was the thing. Our Lord, in how poor a Condition soever he lived, yet he spake as never man
spake. He so explained the Old Scriptures which fore∣told of him: He taught such Important Truths con∣cerning another Life; concerning the Nature and Providence of God, and his Mercy to lost Mankind, and the way in which he would be served, and in what sort of things it was, that true Religion did consist, that he pierced the very Souls of those that heard him. There was so much Evidence in the Truths themselves that he delivered, that no honest virtuously-disposed Minds could stand out against them, but must be convinced in their own Consci∣ences, that this, of all that they had ever heard of, was a Religion worthiest to come from God, and most accommodated to the Spiritual Needs of men; nay, and their Temporal ones too, supposing that all men would embrace it. And then the whole Tenor of his Life was suitable hereunto: For he appeared in all his Actions and Conversation, to be a Man of so much Candor and Goodness, and Clearness of Spirit; so Humble, so Just, so Prudent, so Charitable, so Obliging to all Mankind; so full of Piety and Devotion, and Re∣signation to God; and lastly, so free from all suspi∣cion that he carried on any selfish Designs; that all these Heavenly Doctrines came better out of his Mouth, than if any other had delivered them. But that which crowned all was this; that through∣out the whole Stage of his Life there was a visible
Evidence of a Divine Power and Presence going along with him, which shewed it self in a thousand Instances of the most glorious Miracles that ever were seen or heard of in the world, and that to the Amaze∣ment of the whole Country where he lived. In this manner, I say, did our Saviour lay the Foundation for a Belief of his Doctrine, to all suc∣ceeding Generations; and a solid unshaken Foun∣dation it was. But yet for all that, if the Power of God had stop∣ped here, I do not know what Superstructure would ever have been made upon this Foundation. For so it was, that those very men, those honest plain-hearted men that he had taken into his Family, to be Witnesses of what he did and taught, with a design, as I told you, of sending them abroad to publish all those things throughout the World; yet when he came to dye, such poor-spirited Creatures they proved, that every man of them forsook him. O sad Example of human Frailty and Inconstancy! those men that had the greatest opportunities of knowing him and his Doctrine, and had professed the most firm Resolutions of adhering to him; yet all forsook him in the hour of danger, and shifted for themselves. But God Almighty, tho he suffered good men to act as men, did not therefore lay aside that great De∣sign he had set on foot by our Lord Jesus; no, nor
of accomplishing it by the Ministry of these very men. For he raised up his Son from the dead on the Third Day (as our Saviour had before told them he would); and this put new Life and Spirit into those Persons that had lately abandoned him. But that was not all. Our Saviour calls them all together after he was thus risen from the dead. He acquaints them with the Work that he had committed to them. He assures them that he will be with them, and those that should succeed them in that Ministry for ever. Not in Person, for he was to continue in Heaven to intercede for all Believers at the Right Hand of God; but by the Virtue and Presence of the Holy Spirit, who was to be his Deputy and Vice∣gerent upon Earth. This Holy Spirit he would in a few days send down upon them, who should effectu∣ally furnish and endue them with all Powers, and Qualities, and Abilities, needful for the discharge of so great a Work, as the Conversion of the World to his Religion, was. And after he had told them these things, he visibly in their Presence ascended up into Heaven. Here now begins Christ's Kingdom. He had con∣quered Death before, and now he comes to conquer the Devil and the World. From henceforward you hear of no Fear, no Pusillanimity, no mean Behaviour in any of the Apostles. They then go and Preach to all the World that Gospel which their Master order∣ed
them. No Danger frights them: No human Learning or Philosophy is able to stand before them. The greatest Obstacles, the greatest Terrors that come in their way, are so far from making them quit the Work they had begun; that they rather prove In∣centives to them to go on in it. They make it their business to gain Souls in every place to Jesus Christ: They run about the whole Roman Empire, and far∣ther than ever that extended. They pretend to no Eloquence, no polite Learning, no Arts of Insinua∣tion: But they preach a plain, honest, pious Do∣ctrine; but withal such a Doctrine, that as the Times then went, a man must expect to bid an everlasting Adieu to all the Wealth, and Pleasures, and Ho∣nours of this World, if he once embraced it. They declare to all people the Authority they had for the Preaching this Doctrine. They vouch our Lord Je∣sus Christ as the Author of it, who died for the bear∣ing Testimony to it; and rose again for its Confir∣mation; and is now King of Heaven and Earth. And they shewed that they had an Authentick Com∣mission from Heaven for the doing all this; by speak∣ing the Language of every Country where they came, without ever being taught it; by curing all diseased people that were brought to them; by dispossessing Devils; by giving sight to the blind; and making the lame to walk, and restoring dead Bodies to life. All these wonderful things they did all the World
over. And what the Effects hereof were, was manifest every where, and continues manifest to this day. The Gospel spread like Lightning in all places: And whereever it came, Pagan Idolatry was con∣founded: Till at last the whole Roman Empire was converted to the Religion of Jesus Christ. Converted it was by men naked and unassisted; without the least Encouragement at the first from the Secular Powers, nay, in contradiction to the severest Penalties that the Secular Powers could contrive or decree to hinder it. We grant indeed, that many thousands of brave men did lose their Lives in this Religious War be∣tween our Lord Jesus Christ and the Devil (who was then the Prince of this World), and did patient∣ly submit to Death, that they might assert the truth of our Saviour's Cause: But that was Christ's way of vanquishing the Devil: He did thus break the Serpent's head, while the Serpent bruised his heel: And he did at last by this way effectually break his Kingdom; as is visible and notorious even from that time to this day. And now I Appeal to every one, Whether this, which is matter of Fact, and known to all men that look into the Histories of Time; and of which we at this day see and enjoy the happy Effects, in having the Christian Religion, not only received among us, but made a part of our National Constitution: I say, whether this be not a convincing Proof, both of the Truth of our Religion, and likewise of those Scriptures from whence we fetch it.
Had not the Christian Religion been true, how could these things have ever come to pass? Seeing it is utter∣ly unconceivable, that without a Divine Power they could be effected. And sure none can suppose that God would exert his Power for the confirming of a Falshood. And again; had not our Scriptures been true like∣wise, or had they been the Fictions of any designing men; how is it possible they should have given us an account of these things so long before they came to pass, and when there was so little appearance of their ever coming to pass? And yet all that I have now mentioned is plainly there set down, as foretold by our Saviour, and his Apostles: And not only those things, but a great many other remarkable Events are there also foretold, which have since been exactly made good. I hope by what hath been said, it doth appear that we at this day have sufficient Arguments to oblige us to be∣lieve and adhere to the Religion of Jesus Christ, tho we never saw the Original Proofs he gave of it; which was the Point I was to make good. For I think I have shewed, That if those Proofs were good and conclusive at the first, to them that saw them, and were Witnesses of them; they are so to us now, who receive them upon their Testimony. And as for the difference that may be alledged in point of Evidence, between a man's seeing a thing, and receiving it upon the Report of others; all that, I think, by the account I have given, is in a great measure out of doors as to this matter. For the Report
upon which we receive the Gospel, being so Authen∣tick, so unexceptionable, and likewise so confirmed by Matters of Fact still visible to us, it amounts to as strong a Proof, as if we had Evidence of Sense. And I do in my Conscience believe, that there is not a man in this Na∣tion now stands out against the Religion of Jesus Christ, but who would have done so, if he had lived in the time of our Saviour, and heard him preach the Gospel. As for us who believe, let us persevere in our Faith without wavering. Our Faith is never the worse for not seeing. Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have be∣lieved. And as for those that do not believe, their not seeing will be no excuse for them, if our Saviour may be Credited: For it was as well with respect to them that did not see, as to them that did, that he pronoun∣ced his Definitive Sentence, when he sent out his Apo∣stles to Preach his Religion: Go (saith he) and preach the Gospel to every creature: He that believeth and is bapti∣zed shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned. God give us all Grace to consider the things that belong to our Everlasting Peace. That both all those who now oppose the Truth as it is in Christ Iesus, may be converted from the Error of their ways; and that all those who do own and profess it, may adorn the Doctrine of God which he hath called them to, by a pure, holy, and unblameable Life; to the Glory of God, and the Eternal Salvation of their Souls, in the Day of our Lord Jesus. To whom, &c. FINIS.
