S3852 13553532 100231
A SERMON Preach'd before the SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of Manners IN DUBLIN, April the 11th, 1699. By ALEX. SINCLARE. Published at the Desire of the said Societies. DUBLIN, Printed by John Brocas in School-House-Lane, near High-Street, for John Bentley at the Corner of Nicholas-Street, over against the Tholsel, 1699.
TO THE SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of Manners. Gentlemen, THAT Glorious Work which you have the Honour to be imployed in; hath afforded abundant Matter for your Great and Noble Attempts; and also a very large and pleasing Subject for the many Excellent Discour∣ses that have been Preach'd and Publish'd to instruct and quicken you therein. But this Field (how fruitful soever it was) hath been reapt down by so many more Skilful Labourers, that I have been left, with the Moabitish Damsel, only to glean among their Sheaves; but hope for the Charity of Boaz, that if I gather some handfuls they have let fall, I shall not be reproach'd. But I will not make any further Apologies (how needful soever they may be) for my defects in this Performance; for it is enough, that what I have done was in compliance with your Desires, whom I esteem very highly for your Works sake; and in Obedience to their united Requests, to whose Spirits mine ought to be subject: and that by overcoming the Reluctancy I had to expose my Weakness in this manner; I give the great∣er Testimony of my fervent, if not prudent, Zeal for the Work you are engaged in. A Work that was the Desire of former Ages, is the Glory of this; and may leave a Blessing for those to come: which the Covenant of God, the God of your Fathers, doth oblige you to be active in: which hath derived many Signal Blessings upon us already. And that it is the great Duty and Honour of the Zealous Inhabitants of our Jerusalem; and how far it may determine our future Condition; and that our Hopes and Fears depend upon the Success of it, I have endeavoured to show, in the following Discourse.
You are encouraged, by the Presence and Promises of God, whose Cause it is, and who hath blest you with wonderful Success: And also by the excellent Zeal of his Vicegerent, our great Josiah, who hath given Life and Vigour to it: May he be also as David (as he resembles him in many other things) to prepare abundant Materials, to build a most Glo∣rious and lasting Temple for Generations to come. Nay, may he be a∣nother Zerubbabel, not only to lay the Foundation, but also to hold the Plummet in his hand till he hath finished it, and brought forth the head Stone thereof. And may he be as Successful to vanquish the Devil's Kingdom at home, by a more Glorious Conquest; as he hath been to re∣duce his Enemies abroad to an Honourable Peace. You, and such as you, are his Worthies and Armies, upon whom he must rely in this War∣fare against the Powers of Darkness. Our Elders also have strengthened your Hands, by their ready Com∣pliance, to Enact many good and necessary Laws that you are to assist in the Execution of: Our Governours and Judges, our Magistrates and ma∣ny considerable Persons, both in Church and State, do give their help and countenance to it. So that many great Names of Majesty and Honour, Excellency and Justice; Grace and Authority, are all on your side: and many more of all ranks and sorts of Persons, do now approve your gene∣rous Designs, and are daily coming over to you. And shall not all this ex∣cite your Zeal, quicken your Diligence, and encourage your Perseve∣rance; and reproach them that are yet backward to joyn with you, and assist in such an Honourable, and Successful Ʋndertaking. And it's no small Encouragement, that so many of different Perswasions in other matters, do so heartily conspire together to carry on this happy Work, wherein we are all agreed; who do also provoke one another to a generous Emulation of promoting the great Designs of our common Pro∣fession: not to a spiteful Envy, that hath been the Curse and Character of the unhappy times that are past: and may they be for ever past. And may the Blessed God continue to protect and honour your Persons, direct all your Counsels, and prosper your Zealous Endeavours in this, and eve∣ry good Work: and may he cause the Dawnings of this Blessed Day to shine more and more, till all the promiser Mercies to his Church and People in this World have their Accomplishment; and bring us to that perfect State where there shall be no need of a Reformation: These are, and shall be, the earnest Prayers of Your Affectionate Friend, and Faithful Servant in the Gospel, Alex. Sinclare.
A SERMON Preach'd before the Societies for Reformation, &c. 2 Chron. Ch. 34. latter part of vers. 32. And the Inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the Covenant of God, the God of their Fathers. THE Text, I have chosen, seems Calculated for this Meridian; and evidently appears to be suitable to the present Occasion: For it's an everlasting Record; to the great Honour of the illustrious Inhabitants of Jerusalem; for their active Zeal, in the most Glorious Reformation, that was ever known in the Kingdom of Ju∣dah. This Blessed Work had its first Rise and Spring in the tender Heart of that great Reformer,2 Chr. 34.19.27. the incomparable Josiah; who carried it on to such a perfection; That, after a large description of its successful Progress; it's said,2 King. 23.1.24. 2 Kin. 23.25. That, Like unto him there was no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all his Heart, and with all his Soul, and with all his Might, accord∣ing to all the Law of Moses; neither after him Arose there any like him. He called the Elders together, and caused
all the People to enter into a Covenant, to turn unto the Lord: But these Renown'd inhabitants of Jerusalem, Sig∣nalized themselves beyond all others; by their ready Com∣pliance, and needful Assistance; for they Did according to the Covenant of God, the God of their Fathers. And that this High Commendation of them may be well understood and fitly applied; I shall briefly explain these three Things in it. I. Who these Inhabitants of Jerusalem were. II. What is the Covenant of God, the God of their Fa∣thers, &c. III. How they did according to it. The first of these will be easily known; if you consider, That Jerusalem was the Metropolis, or chief City, of the Kingdom of Judah; and that these Inhabitants of it are distinguished, not only from them that were present in Je∣rusalem and Benjamin; and them that pertained to the Chil∣dren of Israel, mentioned in the Context before and after: But also from the Elders spoken of,Ab eo decreta & judicia exibant in omnem Israelem. Dr. Light. Vol. 1. p. 609. vers. 29. who were the Magistrates or Members of the great Sanhedrim the Supreme Council, and Court of Judicature, not unlike to our Parli∣aments. These the King gathered together, to advise about the necessary and arduous Matters of the Kingdom, who speedily performed their Parts: And therefore these inhabi∣tants are chiefly to be understood of private Persons dwel∣ling in this City; and such only I expect my Hearers to be, and therefore shall not be solicitous to extend the Words a∣ny further. Secondly, The Covenant of God, &c. is the Divine Law, written in the Books of Moses and the Prophets, with their solemnly declared Consent; which gives it the proper Deno∣mination of a Covenant. This Book was found by Hilkiah the High-Priest in the Temple, and brought to the King, who read it in the Ears of the People, both great and small, that were met together in the House of the Lord; and ha∣ving solemnly engaged himself to walk after the Lord, to keep
his Commandments, &c. he caused them also to declare and give their Consent, and is therefore called the Book of the Covenant, v. 30. And in the Text, the Covenant of God, the God of their Fathers; because it contains the Terms of that Covenant which God made with their Fathers,Ex. 24.7.8. and the manner of its solemn Ratification; when Moses sprinkled the Blood upon the Altar, and the People, who declared their Consent, by saying, All that the Lord hath said, we will do, and be Obedient, Ex. 24.7. And now it may be well supposed, that they Renewed this Covenant, and ex∣pressly engaged themselves to perform all the words of it; as its here said, They did according to the Covenant of God, the God of their Fathers. Thirdly, They are chiefly commended here, for doing ac∣cording to this Covenant; which signifies their faithful and active diligence, by which they excell'd all others: For whereas the rest were rather passive to suffer the Reformation to be carried on, which they could not hinder, and durst not oppose; as its said, the King caused them by constraint, to stand, or give their Consent, to the Covenant, and that he made, or compelled them, by some necessary force upon their backward inclinations, to serve, even to serve the Lord their God: But the more Noble inhabitants of Jerusalem of∣fered themselves willingly and were active; both to Reform themselves, and to assist all they could to Reform others. That they complied with the Covenant, and were active to Reform themselves, is plainly signified by this Expression. And that it further implies their necessary Assistance to Re∣form others also, will evidently appear, if we consider these two things. 1. That this Glorious Reformer put away all the abomi∣nations that were spied in the Land of Judah, and in Jerusa∣lem;2 King 23.24. and by a just execution of the Law, reclaimed the peo∣ple that were unwilling, and compell'd them to serve the Lord; which he could not do by himself alone, but stood in need of Informers to assist him; and we Read of none
others that did so, but these Honored Inhabitants of Jerusalem. 2. That it was a part of the Covenant; for the Divine Law commanded it; That all the People should assist in the Punishment of notorious Offenders, that could not other∣ways be Reclaimed:Deut. 13. And we have no cause to doubt; that the Zealous Inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to this part of the Covenant of God. And their generous assistance was Crowned with Glorious Success, to spread the Refor∣mation in an eminent manner thro' the whole Kingdom; and a special Mark of the Divine Favour, and the Honour that comes from God, is here fix't upon these Renown'd inhabi∣tants of Jerusalem. And now from all that hath been said, doth clearly arise this. Doct. 1.DoctriN. 1. That it's a singular advantage to the Publick Work of Reformation, and will redound to the great Honour of the Inhabitants of the chief City of a Kingdom, when they are vigorously engaged in it, to Reform themselves, and all others as they have Opportunity. In Prosecution of this Truth, I shall only propose to your Consideration these two Propositions that are implied, and inforce them with two Arguments that are expressly contain∣ed in it. 1. That when a Publick Reformation is happily begun by the Supreme Powers, and carried on by the just Execution of necessary Laws in that Case made and provided: All Persons should not only submit to them, and be active to Reform themselves, but also assist all they can in their seve∣ral Stations and Capacities to Reclaim others. For to resist and seek to be Revenged on them, who are ready to perform such a kind and needful Office, and so to render Evil for Good; is hellish Madness, and to Act like Devils incarnate;Jo. 8.44. for as Christ says of such: They are of their Father the Devil, and the Lusts of their Father they will do, who was a Murderer from the beginning. And to be only Passive, and tamely suffer themselves to be Reclaimed, or patiently to bear the just Punishment of
their Miscarriages; is no better than brutish Subjection,Ps. 32.9. and to act like the Horse or Mule that must be held in with Bitt and Bridle. Nay, To be active only to comply with the Precepts of the Law, and Reform themselves, is but humane Prudence, and to acquit themselves meerly as Men, that are capable of Moral Government. But to give a good Example by their own cheerful Obe∣dience, and vigorously endeavour to Reform others also; is a Noble act of that excellent grace of Charity, which the Christian Religion doth indispensibly require, by which they imitate God himself, and act like his Children. And, That this is the necessary Duty, not only of Magi∣strates in Authority, who must not bear the Sword in vain;Ro. 13.4. but also of private Persons as they have Opportunity and Abilities, in their Places and Stations, to be aiding and assist∣ing, by their faithful Informations, wise Counsels, social Combinations, vigorous Prosecutions, liberal Contributions, and all other lawful and necessary means to Reform a vitious Age. This hath been so fully Explained, Proved, Press't and Vindicated, in those excellent Discourses that have been Pub∣lish't on this Occasion, That I shall only refer you to them, and proceed to another Proposition implied here. 2. That the Inhabitants of the chief City of a Kingdom, should be the most forward and active to engage themselves in this Work; to be the first and most illustrious instances of sincere Obedience to the Laws, by their own personal Re∣formation; and also to assist, with their utmost diligence, in the just Execution of them upon Notorious Offenders, that their fellow Citizens being first Reclaimed; the whole Na∣tion may be likewise Reformed. This may well be expected from them, who ought to be first and best acquainted with the Laws to be put in Execu∣tion. And as they would be thought, and are generally e∣steemed to be Men of better Parts, and higher Improve∣ments, to have greater Abilities, and more Advantages; to
excel others in Wisdom, Riches, Interest and Conduct; and to be intrusted with many excellent Talents, that qua∣lify them to be useful Instruments in such a Work: So they must give an awful and strict Account,Math. 25.19. Luc. 12.48. how they have im∣proved them for the Glory of God, and in the service of their Generation according to the Opportunities put into their Hands. But there are two Arguments expressly contained in the Doctrine, that are sufficient to confirm and enforce this which I will briefly mention, and is all that I shall say upon it. I. That their Zealous Endeavours will exceedingly advance the Work thro' the Nation. And II. They will greatly inhance their own Glory. 1. It's a singular advantage to the Publick Work of Refor∣mation, to make it spread thro' the whole Kingdom, when the Inhabitants of the chief City are vigorously engaged in it; for the Glorious Lustre of their excellent Example, will provoke many to imitate them; and the powerful influences of their successful Attempts be quickly dispersed thro' all the Country: For as the Blood circulating thro' the Heart, receives a fresh Vigour and Tincture, which it conveys to all parts to repair the Health and Strength of the whole; so the Trade and Treasure of a Nation doth usually circulate thro' the chief City, and brings there a continual concourse of the most active people from all Parts, who receiving the impressions of your Zealous Diligence to Reform them; will carry them back and communicate them to others, as the most profitable part of their Traffick. And as plentiful Streams derive their noxious or wholsome Vertues from their Springs, and carry them to all places where they flow; so the Fountains of Virtue and Vice are usually found in the chief Cities of a Kingdom, and thence disperse themselves thro' the whole Land;Jer. 23.15. Is. 2.3. for both Profaness and the Word of the Lord went forth from Jerusalem. We have observed by sad experience, how the Contagion of that Wickedness which began and reigned in our chief Cities, did quickly spread
thro' the whole Nation; and why may not the influence of your Virtue; when this Metropolis is Reformed, prevail as much, and spread as far? Let us cleanse the Fountains, and the Streams will run clear. Surely the good and wise King Josiah took this Course; when he first caused them that were present in Jerusalem to stand to the Covenant, and took a∣way all the abominations that were Spied there; and then put away the like abominations, out of all the Countries that pertained to the Children of Israel, and made them to serve the Lord. And now, if ever we expect a general Refor∣mation of this Kingdom, it must begin and receive its suc∣cessful Vigour by your Zealous endeavours in this City. Be strong therefore all ye People, and be Active, ye Inhabitants of our Jerusalem, that ye may have the Honour of being the happy Reformers, not only of one City, but also of a whole Nation. This brings me to the second Argument to Encourage and Quicken your Diligence, which is, 2. That it will redound to your own immortal Glory. The Work it self is Honourable, to Vindicate the Glory of the Blasphemed Name of God, and the Honour of his broken Laws and despised Government; to Conquer the Devils Kingdom, and vanquish all the ruleing Powers of Dark∣ness; to restrain Lewd and Prophane Sinners from their de∣structive Courses, and rescue them, as far as you can, from their everlasting Perdition; to repair the almost sunk Credit of our Holy Profession, and restore Religion to its Primi∣tive Power and Purity; to prevent, if possible, the direful Executions of impending Judgments, and derive many last∣ing Blessings upon the Nation: This is the Work you are engaged in; these and such like are the Glorious Effects and Tendencies of it; which are greater than all the Victories of Alexander, who having Conquered the World, could not Reform one Person; No, not himself. And all the swel∣ling Titles of the most Renown'd Hero's on Earth, are flat, and not to be compared with the Honourable Name of Zea∣lous Reformers. 'Tis God himself, the Fountain of all
Glory, who confers this Honour upon you, and doth Re∣cord your Names in his Book; as he did the Noble Inhabi∣tants of Jerusalem; where they shall be more durable than if they were ingraven on Brass or Marble. You are Ho∣nourable in his Account, and he will make others to Esteem you so; for he hath set you upon High Places to be seen and admired by all;Math. 5.14.16. You Act in a City set upon a Hill, that your Light may so shine before Men, that they seeing your good works, may Glorify your Father which is in Heaven: You move in one of our highest Orbs; that you may disperse your influences farther; and if you turn many to Righteousness, shall be Translated much higher,Dan. 12.3. to shine as the Stars for ever and ever. But, This Argument hath been so excellently Discoursed and well improved already, to excite your Zealous Diligence; that I will not further insist upon it.Vid. Mr. Emlins Reform. Sermon. And verily, I find it so hard to say any thing upon this Subject, that hath not been much better expressed by others; that I will leave this Doctrine as it is, with what I have said upon it; and before I come to the Application, will seek for, and raise another, from two principal Circumstances of the Text, which are the antecedent Occasion, and consequent issue of this Refor∣mation, that the Inhabitants of Jerusalem were so Active in. 1. The antecedent Occasion of it, was their danger of the Wrath of God, which was so expressly threatned against them, that it's spoken of v. 21. as already poured out upon them. This broke the tender Heart of good Josiah, that he Rent his Cloaths, and humbled himself before God, with penitential Tears;v. 27, 28. and was therefore assured by a Message from the Lord; That his eyes should not see all the Evil that he would bring upon that Place, and the Inhabitants of it. But knowing that he must use the means, and that none was more necessary than a thoro' Reformation; he applied him∣self effectually to it. He gathers the Elders, and calls the People together; caused them to enter into a solemn Cove∣nant, and made them to put away their Abominations and
serve the Lord, that the Judgments threatned against them might be averted; and upon this Occasion, the Zealous In∣habitants of Jerusalem were more active than others, to do according to the Covenant, and would have been happily delivered, if they had been as sincere and constant in it as their King was. But Secondly, Behold the consequent issue of all this; that it was not sufficient to appease the incensed Wrath of a provoked God, and to free them wholly from the dreadful effects of it: For after a large Description of the great suc∣cess of this Glorious Reformation, in 2 Kings ch. 23. from the beginning to v. 25. it immediately follows in v. 26. That notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great Wrath, wherewith his Anger was kindled against Ju∣dah, because of all the provocations, that Manasseh had pro∣voked him withal. And the event was answerable to this terrible Denunciation; when their Land was laid utterly de∣solate, their City and Temple wholly Destroyed, the great∣est part of their people cruelly Slain; and the rest carried in∣to a miserable Captivity, and kept there for a long and te∣dious 70 Years: So that hence you may Observe, 2d Doct. That an external Reformation begun in the chief City, and carried on with great success thro' the Kingdom; is the necessary means to prevent, and may sometimes effectu∣ally delay: But it is not always sufficient wholly to avert the Execution of impending Judgments from a sinful Nation. In this Doctrine are only these two Parts, that I will take No∣tice of. 1. That such a Reformation is the necessary means to di∣vert impending Judgments, and may effectually delay the Execution of them for sometime. This the tender hearted Josiah, and Zealous Inhabitants of Jerusalem were very sen∣sible of; and also successful, by their Blessed Endeavours, to deliver themselves and the Nation from the destructive Miseries they had deserv'd, during his good Reign, and four bad Kings that succeeded him. In which time, the Lord
waited to be gracious to them, rewarded their present At∣tempts, and made a further Tryal of their sincerity and con∣stancy in this Reformation.Rom. 2.4, 5, 6. But, because they despised the Riches of his goodness and forbearance, and long sufiering that should have led them to Repentance: After their Hardness and impenitent Hearts, they Treasured up unto themselves Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God, who rendered to them at last ac∣cording to their Deeds: Therefore, 2. Such an external Reformation, is not always sufficient to deliver a sinful Nation from the Calamities which they have long provoked a Jealous God to threaten against them: For there may be such Defects in a Reformation of this Na∣ture, that will render it altogether ineffectual to procure their Pardon, and freedom from his righteous Judgments: So that I will next enquire what were the fatal Defects of this great Reformation, and the Causes of their consequent Miseries, notwithstanding all that was done to escape them; and will only mention these two. 1. They turned not to the Lord with their whole Heart,Jer. 3.6, 10. but feignedly: as they are reproved by Jeremiah when he Prophesied in the days of Josiah the King. And there ap∣pears too much Evidence for such a Charge in the History of his Reformation.2 Kings 23.25. For tho' the upright Josiah turned to the Lord with all his Heart, and with all his Soul, and with all his Might: Yet the generality of the People had no Heart to the Work, but were forced to it, and went no farther than the Beast:2 Chron. 34.32, 33. for it's said, that he caused them to stand to the Covenant, and made them to serve, even to serve the Lord;2 Kings 23.3.  which they had no mind to do, if they had not been compelled to it. For what is said, 2 Kings, 23.3. That they did it with all their Heart. and all their Soul, seems to be a defect in our Translation; for there is no such Relative Particle in the Original,2 Chr. 34.31.  and the Grammatical Construction necessarily refers it to the King alone, for he is the only Per∣son spoken of in the beginning of the Sentence: And so it is applied to him only in v. 31 of this Chapter, where the
Affix is used in the Singular Number, and thus Translated; that the King stood in his Place, and made a Covenant before the Lord, to walk after the Lord, to keep his Command∣ments, Testimonies, and Statutes, with all his Heart, and with all his Soul. But the People were not sincere, and no such Commendation is given of them; for they still loved their former Sins, tho' they left them for a while; and there∣fore quickly turned to them again when the restraint was ta∣ken off in the succeeding Reigns: And a Jealous God who judges according to the Affections of Mens Hearts, would not be imposed upon by their outward temporary Professi∣on; but doth charge their Sins upon them still, continues his Threatnings against them, and at last executes upon them all the Judgments they deserved. 2. They made no Publick Confession of their gross and mul∣tiplied Sins, nor gave any Signs of a National Repentance for them; which the Prophet doth plainly insinuate to be their dangerous Neglect, when he exhorts them, Jer. 3.13. Only acknowledge thine Iniquity that thou hast transgressed a∣gainst the Lord thy God, and hast scattered thy Ways: and ye have not obey'd my Voice, saith the Lord. They compli∣ed with the Command of the King, to Reform; but neg∣lected the Calls of God, by his Prophets, to Repent. And this is also observable in the Account we have of their Reformation; that tho' the tender-hearted Josiah rent his Cloaths, and humbled himself with Tears before the Lord; yet we do not read of any one more that did so. And tho' the Inhabitants of Jerusalem acquitted themselves like Men,2 Chr. 34.27. and were active to reform themselves and others; yet most of them came short of being Penitent Saints, and Par∣doned Sinners. They were prevailed with to forsake their Sins, but not to expose them by an open Acknowledgement of their Iniquities. Being over tender, it may be, of their own, and the Reputation of the former wicked Reigns, they were willing to be reformed, without any publick Humilia∣tion. or expressions of their Grief and Shame, for their ma∣ny
aggravated Transgressions. We find afterward, in more successful Reformations by Ezra and Nehemiah,Ezra 10.1, 3. Neh. 9.1, 3. that all the People joyned with them in their Publick Confessions and Penitential Sorrows for their Sins. And this the Pro∣phet Jeremiah suggests to them as most necessary to justifie God in his Treatnings,So David thought, Ps. 51.4. and the only effectual means to turn away his Wrath from them and procure his Favour. The Guilt of Sin, or its actual Obligation to Punishment, doth always remain till it's removed by a Repentance suitable to the Nature of it: So that private Repentance may be suffici∣ent for the Pardon of secret Sins; but National Provocati∣ons require some publick Acts of Repentance to vindicate the Glory of God. and prevent the Execution of National Judgments. And therefore, because they did not glorifie God by a Publick Confession of their Iniquities; he glorified himself upon them by their General Destruction. These were the two fatal Defects in Josiah's Reformation; That tho' it was successful to delay, yet these made it ineffe∣ctual to deliver them wholly from the just Executions of Di∣vine Vengeance. And now, what remains but to make some Application.Applicati∣on. 1. By suggesting to you some causes of our Fears. 2. By shewing you the Grounds of our Hopes, concerning the Issue of our present Reformation. 3. By giving some Directions how you should behave your selves, that if it be possible, we may escape the Calamities that our National Sins have deserved. I shall begin with the first of these, by comparing our Condition with that of Judah; and if we shall find, upon inquiry, that ours is like to theirs, nay. if ours appears to be much worse, what reason then shall we have to fear, that we are still in danger of the Mi∣series we deserve? And 1. The chief and fundamental cause of our Fear is, the great Provocations we have been guilty of, which are too too like the Sins of Judah, if they do not exceed; and deserve severer Judgments than were inflicted upon them. And tho' I might run the Parallel much farther backward, yet I shall
confine my self at present to that which is expresly mention∣ed,2 Kings 23.6. as the reason why the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great Wrath, wherewith his Anger was kindled against Judah, viz. The Provocations that Manasseh had provoked him withal, i. e. The gross Iniquities that were committed in his Reign; countenanced, and in∣fluenced by his Command and Example; and conti∣nued through the much shorter, but as wicked Reign of A∣mon his Successor: And hath not the profligate Wickedness and Impiety, the horrible Profaneness and Lewdness, of the two late Reigns been equal to theirs? I have not time to mention either of them, nor to compare them both toge∣ther. You may do it your selves if you'll read 2 Kings, 21 ch. and 2 Chron. 33 ch. And consider what hath been acted of late in these Kingdoms; for which God may as se∣verely punish us. as he did Judah for their Sins. The 2d cause of our Fear. is from the Dispensations of Gods Patience; who hath long spared us, and his Patience been as oft abused by us: So that this may be the last Tryal he will take of us; and if we still provoke him to anger he may resolve to pass by us no more. For this was the case of Judah, as it's represented by the Prophesie of Am. 7.1.8. That he first threatned to send the Grass-hoppers to devour them; but at the Intercession of the Prophet, the Lord repented, and removed them. And again he called to contend by Fire; but this also shall not be, saith the Lord. And last of all he appears with a Plumb-Line, to take a stricter Account of them, and declares that he will not pass by them any more. And hath not the Lord been dealing so with us. when he delivered us from the Spanish Armado that appeared as Sea-monsters ready to devour us, but proved like Grass-hoppers easily dispersed? And from the Gun-Powder Plot that threatned to contend by Fire? but this also shall not be, saith the Lord. And hath not he repeated these Warnings by the Pestilence and Fire. that made a very great Destruction; but not a full end of us? Nay, hath he not
trippled them by the horrid Irish Rebellion in 41, and the Civil Wars that threatned our Dissolution? And also by our late Dangers that were like to have been more Fatal to us, if a Patient God had not seasonably interposed to deliver and restore us to this happy State in which we have another opportunity to reform and repent, that we may escape the last Effects of his Destructive Vengeance? And if we don't improve it aright, we have cause to fear what may be the dreadful Issue of such a Fatal Neglect. A 3d Cause of our Fear is, That very few are sincere and hearty in the Work of Reformation begun among us: Alas! this is too evident to be doubted; for tho' some Zealous In∣habitants of our Jerusalem are active to promote it: yet they are but a small number; and how many are very backward and unwilling to be engaged in it? nay, what vast Multi∣tudes do still resist, and at best, are only Passive, and must be forced to comply with it; but do still love their Sins, which they are compell'd to leave; and are ready to return to them again, if Restraints were removed. Your Experi∣ence doth sadly prove this, so that I need not say any more of it, to convince such as you are, of this reason of our fear. The 4th Cause of our Fear is, The want of National Repen∣tance, and publick Acknowledgements of the great iniquities that have abounded in these Kingdoms. We have had some days of Humiliation upon other Occasions; but there hath not yet been so much as a general Confession of the grievous Sins of the Two last Reigns. Whether we have been too tender of their Reputation or our own, it's certain we have not exposed them openly, and humbled our selves for them, with grief and shame before the Lord; which is necessary to vindicate the Glory of God, and deliver us from a Nati∣onal Destruction: For tho' a patient God may spare the worst of particular Sinners in this Life, because he will repay them fully in that to come; yet Nations will not appear as such to be judged and punished in the next World; and therefore cannot escape the direful Effects of
Divine Vengeance in this, without a publick Repentance for National Sins. A 5th Cause that increases our Fear, as it aggravates our Guilt and Danger is, what Judah is accused for, Jer. 3.6, 8, 10. That when She had seen all that God had done to Back-sliding Israel, yet her treacherous Sister Judah feared not, and turn∣ed to the Lord but feignedly, and not with the whole Heart. And have we not as doleful Instances of the sad Desolations of other Protestant Churches whom the Lord hath made to drink very deep of the Cup of his Indignation? and may he not cause us to drink of the Dregs of it? A Jealous God is on his way, and begun to punish others, and shall we escape? What reason have we to fear the last and most ter∣rible Effects of his Wrath, if we do not fear and turn to the Lord with our whole Heart? The 6th Cause of our Fear is, That we come so far short of the Reformation in Josiah's days: And if he executed the fierceness of his Wrath upon them, notwithstanding all their successful Attempts to reform the Nation, what shall become of us, who have not extended the Reformation so far as they did, either as to the Places and Persons that were reformed, or the Sins that were suppressed? 1. As to the Places and Persons that were reformed. The Reformation in Josiah's Reign was not confined to the City of Jerusalem, and those of Benjamin that were present in it; but extended to all the Cities of Judah and Benjamin: Nay, their Zeal carried it to all the Countrys that pertained to the Children of Israel, to Bethel, and the Cities of Samaria, that were not directly subject to the Kings of Judah: But it may be, that after the Ten Tribes were carried Captives, some of Judah Transplanted themselves, and made Colo∣nies there; which gave an advantage to the Zealous King of Judah to suppress their Idolatries, and cause them also to serve, even to serve the Lord. But alas! we have cause to lament it, that few other Cities do follow your Pious Example, and a very small part of the Country is yet reformed. Our
Plantations abroad are still a Reproach to our Nation and Religion by their insolent Wickedness and uncontrouled Impieties: And nothing is yet done to reclaim the Natives of this Kingdom from their Abominations: and, it may be, that for this Sin they have been so often the Rod of God's Anger to correct us; and if we still neglect their Souls, they may become the Sword of his Vengeance to destroy us. 2. We come as far short of their Reformation, with re∣spect to the Sins that were supprest: for all the Abominations that were spied in the Land of Judah and Jerusalem; and that were in all the Countries of the Children of Israel, did they put away, and restored their Religious Worship to its greatest Purity, according to all the Law of Moses: So that their Reformation seemed to be perfect in this Respect; but ours is very defective, for it hath not yet been extended so far. And many great Sins, which our Penal Laws do not reach, are still committed with Impunity; and those that are punishable do often escape: Some Persons pretend to a Prerogative above the Laws of God and Man, to pro∣phane the Sabbath. How much precious time is sinfully mispent in Ale-houses and Taverns, thro' the Week! and some are not ashamed to be found in them on the Lord's Day, if they are not catch'd there in the short time of Di∣vine Service: Nay, what Cursing and Swearing, Perjury and Blasphemy, Oppression and Injustice, Lewdness and Prophaneness, &c. are still abounding among us? And many are impudent to serve the Devil by such Wickedness, when few are Zealous for God, to give Information, and put the Laws in Execution against them: And if they did not escape that were so much more reformed;Jer 5.29 what shall become of such a sinful Nation as this? The 7th and last Cause of our Fear that I will mention, is from the many other Sins which abound among us, that cannot easily be restrained by Humane Laws, nor fall un∣der such a Reformation. As many Back-slidings and De∣clensions in the Ways of God; great Formality and Hypo∣crisie
in his Worship; Murmuring Complaints,1 Cer. 10.10. and Dis∣content at the Providence of God; Divisions and Conten∣tions among Professors: The Sins of Sodom, as Pride,Ezek. 16.49. ful∣ness of Bread, and abundance of Idleness; Love of the World, and Covetousness which is Idolatry, &c. For these, and such like Sins, may the Wrath of God be pour∣ed out upon a People; and so much of them is found among us that may justly increase our Fears; that notwithstanding all our Reformation, the Lord may not turn from the fierce∣ness of his Wrath, wherewith his Anger is kindled against us, &c. But some may possibly think,Objection. that these things are unsea∣sonable upon this Occasion and Object, that they expected only Encouragements to this Work: and behold! I have discouraged them altogether; for to what purpose shall they be active in it, if notwithstanding all they do, we are still in danger? and how can they be diligent that are possessed with these Fears? Answer 1.Ans. 1. If there be such real grounds of Fear, it's nei∣ther safe nor prudent to conceal, and be iguorant of them: for the Judgments we fear will neither come sooner, nor be greater, because they are foreseen and discerned at a distance: Every wise Person will desire to know his Danger:Prov. 23.3. For the Prudent Man foreseeth the Evil, and hideth himself, but the Simple pass on, and are punished. 2.Ans. 2. True Zeal will not be discouraged, but rather animated by apprehensions of Danger; as true Valour never appears so much as in the most hazardous Attempts. It's a pusillani∣mous Spirit that shrinks at the appearance of Danger, and sinks under its own Fears: Nay, such Fears will rather ex∣cite the most active Endeavours; and should make the Sloth∣ful diligent, and the Coward couragious. Persons in a Storm need no other Motive to excite them to the use of all means for their Safety, than a Sense of their Perilous Condition: their Danger is sufficient to provoke their Di∣ligence; and we never labour so hard and successfully as
when we work with Fear and Trembling.Phillip. 2.12. So that these are proper Motives to excite your Zeal, and quicken your Di∣ligence in this Work. 3.Ans. 3. 'Tis not a Prospect of the Event, but a Sense of Duty, that doth chiefly determine Upright Persons in their vertuous Attempts: for whatever be the Issue of them, 'tis their de∣sire to be found Faithful in the way of Duty. And as it hath been sufficiently proved to be your great Duty; so it may be a tryal of your Sincerity, if in the face, and over the fears of all Dangers, you are constant and vigorous in the Work of Reformation. 4.Ans. 4. If you are Sincere and Zealous in this Work, you shall not lose your Reward; which doth not depend upon your Success, but your faithful Diligence in it. And, supposing the worst that your Fears can suggest, concerning the Issue of it; the Lord will accept your Labours, and make you Honourable; you may deliver your own Souls, have great peace,Isa. 49.4, 5. and hopes of Everlasting Glory. Your Work is with your God, and you shall be Glorious in his Eyes. 5.Ans. 5. Tho' there be such causes of Fear to make you serious, yet there are also grounds of Hope to encourage and make you cheerful in this Work. 'Tis a very critical Season in which God keeps us upon our good Behaviour, that you may be cautious and careful to approve your selves to him in what you do; we have trespassed against the Lord, and therefore should be afraid of his Judgments.Ezra 10.2, 3, 4. Yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing: Now, therefore let us make a Covenant with our God, and put away all our Iniquities, and let it be done according to the Law: Arise, for this mat∣ter belongeth unto you; be of good Courage, and do it: For, Secondly,2 Applicat. In the next place I will show you what are the grounds of our Hope concerning the issue of this Reforma∣tion, and your generous Labours in it. And 1. You may lengthen out your Tranquility, procure a long Reprieve, and delay the Execution of threatned Judgments for a great while. You know not how far you may prevail
with a patient God, who hath often and long spared a sin∣ful Nation, but never poured out his Wrath upon a reform∣ing People. We may hope to escape whilst such Zealous Reformers survive:2 Chr. 34.28. and (as it was promised to Josiah) You may be gathered to the Grave in Peace, that your Eyes may not see all the Evil that he will bring upon this Place, and upon the Inhabitants of it. And as Hezekiah said in such a case, 2 Kings, 20.19. Good is the Word of the Lord; and is it not good if Peace and Truth be in my days? So it's good and worth all your Labours, if you prolong Peace and Truth as long as you live; and they may be continued much longer. And in the mean time, how much good may be done? how many may be converted and Eternally saved? Some may be prepared for their share of those Try∣als, and become useful to support and comfort others, and preserve a sense of Religion under them all. Nay, your faithful Diligence may have a further influence, to a∣bate the violence, and shorten the continuance of those miseries, and procure an happy Issue out of them, and re∣store a more prosperous State after they are past. Such have been the blessed Effects of the like Attempts, and may be so again; for the God you serve is as Patient and Long-suffering, as Merciful and Gracious, as ever. 2. Your Zealous Endeavours may be Crowned with much greater Success; and prevail so far as to remove all the Causes of our Fears, and supply all the defects of this Refor∣mation; that it may become effectual at last, to avert the Judgments threatned against us altogether: For hath not the Work prospered in your hands hitherto beyond all Mens Expectations? and who knows whereunto it may grow? and who would not take Encouragement to persevere and encrease their Diligence, when they find by glad Experi∣ence that their Labours are not in vain? It's very observable, what fresh Encouragement and great Advantages you have obtained upon every Occasion of this nature:2 Chro. 15.2. For even since the last time you have found that the Lord is with you while
you are with him: For by your Zealous Diligence, and the large Bounty that was liberally contributed to this Work, you have been successful in prosecuting those Lottery Games that had the pretence of Authority to support them. And what can stand before your vigorous Zeal? How much Leud∣ness and Prophaneness hath been supprest in this City? And we are told of considerable Progress that is made in other places. Our King, like the great Josiah, hath called the Elders toge∣ther, and effectually recommended it to them in Parliament, and they have made good Laws to promote it: Some Judges do earnestly recommend it to the Justices of Peace, and Magistrates in their Circuits, and greatly encourage the Execution of them. Some Persons of considerable Interest both in Church and State in England, begin warmly to e∣spouse it, and (as we are told) they express their Regret, that they have so long neglected it, and suffered meaner Persons to get the Honour of it. You have the Almighty God on your side, whose Work you do; and who makes it to prosper:Zech. 4.7, 8, 9, 10. So that Mountains become Plains before you; and therefore let none despise the day of small things; for he that laid the Foundations of this Work may also finish it, and bring forth the head Stone thereof with Shoutings; crying, Grace, Grace unto it. 3. A Spirit of serious Practical Religion is poured out upon many; and that which doth very much encourage our Hopes, that God hath some kind thoughts of Love and Peace for the rising Generation, is, that plentiful measures of it are fallen upon many young Persons; who are combined toge∣ther in several Societies for the Exercises of Godliness; and they are all continually praying for you: nay, you have the Prayers of all the Godly for your Success. And is it not from the same Spirit of Peace and Love, that there is such a blessed Harmony and Agreement among them of different Persuasions in other matters; who conspire joynt∣ly together to carry on this Excellent Work? And I hope, when some unreasonable Jealousies and Prejudices are worn
off, that it will procure a greater Union, which the envious endeavours of some spiteful Men shall not be able to pre∣vent. No small measures of a Spirit of Zeal have also been poured forth upon some Magistrates and Inhabitants of this City, and the Work hath prospered in their Hands; not by Might, nor by Power, but by the Spirit of the Lord. And how necessary and effectual such Divine Assistances are to perfect this Work hath been sufficiently proved in a former discourse of this nature;Vid. Mr. Weld's Reforma∣tion Ser∣mon. and our hopes are exceedingly rai∣sed by the successful appearances of them. 4. The present Revolution of Providence we are fallen un∣der, doth also encourage our Hopes: for if we understand a∣ny thing of the Apocalyptick Writings, the Antichristian Kingdom is begun to fall, and will gradually decline to its total Dissolution; and the Churches of Christ must propor∣tionably advance to their best, and most flourishing Condi∣tion: And tho' the Witnesses may be slain, yet its only in one Street of the great City,Rev. 11.8, 12. and they shall soon rise again to a better State. All Affairs in the World must effectually concur to the accomplishment of these Predictions; and now the Wheels of his Chariots seem to move very swiftly, and make haste, by the frequent great changes in the World, to perform some glorious Work that he hath designed for the great Happiness of his People. And being well assured, that we have espoused his Cause, and are a part of his true Church, we may comfortably expect, that he who hath done such won∣ders for us already, to deliver us from the very brink of Ruin, and restore us to all the Priviledges we enjoy, will perfect his Work, and bring to pass the great designs of his Provi∣dences and your Endeavours, which appears to be the same. 5. There is an amazing Providence of late that gives fur∣ther Encouragement to our great Hopes; which I will briefly mention, viz. That after all the Confusions and Wars that have been in most Nations of the World, we are suddenly surprized with an Universal Peace.Ps. 46.9. He hath made Wars to cease to the ends of the Earth. And usually such a Dispen∣sation
is accompanied with some great deliverance, or ad∣vancement of the Church; as there have been many Instan∣ces; particularly. The Reign of Solomon was the time of greatest Peace and highest Advancement of the Church un∣der the Old Testament. In the Reign of Darius, when the Temple was rebuilt,Zech. 1.11. and the Church most reformed, all the Earth was still, and at rest. In the days of Augustus, when the Temple of Janus was shut,The Temple of Janus was never to be shut, but when there was an Uni∣versal Peace thro' the World; and this was the third time of its shuting. Our Lord Jesus Christ came into the World, and laid the Foundations of the Gospel Church. And Cnstantine the Great re∣stored Peace to the Empire, and great Prosperity to the Church of God. And what may we now expect will be the Issue of such a sudden change of Affairs in the World? How quickly is the Scene altered, and the most hostile Na∣tions agreed in a general Peace? Surely, he hath hush't the World into this quiet condition, because he is about to do some great thing for the good of his Church; and a re∣forming People shall have the largest share of such Blessings. 6. 'Tis no small ground of our hopes in the last place, that a day of Solemn Humiliation hath been lately observed in most Protestant Churches abroad, and in our Neighbouring Lands; and is now appointed in this Kingdom by a publick Proclamation: That we may lay to Heart the Sins and Suf∣ferings of our persecuted Brethren, and deprecate the Judg∣ments which our manifold Sins and Provocations have most justly deserved. And if we improve such an happy Season, only to acknowledge our Iniquities wherein we have trans∣grest, and turn to the Lord with our whole Heart; we shall supply the two fatal defects of Josiah's Reformation, and may escape such Judgments as befel the Jews: who knows what such a day may bring forth? Let every one act their part, and provoke one another in a publick Confession of the notorious Sins we are still guilty of; that by a National Re∣pentance, Gods Wrath may be turned away, his Favour and the Blessings of it procured, our Fears prevented, and our
Hopes take place. And this leads me to the last thing I pro∣posed by way of Application; which is, 3. To give you some directions how to behave your selves,3 Applic. that if it be possible, we may be delivered from the destru∣ctive Evils our Sins have deserved. And because every Dis∣course of this Nature hath abounded with them, I shall briefly mention only these few. First,Direct. 1. Have a due Regard unto God, whose Cause you have espoused. Have a sincere Respect to his Glory as your End, and his Word as your Rule. Pray earnestly for his Counsel, Assistance, and Blessing; and be sure to avouch him for your God, by making a Solemn Covenant with him: I mean not, a National one, which you cannot do without the concur∣rence of Publick Authority, but a Personal one, to secure an In∣terest in him thro' Jesus Christ. For what will it avail you, to reform others from their publick gross Sins, if you perish at last for your own secret Hypocrisie.Luke 10.20. In this rejoyce not, that Spirits are subject to you, but rather rejoyce that your Names are written in Heaven. Secondly, Guard against those Sins you are most in danger,Direct. 2. and have been oft warned of; as Pride, Vain-Glory, private Revenge, Prejudices, Slavish Fears, Cowardly Withdraw∣ings, Rash and Irregular Attempts, &c. Thirdly,Direct. 3. Provoke others to give their Assistance to this Ho∣nourable Work you are engaged in. Recommend it by wri∣ting to your Acquaintance in other places, and speaking to those you converse with: Give them advice from your own Experience; and advance the Reputation of it by your Pru∣dent and Zealous Example. And if you have not access to them, that may have Influence upon the Reformation of our Colonies abroad, or the Conversion of our Natives at home; yet do you consult and contrive what may be the most proper methods to promote such a necessary part of this Work. Pro∣pose and speak of them as you have opportunity; it may be that your words will reach and stir up some that have Power, to make use of it for such Glorious Ends.
And let this also have a share in your fervent Prayers, that your Zealous Desires may, if your Endeavours cannot, ex∣tend to the utmost Bounds of such a necessary Reformation. Fourthly,Direct. 4. Where the Law is defective to suppress some Vices, by its Penal Sanction: Use the most Prudent Methods to reclaim those you have any influence upon. Disswade them from their constant Tippling Clubs, and haunting the Ale-house and Tavern thro' the Week: from their vain Recreations, and walking abroad on the Lords Day: from their unlawful or excessive Gaming, and frequenting the Theatre, and vain Plays, and such like scandalous Occasions of Vice and Im∣piety. A prudent Admonition in your Name may prevail much with them, that have any Shame or Probity remain∣ing: for God hath highly honoured your Societies, so that your Counsels may be as effectual as Commands; and your Reproofs as successful as the Restraints of a Penal Law. Fifthly,Direct. 5. Let every one be diligent and ready, according to their Ability, to give all the assistance they can. You that are not chosen Members of these Honourable Societies, do not envy, but support them; do not reproach, but vindi∣cate them. Be ready to give Informations as you have op∣portunity; and to assist on Juries for the prosecution of Of∣fenders. Repeat and inlarge your Liberal Contributions as there shall be occasion: and let us all be fervent in our Sup∣plications to Almighty God, that he would bless the Zealous Endeavours of those Renowned Inhabitants of our Jerusa∣lem, that are doing according to the Covenant of God, the God of our Fathers. FINIS.
