S5335 12362555 60277
Minervas Laureate breaths, whose face Is heere acquainted first with brass: His lofty stile, yet smooth and trim, Can make ev'n Tumours beauteous seem Romes Orpheus, who creates a GROVE, Which t'o thers Musicke could but move: Singing Thebes's Ruines, hee does teach The listning stones to mend the breach Wouldst know him! read his straines Thoust find This shews his face, but Those his Mind.
AN ESSAY UPON STATIVS: OR, THE FIVE FIRST BOOKS OF PVBL: PAPINIVS STATIVS his THEBAIS. Done into English Verse By T. S. With the Poetick History Illustrated. JUVENAL. Sat. 7. Tunc par ingenio pretium: nunc utile multis Pallere, & toto vinum nescire Decembri. LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-Lane. 1648.
NOBILI AMICORUM PARI, Do. GULIELMO PASTON BARONETTO, ET Do. GULIELMO D'OYLY EQV: AVRATO, MVSARVM EXVLVM ASYLIS, ET RELIGIONIS PROFLIGATAE ASSERTORIBVS, PATRONIS EIVS PLVRIMVM HONORANDIS, THOMAS STEPHENS VOTO ET MANCIPI CLIENS ADDICTISSIMUS, HASCE STATIANAS PRIMITIAS, IN GRATI ANIMI TESTIMONIUM, L. M. M.M.D.D.C.Q.
To the ingenuous Reader. READER, THou art here presented with a piece of Statius metaphrased: The Authour was twice crow∣ned Laureate, in the most Poticke, and best judging Times. It is not the least part of his glory, that he deserv'd Juvenals envy, as some judiciously suspect the applauding Satyrist. I intend to pick no quarrels with his Name or Country: but shall be well satisfied, if thy courtesie will allow him to be Naturaliz'd a∣mongst us. For those Criticall pens which have pub∣lished their ingenious disputes, between Ursulus and Surculus, (although, I conceive, neither were of kin to our Statius) would have deserv'd better of the Common-wealth of Learning, if they had held a torch to the darke and mysterious places of the Poem: Which, I dare say, would not be so much neglected, but that it is so little understood. The subject matter of the worke, is the most ancient of any History recorded by the Poets: And were it not preserv'd in our Au∣thour, it had been, long since, worne out by Time: Ap∣pearing now like old ruines, which preserve the me∣mory of a place, although the forme be wholly dcay'd. For those Homer (applauded by Pausanias:) Autimachus, Ponicus, &c. teeming wits, which have been delive∣red
of Poems on the same subject, (the comparing of which, would have been the best light to an interpre∣ter:) have nothing but their Names, now remaining The iniquity of Time! which has not onely defaced Thebes, but rob'd us of that Poesy which might re∣paire it: at least with paper-wals, more lasting then Amphions stones. The translation was meditated, midst all the clamour and imployments of a publike Schoole; and so, cannot be so accomplish'd, as might be expected from a va∣cant retirednesse. And, when I shall tell thee, that it was intended for a help to my Scholars, for under∣standing the Poet, thou wilt not wonder at my margi∣nall explications of the Poetick story. Those grander proficients, who have digested that in their owne braines, may save themselves a labour of glancing on them: (I would provoke no man to looke asquint:) For others that want bladders, however in honour perhaps they had rather sinke, safety will perswade them to swim with this inferiour help. I know the common Fate of Translations, which are seldome read intire, but by snatches; and such pieces onely, as are pre-judg'd by the critick Reader, where the Translatour is sentenc'd, according as he jumps with the others fancy. Yet censure me as thou wilt: So I benefit any, I have my end: And if any thing here prove satisfactory to my candid, ingenuous Friends, it will incourage my progresse in that worke, which otherwise here receives its period. Farewell.
In Statium omnibus numeris accurate Anglica Poesi donatum, a doctissimo viro Do. Stephens. —Nee diguius unqum Majestas meminit ses Romana loutam.Claudian. Quis novus hic Hermes vatem felicibus umbris Evocat? & Lucim  cultore superbum Elysi viduat? Manes, quibus esse sodalis Dignatus , mrent; passim innuba laurus, Et Pbi marcent myrti, florentqu cupressi. Post Cm quisnm Vencrem teniaret Apellem? Hoc facts! Authoris tamen hic Veneres, Charitesque Spirat, & in vers redivivus Statius omni. Enibeus ille calor vatis migravit, & in Te Congestus: major collectis viribus exit. Atque erit mbiginon populo fortasse nepotum, Interpres potius fueris dicendus, an Author. Tam similis vix ipse sui est: Sic garrula vocem Nympha refert, repetitque sonos, inguae aemula nostrae. Non adeo similes, peperit quos Led, gemelli; Lactea utrique coma est, par frons, cadémque genarum Purpura, consimiles acceudunt lumina flammae. Thebanae portenta domus, Iocasta marito Quos peperie frares, confusae aenigmata stirpis (Heu! male virgineam quae incestant nomia chartam) Dum recitas, alto superas ea monstra Cothurno. Argia & Dei∣phile.Si pulchras pingas (fucus decet iste) puellas; Si non illarum, flagramus amore Poetae: A facie nullae, veniunt sed ab Arte sagittae, Lib. 2.Sin  celebres, & casti federa lecti, Frigida corripitur ta purâ oeia flammâ, Imactaque rapi velle, vel spoute Sabinae. Personat & jam festus Hymen, ducuntur ad aras Nativoque crocus mutatur sanguinis ostre. Sponsae, virginco  pepla rubore. Lib. .Sive sitim caes, nobis sitis alicrae crescit, (Tanah hi ieri quis llet▪ sola levare Ham Agaipae potrit Permessidos unda. Quo pede apisti fauste pergas, iterúmque Thbam surgent meliore Amphioue muri. Reginaldus Bekenham.
To his approved friend, and late reverend Master Mr. Thomas Stephens on his judicious, and incomparable Translation of Statius. DIamonds forme diamonds: who'd know the just Length of your worth, by your own labours must Take measure. Honour to my verse it is (Admired Sir) to dawnei'th' frontispice And usher day, which flowers in each page Of your learn'd Paraphrase: which should my rage (Misguiding-folly rather) fondly praise 'Bove the deserving text and Authors bayes, Sweare th' anger kindled in the brethrens pile, Duels more sprightly in an English stile, 'Twould injure him and you. To overdraw Were errour in Apelles 'gainst the Law Imagery commands, since in these arts The beauty of the liknesse wonder darts, And makes the miracle, Hence flowes your fame, We can but onely say 'tis not the same. The short-liv'd issues then of such, whose braine Needes others workes as bladders in the maine Of wit and fancy, these we terme Translation; You's brooke no other Title then creation. From the old Latin stock new stemmes are sprung▪ Statius new borne, speakes a new mother tongue. Live then bright Suns of Masculine Poetry Phoenix and heire at once, Parelii. These and all else are weake, except that one Betweene your selves there's no comparison. Rob: Baldocke.
To my honoured friend Mr. Thomas Stephens on his admirable Comment and Translation of the first five bookes of the Thebaids. ARt, Sir, workes miracles: she can Revive Men dead, in years and Fame, and bid them Live; And speake a Language which they knew not, and More sense perhaps, then They did understand. (Some Comments courteously bely, and wit Authors into more Raptures, then they writ.) Your Statius ne're knew English sure: scarce we Know it our selves, but by Dictionary; 'Tis so new cast, and molded, we oft looke For our owne Mother-tongue i'th' constring-booke: Yet here he speakes't so in the mode and trim, The Finers selves envy both you, and him; Who is your debter for his stuffe, and glase; His text owes wit unto your Paraphrase. Which you so turn'd, wrought, sweat untill you hit What Statius in English should have writ. Which cost you so oft watchings, it pleads right To shine now: Day's due, after so many nights. Five Bookes, so absolutely just, and best, There's nothing wanting to them, but the rest: For Comment and Translation so agree, They shew the Beauty, and they helpe us see. Strange Artist! who doest thus miraculously Paint Shapes: And then paint'st Day to view them by. Clem: Paman.
To his much honoured friend, and late reverend Master, Mr. Thomas Stephens, on his deserving Translation of Statius. THe world's refin'd, we see; and golden wits Spring up i'th' iron age; more tersenesse sits On Pallas's smoother brow; and every river Can nobler streames then Helicon deliver. If so, why are those The Quinquatria, in which Statius was crown'd. Festivals forbid That crown'd our Author? where's the baies that did Inrich his glorious head? shall vertue rise To a higher pitch, and have a cheaper price? Yet with neglect there's safety: Seldome's praise Secure, but aemulation blasts the baies. If thou wrot'st Laureate too, others we see Have envy'd Him, his Ghost would envy Thee. Pereg: D'oyly.
To his highly esteemed friend, Mr. Thomas Stephens, on his incomparable Translation of Statius. WE thanke you (Noble Sir) you've caus'd to be, What we have wish'd, but yet despair to see: Statius translated; One, all Sphinx to us, Till we had met with Thee, an O Edipus. T'incounter whom, 'tis far more glory then Tydeus his conquering of the fifty Men. And thus Etheocles with his Brother, are In Thee more glorious, then in Thebes they were. Thou writest of Princes, yet I'de rather be Authour, then subject of thy Poetry: And yet be Prince too; since thou art of all Minerva's traine, the it imperiall. The Muses here had ne're been free from doubt, Had'st no Thou Hermes come to helpe them out. 'Tis that which raises wonder to thy Booke. To see therein light out of darknesse strooke. Lucan and Ovid, with such easie men, Are a fit worke for a meere Rimers pen: And cryptick Iuvenal, though darke he be, We see unnighted is by Farnaby. 'This makes me praise thy choice; thou'st ta'ne a Poet, Which to translate, is to be Author of it. For had we not thy clear invention seen, Statius to us had not half publish'd been. Methinkes, I hear the Authours ghost repine, To see his owne worke thus out-vied by thine. Now let dull Rabbies, that learne nothing better, Then to pick quarrels with an Hebrew letter; (Of which crook'd Characters, to find the way, They make their faces more deform'd, then They:) Let them contemne thy Booke: Thy Noble straines Are made for clever, and unwrinckled braines. Go on; make up the rest; and let us know The perfect height, that Art can reach unto: That so the learned World may owe Thee more Then to the Authors selfe it did before. When thou hast thus displaid the Thebane war, 'Twill be more during, then tis Ancient far. Thomas Poley.
In eruditissimum Statianae Thebaidos interpretem, olim Praeceptorem ejus observandum. QUaliter in mundi votis, aviúmque querelis, Nata recèns, surgit gratior inde dies: It meliore comá, flavos spondétque capillos, Lanugo tenerae lucis, Apollo, tuae: Nostratis Stati, sic dum crepuscula spargis, Optamus totam, quae sine nube, diem: Sylvae ut detonsae, coelo videantur aperto; Nulla sit obscuro textilis umbra loco. Sic erit; & Iaetam faciet nunc Statius urbem: Thebais & populo fiet amica uovo. Gulielmus Copinger. To his ingenious friend Mr. Tho: Stephens concerning his judicious Translation of Statius his Thebais. I'M not ambitious that the Presse should sweate In torturing the harmelesse Alphabet To print my rurall Genius; nor do I Pride it to list my common Poetry 'Mongst those Commander-wits which lead the Van Of thy Heroicke wars, whose each pen can Muster an Army of Poetick straines. To rout those Rebels of the vulgar braines Ignorance, envy, obloquie, and scorne And truely make all their base hopes forlorne: No 'tis thy love, 'tis thy word of Command In thy Battalia's front makes me thus stand And dare the peevish world to charge thy wit Censure-proof with what e're would pistoll it. Let envy squint her venom'd lightning, Thou Shalt stand unblasted with thy Laureate brow. Ch: Woodward.
ERRATA. Reader, thy ingenuity will correct those literall errours, which doe not much pervert the sense; especially if thou ave reference to the Latine Copy. The most materiall I have thus observed. PAg. 1. in the Comment, lin. 1. read, ravish'd. p. 4. ver. 93. r. Then ear; 1. p. 17. dele lineam primam. p. 43. in the Comment, . 14. r. venemous; Lytarge. (y) —. p. 56. v. 715. r. Iove's. p. 72. . 308. r. Harmion. p. 78. in the Comment, l. 6. r. Oicles. p. 83. . 629. r. stumps and rocks. p. 109. v. 613. r. hatted God. p. 115. in the Comment. m r. almost all winter. p. 116. v. 761. r. shrill. p. 118. v. 814. r. sleepe. p. 118. v. 827. r. curdled. p. 119. in the Comment l. 1. nterpone, m, A fountaine or well in the Nemeaean wood. p. 120. v. 889. r. Curetes. p. 122. in the Comment. l. 5. interpone, . on whose bankes laurels. & l. 6. r. Thessalian river. p. 123. r. now's th. p. 126. v. 89. r. women. p. 130. v. 196. r. angry (y) God. p. 131. in the Comment, r. * solvit sua Brachia. p. 137. v. 426. r. sterne. p. 138. v. 441. r. corne p. 140. v. 499. r. close flames. in the Comment, interpone, d, Son to Thiodomas, squire to Hercules. and in the Comment, l. 6. r. Heroes (d)  losse. p. 141▪ v. 523. r. and nurse.
Argument. Lib. 1. Statii Thebaidos. Blinde O Edipus, th' incestuous parricide, Invokes Tisiphone to scourge the pride Of's scornfull sons: Who reigne by joynt consent, In course; then change their Crownes for banish∣ment. The first lot fell t' Etheocles: But Jove Sends Hermes down, for Laius Ghost, to move Quarrels between them. Polynices flies To Argos, weather-beaten: Thither hyes Young Tydeus too: There they contest, and fight: Till King Adrastus, thus disturbd i'th' night, Makes peace; invites them; asks their names: They follow To'th' Altars; where he chaunts Hymnes to Apollo. A Sacred heat inflames me, to relate The Etheocles and Polynices. Brethrens quarrels, and inveterate hate For an alternate Crown; and to reherse Thebes's guilt. Great Powers, whence shall I fetch my verse? Shall I that Nations infancy display? Banished by Iupiter Europa's rape? Forbid∣ding his son Cadmus to return without his sister Europa. Agenor's fatall Law? Or Cadmus scowring th' Ocean? 'Twere too far, Should I discourse, how th' Cadmus in the place sowed serpens eeth, which grew to Gns, who kid one another. Plowman, sowing war In his seditious furrows, stood amaz'd At his own new-sprung blades: How th'wals were rais'd With Tyrian Stones, charm'd by Amphions ditty:
Whence grew that By which Agave slew Pebeus. rage, wch seiz'd on Semel halfe Mother to Bacchus was a Thebane. Bacchus's City: (Sterne Iealous of Iove with Semele. Iuno, twas thy work:) against whose brow, Unhappy Who slew his son Learchus, instead of a young Lyon. Athamas did bend his bow: Why, slighting the Ionick sea, the Lucothoe. Mother Leapt with Palaemo in, the second Brother. But farewell these; farewell both grief and joy, Which Cadmus found: The miseries which annoy The house of O Edipus must be my song: Who dare not sing the triumphs that belong To Titus Domitia∣nus whom the Poet flatters. Caesars banners; nor the double baies He bore from He triumphed twice o're the Catti and Batavi. Rheine, or Danow: Or that praise The conquer'd Dacians yeild him, who were thrown Down from the Amongst these Nations mountaines were consecrated, on which they cursed their enemies. Strab. Lib 7. Hils they curs'd us on. 'Tis known How's Domitian, yet a child, freed his father from Vitellius his siege in the Capitol. infant years brought succour to, the glory Of Iov, Romes Capitol — Thou larger story Of great Vespasians name, borne to compleat Thy Fathers Vict'ries, whom this The Romane Empire. Royall seat Wishes eternall: Though the starres be crowded In narrower compasse; Though the never-clouded East, the cold North, and Southerne climate, free From blasts, invite Thee: Though Apollo be Ambitious to set off his round with those Rich The custome was to paint the Emperours with glories a∣bout their heads, in the similitud of gods. glories of thy Raies: And Iove dispose Halfe of his mighty Throne to Thee, (Great Soule) Humble thy thoughts to earth, stoope to controule The Sea and Land; a while Divinity smother, And make the heav'ns thy free gift to another. The time may come, when a diviner rage May swell my verse to thy great Acts. This page,
Tun'd on my harpe, is fill'd with Thebane Wars; One Crowne destructive to two Princes: jars Which death could put no end to; funerall When the two Brethren were burnt at one pile, that flame (as if it were angry) parted in the aire. flames Divided, like the soules they carry; names Of dead Kings without Tombstones; many a Towne I'th' ruines of the people overthrowne. When A fountaine neer Thebes. Dirce blush'd, being stain'd with Graecian bloud: And Ioves-beloved Thetis wondring stood To see A River of Boeotia emptying it selfe into Euripus Euboicus. Ismenos, which was dry before, Flow with such violence and chide his shore. What Champion (Muse) do'st first remember? Is't Inraged Tydêus? or Apollo's Amphia∣raus who with his chariot was swallowed into the earth. Priest, Buried before he's dead? Or is't the proud Fighting n the river Hismeneta he was drowned. Hyppomedon, whose slaughters stop the flood That overwhelm'd him? Or wilt weep the tale Of young Parthenopaeus funerall? When that's spun out, take Brained with stones as he was scaling the walls of Thebes. Capanêus, and tell (But with a greater horrour) how he fell. The hand of O Edipus had eclips'd the light Of's wicked eyes, and brought eternall night Over his shame, whilst he still liv'd the longer, That he might long be dying: But a stronger Beam's darted from his soule, there Furies lye In thousand shapes (invited thither by His bosome sins) which watch him; whilst he hides Himselfe in his hugg'd darknesse, and resides In his close, useen Chambers. Then he raises The fresh wounds he had made, those empty places Where's eyes had been, to heav'n: Beating the ground, The senselesse ground, with's bloudy hands; a sound Of horrour thus breakes out: —Ye' infernall Fiends,
Which raigne or'e guiltinesse, and Hell, whose ends Are narrower then our faults; And thou darke Lake Of Styx, whose prospect I, though blinde, can take. Thou too, Tisiphone, which knowest best That voice, th'hast heard so oft, grant this request: If I have serv'd thee truly, whom I found Nurse to my infancy, who heal'dst the wound They Then he was named O Edipus. This was commanded by his Father Laius, affighted at the Oacle. bored through my feet; If I did go At thy command to A Phocian City neere Per∣nassus. Cyrrha's streames, which flow Twixt the two-headed Hill, when I might rather Have staid with King of Corinth, to whom O Edipus was presented by his Shepheard Phorbas. Polybus, my supposed Father. Where in the Tower of Appearing with three Promontories. three-top'd Phocis, I Grappled with th' hoary King, and did deny Life to his trembling joints, seeking to find What there I lost, a Father: If my mind By thee inlightned could unty the knot Of Sphinx her riddle: If the incestuous blot By which I stain'd my Iocta whom he married. Mothers bed brought joyes To my free spirit; where I got thee boyes. Straight on these hands I fell desiring death, And to my Mother did mine eyes bequeath. Then here I aske a noble boone, and that, Which thou thy selfe would'st prompt: My sons of late (Sonnes still, howe're By ince∣stuous marriage. begotten) doe despise Their mournfull Father, rob'd of's power, and's eyes. They will not Onely his dughter Antigone would perform that office. guide me, will not cheere my heart With words of comfort: But (O grievous smart!) Grown proud, they raise their Scepters from my urne, Triumph o're blindnesse, laughing when I mourne. Am I accursed in these too? does dull Iove
See this with silence? Thou at least may'st prove Their scourge: Sweet Mistresse of revenge, come hither, Entaile a Curse upon their heirs for ever. Put on that Diadem besmeard with gore, Which from my fathers head these fingers tore. Goe, winged with a Parents curse; Divide Between the Brethren: Let the sword decide That title too: Dear Queen of Hell, invent Some mischiefe, great as my desires: Th'event Will shew their courage: Could'st thou plot a rage Worthy their souls, they'd prove their Parentage. This said: the Fury throwes a cruell glance Upon him. She was sitting then by chance On black Cocytus banks, where she did scatter Her serpent locks, to let them drinke o'th water. But swift as lightning, or some falling Star, She flies from thence; The ghosts give place, and fear Their Mistresse presence: she her progresse makes Through the black shades, where souls do swarm, and takes The way to th' Iron gate; at foot o'th' hill Of A Laconian promontory whence was supposed a passage to Hell. Taenarus, where's a free entrance still, But no returne: The day shrunke from her sight, And hid her selfe in that dark cloud, which night Brought for her mantle: Distant A high Thessalian Mountain, feigned to be Metamorphosed from a man at the sight of the Gorgons head. Atlas fled, And let the heav'ns fall from his trembling head. But from the plaines of Part of the aforesaid Pomontory. Malea she does hurry I'th' beaten path to Thebes: Nor do's the Fury Fly any way with greater speed, or takes More joy in hell: A hundred This kind of Serpent was sribed to the Fries locks for  horned snakes (The life-guard of her head) shades all her face; A darke black colour fils the hollow place, Where stood her worn-out eyes: just as the Moone
Blushes, when by Art The superstition of the heathen thought that the Moon Eclipsed was conjur'd out of the heavens, at which time they sounded loud In∣struments of brsse, left she should her their incntations. Magick shee's charm'd down▪ From heav'n. Thus puffing out her hollow cheekes With rage, and swolne with venom'd gore, there breakes A black flame from her ugly mouth: Whence came in An army of diseases; Empty famine, Devouring plagues, grim death: Her tattered coate Sits wrinckled on her back, tied with a knot Or two about her: if she change that hue, The Iu∣stice is a servant to the Fates. Destinies spin her another clue. Then shakes she both her hands: this flames does weare, T'other with serpent fingers stings the ayre. When she stood still, where long A mountain dedicated to Bachus. Cithaeron meets Heaven with his cragged top, her hissing greets The earth so loud, that th'Ecchoed noise resounds Through vast Containing Attica, Baeotia, Megaris, AEtolia, and Phocis, besides the sea so called. Achaia, and the Graecian townes. Proved to be the middle of the erth by Ioves Eagles, which met there. Parnassus, the worlds navell, heard it: so Did sharpe Laconia producing vliant men. Eurotas; doubtfull Whether belonging to Thessalia or Thracia. O Ete too, Which totter'd at the sound. A neck of land where Corinth stands, induring the violence of the waves on either side. Isthmos did wonder, And scarce had power to keep two seas asunder. Leucothoe affrighted at the crack Pull'd her Palaemon from the Dolphins back, And hid him in her lap. The Fury next Flying to Thebes built by Cadmus. Cadmus Towers (which she had vext With many stormes before) begets strange passion I'th brethrens frighted mindes; renews the fashion Of their The earth-born Gyants, which de∣stroyed one another. first founders rage; then Envy tears Their tortur'd souls, and hate-begetting fears.
Now a desire of Government possest'um: Their league is broke, whilst both strive to invest'um First, with the pall, and Scepter: Oh! 'tis brave To be Lord Paramount, and not to have A partner in our royall Fortunes: Neither Will Crownes divided ever hold together. So, when the toyling husband-man shall yoake Two untam'd steeres in's plow, they'l scorn the stroake They feele, and know not how, with down-press'd necks To draw such burthens: straight the carriage cracks, Rent with their sev'rall forces; whilst they take Two divers paths, and crooked furrows make. Such was the Brethrens discord, such sterne Ire Had set an edge, on their untam'd desire. At length they cov'nant, year by year, t'exchange, By course, their Crownes for banishment: Tis strange, How they would cool their Fortunes: whilst the heire Gapes at the hopes of the succeeding yeare. This was that league, their wars were stopt upon: Scarce lasting to the next For the second year Etheocles denied it. Succession. And yet the world had not us'd then to guild Their seiled roofes, nor had it learn'd to build Piatzo's rais'd with Lacdemonn  Corinth being most famous for it. Graecian marble, able To shelter throng'd He alludes to th Romane ustme of entertaining their clients with a sportula. retainers to their table: Kings slept (if Kings can sleep) without a Guard; No Centinels at door kept watch and ward: No pretious Goblets made their wine look neat, No plates of gold were sullied with their meat: 'Tis a bare power they seeke, an empty prize, A naked kingdome crownes their victories. Thus whilst both strive for a neglected soile, The humble throne of Cadmus, they defile Religion and themselves: The laws and rigt
Are beaten down, In their funerall flames. alive and dead they fight. Misguided soules! whither does passion bear you? What if both poles were th' purchase, should it dare you To such impieties? If all that's seen By th' eye of heav'n, ith' East, or West, or when He wanders out of's circle, to behold The Southern heat, or squints o'th' Northern cold? What if Tyre's wealth, or Phrygian heaps invite you? But 'tis a dismall Palace does excite you To rage: you'd buy from hell a wretched boone, To sit in O Edipus his The Scepter being alwaies fatall to those that sway'd it. cursed throne, But now the lots are cast, and fate has crost Stiffe Polynices hopes. How wast thou lost In thine own joyes, proud Etheocles, to whom the lot fell. Tyrant then? when all About thee, were thy slaves? when thou migh'st call, What 'ere thou fanciest, thine, and none deny thee? Yet by and by the commons whisper nigh thee Some relish of dislike; and (as they use) The next successour in their heart they choose. And one amongst the rest (whose minde was set To blast the Scepter, and could never yet With patience bear commands) cries out; Oh Fate! Is't thus resolv'd to vex th' Ogyges was King of Thebes when the first deluge hppened, long before that of Deucalion. Ogygian State? Must we exchange our fears still? and indanger Our subdu'd heads by course to serve a stranger? Th'ave made division of our lives, th'ave weaken'd The hand of Choosing banishment willingly, the worst of misery. Fortune. Shall I still be reckon'd A bond-slave rul'd by banish'd spirits? is't, Great power of heaven and earth! fixt in thy brest To plague my country-men with such a doome? Or does this long-continu'd mischief come Since Cadmus searching the Carpathus is an Island twixt AEgypt and Rhodes, which names the sea about her. Carpathian seas,
For her who back'd the wanton Europa Cadmus's sister, stoln by Iupiter, transformed to a bull. Bull, did please To choose those fields of Once King of this place, after whose name, the Baeotians were once called. Hyas, here t'erect His new-found kingdome? Might we else expect This plague, from the first The Gyants springing from the Dragons teeth, who destroyed one another. Brethrens quarrels, when Earth shew'd her sons, but call'd them back agen? D'ee mark, since t'others banishment, how sowre He looks upon't? How he has swell'd his power? How big his words? how proud his pace is grown? Think you, that this man will be e're brought down To his own private fortunes? Yet we find That none was once more gentle, just, and kind: And reason good: he had a rivall then, But we 're contrould by all: Poor, abject men. Like as two winds, from sev'rall quarters met, Scuffle for mastry o're the sayles, and wet The top-mast in the churlish waves: such fate Hangs o're this doubtfull, this distracted State. One Prince commands obedience, whilst t'other Threatens as much if they obey his brother. But at Ioves high command the gods resort To heavens Star-chamber: 'Twas the inner Court Where they assembled, In the middle of the heavens. equally between The East and Western houses: whence was seen The confines of the earth and seas: Iupiter. The God Shining i'th' mid'st, strikes terrour with the nod Of his majestick countenance: Aon He sets him downe, in his bespangled throne. The rest stand, and expect: not one presum'd To sit, till leave was beckned: Then they assum'd The Demy-gods, toth' place they had assign'd; And th' heaven-begotten Growing from the raine, distilling out of the clouds. Rivers: Nay the wind
Comes whistling too; but's breath was stopt with fear. Thus having fill'd the starry Quire, they wear Such Majesty about them, that the face Of heav'n's amaz'd: Such beauty fills the place, That more then day breakes thence: The roofe's all gold, The beames of Chrysolite hidden flames doe hold. Having commanded silence, all the round Gave care and trembled: (for within that sound Was an unchang'd decree; the Divinely enough, contrary to the fond opinion of the Stoicks. Fates did make His words a law:) thus then aloft he spake. The tainted earth; and mans polluted soul I here impeach, whom vengeance can't controul. How long shall guilty cryes awake my rage? This arme is tir'd with thundering. 'Tis an age▪ Has wearied out the Vulcans men which made Iove his thunderbolts. Cyclops. Ev'ry cinder In Vulcans shop's burnt out. AEtna, the fla∣ming Sicilian Mount. I would not hinder Thy horses (Phoebus) ranging where they list To fire the world, when their false Phaeton throwne headlong into the river Pa∣dus. guide was mis't, Hoping they would refine't: But all in vaine, As was thy labour, Neptune, when the In the great deluge. Maine, Rais'd by thy trident, found a way to passe Beyond its bounds, and wash'd Earths dirty face. Now come we arm'd with vengeance 'gainst two Nations Sprung from our The Argives challenge from Perseus the son of Iove and Danas, the Thebanes from Cadmus, of the line of Epa∣phus. loynes: One's Greece, the habitations Of Perseus: T'other's Thebes, built in that tract, Which men once call'd Afterward Boeotia, from the Oxe which the Oracle comman∣ded Cadmus to follow. Aonia: One neglect Has seiz'd on all their soules. Who does not know Cadmus his ruines? Whilst the powers below, Charm'd from their darker vaults, oft quarreld here.
D'ee see their As that of Agave triumphing in Pentheus's death, and that of Iocasta's incest. Matrons wicked joyes? D'ee heare The out-cryes from their Where Athamas slew his son Learchus. groves? I would conceal Those daring sins that strike at As Niobe against Latona, Pentheus against Bacchus, and Smele against Iuno. heav'n: to tell All those lewd manners, which defile that place, One day and night would be too short a space. Yet O Edipus, more fruitfull in his sin, Covets his Fathers bed, and strives to win Strange pleasures from his Mother. Who, before him, E're forc'd a passage to that wombe that bore him? But just revenge has Ha∣ving torn out his eyes. reach'd him: He has banish'd All day, and comfort: Heav'n it selfe is vanish'd Out of his sight: whil'st his malignant brood (Wicked beyond all president) have stood Triumphing o're his blindnesse. Th' hast obtain'd, Old Mischief, what thou ask'dst:Thy Of blindnesse. night has gain'd Ioves eare, and's hand: Ile arme their rage, and mock At th' ruine of both kingdomes: All that stock Ile root and branch destroy. The quarrel's spun With ease: King of the Argives. Adrastus pitying's exil'd son, Joyn'd to that His daughter Argia, was married afterward to Polynices, but it is spoken here as if done and past, as all things are in the foreknowledge of the gods. Line unhappily, shall give Assistance. 'Tis decreed: Nor must they live. Deceitfull Once King there, who intending to try the divinity of the gods, whom he had invited, serv'd up his son Pelops to the table. Tantalus sticks in our breast: We han't digested yet his bloudy feast. So spake the God: But Iuno deeply wounded With such unlook'd-for news, this answer rounded. Must I to Armes (great Justice?) must I fight? 'Tis known full well, what strength of men, what might I always brought to th' towers of Call'd he Cyclops towers for the excellency of the workmanship. Greece: that Crowne
Which my Who bounding the dominion between Neptune and Iuno, gave sen∣tence on her part, and was therefore honoured by her. Phoronêus wore, with what renowne Hast flourisht? I have wink'd at one dull sleight, When sleeping Made the keeper of Ioves beloved Io, and slaine by Mercury. Argus found eternall night Within those borders: when in a Golden shower Thou found'st a passage to the guarded Where Acrisius imprison'd Danac. tower: 'Tis pardon'd: 'twas a borrow'd shape offended. But when thou wor'st As he appeard to Smel in Thebes. thy selfe, and wast attended With flames, the tokens of our nuptiall sports, My hate may justly blast such rivall Courts. Let Thebes be punish'd: what had Greece deserv'd? Yet take thy pleasure: If thy Queen's reserv'd An object for thy scorne, levell her Cities, Graecian Cities dedicated to Iuno, Samos had the honour to see her Nuptials. Samos, Graecian Cities dedicated to Iuno, Samos had the honour to see her Nuptials. Mycene, and Graecian Cities dedicated to Iuno, Samos had the honour to see her Nuptials. Sparta: Sure it pities Thee, shee's so great: What needs perfuming wood To warme her Altars, wash'd with sacred blood? A City devoted to Isis, formerly Io, now deified. Coptos in AEgypt sends a better savour, Where Isis teares This sacrifice began with sound of kettledrums, where Isis's teares for her Osis, were thought to cause Niles inundations. with Nile obtaine more favour. But if old scores t' a new account we call, And 'tis decreed to squeeze the dregs of all The times are past: Where shall this task begin? What age will serve to purge Earths raging sin? Looke back upon that Pisa in Arcadia, by whose wall Alphus flowes, neere which was Ioves grove. kingdome, whence by cunning Alpheus afer a long curse under earth and sea, rises againe with the fountaine Arethusa in Sicily. Alphêus is joyn'd with Arethusa; running Through sea and earth, to find her; Is't not shame, Th' Arcadians should build temples to thy name In so unchast a place? There were the forces
And charrets of Who proposed his daughter Hippodamia a prize to him that con∣querd him in a chariot combat, which cost the lives of thirteen woo∣ers. O Enomâus: whose horses Might make Getulian Thracia, where Diomedes his horses were fed with mans flesh. AEmus a fit stable: Behold the mangled limbs of a whole rabble Of suiters lye unburied there. False Where Paris gave the rash judgement against Iuno. Ide, The place of my disgrace, thou mak'st thy pride▪ So's The place of Ioves nativity which does likewise bost of his tombe. Crete, which has bely'd thy sepulcher. May not poore Greece be left thy spouse? Forbeare Such furious threats. Take pity on that Nation, That claimes from thee, by a most neee relation. The world has many kingdomes: None's so good, But may be dy'd, in the false brethrens blood. Thus ended she her suit, made up of teares Lin'd with reproaches: But Ioves patient eares Heard her without disturbance: then replies; 'Twas not expected, any curse should seize Upon thy Graecians, were it ne'r so right, But thou wouldst frown: Nay There worship'd. Bacchus, if he might Have liberty, would plead for's Thebes, I know: And (durst she speake) so would Mother to Venus, and solicitous for her grandchild Her∣mione. Dione too. But witnesse all th' infernall lakes, and those Black Stygian floods, my brother Pluto chose, There's an irrevocable sentence past: Wherefore my swift-wing'd The Embassadour of heav'n. Mercury, make haste: Outstrip the winds that beare thee: Through the ayre Glide downe to th' darker region: There repaire To grandsire Father to O Edipus. Laius; call him back from hell: (He's not yet pass'd the Of Lethe whence no returne. Gulfe: because he fell Untimely by the sword of O Edipus:
This is that kingdomes That the souls of slaughtered bodies wander a hundred yeares. Fundamentall:) Thus Quickned by thee, send him to's Etheocles. Grandchilds Court, With these commands: His brother (whose resort To Greece, in's banishment, will swell his pride, And strengthen's sufferings) must be deni'd Accesse to's presence, (He himselfe would chuse it) And when the throne is ask'd, let him refuse it. Hence will I ground their anger, and dispose The rest as order bids me. Called Atlantiades from his grandsire Atlas, King of Arcadia. Hermes goes As Iove commanded, putting on a paire Of winged buskins; whilst his golden haire, And starry head was shadow'd with his hat: Then takes his charming rod, the scepter that Commands sleep, or forbids it: He lookes over Death's Court with this: This can lost life recover. Thus vaulting downe, he flutters in the ayre; Which parted gently; Neither stops he there; But with his sodain flight, the welkin sounded, And darting downward, all the skie was rounded. Now Polynices, banish'd from his throne, As 'twas contracted, wanders all alone, By Not daring openly to appear there in his brothers year. stealth i'th' Thebane deserts: Whil'st his minde Feeds on the hopes, of what must be resign'd E're long to's hands. Sometimes he thinks the Sun Stands still; 'Tis tedious e're the yeare be done. One thought, asleepe and waking has possest him, What beames will guild that howre, that shall invest him I'th strength o'th Kingdome; When his humbled brother Must goe and seek new fortunes, whil'st Himselfe by course. another Shall weild the scepter. This were such a day He'd spend an age to see't. But the delay Is irkesome to his fancy: Yet that thought
Is quell'd, remembring how he shall be brought With pompe to th'Diadem; and sit on high, To laugh at's wandring brothers misery. Thus various passions do his soule annoy, And over-greedy wishes spend his joy. But now he settles his undaunted pace To First King of the Argives, whence they are called Inachidae. Innachus his City's, and the place VVhere Who expelling King Sthenelus governed Argos. Danâus reign'd; To Where Atreus frighted Thyestes with a banquet of his own children. At which sight the Sun fled backward. Mycene, which would hide Her black deeds from the startling Sun: His guide VVas rage, or chance, or destiny. He flies By the In which Bacchus's Priestesses performed their howling sacrifices. Ogygian caves, where frantick cryes Of the mad Priests are eccho'd: where the fields Fatned with Of the Bacchae which lance themselves. sacred bloud more plenty yields. Then pass'd he by A Boeotian mountaine devoted to Bacchus, on whose smooth top was a long continued plaine. Cithaerons gentle plaine, VVhere the high mount stoops downe to kisse the Maine. Next climbs he A famous thiefe, who threw the passengers he had rob'd, from this place, headlong into the sea. Scyrons dangerous craggy rocks: And sees, where The City Megara where Scylla cut off her fathers fatall haire. Nisus with his purple locks Once reign'd. Then leaves he quiet Corinth, where 'Two neighbour The Isthmos where Corinth stands is between the Ionian and AEgean Seas. seas made musick in his eare. By this time had the Moon begun her station, And Sol, tir'd out with's last perambulation, VVas gone to bed. The silent world does view Her Ayery charriot, pearld with drops of dew. No beasts doe roare, no birds doe chatter, sleep Or'e mans desires, and carefull thoughts does creep: And nodding through the aire, brings downe in hast, A sweet forgetfulnesse of labour past.
But the gray skie promis'd no glorious beames From th' morning sun: The duskie Twilight seemes To put out day too soone, and keeps no light Reflected from the absent sun: Grim night Arising thicker from the earth, does cloud Heavens glittering fires. Whilst the windes aloud Knock at th' AEolia is a part ef'Asia minor; where AEolus king of the windes kept Court. AEolian barrs, and rudely force A passage from their prisons. Straight the hoarse And hollow throat of winter comes on, scolding: The winds fall out among themselves; Each holding Heav'n by a proper title, for his owne; Till Poles are rent, and th' Axle's overthrown. But the prevailing Southern blast has giv'n Most clouds to th' worke, and chiefly mantles heav'n: Opening a thousand spouts; whose drops are stay'd By th' dry cold Northern breath, and haile are made. Nay heav'ns artillery comes in; the Thunder And subtile lightning, tear the clouds asunder. By this time A wooddy country, near the city Cleon, where Hercu∣les slew the famous Lyon. Nemêa, and the Five in number: viz. Cyllenus, Lycaeus, Lycormis, Argoleon, and Maenalus. hills that scatter About th' Arcadian groves, are drench'd with water. Old Named from the first Argive king. Inachus with nimbler floods does roare, Cold Arising in the North. Erasine's more active then before. In sandy channels, where men walk'd but now, In spight of damms, huge streames doe overflow. You'd think that The poole where Hercules killed the serpent Hydra. Lerna's poys'nous, troubled lake, Sweld with new venome. Every wood does cracke: The trees let fall their armes: And heav'n beholds What it ne're saw before, In which shades Pan kept his summer Court of re∣sidence. Lycaean folds. Our frighted travailer's amaz'd to see The stones drop from the craggy clifts: But he
The stones drop from the craggy clifts: But he Startles at harsher musick, whilst each mountain In dreadfull Cataracts powres down a fountain Of cloud-begotten waters; which orethrow Both folds and cottages of shepheards too. Benighted thus, and mad at this disaster, He gropes on: Fear and's brother, spur him faster. So when a storme has caught the mariner In raging seas, when neither Moon, nor star, Lights him t'his channel; troubled reason leaves His soul to th' angry heav'ns, and boistrous waves: Now fears he treacherous sholes; now thinkes he knocks His reeling ship against the foming rocks. Thus through the woods does Polynices flie; Rousing with's trusty spear the beasts that lie In their wild mansions: His stout brest does tear A way through thickets: now grown bold with fear. Till from Larissa's top, he spies a light, (For there was a Thessalian City of that name, which named Achilles Larissaeus. Lariss a tower of Argos) conquering night, Through all the winding streets, to this he plies With all his power. O'th left hand, he descries Iuno's Where stood Iuno's Temple. Prosymna. On the right, he sees The lake of Lerna drain'd by This lake was dried up by Hercules, burning the spungy ground about it▪ The name of Hydra being fetch'd . Hercules. At length he enters th' open gates, and straight Beholds the Where Adrastus kept Court. Palace, in whose porch he might Repose his stiffened limbes: Here rests his head, And sleep's invited to so hard a bed. Adrastus then was King; whose quiet fate Had spun his years beyond a middle date: Nobly descended; challenging from heav'n In both his Son to Tàlaus the grandchild of Iupiter, and Eurynome daughter to Apollo. parents. Yet the gods had giv'n
No male successour to him: All his hope Rests in two Dcipbile, and Argia. daughters, which must underprop His throne. Apollo, once being ask'd about'um, Reply'd: (you'd think the god had meant to flout'um) (But time discovers Truth) Their chosen love, A bristled Hog, and Lion fierce, shall prove. This riddle could'st not thou, grave Sire, untwist, Not thou Amphiaraus Oicles's son. Oiclides, great Apollo's Priest. The god forbad it: Only care possest, And gnaw'd upon their Fathers doubtfull brest. As't happen'd: The son of O Eneus raigning over Calydon, Pleuros and Oleuos, Cities of AEtolia. Tydeus at that instant, leaving His native Calydonia; (Horrour cleaving Fast to his guilty soul, for's Menalippus, whom unawares he had slaine, as he was hunting. brothers blood) I'th' dead of night, trac'd the same desert wood, And felt that storm of Ice, and haile; till raine Had wash'd his face; and thaw'd his back again. Then chances on that shelter, where before T'other had stretch'd his limbs upon the floore. Here chance presents a bloody rage. The weather Can't make one roofe shroud both their heads together. Their tongues beat the preparative, till both Swoln big with anger, rise: And first they 'uncloath And strip their shoulders naked: next they dare Each other (Champion-like) t'a single war. The Thebane was the taller, and had told Most suns o'th' two: yet Tydeus was as bold, And equal'd him in's courage; Give him's merit, In a lesse roome there raign'd a greater spirit. By this time they were faln to cuffes: the blows Like Ripeus the most Northern mount of Scythia is famous for these stormes. Scythian haile, or darts an Army throws, Flie thick about their ears: Nor do they stick
With buckled hammes their empty guts to kick. So when th' Olympick games returne again At five years end to Iove, on A City of Elis, eer which the Olympick games were celebrated every fifth year to the honour of Iupiter. Pisa's plain, The dust is laid with falling drops of sweat, And the spectators differing votes do whet The striplings valour; whilst the No women were admit∣ Matrons barr'd From entrance, stand expecting their  reward. Thus quickned by their rage, they fight this duell, (For 'twas not praise they look'd for) whilst their cruell Hook'd fingers, claw their faces: Each man cryes How he can best tear out his fellows eyes. Perhaps their angry swords too had been drawn, Which they had girt about them; where thy bane, Unhappy Thebane, had been better wrought By a strangers hand: But that Adrastus thought He heard some deep-fetch'd grones, and outcryes passe, I'th dead o'th night, which call'd him to the place: Whose hoary head, since care and age did cumber, He could not freely harbour quiet slumber. Thus, when by torch-light he was brought in state Down, through the Courts, and had unbar'd the gate; He spies strange faces there: scratcht mangled cheaks, Which dropt large showers of blood: With that he breaks To these expressions: What inflames your angers To these uncivil broyles, young fiery strangers? None of my subjects durst presume I'me sure, To breake the peace thus rudely. Why does your Unbounded rage disturbe the silent night? Is the whole day too short? Or d'ee delight To banish peace, and rest? Speak: whence d'ee come? Or whither go ye? why so quarrelsome? Your rage say's y'are not base: A noble house
s wrot in bloody letters, on your brows. Scarce had he done: when speaking both together, They mixe these words, and frown on one another. Milde King, what need we talke this quarrell over? These streames of blood you see, our wrongs discover. They utter'd this confusedly: But next, Tidêus goes on, alone: My soul being vext At her Killing his brother unawares. misfortunes, left her native Land Of The boar slain by Meleager and sent by Diana. Monster-bearing Calydonia, and Th' AEtolian Which were wash'd by Achelous, a iver springing in Thessalia. plaines; hoping to find some ease: But close within your borders, night did seize With all her powers upon me: Who is this Denies my head a shelter here, cause his Took' first possession in the place? We see The double shapen Halfe men, halfe horses, indeed Thessalians, the first that back'd horses. Centaures will agree To lodge together: And the Cyclops rest But in one The shop where they make Ioves thunderbolts. AEtna: Nay the wildest beast Knows natures Laws, and can't one roof contain Us two? — But why do I spend my self in vain? Be whoso 'ere thou wilt, thou art not like To triumph long. If guilty Of hi late slaughter▪ blood don't strike New horrour to my soul, Ile make thee know I'm O Eneus son, and Melger the father to O Eneus was son to  Mars his grandchild too. We have both stock and courage too, says t'other: But 'twas a startled  conscience made him smother His Fathers name. Stay, saies the King: asswage Such churlish thoughts begot by night, or rage, Or valour. Use my Court: come enter hither, And let your shak'd hands joyn your hearts together. 'Tis not in vain, nor were the gods asleep,
When first you quarreld: Love perhaps may creep Through these rough paths; & then you may with laughter Remember these past discontents hereafter. How truly did this reverend King foretell Their fortunes I when this storm was o're, they fell In such a league, as made another The four paire of friends are famous: Theseus and Perithous, Pylades and Orestes, Patroclus and Achilles, Tydeus and Polynices. paire; And might with Thesêus and his Perithous, accompnied by his friend to hell in search of Proserpina. friend compare, In their long progresse: Or with Orstes haunted by the Furies for Clytemnestra's murther was freed by Pylades's advice. Pylad's stand Who freed Orestes from Megara's hand. Their wounded minds were heal'd now, with the balme Dropt from Adrastus lips: Like as a calme Quiets the troubled waves, when th' storm is over, And the last blast expiring now, does hover About the sailes. Straight into th' Court they passe; Where the good King beholds the comely grace Of their attire, and armes: He spies the skin Of some great bearded Lion (sure, of kin To that young Hercules whilst a child slew a Lion neer Teumessus, whose kin he alwayes used as a mantle. Hercules in Tempe slew For there is another Tempe in Thessalia, this in Boeotia. Teumessian Tempe, long before he knew The Afterwards one of his twelve labours. Cleonaean monster) hang about The Thebanes shoulders: whilst a bristled, stout, And tusked boar, of Famous formerly for the great boare Diana sent. Calydonian kind, Had parted with his coat, which spred behind Tydeus his back: The aged Prince, possest With strange amazement at the sight, confest Apollo's sacred truth, remembring then What Oracles he heard, i'th Where the Tripos was speaking Den.
This spectacle confounds him: Joy does thrill Through all his foul; He reads express'd the will O'th' gods, that brought them hither: Now he sees, What beasts they were, the riddling god did please To point out for his sons-in-law: then raises His hands to heav'n, and chant these solemn praises. Thou sacred power of Night, which do imbrace The cares of heav'n, and earth: whilst every place I'th' sky, is spangled by thy hand; Repairing Our wearied natures, 'gainst the Suns appearing: Thy darknesse is my guide: through the thick mist Of perplex'd errour: Thou doest best untwist Thy threds of foretold destiny. Go on; Perfect, great Queen, the work thou hast begun. This Court shall pay a yearly sacrifice To thy great Deity: On thy altar dyes Two faire, The colour making them proper for the night. Macr. black heifers; whose Having been shut up five years, whence they were called Lustralia. fat gus shall soake I'th' newest With which they used to sprinkle the inferall sacrifice, and those offered to the Dii minores. milke, and make thy Temples smoake. Haile faithfull The place where the Pythia ate, when she prophe∣sied. Tripos, and ye close aboads Of the dark Oracle. I've found the gods. This said, he grasps their hands, and guides them right To th' farther court: Where th' Altars still look'd white With their late Having sacrificed the day before to Apollo. fires; I'th ashes yet there fumed Some sparkes alive, with fragments unconsumed. He bids them bring new fewell, and prepare A second offering. His servants heare With rev'rence and obey him: All the Court Rings with their diligence: One goes to sort New broydred coverings for the beds, and calls For richer tapestry to hang the walls. Another scours the pots. One puts out night,
And fils the branched candlesticks with light. Some play the Cooks, and spit the joynts of meat; Others make paste, when they have ground their wheat: Adrastus joys to see them; putting on His richest robes, and mounts his Ivory throne. Of th' other side, the strangers tooke their places, (Their wounds being wash'd) and view'd each others faces; Then tooke acquaintance. Th' aged King soon after Sends for Acestes (she had nurst his daughters, And had their virgin chastity in care Till At whose Altars they use to be presented spotlesse on their marriage day by a matron. Hymen ask'd for't) whispering her i'th eare. Who soon perceiv'd his mind: And forthwith came Her double charge, (you'd think their shape the same Which armed Pallas and Diana wore, But with lesse terrour) from their chamber dore. Soon as their looks were on the strangers fixt, A blushing red, and paler white were mixt Within their comely cheeks; their eyes did rove A glance, or two, but duty check'd their love. When the last course o'th feast, was served up, Adrasus cals for's graven guilded cup, Which Two former kings of the Argives. Danâus and Two former kings of the Argives. Phoronêus us'd of old In sacrifice: 'T had many stamps i'th' gold. On th' one side He was said to flye to the Gorgons execution, because he was the first that used a ship with sailes. winged Persêus sets upon, And kils the snake-hair'd Gorgon, which being done He seems to mount i'th' aire: But she lets fall Her ghastly eyes; and, though in gold, looks pale. Neer her, takes Tros his son, beloved of Iupiter, and moun∣ted to heaven on an Eagles back, where he was made the gods cup∣bearer. Ganymde his glorious flight, And leaves the hils behind; Troy's out of sight: His fellow-huntsmen sadly looke about,
And's dogs in vain do barke at every cloud. This cup was crown'd with wine: Whilst all the gods By course were call'd on: But Phoeb' got the od. The servants crown'd with Retaining still Daphnes temper. chast unspotted baies Chant at Phb's shrine their Chorall Hymnes of praise. This day's his festivall: The fire ne're falters, But fed with incense shines on's smoaking Altars. Then saies the King: Perhaps my noble guests, You'd aske what cause begat these solemn feasts; Or why, 'mongst all the gods, w'adore Apollo. It is no vain religion which does hallow This time: The Argives lng since groaning under A curse began it: Marke, and hear the wonder. After the god had pierc'd the speckled skin Of th' earth-begotten Said to be born of the earth, and slaine by Apollo, because the sun dries up those vapours which are exhaled from the moist ground. Python, folding in Delphos with's numerous circles, wearing out With's taile the well-grown oakes; whil'st spread about The springs of Helicon, his forked tongue Lick's poyson from the crystall streames; 'Twas long E're many darts dispatch'd him; spreading over The Phocian plains his yet-twin'd bulke did cover A hundred acres. Then the god resorts (To cleanse the Nothing staind with bloud, before expiation made, might be admitted to the court of heaven. guilt of bloud) to th' humble courts Of our Once king of the Argives. Crtopus, whose young Psamate beloved of, and ravish'd by Apoll. daughters eye Rul'd o're his house: In her, sweet modesty, And beauty strove for conquest: Happy maid, Could shee Apollo's close desires avoid. For on the bankes of Nemêa, giving way To th' sportfull god, she there conceiv'd a boy: And after ten moons wanes, brought forth her son, Latona's royall grand-childe. But anon
Fearing her fathers vengeance (for he knew Nothing of those imbraces) she withdrew To desert walkes: Where she expos'd (for fear) Her infant 'mongst the folds t'a shepherds care. Sweet babe! such entertainments don't become The stock thou springst of: Earth prepares thy room Garnish'd with flowry beds, and thatch'd above With oaken leaves close woven; whilst the grove Lends bark to make thy garments; gentle sleep Is whistled on; Thou battlest with the sheep. Yet Fate thought this too good a place for him, For deep-mouth'd bloud-hounds tore him limb from lim And feasted on his members, which were spread Upon the grasse, where he with aire was fed. This newes no sooner strook his mothers eare, But she forgot both father, shame, and fear: She fils the Court with outcries, and uncovers Her naked brests; Then the whole truth discovers To the hard hearted King; who publisheth The sentence which she hop'd for, present death. Could Phoeb' forget his joyes thus? But too late He plots her just revenge, and does create A monster, hell would owne; conceiv'd between The coupling Furies: In whose shape was seen A virgins face and brest, but from her crown, A snake, that hiss'd eternally, hangs down, And parts her cloudy brow: This Impe does creep To their close-chambers secretly when sleep Sits heavy on them; tearing infants from The breast that suckle them; devouring some With rav'nous jaws, before their Parents eyes, And fats herself with publike miseries. But Coraeb's skilfull valour could not brook This plague without revenge: Who straight betook Himself to's chosen band of friends, whose souls, Priz'd credit more then life. The Monster rouls
More death before hee still; and then she stood Where two wayes parted, smeard with infants blood: On both sides of her hung a babe, whose hearts eak'd with her claw, which search their vitall parts: Our Champion here sets on her, guarded round With all his traine; His sword siks intoth' wound t made in her black brest; and hunts her soule Through all her limbs till hell receives her foule espotted carcesse: 'Twas a joy to come nd see her ghastly lookes, and panch that wombe n which sh'ad cram'd our sucklings; To behold er venom'd brest: Amazement strooke us cold: nd these extreames of joy turn pale again. ome thrash'd her senslesse limbs, seeking in vain This solace for their griefs: Others brought trees o dash her teeth out: rage their power out-vies. e rav'nous skrieking birds few from these grounds, hough hungerbitten, when as deep-mouth'd hounds, nd chap-faln wolves, gaping at distance stood, Greedy of prey, yet durst not take such food. Inrag'd Apollo sets an edge on's spleen hus disappointed: Sitting then between arnassus double top, he armes his bow ith poyson'd arrows; Whilst the fields below, nd all the Graecian houses seem'd to flame, hrough the thick clouds, which hung about the same. weet souls of all sides dropt: Death Not broke it off, as in common destinies. cut the thred f Fate, and captive townes in triumph led. But when the Oracle was sought to, why uch flames and dire As that of the dog∣r, so generally hurtfull. Aspects possest the sky: he same Power bids, their lives should pay to hell sacrifice, by whom his monster fell. Couragious soul! deserving when th'art dead lasting name: Thou didst not hide thy head
Through base degenerous fear; nor trembled'st when Thou metst grim death to'th' face. Thus Corb then With an undaunted looke, stands at the do Of the gods Temple, and inrageth more The divie brest, thus speaking: I'me not sent, Called Thymbraeus, from a place neer Troy, where he was worshipped. Phoeb', to thy shrine; nor come I to relent, And beg thy pardon: 'twas mine own free spirit And care to th' publike, brought me: 'Twas my merit That tam'd thy vengeance, god, 'tis me th' hast sought With clouded foggy dayes, and pest'lence brought From heav'n unjustly. But if gods delight So much in monsters, and regard so slight The losse o'th' world, and death of men: if heav'n Be so unkind; How have the Graecians giv'n Just cause of anger? May not I suffice (Great Power) to be the Fates just sacrifice? Or does thy gentle heart declare more pity When it depopulates a well-fill'd City? When the fields shine with bonfires, which are made Of plowmens bones? But why should I disswade Or stop thy striking hand? The matrons vow Powr'd out long since attends me. 'Tis enough▪ I have deserv'd that Provoking it by these affronts. stroake, that shall not spare me: But draw thy well strung bow: Let th' arrows tear me, Send a triumphing soul to th' grave: But then Drive that black cloud away, that blasts our men: So that I die, be satisfied: 'Tis just To punish onely those who break their trust. Phoeb's rage gave back a this, and grants a boone More then was ask'd; His life: The tempest soone Blew from our heav'n  whilst Choroebe is intreated To leave the startled god. This cause created These solemn feasts, which yearly we renew T'appease the god, whose Altars now ye view.
But what blood fils your veines, my Friends? Although (If fame deserves beliefe) Son to O Eneus King of Calydonia. Tydêus does owe, His birth to Calydoniae, and may claim AEtoliae where now raign'd Praetus▪ Tydeus's unkle. Parthaons ancient scepter. But what same Brought you to Argos? Tell me, who's this other? Since 'tis a time to talke in, nothing smother. The noble Named her from Ismenos a Thebane river. Thebane now with down-cast eyes Swolne big with grief, now with side-glances spies Tydêus his wounds; then breakes his silence thus: Before these Altars here, it fits not us To mingle such discourses: What I am, How stock'd, what bloud, the country whence I came, Will blast your sacrifice: yet if yee'r bent To know my wretched fortunes; My descent Came from my grand-sire Modestly for shame concealing his fathers name. Cadmus; Thebes, the joy Of Either from Queen Hermione Mars's daughter, or for the Gyants springing from the dragons teeth, both being the delight of Mars. Mars, my Country; I Iocasta's boy. And now Adrastus startled with his guest Discover'd thus, saies, why d'ee hide the rest? 'Tis known already: Fame does take her rise Not so remote from Argos. He that lies Under the North pole, chatt'ring: He tht drinks I'th' Indian Ganges; He i'th' West, that thinks To trace the sun to bed, and those that saile Amongst the Africk shoals have learn'd the tale Of Thebes beset with Furies; and those eyes Which shrunk from their own guilt: Let this suffice To thy complaints; and score not up their sin On thine own head; Such staines may be of kin To us from our As from Tantalus. forefathers: But that blot Don't prejudice their off-spring. Equall not Their vices; but endeavour by thy merit
To purge their guilt: Them, not their faults inherit. But now Two Northern signes, viz. Sepentrio and Opiochus, which at the first appearance of the morne, burne dim. Charls-waine declines, and the chill Two Northern signes, viz. Sepentrio and Opiochus, which at the first appearance of the morne, burne dim. sire Does disappear: with fresh cups feed the fire: Chant out Apollo's hymnes; repeat his praise, Our guardian still from our As when Apollo taught Thye∣stes after Atreus his wickednesse, to marry his own daughter Pelopeia, on whom he begat AEgisthus, who reveng'd his father by Agamemnons death. fore-fathers dayes. Great Father Phoeb', whether the snowy tops Of A Lycian City dedicated to Apollo. Patara delight thee; Or the drops Of pure Apollo enamourd of Castalia, who threw herself into a fountain, used to dip his locks in the waters. Castalian dew do bath thy haire, Thy golden haire: Or whether Troy does weare Thy That of Thymbraeus. name and presence; where thou didst submit Thy self to labours for thy selfe unfit, And serv'dst the When he and Neptune ere hired to build the wals of Troy by Laomedon. Mason willingly; or tir'd With seeking floating When Delos could not be found by Latona, Cynthus the highest mountaine discovered it self, where she brought forth Apollo and Diana. Delos, if desir'd Cynthus, Latona's welcome mount, does please: Cynthus, whose top shades the AEgaean seas: The Quiver's thine, and bow stiffe-bent, to quell Thy daring foes: The sun never grows old. Eternall youth does dwell Upon thy cheeks: Thou canst foretell the doome Of th' unjust Fates, and know'st what is to come: Knowst what decrees Iove means to passe; doest shew What plagues or wars shall raigne; what overthrow Of crowns By Comets. heav'n points at: 'Twas thy harpe subdu'd The Marias who challeng'd Apollo. Phrygian minstrell. Thou did'st drag the rude Earths offspring Seeking to inforce Titius downe to hell, and take Just vengeance for thy mother: Thou dost shake Envenom'd Python with thy lookes; and quaile
The Theae Niobe, contending with Diana, was deprived by Apollo of all her chil∣dren. dame, with thy triumphant spoile. Wrinckled Megara is thy Minister Tormenting hungry Who burning the temple of Apollo, was placed in hell under a huge stone, whose downfall was daily threatned, and he fed there by Megara. Phlegîas, who does fear The ever-falling stone; she proffers meat To's empty stomach, but he loathes to eat. Great God be present, thinke upon the place That n Crotopus's time. entertain'd thee; shew a smiling face To Iuno's land; whether thou please to choose Faire Titans name, which th' These were part of Persia, named from their King Achaemenes. Achaemonians use; Or if Worshipped under that ame by the AEgp∣tians. Osiris's title take the more, Whom AEgypt makes the Author of her store. Or, as the Persians in their caves below, The Persian worshipped the sun eclipsed in a Cave, by the name of Mitra, in the shape of a Lion with a Tiara on his head, hold∣ing by the hornes a strugling Cow, representing the Moon, which la∣bours to avoid him. Mitra, which drawes by th' hornes a stubborn Cow. Finis Lib. I. Statii Thebaid.
Argument. Lib. 2. Statii Thebaidos. Hermes returnes with Laius's Ghost, which steales Tiresias's shape, and in a dreame reveales To th' Tyrant, Joves decree. Adrastus gives Argia and Deiphile, for wives To Polynice and Tydeus: They are married With prodgies, because Argia carried Hermiones chaine. The Thebane Prince desires His Crowne; which Tydeus in his name requires. Denied by th' King, he war denounceth; then Returnes by Sphinx her rock; where fifty men Way lay him; they're subdued: He sends this story By Maeon back, and sings Minerva's glory. MEane time wing'd Mercury, with Ioves embassage Returns from hell: thick clouds oppose his passage, And troubled aire infolds him: Ne're a blast To drive't away; but stinking fogges are cast Out of the silent region: Then appear The spreading floods of Styx, and flames of fire, Belch'd out of sulph'rous streams, which choak th way. Behind crawles Laius trembling, whose delay His wound might yet excuse; for in his side His sons rash sword sunke, hilts and all; He try'd The onset of the Which possest his son OEdipus. Furies; yet he creeps, And Mercuries Caduceus, which can charme soules from hell. Hermes's powerfull wand doth guide his steps. The barren groves were startled, and those coasts
Where the dark shades were fill'd with trembling Ghosts. The Earth herselfe's amaz'd, to see her womb Lye open back again; nay there were some In their cold, senselesse Urnes, whose wither'd brows Spoke envy: One amongst the rest, whose vows Were still unlucky, and (which wrought his bane) Heav'ns grief his joy, heav'ns joy his grief began; Saies, Go and prosper whatsoe're designe Thou'rt call'd for, whether Iove did so injoyne; Or uncontrol'd Erinnys by thee sent Greeting toth' day; Or some These were wont to counterfait a phrensy before their incantations. Enchantresse spent Her charmes upon thy Tombe. Thou shalt have sight Of the fresh aire, and the forgotten light O'th' sun; thou'lt tread upon the springing grasse, And hear the warbling Rivers, as they passe From their clear fountaines. Yet at last with pain, Look to return to these black shades again. No sooner Cerb'rus spies them, from the dark Cell, where he lay, but he begins to bark With all his mouthes at once: The cur does grin At such strange ghosts as seek to enter in; But now he swels his bristled neck, inraged, And would have torne them piece-meal; But asswaged By the gods powerfull Scepter, down he lies, And treble sleep tames his Answering to his three heads. three paire of eyes. There is a place, which the old Graecians said Was A Laconian promontory, where Hercules had a Temple in a cave, which Poets imagine the passage  Taenarus, where foaming Malea's head, Which seamen tremble at, towrs to the sky's, Till it hath quite lost the beholders eyes. The lofty top's still faire, and does disdain Th' inferiour power of wind, or force of rain: But the tir'd stars rest on it; and the wind
There ye may trace the lightning; and the ranks And shapes o'th' clouds are moulded on those banks. The soaring Lark could never raise her flight So high, nor thunder could this Mountain fright. But when the day grows old, the shade does flee, (Strange bounds are these)toth' midst o'th' neighbour Sea. There Taenarus crooks his broken shoars, as though His coward banks gave backward from the rough And boistrous waves: Here Neptune lands his steads Tir'd in th' The description of the Sea-horse. AEgean Sea, whose Named so from AEgeus, son to Neptune. fore-hoof treads The sands, but spread to a fishes tail behind. From hence, as men report, the pale Ghosts find A by-way path, through which due Custome's reard By death, to Pluto's Court: Here may be heard Strange shreeks and groans, (if any truth be found In the Arcadian Plow-men) all the ground Rings with a hellish noise: Sometimes a stroak, Sometimes a word which the last Fury spoak, Sounds till high-noon: It frights the Country-boare Out of the fields, to hear Three-headed Cerberus. Deaths Porter roare. Here Hermes, with a Stygian fog surrounded, Springs into th'ayre. The clouds, which late abounded, Break with his Glory: His warm breathing makes Fair weather round about him. Thence he takes His circuit by The Northern Star, which Climate was chosen by Mercury, because the most windy and most ad∣vantageous for his flight. Arcturus, mounting then Through Phoebes She being Nights Mistris. silent Orbe, ore lands and men. Sleep meets him with Nights chariot, and does rise With reverence, and straight departs the skies. Laius beneath him hovers, and does view The stars he's B dying unnaturally on his sons sword. robb'd of, whence his Either because of the Nobility of his Progenitors, or from the Stoicks opinion, who fetch the Souls of men from the Stars. soul he drew.
And now to The Boeotian mountain which over-looked Phocis, where he was slain. Cyrrha's craggy top was come, Whence he spies Phocis, stained with his tombe. At last he reaches Thebes; there sighs out tears Neer his sons threshold: Yet at first forbears To passe those wel-known dores. But when he spies Those stately roofs, whose beauteous tops did rise On pillars he had laid, and saw those Of the Chaiot in which he was slain. wheels Stain'd yet with bloud; troubled, he backward reels: The Thund'rers high command, the charming force Of the Mercuries Cadu∣ceus, given him by Apollo in Arcadia, after the Oxen were stoln. Arcadian rod, scarce stopp'd his course. As't chanc'd too, 'twas a solemn Called Bacchus his first Birth-day. Day, which heav'n Mark'd out with Semele desiring to see Iove in his Majesty, was thunder-strook, yet the God pitying her Babe, not ripe for nativity, took him from her womb, and nourished him in his thigh. thunder; when young Bacchus, giv'n To's Fathers thigh, found a too early birth From Semele: This caus'd the Tyrants mirth To banish sleep that night; but spread abroad Through house and ground, belch'd out the pursie Bacchus to whom that day was dedicate. God Amongst their Crowns and empty Cups, till day Did part them: There ye might have heard them play On their loud Pipes, and Trumpets, which o'recome In their shrill noise the ratling of the Drum. And glad A Boeotian mountain dedicated to Bacchus. Cithaeron tie'd the women out, Inflam'd now, not As once, when Agave tore her son Pentheus piece-meal; hence our Poet calls Bacchus now, Their more gentle God. inrag'd, to dance about His un-trod thickets. So the Named here from Biston a Thracian King; they used to feast upon their mountains. Thracians spread Bankets to their rash troups, o'th' snowy head Of Rhodope, or Dale of A mountain between Thrace and Thessaly, which in the middle incloseth a famous Valley. Ossa: where
The panting limbs of beasts, which they did tear From Lions jaws, and bloud with milk allaid Proves a rich Feast: but if their sense be staid With wines inraging sent, then 'tis their play To dash their cups, throw stones, or any way To shed their partners bloud; with which the rabble Will make new feasts, and garnish a new table. Such was the night, when swift Mercury named from Cyllene, an Arcadian mountain, his birth∣place. Cyllenius crept Toth' Thebanes privy-Chamber, Etheocles named here from Echion one of Cadmus his com∣panions in building Thebes. who then slept Stretch'd out at large upon his Ivory bed, With cov'rings of Assyrian tap'stry spred. How carelesse is mans heart! He feasts, he sleeps! But Laius did, as he was taught, and creeps In blind  blind Thebane Pophet, punished by Iuno, for passing verdict on Ioves part against her. Tiresias's borrow'd hiew; left this Might seem a dream, he wears his voice and fleece: His own locks still remain'd, and the driv'n snow Upon his chin, so did his palenesse too: But a false Miter on his hair was plac'd, And's veyle with wreaths of Olive boughs was grac'd. Then seems to touch the breast o'th' sleeping King With's bough, and thus the Fates decrees to sing. This is no time for sleep, secure from fear Of thy false brother, Dullard! Doest not hear? Heroick acts invite thee: Doest not see, What preparations, Foole, he makes for Thee? Thou dalliest, like a sleeping Pilot, when The Sea works high with winds, his Compasse then Is quite forgot, his Stern let loose: And yet Thy brothers new-match'd spouse, Fame saies, has set New wings on's soul: He's gathering strength to gain
Thy Kingdome from thee, and  deny't again: H'appoints thy Court, the nurs'ry for his age: Adrastus his Wives Father, does ingage His resolution deeper, with what force Her Dowry th' Argives bring: Nay (which is worse) Tydeus, who's stain'd in's brothers bloud, has tied A solemn knot of friendship: Hence his pride Puffs up it self: this raises his intent To promise thee a lasting banishment. The King of heav'n, in pity sent me down, With this advice; Keep Thebes; It is thine own: Banish th'ambitious brother, who would deal As ill with thee; let not his gaping zeal For thy destruction, any longer trust To his close plots, or think the Graecians must Come, Lord it over Thebes. Then, leaving him, When this was said, (for now the Stars burn'd dim Before the day) he first uncloaths his face Of's borrowed mask, confessing that he was His Fathers Sire; and falling on the bed Wher's cursed Grand-child tumbled, he does spread His throat, still gaping with the wound, before His eyes, and seems to bath him in his gore. This breaks his sleep; then starting up, he stood Scar'd with these prodigies; and shook the blood, The seeming bloud from's trembling joynts; together He fears his Grand-sire, and demands his Brother. As when a Tyger th'Hunts-mans Eccho hears, She rouses up her sluggish limbs, and tears The toyls she's trap'd in: 'Tis her sport to meet With some bold foe; She yawns; She sucks her feet; Straight intoth' midst o'th' company she hurries, And in her jaws, some panting soul she carries, To feast her bloody Whelps: So rage perswades The King, he'has vanquish'd now his Brothers aides.
But now the Morn rose from her Named here from Migdon, a King of Phrygia, where Tithonus, Au∣rora's beloved, lived. Phrygian cell, And wiping her dew'd locks, she did expell The nights cold darknesse, blushing on the Sun That follows her: Bright The morning star, which drives his other flock before him. Lucifer was one O'th'last that wooes her, with his parting glances, But now resignes the Sky: And Sol advances His Chariot ore the heavens, whose glorious light Deprives the world of his pale sisters sight. When old Adrastus, leaves his chamber, where The Named from Dirce, a Thebane fountaine, and Achelous an AEtolian river running into Calydonia. Thebane and the Named from Dirce, a Thebane fountaine, and Achelous an AEtolian river running into Calydonia. Calydonian Peere Did not stay long behind: Sleep had refresh'd Their wearied limbs, (since the last storme had flesh'd Each in his fellows blood) with all his store Of blessings: But Adrastus breast found more Unquiet thoughts; whilst he recalls the gods, And his new guests, with what strange fate abodes His sons-in-law, found thus unlook'd for: Those Meeting i'th'midst o'th'Hall, shook hands, and chose A place fit to discourse their private cares: And first Adrastus thus salutes their eares. My noble Sparks, whom the black night brought hitr By the gods care; whose steps through stormy weather, And thundring showres, Phoeb' guided to this Court: Y'ave heard (I doubt not) what a troop resort To wooe my daughters; both whose equall yeares, Are all the pledge my hopes can find of heires. What modest beauty sits upon their brow (Trust not a Fathers eyes) your selves may know From last nights entertainment. Puissant Kings, Whose thoughts soare on their Armies spreading wings, Make these th'ambition of their vows. 'Twere long To tell how the Either a Missenian, or ra∣ther an Achaean towne, by which the river Pierius floweth. Pharaean Princes throng,
And the Named from O Etialu, a Laconian King. Laconian Lords: With what strong hope Th' As Atalanta the Mo∣ther of Parthnopaus. Achaean matrons strive to underprop Their house with plants from hence. For his Daughter Deianira for whom Hercu∣les fought with the river Achelous. O Eneus thy father Has not refus'd more courteous proffers: Neither Has the O Enomaus, whose Daughter Hip∣podamia had triumph'd over the lives of thirteen Wooers, who were vanquished by her Father in Chariot-combats. Pian Chariotteer▪ But I Both Spartans brood, and Elan kind decry To be my Sons-in-law: This blood is due With all my care, by th' Fates decrees to you. The Gods are kind, which sent such valiant Knights Within my Court: How th' Oracle delights, And feeds my soul▪ This honour you atchieve Through the hights storms; this balm your wounds receive. They heard him, when their eyes a while were fixt On one another; who should answer next, Their looks did complement: But Tydeus spirit More daring still, began: How is thy merit Eclipsed by thy modest soul, which tames Thy growing Fortunes? Who can claim more names And kingdomes then Adrastus? Is't not knowne How thou wast woo'd to leave thy The Sycionians inhabited part of Pelopomisus, where AEgileus stood, whose king Po∣lybus was Grandsire to Adrastus by his Daughter Lasanassa, who was maried to Talaus King of the Argives: Their Son Adrastus flying the rage of the Citizens, to his Grand-father, was made Heire to his Crown, but was recalled by the Argives after his Fathers death. Pau∣san. Grand-sires throne Of Sycion, to curb th'unbridled lust Of th' Argives. Would the Gods be pleas'd to trust Those nations to thy hands, which lie within The Graecian This Isthmos divides the AEgean and Ionick Seas, being a pas∣sage between Greece and Peloponnesus: these Countries therefore are meant, and the other Ilnds in both Seas. Ismos, and whose banks are seen
Beneath it: Savage Mycene had not then Scar'd back the Which fled from the wicked acts of Atreus and Thyesies there. Sun; nor th' Where OEnomaus raigned. Elean vale had been The Theatre of bloud: And other Kings Had scap'd the Furies lash, whose venom'd stings This Polynices in his Father and his Bro∣ther. Thebane, who has felt, may speak. But we Have ready minds to serve thee. So said he; And th'other then subjoyns: Who would not toile To find such fathers? Though love seldome smile On banish'd wretches, yet all grief departs Our soul, and Care bids fare-well to our hearts. Nor doe our joyfull breasts lesse comfort find, Then when a Ship, late toss'd with raging wind, Beholds the welcome shore; 'Tis our desire, Who have begun so luckily, t'expire, And run our Fortunes with Thee. Thus they rise Without more words: Whilst the old King out-vies His last words with new promises: His might Shall aid them back, t'instate them in their right. The frolick Argives now, with joy did meet This welcome news, which through the town did greet Their ears: Their King had found a noble paire Of sons, with whom Argia, and the faire Deiphile should kindle Hymens flame, And lose their Virgin crop, now ripe. This Fame Spreads through the neighbour Cities; all the round's Fill'd with't, as far as the Two woody mountains of Arcadia, one dedicated to Pan, the other to Venus. Lycaean bounds, And the Two woody mountains of Arcadia, one dedicated to Pan, the other to Venus. Parthenian thickets: to the Coasts Of There were divers other Ephyrae, but Corinth her was named so, from the Nymph Ephyra, Daughter to the Ocean, and Thetis. Corinth: Nay the tel-tale Goddesse boasts The same in Thebes, where hov'ring o're the walls, She frights the startled Etheocles, named from Labdacus Grand-father to OEdipus. King; whilst she recalls
His last nights Dream: (what dares the Monster? where Does her spleen end?) Shee sings o'th' solemn cheer That entertain'd his Brother: Of the hower That crown'd his Bride-bed: Of the league and power O'th' stock he's joyn'd to: Nay her fatall ditty Speaks war already. Now the pompous Argos where the marriages were solemnized. City On the set day, did all her train unfold; Joy crouded in the Court: You might behold Their Fathers On their Wed∣dings and Funerals they used in triumph to produce the Images of their Ancestors. statues march; The brasse did strive With living faces, which was most alive: The artist durst make such comparison. Horn'd First King of the Argives, but feigned by the Poets, to be changed into a River, and therefore said to be horn'd, either from his crooked banks, or because the murmuring of waters sounds like the lowing of Oxen, AElian. lib. 1. Inachus sate o'th' left hand, leaning on His o'return'd This was the old portraicture of rivers, and thus Inachus is described by Virgil, AE ead. lib. 1. Pitcher; old These are all Argive kings. Iasius And good Who taught the people first to sacrifice to angry Iuno. Phoroneus, bold First shutting up his Daughter Danae from him, then exposing her to the mercy of the Seas. Acrisius Whose anger struck at Iove, and Father to Acri∣sius an heroick Champion. Abas too The warrier, with valiant Who killed Apollo's Monster, whose head he bore in triumph. Choroebe, who On's swords point bore a head, incompass'd him; As Commanding his fifty Daughters in one night, to murther all their Husbands who were Sons to his Brother AEgyptus. Danâus did, whose crabbed looks did seem Still to be plotting mischief. Then there stood A thousand chieftains more. When straight a floud O'th' common people roares within the gate, Set open now. Where first the Nobles sate, With those o'th' royall blood. The inner ground
Was warm with sacrifice, and did resound With womens chat: The Graecian Matrons there, (Yet interlac'd with Virgins every where) Make a chast ring, and teach the Brides to tie This knot, and shake off fearfull modesty. These were led on, in Virgin robes, and state; Staining their lilly-cheeks, with roses late Dissolv'd to blushes; casting down their eyes; When love of their Virginity did seize Closely upon them; and the bashfull thought Of the first night a second blushing brought: This does bedew their cheeks; Yet at those tears Their tender Parents smile. Just so appears Pallas, and rougher Being alwaies accustomed to the woods. Dian, when they slide From heav'n together, both have The one a helmet and spear, in token of the vanquished Gorgon; the other a bow and arrows, because she was a Huntresse. Armes, beside Stern brows alike, and yellow locks tied up Above their Crown: She leads her troops to th' top Of A Delian mountain dedica∣ted to Diana. Cynthus, this to An Atticke mountain dedicated to Mierva. Aracinthus: Then (If Which their divinity denies. eyes might see) what eyes can judge between Their grace and lustre? Who did most partake Of Iove and majesty? Or should they make Exchange of habits, then Minerva's quiver And Delia's helm, would suit as well together. The Graecians joyes o'restow: The Gods were tired With vows; As each mans house and state required, He brought a sacrifice: Some from the ground, Some from the folds. Yet all like favour found If pure hands offer'd it. The Gods were pleas'd With incense, and their dores with Vsed both in private and publick houses on solemn dais, Iuven. Sat. 6. garlands dress'd.
But loe! a Panick fear struck all their mind, Upon a sodain, (thus the Fates design'd) The peoples joy's were clouded, and the day Disturb'd; They went with torches light to pay Duty's to maiden Pallas, who accounts The City where these Nupti Is were celebrated. Lariss' as much as her The mountains on which Minerva's festivals, called Munichia, were celebrated. Munichian mounts: Here th'Argives, as their Fathers us'd, resort, When their chast years were ripe for nuptiall sport, To dedicate their Virgin Vir∣gins before they were espoused dedicated their locks, and whatsoever was an embleme of their Virginity, to Pallas the guardian of it. locks, and plead Excuse for Loves first sweets. But as they tread O'th' greeces of the stately Towr; the shield Of brasse, which brave An Arcadian born, but a most prosperous king of the Argives, whose shield consecrated to the Goddess, was in their solemn triumpht born before the Conquerour through the streets▪ s his greatest honor. Euhippus won ith' field, Comes tumbling from the Temples stately spire, And puts the ig∣nificantly intimating tht war should quench this love. torches out, Loves sacred fire. And from the distant Quire a trumpet sounds Frighting them back, wch now scarce kept their grounds. All trembling, star'd at first upon the King; But straight Flattering the King. deny they'd heard it. Yet this thing Sounded unluckily within their ears, And sev'rall whispers soon increas'd their fears. No marvel: thou Argia did retain Thy husbands fatall gift, Harmiônes chain. This mischief was far-fetch'd; but I'le discourse Whence this new Present, gain'd such deadly force. Thrown out of heaven or his deformity, into the Ile Lemnos, which here denominates him. Vulcan, long griev'd at Mars his stoln With Venus, for whom V∣can made artificiall fetters, which could not yet hinder their imbraces. content, (As stories say) and finding punishment
No bar to his delights, nor could his chains Chastise the bold adulterer; he feigns This bracelet as a Dowry, for his joy The Daughter born to these adulterers. Harmione, upon her mariage day. The skilfull Vulcans forge-men, which make—. Cyclops hammer'd it; (and yet They'd —Ioves thunder-bolts▪ greater work, to which the Envious orce∣rers, but cunning Artificers in working poysons. Telchines set Their helping hand: But Vulcan himself. he sweats most; and works Bright Em'ralds in't, which shine with hidden sparks: And th' Adamant, ingrav'd with charms: The ball Of Stones as splendent and as dangerous. Gorgons eyes: With cinders, which did fall From Ioves last thunder-bolt at AEtna: This Was thredded with young Serpents manes: There is Some buds beside of the Which bore the golden apples watched by the waking Dragon whom Hercules slew. Hesperian tree, Wrought in with Who swimming ore the straights to Colchos, on a ram with a golden fleece, sacrificed the ram to Mars, and hung up the fleece in his Temple, from whence Ison fetched it. Phryxus golden fleece: Then he Studs in his severall plagues, and th' Captaine snake Pluck'd from the Furies head: such pow'r could make Venus her This girdle called Ceston, Venus puts on at lawfull Nuptials, whereas unlawfull wedlock is called incast, which this venomed bracelet in Ioasta did more then threaten. girdle crack: All these, h'anoints With The Moon, mistris of Magicians, was thought to spit her jelly on the most powerfull charming herbs. Some please themselves in referring this to Spuma Argenti (the Moon in Minerals being Argent) which is glitte∣ring, but venemous. Moon-froth, and with varnish'd poyson paints. 'Twas not Lytarge Daughter to Iove and Harmione, m∣ther to the Graces, Aglaia, Thalia, and Euphrosyne. Pasiphaes work, the Graces Queen, Nor Named here from Idalus a hill in Cyprus, where his mother and he were worship∣ped. Cpids, nor Aglaia's: But 'twas Spleen, Grief, Discord, Sorrow shap'd it: The first triall
Was wrought on poor Who accompanying Cadmus into Illyria (transformed there into a Snake) by kissing him assumes the same shape. Harmione, who loyall To her now creeping husband, with her brest Plough'd up th' Illyrian sands, whilst she exprest Her plaints by hisses. Semele next venters No sooner on't, but beldame Perswading her to her destruction, to require of Iove such imbraces as he used to bestow on his own Queen. Iuno enters. And thou too, curst Iocasta, once didst owe This guilded mischief; which adorn'd thy brow, To please strange, oh strange That of her own son. Love: With mo beside, Till now Argia shines in't: and does hide Her sisters cheaper habit, with this gold, Accursed gold. As't chanc'd, the Eryphile, who after∣wards obtained it. wife of old Amphiaraus spy'd it; and in sight Of the Gods altars, and the tables dight, Durst feed close Envy: Oh! might she inherit This prize! Alas! her Lords prophetick spirit Could not avail her. What a dismall honour, What No less then her Husbands death, her Sons mad∣ness, and her own destuction. mischief the fool strives to bring upon her? Let her: but can her husbands cheated Armes, Or her sons guiltlesse rage, deserve such harmes? After twelve daies were spent in royall cheere, And publike triumphs; the Polynices from Ismenos, a Thebane fountaine. Ismenian Peere Looks back to Thebes and thinks of's Crown: For now That day takes up his soul, when he stood low In's brothers eyes; (such was his Fortune then) He thinks the Gods deserted him, and men Shrunk cowardly back; he naked; but the worst Was Fortunes flight: Onely one Antigone, who likewise guided her blind Father. sister durst Shew him the way to exile, but forbeares To passe the thrshold, whre rage stop'd his teares.
Then night and day he meditates, what joy His absence brought to some; And who are they Which wait on's brother: what moist eyes he saw At his departure. Grief and anger gnaw Upon his soul, but expectation most, The greatest plague that ever mortall crost. Thus plodding in his thoughts, still clouded, he Resolves again forbidden Tebes to see. So when a bull, leaves his beloved cow I'th' pastures, whence his Conquerour but now Has driv'n him; he stands off, and bellows; till He thinks of's lovely mull, and blood does swell His wrinkled neck: But then recruiting strength, He's mad for t'other push, and gains at length His captive herd: With's horns, and hoofs he fights, And's conquering mate, with's herds-man too he frights. Such anger whets our lusty Named from Tamessus, a Thebane mountain dedicated to Bc∣ch Theban's mind. But his dear wife this close designe did find; And as her soft imbraces did inclose Her husband, when the pale-fac'd Morne arose: Dissembler, saies she, what's this change? what flight Doest thou intend? Nought blinds a Lovers sight. I feel it: Do not deep-fetch'd sighs proclaim Thy waking cares? How many a startling dream Breaks off thy sleep? How often have I found This face bedew'd with tears? this brest abound With sobs, when ere I felt it? 'tis no bond Of wedlock breaking moves me, nor the fond Despair of widowed youth: (although Loves sweets Be newly budded, and the bridall sheets Be not yet fully ayr'd:) Thoughts for thy quiet And safety trouble me▪ I'le ne're deny it. Wilt thou, without supplies of armes and men, Demand thy Crown? Canst thou retreat agen,
Should he deny it? Fame that's nimble ey'd To trace the lives of Kings, reports his pride Rais'd with usurping; how, his love's diminish'd To thee; nor is his year compleatly finish'd. And, truth is, some late Prophesies, with all Prodigious Misplaced or speckled, which threaten heaven was angry. entrals, and th'unlucky fall Of birds, with startling dreames increase my feare: Hah! I remember, The patroness of the Argives, and therefore would not deceive them. Iuno don't appeare In vaine: What journey's this? Does Out of jealousie, lest he should have left another wife bend him. love t'another Draw thee? Can Thebes a nobler stock discover? Here Poly∣nices from Echion, one of Cadmus companions in building of Thebes. th'Echionian smil'd a while, and strove With soft imbraces t'undeceive his Love. He dries her moistned eyes with welcome kisses, And with these friendly words her tears represses. Take courage, sweet; trust me, blest peace attends The Counsels of my best deserving friends. Leave cares for riper years: Iove may hereafter Behold our wrongs, if Justice be heavn's daughter, And daignes to looke beneath the clouds, to see The right maintain'd on Earth: The time may be Thy husbands palace shall with joy be seen, And through two Cities thou saluted Queen. This said, he slips out closely, and repairs To Tydeus, now co-partner in's affairs; Whose brest sob'd equall cares: (such love combin'd Their once divided souls) to whom he joyn'd Adrastus's counsell, sadly: Here they pause: But after long dispute, this sentence was Receiv'd of all: Best, feel his Brothers mind Fairly, and pray the Crown might be resign'd. Bold Tydus freely undertakes the message; Yet (brave AEtolian) tears had stopp'd thy passage,
Shd by Deiphile, had not the name Of a commading Father overcame: Besides her sisters prayers▪ and that pow'r Which gives safe conduct t'an Ambassadour. Now trac'd he rugged paths, through woods and rocks, By Lerna's poole, where the scorch'd See Polynices his journey, lib. 1. Hydra smoaks In the still boyling foord; By Nemea's bounds Where the blith As if he stil fered the Lion which Hercules kild there. Shepherds pipe, scarce yet resounds Sweet roundelaies: By Corinth's Eastern side: And the Where Sisyphus formerly had practised his robberies. Sisyphian port, where Of the AEgaean Sea, which by the Isthmos is divided from the Ionick. th'waves that chide Their crooked banks, are parted by the shore Of Palaemonian A Pot of Corinth, under the Lee of a promonte∣ry, from which Palaemon with his Mother leap'd into the Sea. Lache: passing o're Eithr Megara where Nisus raign'd, or rather a Mountain of that nam, whee he was buried. Nisus from hence; o'th' left he spies the plain Of mild Where Ceres first was entertained of King Eleusinus, and afterwards worshipped as a Goddess. Eleusis, and does straight obtain The Mount Where Hercules kild the Lion. Teumessus; reaching neer the tow'rs Of Built by Cadmus▪ Agenors son. Thebes; where he beholds the royall pow'rs Of stem Etheocles, whose loty state Was guarded round with Armes: the Tyrant sate To judge the folk, beyond all right, and The year being now ex∣pired. time Prescrib'd, for's brother: Mischief hardned him For all adventures: Quarrelling because They came so As if angry that he had no occasion to break his faith sooner. late to prove him. Tydeus draws To th' midst o'th' Court: His Olive-boughs discover He was a Legate: Who being question'd over His name and message; rude of speech and prone To choler, mixing threats, thus he begun.
If any faith posses'd thee, or just care Of keeping Cov'nants, now th' hast raign'd thy year, Thou wouldst have call'd thy Brother, and in course Exchang'd thy fortunes, and resign'd thy force: That he, long wandring, toss'd with storms unfitting Abroad, might find his due, a throne to sit in. But since thou'rt thus inamour'd of thy Crown And courtst thy pow'r; We aske it. 'Tis well known The sun has trac'd the Called the girdle of the year. Zodiack, and the hills Have their lost shades restor'd, since all the ills Of banishment through unknown Coasts did seize On thy poor Brother: Now's thy time to freeze Under heav'ns spangled Canopy, and stand Toth' mercy of the cold, and cap-in-hand Beg entrance at anothers dore: Forget Thy happy state: Those purple robes, beset With plates of gold, have glister'd long: And thou Hast sported with thy Brothers ebbe: But now Unteach thy self, I advise thee, how to raign, And by thy patient Let thy voluntary exile merit of thy Brother at the years end, that thou be re-instated in the Throne. flight deserv't again. This said, a secret flame was kindled in The Tyrants brest: (so when a Serpents den Is batter'd, she springs up, who thirsty dwels In her close coverts; but now chaf'd, she fils Her gums, and scaly neck with venom'd gore) Had not I fully known (saies he) before, My brothers anger; had not's private spleen Appear'd thus naked; Faith alone had been Sufficient pawn for's kingdome: Faith, which swels Thy looks so big, that whilst thy fancy dwels On him, thou ragest, as if Pioners Now min'd our walls, or trumpets call'd to wars.
Were this thy message to the Called Bistonians from Biston son to Mars and Calirrhoe, who built the Metropolis of the Country after his name. Thracians done, Or the pale Scythians, which know no Which seldome de∣clines so far North as to behold them. Sun, Thou would'st use fairer language, and begin With greater reverence: But 'tis no sin Of thy rash soul, I blame: Thy errand's so, Now since threats usher all, and faith's let goe: Nor peace is brought to mediate, but thy sword Does rest thy quarr'ling hand; Returne this word To my brave Enviously not allowing his brother the name of Thebane, but intimating he may seek a kingdome where he found a wife. Graecian Monarch; not so sowre As thine, yet my full answer: All that power Which Because the lots determined it, according to the right of age. equall fortune, and my birthright gives, I hold, and will maintain: Thy wife relieves Thy wants with Greece her dowry; Thou may'st heap The Either respecting Dana, courted in a golden showre, or put for Graecian from Danaus the Argive King. Danaan wealth into thy lap: (I keep No envious thoughts to blast thy Fortune) Rule Argos succesfully, and Said to be made by the stroake of Neptune speare, in the place where he deflowred A∣mimone Danaus's daughter. Lerna's poole. Dirces bare pastures give content to me, And the coast straitned with th' The Euripus between Euia and Boetia. Euboian sea, Not sham'd with EOdipus my wretched father. But thou from th' stock of The son of Iupiter and the Nymph Phocis. Tantalus may'st gather Far-fetch'd Nobility, and Tantal his son, both Graecian Kings. Pelops heire Kindred with Iove may'st challenge. Can thy faire Delicious Queen, indure this homely place? For whom our sisters may esteem't a grace To spin, forsooth: where Iocasta and OEdipus. Mothers dreery eyes And that imprison'd Iocasta and OEdipus. fathers dismall cries, If heard, may fright her. And the common folke
Are now accustom'd to indure my yoake. Hard were the peoples lot, should they submit T' I know not whose command, and weeping sit Under continuall changes; They'l repent Of duty, to a doubtfull Tyrant lent. Short raignes spare none. These loyall subjects view, What horrour strikes them since this quarrell grew. Shall these be left to thy sure lash? Thou art Too hot on't, brother: Say, I would depart My right, these Senatours would scarce approve The act, if I have known their purchas'd love, Or find due thankes. Tydeus could brook no more, But interrupts him thus: Thou shalt restore, Tyrant, thou shalt: If iron rampires guard Thy person, or As formerly when his harp drew stones to the worke. Amphions ditty heard, Raise treble wals about thee; 'Tis no armes; No fire shall stop me: Thou shalt feele thy harmes Reveng'd on thine owne head: At thy deaths wound Thy Captive Diadem shall beat the ground. Thou justly: but I pity He seeket to undeceive the people whom Etheocles had flattered. these, whose lives Thou mak'st (good King) so cheap: snatch'd from their wives, And children to these dismall wars. What blood Will stain A Boeotian mountain, with Cithaeron? What a barb'rous flood Will fill a river not far distant. Ismenos banks? This is thy care▪ This thy much talk'd-of faith. But I forbear To wonder at thy Nations crimes: The frame Of thy whole Sprung from O Edipus by incestuous copulation with Iocasta. stock is such, rais'd from the shame Of thy incestuous Parents; yet ther's Polynices whose sweet temper makes amends for his native pollution. one Has cleans'd the staine of's birth: 'Tis thou alone Shalt be O Edipodes; Thy manners here, And sins, rash man, deserv't; We aske our year.
But I delay — This he roares out i'th doore, Turning himself about; then tumbles o're The crowd in's flight: So Who offended with O Eneus for neglecting her in his sacrifice, sent a monstrous boare, which depopulated most part of AEtolia. Dian's curst avenger Sets up his bristled neck, and does indanger The huntsman, with the stroake of's foming tushes, If Pelopo∣nesus sent out troops with Atalanta their Kings daughter, to parsue the boare, by whom he was first wounded. Graecian troopes pursue: at all he pushes; Rooting up stones and broken shrubs; and plows The banks with's crooked snowt: He overthrows Here Telamon, and there Ixios son, under whose name he is here clouded. Perithoûs: Next He sets o The chiefe of those allured out with the Kings promises. Meleager, where he's fixt With a broad arrow, and does sinke their darts In's strugling shoulder. Tydeus thus departs From this affrighted councell, with disdaine, As if himself were here deny'd to raigne. Thus hurries he, and throws away the Crown Of's treating The token of an Ambassadour. Olive. The scar'd matrons run To th' roofes to see him; thence their curses fling On's rage, and Not daring openly to discover their ill affections. closely wish as bad to th' King. Nor was the Tyrants quick industrous braine In plots lesse subtile; choosing out a traine Of hearts resolv'd to fight: These he prepares With money and good words: Then laies his snares For an exploit that night, hoping t'invade Th' Ambassadour, (whose The lw of Nations giving thm a civill respect for  office sake. sacred name was had In reverend esteem) and's person seise. What wo'nt ambition plot? should fortune please To send thy brother, what new tricks would'st find, What arts to circumvent him? Oh the blind
Advice of guilty soules! How fearfull's sin! This troop goes out combin'd, as if't had been To beat up th' enemies Quarters, or to storme A City wals: Full fifty champions forme Their ranks; then crowd they through the lofty gate. Courage, brave soul! thought worthy of such In their own judgement conceiving Tydeus able to cope with fifty of them. hate. These creepe the neerest way, by paths unseen, Through shrubs, and crosse the woods: Then lay their scene For villany. Two remote hillocks stood, Disjoin'd by a treach'rous passage in the wood, Shaded by th' neighbour mountain, and the trees Which grew o'th' top: Here nature seem'd to please Herself in wiles, making this place to hide Her close deceits. A straight path does divide The midst o'th cliffe: Under whose hanging head The pleasant fields, and spacious vallies spread. Against it, was that deadly cave, in which The Thebane Sphinx, born of Typhon and Echidna, which destroyed all those that could not expound her ridle. monster dwelt: Here us'd the witch To raise up her pale visage: Black gore stood About her eyes; her wings were stiffe with blood: She hug'd mens offals; her bare brests did cover Their halfe devoured bones, whilst she looks over The neighbour fields, to see if any The Oracle counselled the way to quit themselves of her, was to xpound her riddle, which  stranger Durst aske her riddles, or approach i'th danger Of her sterne brow, or entertaine discourse: But then she whets her claws, and screws the force Of her staind hands; and grinds those teeth, she broke On some late carkasse; flutt'ring with the stroke Of her unlucky wings, before the eyes Of her new prey: A while these treacheries Were undiscover'd, till she met with one As  wicked as her self: Then tumbles down
With closed wings, upon the rock lay under Her bloody cav, and splits her panch in sunder. The wood still shewes the mischief; Cattell dread The neighbour plaines; no hungry flocks dare feed On that accursed grasse; no Nymphs appear Within these shades, no Fawnes are worship'd there. The scrich-owles flie from this Because strew'd over with humane bon and cneige. prodigious grove: Yet hither this Being re long to become a sacrifice to Tydeus his rage. unhappy traine does rove With silent steps, expecting their proud foe: Where leaning on their javelings, they bestow Their other weapons scatter'd on the ground, And with thick stations they the woods surround. The night had now begun to cloake the Sun With her wet mantle; th' earth was over-run With a darke shade: When Tydus hastning thither Spies from the banke, mens shields, with crests and fethers Glister, where th' boughes grew thin; from th' adverse hill He sees the Moon-beames dance upon their steel. This sight amaz'd him, yet goes forward, and Prepares his darts, and grasps his sword in's hand: Then cals out first: Whence are you? What d'ee here In this close ambush? Questions void of fear. To which no answer's giv'n; this did increase The just suspicion of his doubted peace. When on a sodaine through the duskie aire, Their Captai The chief of the con∣spiratours. Chromius lets flie a spear With's brawny arme: But fortune did not aide This daring blow; yet did it pierce the hide Of the Olnos was a country and city in AEtolia, where the boar was slain, whose skin Tydus wore. Olan boare, whose bristled skin O're his left shoulder, gave it entrance in To rase his flesh: And the but-end did light Upon his neck. This set his haire upright,
And freez'd his blood: He tosses up and down His thoughts and eyes, now pale with anger grown. Nor could he thinke, they had such strength prepar'd Gainst one. Come out, (saies he) come out, y'are dar'd 'th open field. What fear has stop'd your rage? VVhat cowardize is this? 'Tis I ingage My single selfe against you. Nor do these Forbear; whose numbers when he saw increase From their close Coverts; Some o'th top oth' hill Some in the vallies; nor a few did fill The plaines, but's way seem'd pav'd with armes: (As when The huntsmans voice cals wild-beasts from their den Beset with toyles:) His troubled thoughts invent No help but this; To climbe the steep ascent To Sphinx her cave; where, batt'ring's hooked nailes Against the craggy rock, he at last prevailes To reach the top; which thus obtain'd, secures His back from fear of danger, and procures A way for's just revenge: He tears a stone From the maine rock, which well-grown steeres would grone To draw to th' City: Then uniting all His strength, with violence he lets it fall. Thus mighty One of the Centaures, who being drunke at Prithou's wedding quarreld with the Lapithae their Thessalian neighbours, and were van∣quish'd. Pholas heaves a goblet up Against the Lapithans. The Falling soon after by the hand of Tydeus▪ dying troop Wondring at's height above them, were o'rethrowne With th'unexpected rock, thus tumbled downe. Here lay mens mangled faces, hands, and brest, With weapons which they wore, together prest. Four gron'd beneath this burden, th'other fled With terrour from their project; for those dead Were not a despicable traine: There was The Kingly spirit of fierce Dorylas▪
And Theron sprung from Mars, descending from The Those borne of the serpents teeth sown by Calmu. Earth-begotten brood, and Halys whom No horseman ever conquer'd, but now fals, O'rewhelm'd on foot; and Phaedimus, who cals Pentheus his Grandsire, but with Bacchus in∣raged against Pntheus▪ afflicted all his posterity▪ Ovid. Libers anger: The rest, affrighted with this sudden danger, When Tydeus saw disorder'd; his whole stock Of armes, two darts, stuck on the side o'th rock, Were hurl'd at's flying foes; then skips toth' ground: And lest his naked brest should catch a wound, He snatches up a buckled shield, beside Prest Theron; guarding's back and head, with th' That o the boare. hide Of proof, and fencing's brest with's enemies shield, He makes a stand. The Named here from Ogyges, once King of Thebes. Thebanes take the field, Joyn'd once more in a body, and march on With fixed resolutions. Tydeus soon Draws out his Mars, grandfather to O Eneus was worshipped in Thraca, and armes dedica∣ted to him, one of whose swords Tyeus wore. Thracian sword, the Martiall gift Of O Eneus, turning him with many a shift Of's body; here and there his blows they feel; And's buckler wards their darts of glitt'ring steel. Their number grows their hind'rance, and their Armes Fall foule of one another; their owne harmes Are wrought by their own pow'rs; now wanting strengt T'offend, the crowd o'rethrows it self at length. He was so small a marke, their arrows mist 'm, Thus his unconquer'd arme does still resistum. So, (if the Thraecian There were two Ci∣ties, and vallies of that name, one between Macedonia and Thrace, where this battell was pitch'd, the other in Campaia, where Hercules overcame the Gyants. Phlegra doe not lie) Stout A Gyant faign'd to have a hundred hnds. Briareus outbrav'd the armed skie:
Despising Phoebus shafts, and Pallas's Snakes the Symbole of prudence were ascribed to Minerva, and pla∣ced under her Image, and reckoned by Virgil, for part of her Arms. AEnid. 12. snakes, nd the Thessalian pines, which Mavors shakes or spears; One of the Cyclops, which hammer out Ioves bolt in AEtna▪ and Iove forg'd thunderbolts, which tir'd Pyramon last: Yet whilst all heav'n conspir'd n vain to batter'im, he complaines his hands Are idle still: Thus active Tydeus stands, Weilding his buckler: now, he does retire, And guards himself round; now, advances higher Upon their fears; and getting ground, commands The darts which stuck in's shield, to arme his hands. Some deep wounds he receiv'd, none deadly yet: Nor could he fear his death: He does o're set Raging Deilochus, and then does send Phlegeus to hell, t'accompany his friend, As he was threatning death, with's heav'd-up blade; Then Lycophon, and Thebane Gyas had Like fortune. Now the cowards 'gan to seeke, And count themselves: nor did they so well like This killing sport: And griev'd to see the throng Thus melt away. When Chromis (who was sprung From Son to Agenor King of Tyre. Tyrian Cadmus stock) (whose mother, hight Phoeniceaen Driope forgat the weight Of her great belly, when she was possest With fury, father One of the names of Liber, in whose Bacchanals she was inraged. Evan, of thy Priest: And whilst a strugling bull shee haled on By'th' hornes, her Not staying the course of nature, but abortive through his mothers strugling. paines deliver her of this son:) Bold with his darts, and's conquer'd Lions skin▪ He shakes his lusty club of knotty pine: Exclaiming thus: Shall one man, Friends, shall one Triumph in Greece, o're your destruction? Fame scarce will credit him. Mates, where's our pow'r?
Where's our prevailing Armes? We promis'd more Cydon! t'our King; Lampus! more bold adventers. Whilst he spake this, a Thebane Which he had snatch'd from his adversaries. javeling enters His open mouth: His jawes in vaine withstood: But's voice thus stop'd, his clos'd tongue swims in blood. And yet he stands, till death had summond all His limbs; then silent, biting th'spear doth fall. But why conceale I your deserved praise, My noble Thespian paire? Young Periphas (The richest mind, i'th choysest body found) Rais'd up his brothers dying limbs from ground: His left hand under-props his drooping neck; His right supports his side: Whilst sighes do crack His straitned brest: Nor could his helme containe Those floods of tears: But in this weeping vaine, A furious lance pierc'd his short ribs behind, Which through him smote his brother too, and joyn'd Their well acquainted brests: He who was irst wounded. His trembling eyes Looke up on's brothers death, and then he dies. Th'other, not spent yet with his wounds, thus wishes: Such be An imprecation on Tydeus. thy sons imbraces, such their kisses. Thus both did fall alike: (a wretched prize For Death:) and clos'd up one anothers eyes. But he pursues his victories, and chases Mnaetes with his shield and darts; whose paces, Trembling, give back, till the unequall sands Trip'd up his heeles: Then spreading both his hands, He begs for Quarter; and laies hold o'th' spear Charg'd now against his throat▪ then makes his prayer. By these still shades, where stars glide from the skies; By heav'n; by this thy night of victories; Spare me to go, and blaze this dismall news In Thebes; and with contempt t'our King, diffuse Thy glory 'mongst the quaking vulgar: So
Our darts shall fall in vaine, and tho shalt go Shot-free through all our Armes, and be i'th end Brought back with triumph to thy longing friend. Thus spake he: T'other cleares not up his brow: Thou spend'st thy ters in vaine (saies he) 'twas thou Mad'st promise of my head toth' King, if I Mistake not: yeild up now thy arms, and die. Why wouldst spin out thy life, when As if presen lie wold not advantage them, which mus soon after be cut off. I choose to sense the place thus, opposing compendium to di∣spendium. war's at hand? With that he draws his weapon back, now staind With his heart bloud: And crows ore's captives thus: This is n't the The festivall of Bcchus, thus named, because every third year they were performed, with the greater solemnity. Trieterick night, in use Among your Country-men; nor do you see Cadmus his The name of these Sacrifices is fetch'd rom the Priestesses fury, in which ge A∣gave slew Pntheus. Orgies, where your Matrons be Inrag'd by Bacchus: Did you thinke to weare Your buckskin Th Sacrificers wre loose garments made of the skins of beasts. copes, and shake a garnish'd Thes Thirsi, drest about with vineleaves▪ were charg'd fantastically in the way of foiles, at the sound of their Musick. speare, At your soft straines? Or (which true valour scornes) Meant you, at sound of The place where the piper Mara challeng'd Apollo; all winde Instruments were invented there. Celenean hornes, To close your wanton The combates of adulterers. fights? The blows we deal Are sharper, like our fury. Sinke to hell Ye few, ye o're match'd Cowards. Thus he roares: But his tir'd spirits stop'd him: All the force Of's threatning hand was lost: His footsteps falter'd: His arme lets fall his shield, whose hew was alter'd With drops of blood: a could sweat trickles downe▪ His panting brest: A bloody dew stands on His locks, and flaming eyes; o're his grim brow, Whole streames, which spouted from their wounds, did flow
Like as a Lion, when the shepheard's fled, Preyes on Massilian sheep: But when he's fed And pamper'd with their blood, which clots his mane, He stands i'th' midst of o'th' flock, which he hath slaine, Tir'd, yawning, surfeited; his rage does pawse, A while, and lashes th'aire with's empty jaws: Licking, with's loll'd-out tongue, their gentle fleeces. Now Tydeus full of blood, and glorious pieces Of spoiles, had gone to Thebes in pompe toth' view O'th frighted Court: But thou didst please to shew Thy counsell, Called Titonia from the Afric fountaine Triton, where she first appeared. virgin-Pallas, to his mind Inflam'd, and with his prosprous fortunes blind. Great branch of O Eneus's stock, whom we afford To o'recome Thebes at I her fifty champions whom thou hast slaine. distance; sheath thy sword: Spare heav'n that's too propitious: Thou hast done Beyond beliefe already; now be gone With fortunes choicest gifts. There did remaine Onely the Thebane Na∣md either from Haemon a Boeotian river, o son to that Haemon who was inamour'd of Antigone. Maeon yet unslaine; Unwilling to survive them: (he fore-knew This fate, being A famous Auspex. i. c. fortune-teller, from the flight of birds. skill'd in ev'ry bird that flew:) Nor feard he to forewarne the King; but they Destin'd to death, neglect what he could say. He (wrtched creature) was condemn'd to live: To whom grim Tydeus, this harsh charge did give. Thebane, what e're thou art, whom the next Sun Shall see repriv'd, by our compassion; Returne this to thy King: Entrench thy gates, Renew thy armes, view round thy wals defaults: But chiefly raise more men, complete againe Thy shatter'd troops: See how this spacious plaine Reaes from my sword. Such spirits all on's bring
o fight. This said, he chose an offering or thee, kind Pallas, from the field of slaughter: And makes a heap of carkasses; with laughter Recounting his own acts: An oake did grow I'th' middle trench o'th' field, which did not know The age when 'twas first planted: A thick rinde With crooked twigs, and suckers 'bout it twin'd. Here helmets are hung up, and targets batter'd With many stroakes; here broken swords are scatter'd: Here bindes he shiver'd spears, he could recover Out of their gaping wounds: Then standing over His heap of armes and bodies, he begins: Night and the Mountaine ecchoe to his Hymnes. Goddesse of power, thy Minerva was borne of the braine of Iupiter. Fathers braine and pride: Great Queen of war, whose cheekes a helme does hide With comely terrour; whose sterne brow is painted With Lending her shield to Perseus, in his expedition against Medusa, had the reflection of it there imprinted, which ever afterward she wore. Gorgons blood: Mars is not more acquainted With battels; nor Bellona shriller blows Her trumpets: be propitious to my vows. Whether thou leav'st Athens dedicated to Pallas, where Pandion reign'd. Pandions hill to view Our slaughters; or forsak'st thy joyfull crew Of Thebane Severall Cities of this name, were in Epire, Italy, Boeotia, Lydia, Thessalia; this of Boeotia was devoted to Minerva▪ Ithones Nymphes, or kombst thy haires Bedew'd in The Africk river where Tritn used to bathe. Tritns streames, where two white mares Hurry thy war-like Charret: We present These broken spoiles now, and this pillage rent From our foes shoulders: But if e're we come To see AEtoliae where he was borne. Parthaons fields, and finde a home In An AEtolian City, consecrated to Mars. Pleurn, then thy Temples richly gilt I'th loftiest streets o'th' City shall be built. Whence 'twill delight, th' Ionick waves to spie,
And boistrous Achelous passing by Th' Three Islands of sand wrought up by the Sea, in the mouth of Ache∣lous. Echinades, where's azure waves do raise The Ocean. Here will I paint the The stories of victories atcheiv'd by them. baies Of our fore-fathers; the majestick brow Of puissant Princes. Here will I bestow Their Armes fixt to their Scutcheons: What these broiles Afford me here, with all those other spoiles Which thou shalt grant, when Thebes is made our prize. A hundred Calydonian votaries, Shall wait upon thy Pallas, Diana, and Vesta, the three virgin Goddesses. virgin Altars, with Athens, named here from King Actaeus, brought in the use of lights to the Sacrifices of Pallas. Athenean torches; binding many a wreath From thy Either the Olive Minerva's gift, of which they wrought her garlands: or that tree, which every fift year was devoted, on which they hung the first fruits of all their increases, like the Romane Verbena. chaste tree, with white and purple tires. Here thy ag'd Priest shall feed In this, per∣forming the office of the Vestll virgins, who might not suffer their fir to go out without a prodigie. eternall fires; Not searching thy close Whether that of the Palladium let fall from heaven, which was death to prie into. Or rather that of her Virginity, of which there was a strong suspition with Vulan, when Ericthoius was borne. myst'ries: Thou shalt bear The first fruits of our works in peace, and war, Without As once when shee sent the boate into Ca∣lydonia. Diana's anger. Thus he spoke, And to sweet Argos, straight his journey tooke. Finis Lib. II. Statii Thebaid.
Argument. Lib. III. Statii Thebaidos. Maeon reports toth' King his Captaines fall; Then dies himselfe, denied his funerall: The howling Matrons run toth' bloody field To weep upon the dead. Mavors does yield At Joves command, toth' Thebane wars; though hindred By Venus pray'rs. Tydeus returning, tendred His aide to Polynices, who's affected With's Brothers wrongs: Nor are his wounds negle∣cted. On Aphesas, the Prophets Auguries Are taken: Capaneus does them despise. Argia does implore her Fathers aide Toth' war; he grants the boon for which she praid. BUt the persidious Thebane Prince, forbears All rest, this It was not yet discovered which side was worsted. doubtfull night; though the moist stars Had a long race to morning: His Of way-laying▪  base act Keeps watch about his soule; and does exact Just punishment: Whilst fear (which prophesies The worst of doubts) all her conjectures tries. Alas! saies he, why stay they? (he did thinke The taske was easie: Tydeus needs must shrinke At sight of such a power; nor did he weigh His courage with their Numbers) did they stray Through some wrong path? Is there an army rais'd From Greece to's succour? or's the Rumour blaz'd Through neighbour Cities, of our base attempt?
Were some few Cowards chose fit for contempt, Great Father Mars? Chromis and Dorilas, The Thespians too, true champions to our cause, Were there: whole Greece could not withstand their armes: And sure he brought no guard of hidden charmes T'oppose our darts; He wore no coate of mayle, No plates of brasse. Ye sluggards! which do faile Thus long o're one! If battell yet be joyn'd. Thus various heates of rage distract his minde. But above all he blames himselfe, who spar'd The Legate when's Ambassage was declar'd Ith' Court: and did not quench that fire, in's blood: Now he's asham'd, and in another mood Repents. As the Calabrian Pilot plowes Th' That boistrous part of the Mediterranean Sea, which lies about the Adriatick straits. Ionick waves, where every shoale he knowes And creeke; Intic'd out from the friendly shore, Cause the A constellation, in honour to the Amalthean goat which nourished Iupiter, whose first rising threatens boistrous weather, but cleares up before the fall. Olenean Goat rose cleere before: But when a winters storme o'resets him, all The ports flie ope, The son which Iupiter gave OEnopion without a wife, who slaine by Diana's Scorpion, was trans∣figured to a Star, which riseth in the wet month of Ianuary. Orion does let fall Huge tempests: Then he longs for land, and rowes To shore amaine: But a strong South-wind blowes Oth' sterne to Sea: When leaving's skill, he grieves, And toth' blinde waves, himselfe he blindly gives: Thus troubled lies Eteocles, and blames The slow-pac'd Light's not-yet-approaching beames. But loe! when nights black steeds their course had run, The stars went out, and In whose lap she sleepes every night. Tethys rous'd the Sun, Bathing ith' Eastern Sea: The wombe o'th' Earth, (As 'twere to give strange prodigies a birth)
Trembles, the The Globe of the Earth, hanging equally poised in the aire, seemes to be strooke by the Orbe in compassing it, when it jars in an Earth∣quake. Globe being strooke: Bacchus his mountaine covered with snow. Citharons top Shakes off his snow, the hils seem'd lifted up: And Thebes seav'n gates threatned to clash together: The cause appear'd; Spared in the last booke by Tydeus to publish his victories. Maeon returned thither From his could quarters, vext with Who had shewed him a cruell favour. Fate, and sad Because he liv'd: Nor yet the Dawning had Fully discover'd him. But's lamentation Was a sure token of their desolation. And now his stock of teares were spent; As when The heardsman comes from's pastures back again, Spoil'd by the Country wolves, whose Masters herd Was fled out of his Grove that night, afear'd Of stormes rais'd by the Weather was prognosticated by the figure of the Moone after her changes. blunted hornes o'th Moone: Next day their slaughter's seen; Nor dares he run To tell this newes at home, but strew'd with A custome practised by Christians and  sand He fils the Vale with's plaints, hating the land His  silent folds were pitch't on, and does roare For his lost buls, which now he calleth o're. Soone as the crowd of Matrons see him come Toth' gates alone, without his troops, or some O'th valiant Captaines with him; They (alas!) Dar'd not to aske, but made an outcry: As A City storm'd would do, or seamen shout Launching a ship toth' Maine. When he found out, To his desire, the hated King, saies he, Sterne Tydeus recommends one soule to thee, One wretched soule, of all thy traine: If this Were the gods will, or Fortunes, or (which is A shame to speake) the foes unconquered might; I, which relate it, scarce can thinke it right:
All, all are dead: Witnesse ye stars above, My partners Ghost, and that Bringing him back onely to perish. ill fate which drove Me back againe: No craft, nor teares did gaine This cruell pardon, lifes As not worthy to die amongst his confedertes. dishonour'd staine: But the Which as a Prophet he was best acquainted with. command of heav'n and constant Fate Unchang'd from her decrees, or Pluto's gate Late shut against me, did forbid my death: Would'st know, how prodigall I'me grown of breath, How little fearing hell? Then blood-hound hear: Thou'st rais'd a fatall, a forbidden war. Whilst in contempt of Lawes, and brothers right Banish'd, a Scepter's onely thy delight. A list of widow'd houses fill'd with cries, And fifty Those of his Captaines. Ghosts hov'ring before thine eyes. With horrour, night and day, shall fright thy mind, And be thy guard; Nor will I stay behind. With this the fierce Kings brest was swolne with ire: His sterne brows flam'd, his blood was set on fire. Straight, Phlegias and Labdacus, prepar'd For all injustice (Captaines of his Guard) Would force him from the presence. But he had With daring courage, now unsheath'd his blade: And staring on the Tyrant with an eye Glancing on's steele; Thou hast not right (quoth he) To any blood of mine; Nor shalt thou strike That breast which Tydeus spar'd: I go to seeke Forbidden death with triumph; and am borne With Of his partners which fell before him. expectation to my partners Urne. Heav'n and thy Brother plague thee. — But this sound Was stop'd with's blade, sunke up to th' hilts in's wound. He strives against deaths pangs; and doubling all His strength t'a second stroke, on's sword does fall. His trembling soule thus panteth, whilst his bloud Streames from his mouth and wounds in a double floud.
The Nobles minds were strooke, and all the round Mutt'red their troubled thoughts. Whilst he still frown'd, With lookes unchang'd by death; his wife and friends (Not long joy'd with his company) attends On's corps to's house. The Tyrant sticks not here, But interdicts his fun'ralls; and (as 'twere To make his sins compleat) in vaine does turne The Ghost that felt it not, from's quiet Urne. But thou, whose Fate was great, as was thy soule, Who, ne're to be forgotten, durst controule Th'imperious King; and pave a way in which Blest liberty might ride! What verse, what speech Can raise thy name, as high as thy deserts? Thou God-delighting Prophet! Heav'nly Arts Were not taught thee in vaine. Apollo's The tree whence Apollo's Priests had garlands in honour of Daphne. baies Did well become thy brows. Dodona, where Iove gave answer by two Doves, sitting on his Oakes. Dodona's praise, That Queen of Groves, dies: Where Apollo's Oracle in the bottome of Pruassus, was delivered by an antient maid. But this Prophet being dead, all Oracles would be silent. Cyrrha's Nymph wil dare, Now Phoeb' is mute, to unresolve our fear. And now far distant from the Stygian coasts, Goe, take Elysium; which no Because of their last cowardly attempt. Thebane Ghost, But thine, may enter: where the Tyrants name Has no command. The Prophets bo∣dy exposed now by the Kings command. His shape remaines the same, His limbes untouch'd by rav'nous beasts, and where He lay expos'd, the birds with awe forbeare. But wives, and Orphans, with sad Parents, spred Through all the plaines, and rocks, run who should feed Their eyes first, with their miseries: (It was A sad contest:) whilst many thousands passe Along to comfort them: And some haste on To see what one man, in one night had done. The way reek'd with their sighs: Their cries were heard
Through all the fields: But when those rocks appear'd And that Infamous as well for the monster Sphinx, as for Tydeus his slaughter. unhallow'd wood; (as if their shreikes Now first began, and tears first stain'd their cheeks) One generall out-cry's made: this sight of blood Had kindled all their rage. Black sorrow stood In mourning weeds, all torne, and mangled paps Inviting on the Matrons. They unclaspe The beavers from their stiff'ned brows, and shew The bodies, as they found them, which they knew: Falling on friends and strangers. One besmeares Her locks with goare: some close the eyes: Her tears Are shed to bath his wounds: This plucks a dart With a vaine pity, from her husbands heart. Part fit the trunke limbs as they grew before, And joyne the shoulders to the head they bore. But Ide, mother to the Thespian paire, Wandring i'th' braky sands, whose scatter'd haire Was tuck'd up (as her double losse commands) In carelesse manner, having bath'd her hands I'th blood of her pale cheekes: Not wretched now, Now not unhappy: Fear and dread does flow From both her eyes. Thus, through the field of war And slaughter, powd'ring her neglected haire With dust; she seekes her widow'd joyes, and moanes O're ev'ry slaughter'd carkasse, for her sons. As a Thessalian hag, joy'd with the newes Of some late Which might furnish her with store of carkasses. battell; (from whose Countries use Shee'has learnd, to charme up, some departed wight) With Either to keep light the better, or that there was a spell in the inspication and cleaving of them. seare-branch'd-Cedar-torch-light Which besides that they be oylie, seem to Virgill, and Ovid to be of a mgicall power., in the night Traces the fields; where ev'ry corpse is tost As't welters in its blood, to see what Ghost
To her commands, freest it selfe engages, Whilst the black Round complaines, and That their rest and his dominion is thus disturbed. Pluto rages. Those lay together, underneath the rock; Happy, to fall the same day, by th' same stroke: Their breasts were pegg'd together with the speare; Which when her eyes saw, (having drop't a teare) Sons, is't a Mother (saies she) that beholds These your close kisses? These your loving folds? Has deaths too cruell wit, thus coupled you I'th close of life? Whose wounds first shall I view? Whose lips salute? Are you your Mothers glory? My wombs best fortune? Which should raise my story To heav'n, outvying other As Niobs, &c. Matrons names; Ah! how much happier are those coupled Dames Whose barren wombes n'ere call'd Lucina down To ease their paines? my paines my ills may owne. Nor fell you nobly in the Being slaine in a cowardly night skirmish. day of war, The talke of Nations, what things you did dare; Leaving a badge of honour to your Mother: You died a poor, base death, which night would smother. Could so great blood steale without praise to th' grave? But Ile not strive to part you, or to have Your hands untwined as they lie embrac't: And breake your league of death. Goe Brethren, last Long, undistinguisht; when your bodies burne, And may your kinde Ghosts mingle in your Urne. Thy wife laments no lesse Chromis for thee, And Pentheus mother, sad Astioche, Having prepar'd the Fun'rals: You might gather From Phaedrims infants, they had lost their Father: Phylleus her spouse, Marpissa weepes; alas! Whilst sisters bath the bloody Achamas. Now they lop'd downe the To build funerall piles for their dead friends. wood, and shav'd the head
O'th' neighbour hill, which witness'd this black deed, And saw their teares. But sage Alethes stood Before the piles, and whilst no mourner could Be drawne from their owne fires, his reverend age Seekes with these words their sorrows to asswage. Our Nation seldome has been free from danger By'th' sport of Fate, since the When Cadmus sowed the Dragons teeth, whence the Gyants sprung. Sidonian stranger Threw his curs'd seed in our Aonian plaines, Whence new blades sprung & fields affright their Swaines. But Thebes ne're wept so loud, when lightning turn'd Old Cadmus When Iuno counselld Semele, to desire Ioves majestick appearance. court to ashes, where it burn'd By Iuno's counsell: Nor when Athamas Downe from the mount with fun'rall Of his sons dad body. spoiles did passe, Shouting for his halfe-dead Learchus feares. Nay Thebes was bath'd in no more fruifull teares, When tir'd Who in that fury tore her son Petheus piece-meale. Agave's madnesse found reliefe, And stood amaz'd at her companions griefe. The fate and mischiefe of this single day Is like the time, when Niobe did pay For her proud boasts, where overwhelm'd with ills, She gives so many Making a bold comparison with Latona, she lost in one day fourteen children. corpses to their piles. So left the people then the naked City, Whilst aged Sires, and rankes of Matrons pity, That heav'n should envy thus, and ev'ry Thebes the seven gated City, had two corp∣ses carried through every gate. gate Was crowded with two Funerals: My Fate Then taught me, like my Parents to lament; Although my years knew not what sorrowes meant, Heav'n wrought all this: Nor griev'd I more because The furious dogs, knew not their Actaeon torne by his hounds, for espy∣ing naked Diana. Masters face
Wandring by Delia's fountaines, where he spi'de Forbidden sights: or when thy blood did glide Great Dirce drag'd by Amphion and Zetus, had her blood changed into a fountaine of her name. Queen, in new-sprung streames: 'Twas the decree Of Fate, and Ioves high pleasure. Whereas we Are rob'd o'th' kingdomes pillars, all our power, By one false Tyrants fault. Nor at this hower, Greece, how th' Ambassage was rejected, hears: And now, we thinke, we waile the worst of wars. How shall the horses foame? what sweaty brows Will roule i'th' dust? how red the Current flowes? Green years will see this: Whilst I may, will I Kindle my pile: and in my Country lie. Thus spake th'old Father: and much aggravates Etheocles his sin, whil'st he relates, His cruell, wicked purpose, which ere long Just vengeance would pursue. What taught his tongue This freedome? He foresaw his end was nigh, His dayes were spent, and he would bravely die. The King of heav'n from's stately palace, view'd These Nations first, in their owne blood imbru'd. And sends post-haste for Mars. Who laying waste Some These Nations were so warlike, that Mars was said to be borne there. Thracian and These Nations were so warlike, that Mars was said to be borne there. Getick townes, did haste And drove his charret furiously, toth' skie: Lightning did creast his helme; the gold did die On's cruell armes; which quickned with the shapes Of monstrous beasts, he shooke: Whilst thunderclaps Crack heav'n: a bloody-red light sets upon His shield, whose envy strikes the distant Sun. When Iove beheld him, puffing with his late Sarmatick paines, and swelling still with hate, And warr's huge Tempest; Go, saies he, appeare Through Greece, as th'art: Nor sword, nor anger clear,
Bid them Or after another edition, bid them disturbe their idle league. scowre up the rusty bits, and hate All, but thy selfe: Thee, in their lives estate And fortunes: Breake delaies; Cashiere that These Nations never quarrel'd before. peace We gave them. Thou maist fire heav'n if thou please; Thou maist disturbe my quiet. I have sowne The seed of discord thus: Tydeus does frowne At his returne, reporting the base act Attempted by the King, fit to contract As base a war; The treacheries which were laid, And by his steele reveng'd: 'Tis thou must adde Credit to's words. Ye gods, which draw your line From me, dissent not: Hope not, to decline My sentence by your prayers: The black clew O'th' sister-Fates has sworne; this day is due To Mars, from th' Earths first fabrick; and those are A people destin'd, from their birth to war. But should my justice finde you her gaine-saiers, Not to plague old offences in the heires; Witnesse y'Eternall Towers; Thou Cabinet Of mine owne thoughts; And what, as heav'n, I set In mine esteeme, Thou cleare Elyzian water; This hand shall Thebes, and her proud bulwarkes batter: Whose towers raz'd to the ground, on Greece Ile powre: Or turne them both, to poysoned Lakes, by a shower Of blood rain'd downe: Though Contending so earnestly for them. Lib. 1. Iuno in her armes Embrace her hils and Temples, midst these harmes. This said, they trembling, doe their speech forbear, And quell their thoughts, as if they mortalls were. As when the windes in league, becalme the seas, No waves forbid the shoare to sleepe at ease; The shady leaves, and clouds, are scorch'd with heat, Without a blast to coole them: Then the great And roaring lakes contract themselves: The Sun
Drinkes up the streames which now with silence run, Mars triumphs at these summons; as he rides On's fery wheeles, toth' left the reynes he guides. And having rech'd his journey, Heav'ns ascent, Venus does boldly 'fore his steedes present Herselfe: They startling back, let fall their manes With reverence: She on their harnesse leanes; And glancing her moist eyes, makes this complaint: (Meane while his, steeds were fed with Adamant Which sprung besides her feet:) Prepar'st thou war For Thebes? Doest thou, her lovely Being father to Harmione, the wife of Cadmus▪ Sire, prepare So kind a war? And seek'st thou to destroy Thy off-spring? Can't Harmonie, nor the joy Of heav'n, those Where all the gods threw in their offerings. weddings; Can't my tears be heard To stop thy rage? Is this a just reward For my Of playing the adulteresse. offence? Left I my bashfull spirit▪ And wore I Which Vul∣ca forged to ensnare them. Lemnian chaines, that I might merit This boone? Proceed. But 'tis another duty Wrong'd Vulcan payes; whose anger serves my beauty. He would be glad, eternally to sweat In's forge, at my command: And nightly sit Watching at's anvile: He would hammer, Thee, Ev'n Thee, a suite of armes. Yet Thou — But I Thinke by my teares, to melt a rockie heart, A heart of brasse. This onely this impart: I beg it: Why didst cause my childe to take A Tyrian spouse, and fatall wedlock make? Thy boast was, that those champions of Tyre, Though sprung from When Cadmus sowed the serpents teeth. Vipers, challeng'd Iove, their Sire; Brave lively spirits. Oh that my girle had joyn'd To a Northern blade, of the The Northerne part of Thrce, named from its King Sitho. Sithonian kind,
Beyond thy Thrace. I'st not enough disgrace, Queen Venus's daughter Harmione when with Cadmus she was transformed into a snake. creeps upon the grasse, And spits her poyson in th' Illyrian coast? But now a Nation undeserving's lost. The Warriour could no longer bear this waste Of teares, but handling's speare, leaps downe in haste From's lofty Chariot; where his buckler meets her With rough embraces, and thus kindly greets her. Thou sweet refreshment from my warlike toyles. My soules content; whose beauty only foyles My darts, 'mongst gods or men; who safely charm'st My foming steeds, and this right hand disarm'st: I ha'nt forgot th'alliance Cadmus claimes, Nor thy dear Love: (Let me not bear these blames Unjustly:) sooner Ile be drench'd in hell, And driv'n disarm'd to the pale Furies cell. But now the Fates decree, and Ioves command I must obey (Thy Vulcan has no hand Fit for such service:) How dare I oppose Ioves pleasure, or contemne what hee'l impose? When late he spoke, heav'n, earth, and the vast deep (Strange power!) stood trembling: Nay the gods did creep, And hid themselves, though of his ranke: Yet, dear, Be not possess't with a despairing fear: Since there's no change, Ile an assistant sit Toth' Thebane armes, when both their hosts shall meet Under the Tyrian wals: Then shalt thou see Me, hurry through the field of blood, and be A terrour to the Graecians, with more joy. No law, nor destiny does this deny. This said, he whips his horses through the skie: Ioves thunderbolts do not more swiftly flie To th' distant Earth, when on the snowy head Of Two mountaines of that eminent height, that their tops are hid within the  Othrys, or cold Two mountaines of that eminent height, that their tops are hid within the  Ossa he does tread;
And armes his hand i'th clouds: Downe fall his darts Bearing his sad commands; Their sparkeling, starts The Universe, should they a drought infer Toth' Earth, or shipwrack to the Mariner. Now Tydeus did his wary steps recall Toth' Graecian plaines, and sweet Prosymna's dale: His lookes affright; his haire with dust abounds; A showre of sweat fals into's open wounds. His eyes looke red with watching; thirst contracts His drawn-up mouth: his mind feeds on his acts, And breathes his lasting fame. Just so, comes back The pushing bull to's pastures; with his neck And deawlap, and torne shoulders drench'd in gore Of's owne, and's enemies blood: Though tir'd before, His courage rises now: His pride does grow From sight of's mangled breast: His conquer'd foe Lies roaring, as he tumbles on the ground, Which bids him slight the anguish of his wound. Thus he returnes; and as he pass'd, enflames The Inland townes, betwixt A river in the utmost borders of Boeotia. Asopus streames And Argos: Every where discoursing, how Himselfe Ambassadour from Greece did goe, To aske for banish'd Polynices right: Where he endur'd such force, so black a night, That craft, those treach'rous armes combin'd together, By'th' Tyrants charge, who'l not resigne t's brother. The people soone beleeve him; Mars prepares Their credulous souls, and Fame does raise their feares. He entring on a sodaine at the gate, What time Adrastus and his Nobles sate n Parliament:) cries out, at th' Palace doore: rme, Arme my sparkes; and thou great Soveraigne power hich rulest Greece; if any grandsires blood oe swell thy veines; to Armes: All that is good
And right, all thoughts of heav'n are fled from men: More safely, I a Legate might have been To th' greedy Scythians, or that bloody Amycus, who challenged all travailers to combate in the Bithynian woods, and there rifled and murthered them. theife Of the Bebrician wood. Nor do I grieve Or check you for commanding: I am glad I'm glad I went, and prov'd what strength they had In guilty Thebes. Trust me an Army back'd With night and craft, besieg'd me, in a tract Of ground I knew not, naked; yet in vaine: As they had gone some fortresse to obtaine, Or well-fenc'd towne, appointd Cap-a-pe, And arm'd with plots, they came t'encounter me. There weltring in their blood, before the wall O'th Which had lost fifty of her best commanders. empty City. Now's the time to fall On our affrighted foes, when they have made Their fun'rall piles, ere I ungraspe my blade: Though tir'd with sending fifty soules toth' grave, My wounds not cleans'd, and bleeding, yet I crave, Let's march away. Th' amazed Graecians rise, But first the Thebane meets, with downe-cast eyes: I am accurs'd of heav'n, who guilty view Thy wounds, untouch'd my selfe: Was this my due At my returne, dear Brother? was this strife Level'd at me! O base desire of life! Wretch! that I should deny this crimson Of becomming a parricide in murthering his brother. staine To my false Brother. But, may you remaine Long blest with peace: A stranger shan't beget Your trouble: Neither ha's my fortune yet Swell'd me so high, but that I know what smart And griefe it is, from wife and babes to part, And Country: No dismembred family, Nor pensive Matrons eye shall squint on me.
Ile goe resolv'd for death, although my spouse And Father-in-law againe should stop my vowes. This life to Thebes, and to my brother's due, And Thee, great Tydeus. Thus his speeches screw Into their mindes, whilst he windes in his Closely imploring assistance which he seem'd to pray against. prayers. But these complaints had mov'd their spleen; In teares They boyle their griefe. One purpose does ingage The breasts of all; both young, and such whose age Had cool'd their spirits: All would rise as one, And call in neighbours help; and straight be gone. But brave Adrastus, who knew well to guide A Scepter, cries, Let It being unlawfull to wage war, without consulting the Gods. heav'n and me decide This matter. Neither shall th'Usurper live Without revenge; nor you too hastie give Promise for war. But now let's entertaine Tydeus, triumphing o're so many slaine: Whose gallant soul from rest may finde reliefe: Reason shall moderate us in our griefe. The Peeres were struck with this, his wife grew pale: Glad Tydeus now surrounded by them all, Wearied with's war, and travailes, was repos'd I'th midst o'th hall; his back to a pillar clos'd: Whilst Called so from a Graecian City of that name, which bred AEscula∣pius the inventor of medicine. Epidaurian Idmon baths him, who Was skill'd i'th' Surgeons launce, and simpling too. He taken up with lofty thoughts, discourses The cause o'th' jar, how they reply'd in courses; In what place they way-lay'd him; at what hower; What Captaines came against him, of what power; Who put him hardest to't: Then he relates, How he spar'd Maeon, to report their fates. The round of Nobles, with the King's amaz'd, To hear't: The banish'd Thebanes pirit's rais'd.
The Sun descending toth' Hesperian shoare, Had loos'd his fiery steeds, and washes ore Their glitt'ring manes i'th' Ocean: He was met By Nereus traine, and th' Howres with nimble feet. These take the reines off; and th' imbroydred crest Of's Crowne, they unharnesse their chaf'd back and brest. Some lead his steeds to pasture, when they're coole, Some set the Chariot up, and mount the pole: Night comming on composeth humane care, And stops the wilde-beasts ranging; heav'n does weare A sable robe: All do partake this boone, Except Adrastus, and his Thebane son. For Tydeus slept securely, whilst the Theame Of's valour was presented in his dreame. And now the god of war, this gloomy night Clatters his steele; and though he do affright, Yet he allures their soules, through all the bounds Of Arcadie, and the Nemaean townes: Toth' top of Taenarus, and A Lycian City dedicated to Apollo. Therapne blest With Phoeb's great presence. Rage and anger dress'd His horses manes: Terrour his Squire, does use The reynes; and Fame, which watches every newes, Collecting various tumults, and driv'n on Byth' horses breath, turnes his Postilion: And shakes her quivering wings with sounds of fear, Forc'd on byth' bloody whip o'th' Charioteer, To speake both truth and falshood: Th'angry god Lashes her back-parts with a Scythian rod. As windes set by their Captaine Neptune free From their AEolian gaole, before him flee Intoth' From AEgeus, an Athnian, who drowned himself here, in despaire for his son Thesus. AEgean ea: whilst stormes and clouds Sad company, and gloomy winter crouds About his wheeles; and ugly Tempests, hurl'd From the torne Center of the scatter'd world.
The Fifty three little Islands in the AEgea sea. Cyclads then feel their foundation shake; Delos feares Two of the Cy∣clades, incompassing and securing Dlos. Mycone will her forsake, And Two of the Cy∣clades, incompassing and securing Delos. Gyarus; and does implore the aide, And claims the promise, her great Apollo who in recompence to the Island which brought him up, secued it from winds and tem∣pests. Nurse-child made. Now the seventh morning courted heav'n and earth, Giving the day from her fair lips a birth; When the Adrastus named here from Perseus, who once ruled over Ar∣gos. old King, from's privy chamber came, Much doubtfull, much distracted with the name Of war, and's fiery sons: He can't resolve, Whether to be their Generall, and involve The nations in their quarrell; Or refraine His raging brest, and sheath his sword againe. This way sweet peace provok'd; then he's asham'd Of lazy ease, and's subjects all inflam'd With fresh desires of war: But yet, at last His doubts are clos'd with this; He'l go, and tast The Prophets minds, and try what th' One great part of divination being made, by looking on the sacrifices there slain. Altars meane, Which best discover truth. This was thy Scene Eclus his son, who was both Prophet and Captain in the war, slain afterward. Amphiarâus, with old Melampus joyn'd But son-in-law to King Prae∣tus, upon compact of restoring his daughters the Praetides to their for∣mer shapes. Amithaons son, who flourish'd still in mind, And Phoeb's great presence; 'Twas a doubt it seems Who best belov'd, drunk most of Where Apollo was worshipp'd, where they drunk in the Art of divination. Cyrrha's streams. They try the Gods, with entrails first, and blood Of cattell slain; whose speckled hearts withstood: And shrivel'd veines spoke mischief to their feare: Yet they'l abroad and guesse The two other kinds of soothsaying from the flight and chirping of the birds. i'th open ayre.
There was a mount, whose daring top did passe The clouds; the Grecians call it A Cilician mount, whence Perseus took his flight, when he went for the Gorgos head. Aphesas; Once sacred to the Argives: Hence 'tis said Swift Perseus took his flight, and did invade The heav'ns: His frighted Danae. mother saw his feet Part from the rock, and would have followed it. Here came the Prophets, having deckt their browes And sacred locks, with garlands made oth' boughs Of the white Olive; when th' appearing Sun Moistned the fields, and bid the frost be gone. And first Amphiaraus. Oeclides thus invoketh heav'n: Almighty Iove, from whom all pow'r is giv'n To th' winged crew, that birds know what's to come, Discovering heav'ns advice, and secret doome: Not Neer which A∣pollo had his speaking Tripos. Cyrrha's Oracle speaks the God more plaine, Not the A country of Epirus where Doves on the boughs of oaks, delivered Oracles from Iupiter. Chaonian oakes, which men do feigne, Doe answer thee. Though dusty In the desrts of Africa, Iupiter appearing to thirsty Liber in the similitude of a ram, and discovering water, had a temple built, which he honoured with his Oracle. Hammon fret; And th' A Lycian City where Apollo had an oraculous Temple. Patarean lots contend, or yet Niles Apis a good King, since honoured or a God under this shape, who gives them his mute Oracles by the willing acceptance of his meat. Oxe, or Apollo's son, who had a Temple built to him in the City Possideum. Bronchus equall to his Father, Or watry Pisa's The Pisaean rusticks, being (as it were) Pas Organ-pipes, which nightly he inspires. swaines, when they doe gather Pans nightly answer's in the dark; Those souls Are most enrich'd, to whom thy lucky fowles Great Named Dictaus from that name of rete, where he was brought up. Iove, are sent: Strange  whence this honour came To birds: 'tis ancient. Either when the frame
O'th' world was moulded out o'th' Chaos, then The great Creatour gave it; Or, once According to the Pythagorean fancy of the transmigration of soules. men They chang'd their shapes, and chose t' inhabit in The aire: Or their pure climate, where no sin Does nestle, whilst they seldome touch the earth, Has taught them truth; Chiefe power, which gav'st a birth To all things, Thou knowst best. Vouchsafe from heav'n To let us know what paines, what fate is giv'n Toth' Graecian battailes: If th'unchanged Powers Decree, that we shall force the Thebane Towers Discover't with All Omens fetched from the heavens and aire, look'd first to the quarters from whence they came: if from the left it was prosperous, if from the right, unlucky. a left-hand crack: Let birds I'th aire consent to't, chirping hidden words. If thou deny't; here stop us: Cloud the day With right-hand shoales: This spoken, he does lay His limbs o'th' rock; where, to more gods he cries Unknowne, and looking stedfast So intentive to the divisions of the hea∣vens, that he dazled his eyes from beholding any thing. dimms his eyes. Thus having parted 'twixt them all the skie, Their eyes and mind in ev'ry Coast do prie: At last Melampus cals: do'st thou not see, Amphiaraus, under heav'ns Canopy There's no bird makes a prosprous flight? There's none Hovers with cleare wings in this region? There's none flies clapping with a luckie sound? Apollo's The Crow changed by Apollo for his Coronis sake, and ever since attending on his Oracle. black companion can't be found, Nor th' Because Ioves messenger. Eagle bearing lightning, nor the Owle Minerva's howling Nyctimene chang'd to an Owle for incest with her father, was admitted a nightly attendant on Diana. All these were prosperous birds. bird is in the Shole. The best diviner here's a Vultur▪ or Some ravenous Kites, aloft triumphing soare.
A monstrous flight! heark, what a dismall skritch They make ith' clouds; what groans the night-birds fetch! What ill presaging tunes, the Scritch-owles holloe! Must we, these first portents of mischief follow? Shall these impropriate heav'n, blest Named here from Thymbra, where he was worshiped. Phoeb'? see where Their hook'd clawes doe their bloudy faces teare. Their wings doe beat the wind, whose clapping sound Resembles sobs: Their feather'd breasts they wound. Then he proceeds, I've oftentimes endur'd Heav'ns ominous tokens, since I went aboord In the Thessalian Which arried Iason and his Argonauts to Colchos. bark, scarce past a child, Among those royall As the Argonauts, all sons to Kings, were afterwards accounted. demi-gods, who fill'd Their souls with wonder, when I did declare The fate of Sea and Land; Iason gave eare To mine, as much as Apollo's sn most exqui∣site in Sooth-sayings, and intimate with Iason. Mopsus's prophesies, When doubts arose: But never yet the skies Seem'd so prodigious: never so great feare: Yet more's a comming. Mark, in that bright Spheare Of heav'n a thousand swans have clos'd their ranks: Whither byth' North-wind blown from A Thracin river abounding with Swans, where they are thought to be coloured with snow. Strimons banks, Or fruitfull Nile has sent them: Here their flight Is stopp'd; think these present Thebes to thy sight. For silent in a quiet round they're set, As if they were entrench'd with walls. But yet A stronger troop mounts through the aire: I spie Sev'n golden The king of birds, Eagles, who attend of Iupiter. Birds of Iove, in triumph flie: Imagine these are For that number went to the Thebane wrs. Grecian Captains: They Have entred the Swans circle, where they prey With their hook'd talons on their slaughter'd foes;
And claspe their clawes, at more. But see, it blowes, And rains down drops of bloud: the day is drest In plumes: How soon Ioves anger has distrest The conquering party! Betokening Capaneus, who contesting with Iupiter, was slain with lightning. He, which soar'd so high, Scorch'd with the Suns quick beams do's fall and die. Parthenopaeus desiring to accomplish things beyond his age. T'others forsaken by his tender wings, Whilst he mounts after stronger birds: Polynices, who died upon his brother. This clings About his foe, and falls together; Adrastus, who onely returned. He Turns back, and flies from's partners destinie. There's Hippomedon, o'rewhelmed in a iver. one, wrap'd in a Tempest, falls: And Tydeus cat up Menalippus his brains, who gve him his deaths wound▪ he Dies feeding on his living Enemy. Their bloud has stain'd the clouds. Why do'st thou Amphiaraus replies to Melampus whose voice was stop'd with tears, upon sight of the last Eagle falling, which Amphiaraus interprets of himself. steal Soft tears, Melampus? I discover well, Who falleth now. Thus, fearfull of th'event, And So sure, as if they already felt it. feeling what their visions did present; The Prophets stand affrighted. Now they grieve They'ntruded 'mongst the birds, and without leave Screw'd into heav'ns designes: Anon they hate The answ'ring Gods. What fury did create This eager Love in mortalls, to make known Things yet to come? Was't heav'ns gift? or their own Ambitious thoughts, content with no estate? We search the birth, and end of time; what fate The highest Called Coelopeus of Mathematicians. Pow'r, and hardned destinies Determine for us. Hence we cast our eyes On entrails, list'ning to the birds discourse; We trace the stars, and reckon Ac∣cording to whose increase or decrease, their spells were more or lesse powerfull. Phoebe's course;
And use Magicke there, was most in practise by the raising of Ghoss. Thessalian arts. The Golden Age Of our forefathers never durst presage Thus boldly: When Decalion advised by the Oracle, threw his Mothers bones be∣hind him. They were borne of stumps of rocks, And only labour'd to encrease their stocks In woods or tillage. Mortals may not strive To know to morrow's doome: And yet we dive, (Poore Vulgars) in Heav'ns secrets: hence our Lies, Feares, Anger, Craft, immodest hopes arise. The Prophet therefore tearing from his brows His garland now discharg'd, without his boughs Of honour, leaves th'unlucky mountaine: Where The noise of war and trumpets greet his eare: For distant Thebes boyl'd in their breast; He brooks Neither the Kings discourse, nor Peoples looks, Nor the Peers meetings: Hid in's ecret Cell The Gods acts he refuses to reveale. Thy shame, Melampus, and thy cares retain'd Thee in the Being both a Physician and a Prophet. Country. Twelve daies Amphiaraus. he refrain'd His tongue; whose silence, Prince and People holds In doubts. But Ioves command now chafes their souls: Whole towns and countries straight unpeopled lie; Mars prest a thousand troups: With joy they flie From house, and lovely brides, and infants tears, At home; The God did so possesse their fears. They pluck down weapons from their Grandsires halls, And charriots fastned to the Temple walls. Then burnish they their rusty darts, and set Their canker'd swords for slaughter, which they whet On stones to glaze them. Some fit their smooth Crests, And buckling brass-seam'd Corslets on their breasts, They try their crackling Coats of maile; these bend Their Cretian horns: Some, hooks and plow-shares send▪
Toth' forge, with spades and harrows, where they glow: Some do not stick, to cut down spears which grow In consecrated groves; cov'ring their shields With Whence of old a shield was called corium bovis. skins of Oxen, which have plough'd their fields. They break int' Argos next, and roar out war At the Kings dore; their Clamours reach as far As Tyrrhene waves: or when One of the Gy∣ants who attempting heav'n, was ore-whelmed by Iove under this mountaine of AEtn, and there broyled. Enceladus. Desires to change his side: the mountain thus Thunders within its fiery caves: the top Vomits huge Cinders, which begin to stop The channell next A Sicilin promontory, lying over against Scylla's gulph. Pelorus; th' Island Sicily once joyned to the conti∣nent of Italy, and rent from it by the violence of the waves. then Divided now, hopes to be joyn'd agen. And now the hot desire of war did seize The soul of Capaneus, long tir'd with peace; Whose bloud was stream'd from noble veins; but he Outtrips his grandsires acts: Long liv'd he free In his contempt of heav'n, neglect of right, A daring soul, where Anger did excite. Like one of shady A woody mountain of Thessaly where the Centaures inhabited. Pholoes tenants, and Amongst The Cyclops which work in their shop of AEtna. th' AEtnean brethren fit to stand. Before thy dore, Amphiaraus, where The crowd of Captains, and mad vulgars were; Argives, he cries, what sluggishnesse does tame Your spirits? And you Grecians; is't not shame So many arm'd, couragious nations wait At one poore Citizens oraculous gate? Should Phoeb' himself (what ever fears of men And fame has made him) from's inspired den Within the hollow top of The place where the Oracle was delivered by— Cyrrha, mutter;
I'de scorn to stay, till his pale His Enthean Prophetesse an aged maid, pale and frantick, whe she was possessed. wench could utter Her ridd'ling terrours; courage and this steel Are all the Deity's to which I'le kneel▪ Call out the Prophet with his juglings, now: Or I'le make triall what his birds can do. The Grecian bands do shout for joy, and crown His rage with their applause: Amphiaraus the son of O Ecleus. O Eclides soon Was forc'd to make appearance; but his brest Was with another Fore-seeing his own destruction occasioned by his wives pride. sourse of cares opprest. I leave not my dark Cell, saith he, for fear Of this rash young mans clamours, though he bear Mad threatnings in his tongue: another fate Must close my life, which cannot take a date From Being swallowed up by the earth. mortall hands. 'Tis your Love, and the God Too pow'rfull in me, bids me spread abroad These secets: Sadly▪ I'le discover all, You must expect to happen. Neither shall My words move thee, fierce Capaneus. man: Apollo's den To thee alone is silent. Wretched Men! Why, why d'ee take up armes? the Fates, and heav'n Resisting. Whither have the Furies driv'n Your blinded souls? Are lives so burdensome? Argos so odious? Nothing sweet at home Slight ye heav'ns signes? Why did ye make me passe, With trembling steps toth' top of Called the Persean mountain, because Perseus took his flight from thence. Aphesas, T'intrude int' heav'n? I might have liv'd like you, Not knowing the black daies that shall pursue Our armies: Nor mine own, nor others doome; Nor th' Omens, seen: (Witnesse thou secret womb O'th' world, that counsel'dst me; ye chirping birds And thou Apollo, as before. Thymbraeus, listning to my words
More gently heretofore) Prodigious signes Of ruine, I beheld: Mens base designes Were seconded byth' Gods As Venus assisting the Thebanes, Iuno the Grecians.: Furies did mock, And On whose Distffe, the clue of life was seigned to be spun. Lachesis tore lives off from her rock. Lay down your armes: God has your rage withstood▪ God has withstood. Is't sport, with captive bloud To water Cadmus The land where be∣fore he had sown his serpents teeth. tilth, Aonian plains? But why do I lose my song? why take I pains To drive back fixed chance? There's no release, We It bing so determined by the destinies. must go. Here he sighs and holds his peace. But Capaneus replies: Prophet, on thee Light all thy madnesse, and those plagues; to be The Governour of When all the men are gone out to war. naked Argos; where May no Called here Tyrrhene, because they were the first inventors of Trumpets. field-Musick rattle in thy eare. Why stop'st thou nobler Spirits? Is't forsooth For us, to suffer thee to hug thy sloth At home? t'enjoy thy foolish birds, and son▪ And wife? But unreveng'd forget, what's done To gallant Tydeus, and the league they break? But if the Grecians may not fight, go speak, As a new Legate, to the Thebanes; sure Thy holy Ironi∣clly, because he was a Prophet. Garlands will thy peace secure. Shall th' hidden cause, and ground of things, be given Byth' stars at thy command? I pitty heav'n, If pray'rs or charms can move it. Why do't fright Dull sluggish souls? Fear first, gave Gods their height▪ Yet now, rage on securely; but when first, Th'alarme is giv'n, and we shall quench our thirst In helmes, full of Thebane streams. Ismene, or Thebane streams. Dirce's water, Beware of meeting then, when we breath slaughter
Harness'd toth' battell: think not a crosse bird, Or wind, shall make that battail be deferr'd. This wanton Mitre then were best be gone, And terrible Apollo's madnesse. None But I, and such as I am, daring men, Shall divine there. A shout was rais'd agen, By such as did incourage him: which flies With a vast tumult, underneath the skies. Like a swift torrent, which do's nimblier flow With spring-tydes, or the hils dissolving snow, When it ore-spreads the plains, maugre the shoares Resistance; there tempestuously it roares 'Mongst buildings, corn, flocks, men: At last 'tis stop'd Against a hill, or with steep banks o'rtop'd. These Captains quarrels here the night did part: But poor Argia with a pensive heart Bearing her husbands grief, and pittying their True Fellowship in sorrow, with her hair Dishevel'd, as it was; and furrow'd cheeks, Into her Fathers lofty Palace breaks. Carrying Polynices's young son. Thessander at her breast; when night Dis-mantled at th'approaching of the light: And The North star, once Calisto, Ioves har∣lot, who is forbid to bath in the Ocean by Thetis, at Iuno's command▪ whose Nurse she was. Arctos seeing th'other stars decline Toth' Sea, do's envy. When sh'had enter'd in, And kneel'd before her reverend Sire, she saies: You know, dear Father, should I hold my peace, Why thus with tears, without my spouse, ith' night I come into your presence: By that right Our births may challenge: by your self, I swear, He did not bid me: 'twas that waking care, And sleep disturb'd with sighs, since Hymen plighted Our faiths, and Iuno's fatall torch was lighted.
If Tygers milk had nurs'd me, or rocks grew Beneath my heart, I could not bear't: 'tis you Have onely means to help: All powers are In your own hands: Dear Father, wage a war: Pity your son's low fortunes: Pity this Poore banish'd-fathers child: What shame it is? He first, was entertain'd; and heav'n, you'l find Witness'd the contract, when our hands were joyn'd. Sure this is he, foretold yth' Oracle: I stole no close heats, no fires blameable: I lov'd at your command: 'twas your advice. Now with what cruelty can I despise His sad complaints? Father, you know not yet, What Love, a husbands misery can beget. Now my sad soul puts up unpleasing wishes, That I may Him fighting, him departing. fear and Him fighting, him departing. grieve: But when our kisses Shall be divided; at the dismall day, When the shrill trumpets call your Armes away, When you shall shine in your enamel'd steel; Alas, dear father, I perhaps shall kneel, To ask it back again. Adrastus takes Her kisses, water'd from his eyes, and speaks: I cannot blame thy plaints girle; Lay aside Thy fears: Such boones are not to be deni'd: Praise-worthy suits: But heav'n, and mine own fear The weight o'th' kingdome too, (yet don't forbear To hope) suggest much to my soul. Thy cares Shall find their due, nor shalt thou lose thy tears. Comfort thy husband, daughter: this delay Will prove no losse: For great designes we stay. This profits much in war. The light appears As he spake thus, and he's call'd up by's cares. Finis Lib. III. Statii Thebaid.
Argument. Lib. IV. Statii Thebaidos. Bellona calls to Armes: They part with tears: Adrastus first leads on his troups to wars: Then follows Polynice his wronged son: Stout Tydeus next: and then Hippomedon: Then Capaneus: Amphiaraus sixt, Betray'd by's wife: Parthenopaeus next; Though's fearfull mother, would have stop'd his heat. The Thebanes preparations were as great; Whom Bacchus's Priest affrights: Tiresias charms The Ghosts up: Laius then foretells their harms. The Grecians march. Bacchus sends routh to grieve 'um: Hypsipyle shews Langia to relieve 'um. THe winter thrice was thaw'd with gales, which blow From the warm South; short daies do longer grow In their After the vernall AEquinox the days exceed the nights. spring-quarters: When curst fate controuls Their broken Councels; tiil They, wretched souls, At last heard war proclaim'd. Bellona's hand Shakes on A tower of the Argives, where they yearly celebrated their feast of Torches, in memory of Hypermnestra. Larissa's top, a flaming brand At first, and darts her massy spears, which glide Whizzing i'th' ayre, and light on t'other side On A Thebane fountaine which by this re∣ceiv'd an alarme to the war. Dirces banks. From thence she takes the field, Closing with those, whose guilded armes do yield A glitt'ring shew. Sh' inrages now the forces;
Armes the most forward, and claps on the horses; Calls them toth' ports: their valour does prevent Her call; ev'n Cowards had some valour lent. Th' appointed time was come; whole heards do fall To Iove and Mavors; but the Priest grew pale At the unlucky entrails; yet does frame Some shews of hope toth' Camp. And now there came A crowd of boyes and girles, and aged Fathers About their parting friends; this concourse gathers And stops their dores up: teares no measure knew, But sad fare-wells their shields and crests bedew. The souldiers sigh to leave their home: they kisse Through their close beavers: the rough helmet is Bow'd to imbrace. He that ith' Sword delights Or Death but now, breaths out his rage in sighs. So th'Mariner for some long voyage bound, When's sails do swel, and's anchor's weigh'd from ground, Shakes hands with friends, who strive to cull his limbs, Till kisses bath'd in tears their eye-sight dims; So does the fog oth' Sea: Yet left behind They climb a bank, and send their eyes to find His sails, they grieve the wind blows faire from land, And greeting the known keel on shore they stand. Now forward Fame, thou worlds For the Thebane war was the most ancient. first Register, Since to remember Nobles is thy Care, And spin their Lives; these valiant spirits discover: And thou Calliope which raignes-over The sounding Pindus or Par∣nassus where the Muses warbled. grove, take up thy harp, and tell What bands, what Armes Mars rais'd; how people fell From every City: None that tasts the river Of Where they drunk in Poetry. Helicon, can nobler strains deliver. The King Adrastus, sad and prest with cares, Now drawing on to his declining years, Marches amongst the troups unwillingly,
Content to girt his sword upon his thigh: His Coat of Armour's brought byth' guard ith' ree: His Steeds were harness'd by the Charioteer Ith' gate: Adrastus his Horse, sprung from Scyphos, out of the Thessalian earth. Arion does his curb disdain. Under his banner march Grecan Cities accompanying Adrastus. Larissa's train, And tall Grecan Cities accompanying Adrastus. Prosymnes, Grecan Cities accompanying Adrastus. Media pasture-bearing, And The Country of Arcadia famous for pasturage. Phyllos stor'd with Sheep; with A Peloponnesian city, against which Chradros beates. Neris fearing Charadrus foming through her vale: more powres Came from A middle City between Corinth and Argos, neer which Hercules kill'd his Lion. Cleone spir'd with lofty Towres. And A City contested for between th Argives and I acedemonians, whose Captain Orthiades almost van∣quished, dipt his finger in his own bloud, and wrote an inscription for a Trophe of his Victory, and then died. Thyre sprinkled with Laconian blood. More Kings descended from the same line, stood Associated, which inhabit on A rocky country neer C∣rinth. Drepan, or olive-bearing A fruitfull City, where Adrastus first raigned. Sicyon, Where slow An Achaian river, making a poole of that name. Langia's silent waters glide, Or crook'd An Atticke river, filled with the over-flowing of Coytus, whence the Furies are said to bath in it. Helisse his winding banks does chide: Sad is this Rivers honour, whose rough surges, The Stygian Furies bathing in them, purges: Their snakes are wash'd here, quitting The river of hell. Phlegeton: Whether the Thracian houses overthrown Were their last work, or Mycenes wicked At the bloudy Feast which the sun fled from. Court, Or Cadmus family: When here they sport, The river stain'd with poyson, flies their touch. Corinth joynes company, abating much From Building here a Temple to her, and honouring her son Melicrta with the Isthmian games. Ino's plaints: The Corinthian haven. Cenchre sends in her force,
Listed with those, where the Pegasus sprung from Neptune and the Gorgon Medusa, whose hoof raised the fountain Hippocrene in Helicon. Gorgonean horse Beat up the Poets spring: And those that be, Where Dividing 'twixt the AEgean and Ioick sea. Isthmos parts, and beateth back the Sea. Adrastus thus was follow'd with a band Three thousand strong, with shouts: Some arm their hand With darts▪ and some with smoke-dried clubs; (they come From sev'rall stocks, with sev'rall customes:) some Knew better how to use the nimble sling, And wheeling round, would make an empty ring. He marches, venerable for his years, And government. As the stout bull appears In his old pastures, though his strength's decay'd, Yet still he's Captain: all the herd's affraid To try his push; they see his horns are broke, And's breast is scarr'd with many a former stroke. Next old Adrastus, march'd the Polynics, Adrastus his son-in-law. Thebanes Van With banners; for whose sake the war began. His troups whet on his courage: Hither came His country-voluntiers; whether the shame Of's banishment had mov'd them; or their Love Grew with his wrongs; or they were such as strove Still to depose the mighty: many a one Joyn'd, whom the justnesse of his cause had won. Besides Adrastus gave him for a dowre, Cities of Arcadia. AEgion, Cities of Arcadia. Arane, Thesean A Thessalian city, freed by Theseus from thieves which beset it. Troezes powre: Lest his thin troups might prove his shame, or he Of's own lost honours too resentive be. That dresse, those very armes he wore, wherein First i'th' black night he came: The Lions skin Cover'd his back; steel arm'd his glitt'ring spear: The hilt of's sword grim In memory of his father O Edipus who unriddled her. Sphinxes stamp did bear.
His hopes and wishes now the Crown possest, With's mothers lap, and's sisters faithfull brest: Yet looking back he sees his heartlesse Argia disconsolate for his departure. spouse Stretch forward all her limbs, on top o'th' house. She, she recalls her husbands eyes, and mind: Sweet Thebes within his brest no place can find. See, thund'ring Tydeus in the midst does arme His Country troups: Soone as the first alarme Was sounded, Courage now; his wounds are cur'd: (As the sleek snake by the spring-sun allur'd Out of his bed, Reported by slipping of th skin to renue his age. shakes off his duller age I'th' flowry pastures hissing out his rage. Alas, poore Swaine! 'gainst whom at first he comes Gaping, on whom he dries his venom'd gums) Wars trumpet, besides these, had brought him men From the AEtolian towns: Rocky An AEtolian City. Phylene Heard it, and A Boeotia city, where the sisters of Meleager bewaiing his untimely death, were transformed to querulous birds. Pleron, where the birds bemoan Their Meleager; with steep Calydon; And An Arcadian city, where Iove was suckled by the Goat, and therefore challenged shares with Ida, where he was born and worshipped. Olenos, which strives with Ide for Iove: So Chalcis, which the Mariner does prove A secure harbour from th' Ionick Seas: The Achelous, which putting on divers shapes, was foil'd in all by Hercules, his rivall by Deianira. river too, once foil'd by Hercules, Scarce daring yet to raise his batter'd Amongst other shapes he be∣came a Bul, when Hercules pull'd off one of his horns: on which our Po∣et reflects. brow From underneath his waters; but below He hides his mournfull head in slimy caves; And sands choak up his panting Achelous flowed in two channels of which Hercules stop'd one, whence grew the fiction, of his pulling off one of his horns. banks and waves.
Their brazen shield defends their breasts, their hands Are arm'd with cruell javelins: Perhaps to take part with his grandson Tydeus. Mavors stands In's helmet. All the chosen guard surrounds Valiant O Enides, grac'd with former wounds; All courage; nothing lesse in rage and spite Then's brother: you would doubt, for whom they fight. But greater Vnder the lea∣ding of Hippomedon. Dorick troups in armour shine, Which plow upon Two Grecian rivers, upon whose banks he mustered his men. Lyncaeus banks, or thine Old Two Grecian rivers, upon whose banks he mustered his men. Inachus, the Prince of Grecian rivers; Argos denominated from Perseus once king. Perseus his land no quicker streams delivers, If The signe entred April, 10. when the spring-tides begin. Taurus, or the watry Alwaies accompanied with showrs. Pleiads run Their course; or he swels, proud of When he accompanied his daughter Io. Iove his son. Those which Asterion incircles, joyne; Inhabitants neer Parnassus whose corne is washed away by the over∣flowing of this river, before it break out in Argos. Dryopian harvest-spoiling Erasine; With th' An Argive city where AEsculapius was worshiped. Epidaurian tenants: Ceres the goddesse of corn, here named from AEtna, because of the fruitfulnesse of Sicily, whence her daughter Proserpine was stoln. Dime too, Fruitfull for Vines, but stubborn to the Ceres the goddesse of corn, here named from AEtna, because of the fruitfulnesse of Sicily, whence her daughter Proserpine was stoln. Plow. From Nleus Nestors Father. Neleian Pylos all her forces lent, Pylos scarce known, for Nestor had not spent His second To the age of threscore, after which time he went to the Trojane war. age: Yet he refus'd to go Toth' tents destin'd for a sad overthrow. Hardy Hyppomedon leads these, and advances Their love to valour: a brasse helmet dances Upon his head, with three white crests: besides His armes, a coat of maile defends his side: His breasts and shoulders a guilt shield protects, Lively presenting Danaus his night-acts:
The guilty brides, inflam'd byth' Furies, slay Their fifty husbands: whilst their Sire does stay At th' bloudy dore, and with applauding words Commends their wickednesse, and views their swords. He's brought from Called the Palladian city from the founder Pallas. Athens, on a Nemean Steed, Who startling, do's his clashing armour dread: His prauncing raises clouds of dust; you'd sweare, The field it self were flying into th'ayre. So two-shap'd The greatest of the Centaurs, half man and half horse. Hyleus hasting from his den, With both his breasts bears woods down: The Thessalian moun∣tain where they inhabited. Ossa then Trembles: the salvage beasts sink down for fear, His brother Centaures quake, till he appear In A Thessalian river, where they bathed themselves. Peneus streams; where he stops up the river. What mortall tongue can all the train deliver? Th' Artiliery, nations, strength? the valiant spirits Of which The City where Iupiter begat Hercules upon Alemena. Tyrinthe's fruitfull, which inherits The glory of her Hercules, are call'd By him from thence. Though now their state's enthrall'd By time, their valour can no riches yeild. The thin inhabitants in th'empty field Shew where the The founders of this City. Cyclops built their lofty towres: Yet they send out three-hundred striplings; powres Toth' wars Their courage able to overcome the greatest number. innumerable: without speare Or glittering sword. Their heads and shoulders are Fenc'd with their Which triumphs in Hercules's conquest over the Lyon. nations glory, a To resemble their God Hercules. Lyons skin; Clubs arme their hands, their darts are crowded in Their unexhausted quivers; whilst they sing Herculean Paeans, how their God and King Freed all the earth from monsters: this is heard
By him in distant The woody mountain where Hercules was burnt. O Eta's shades interr'd. The wood, where at Euristheus's command, Hercules slew the Nemeaean Lion.Nemea press'd some toth' battell, with what ayd The sacred vine-yards of A poor man who gave Hercules homely, but wel-accepted entertain∣ment, when he went upon the former service. Molorchus had: The cottage is well known: his Hercules, soon after a God. divine guest Has, on the willow dores, his armes express'd: The oake, where's The severall editions vary much in rendring this place. club and bow was laid, is clear In gold, and where the print's of's bed appear. But Capaneus a foot-man, yet byth' head O're-peering all the rest, on's shield does spread The hides of foure wild bulls, besides the weight Of brasse. There, dying Hydra would affright Your sense, branch'd in a Be∣fitting her many heads. triple Garland: Part Bore living snakes engrav'd: A new found Hercules cauterised her fruitful necks. art Stop'd up the other: As she does expire, You'd think, the sparkling gold wore flames of The only means Hercules found to stop the increase of heads. fire. About her the dull streams of The Lake where the Hydra kept. Lerna glide, With which the Iron seems to Azure dy'de. But a most weighty breast-plate, such as was No They used of old to spin military garments for their sons, whereas this was of brasse. Mothers work, cover'd with plates of brasse, Clasp'd on, defends his sides, and spreading chest: A Whose Image was there placed. Gyant dances on his glit'ring crest: And for his spear, a Cypresse-tree was spoyl'd Of all her boughs, which only he could weild. The Citizens of A Messenian City. Amphigenia, and Low Built in a valley, through which a river runneth. Messene, high Built upon the mountains. Ithone's in his command:
With Neere the river Alpheus. Thrion, hill-built Nestors City on the top of the hills. AEpy, Lacovick Cities▪ Ptelion, Th'inhabitants of Lacovick Cities▪ Helos; Lacovick Cities▪ Dorion, The Thamyris who was here sentenced by the Muses. Getick Poets griefe; here Thamyris, Boasting t'out-sing the learned Aonides, Was sodainly strooke dumbe; For many years His voice and Harp were silenc'd. For who dares Challenge the Gods? who knows not With Marsias, who being overcome, was —. Phoeb's contest And — In this City ex∣corinted, Celoenes same, i'th Satyres doome exprest? And now the Amphiaraus. Prophets minde was overcome, And tir'd; although he saw his dismall doome, Yet with a lingring hand the Fates had arm'd Him, and the virtue of his Apollo who forbad him this expedition▪ The Stoiks thinke, the Gods submit to Fate. God was charm'd. Nor wants a treacherous Eriphile who sold m into the Graecians hands for Argia's bracelet, of which before she was so much inamour'd. wife; forbidden gold Now glisters in her house. The Gods foretold, This bracelet would be fatall to a Prophet Of th' Argves, and himself had knowledge of it: But his perfidious spouse had rather sell His bed at such a rate, longing t'excell In such a purchas'd dresse, and beare away Argia's spoiles: who lets it go with joy. She saw this war and the Commanders were Turn'd on this hinge, if the divining Amphiaraus a Prophet, yet a Commander. Peere Would take up armes. Thus with a cheerefull mind, In her dear husbands bosome, she resign'd Th'accursed chaine: And saies; this is no time For gorgeous dresses: Beauty were a crime In her, that's wretched without thee: Ile cheate My fears, with A place variously read; with Calatho, then with Coetu. distaffe comforts, and entreat
At the Gods Altars with dishevel'd hayre: May't be, y' Eternall Powers! when thou shalt weare Thy threatning steel, and clashing armes, that I Put on Harmonie's chaine? Some Deity Perhaps more fitly, will indulge it, then, And I outshine the Grecian spouses, when (At thy return, a Queen) my votive Quires Shall fill the Temples: Now let her desires Take place, who makes her husbands wars her joy. Thus th'execrable Gold did force a way Toth' Prophets house, and sow'd strange mischief in it; Tysiphone laugh'd for joy, when she had seen it. He mounted on Tenarian steeds, (begot By The famous horse of Castor and Pollux Cyllarus, when Castor knew it not, Upon inferior mares) does shake the ground: Prophet-like, with Parnassian garlands crown'd: His helmet is with branching olives drest, Where a white Miter does infold the crest. Weapons, and reines he guides at once: his hands Are sometimes stay'd with darts: in's chariot stands An Of spears and darts. arm'd wood, brandish'd: He far off appears Dreadfull; his shield the conquer'd In honour to his God Apollo. Python bears. Phoeb's A Laconian city consecrated to Apollo, therefore follows his Prophet. Amycleans wait on's chariot wheele: With A city of Pcloponese, whence Nestor came. Pylos, A promontory dangerous to sea-men. Malea, which the doubtfull keele Avoids with terrour: so the A Laco∣nian city, where Diana had her Temple. Carians Chaunting to pleas'd Diana; with the bands Of A Laconian city. Pharis, Cythereian A ci∣ty dedicated to Venus, for the abundance of Doves breeding there. Messe, where The turtles breed: A Laconian mountain dedicated to Bacchus. Tayget's troups were there;
And olive-bearing A Laconian river, neer whose banks they exercised their bodies with scourgings, he being first crown'd, that first have whipt them∣selves to death. Eurot's; Mercury the president of these solemne gmes. Arcas traines These men i'th' moist'ned sands, inspires their vains With rage, and naked valour: hence their spirits Are quick'ned: 'tis esteem'd their greatest merits To fall i'th' bed of honour: Parents joy At their sons Fates, perswading them to die: And when the round bewaile the striplings fall, Mothers triumph at their crown'd funerall. Their fingers hold the reines, and two darts, ty'd In a slip knot; they never use to hide Their shoulders, in a rough coat-armour drest: Swans feathers, into which shape Leda was changed. Ledaean feathers dance upon their crest. These were not all the Prophets troups, a few March'd out of wanton A city of Pelopoese watred with the river Alpheus. Elis; with the crew Which dwell in The valle, where the O∣lympick games were celebrated. Pisa's vale, and doe descry (Faire Inamour'd of the Nymph or ri∣ver Arethusa, he creeps through the Sea to Sicily after her, and there springs again. Alpheus) how thou steal'st to Sicily, Not tainted with the Ocean: their fields Are furrow'd with a thousand charriot wheels: Their steeds are broke toth' wars: This is the glory O'th' Nation, by long custome: Since the story O'th O Evomaus, whose chariotteer Myrtilus being corrup∣ted by Pelops, he lost his daughter, kingdome, and life. Tyrants melting axeltree. They chew Their froathy curbs, foame does plow'd sand bedew. And thou, Partheopeus, yet unskill'd In armes, (thy soul's so much with glory fill'd) Lead'st on Arcadian troups, though 'twas unknown To thy stern Atalanta, Mother: She by chance was gone To hunt in distant chases, and the bleak
Lycean deserts; nor might he partake Of those rough sports; None vent'ring to the place Of danger, had so sweet a beauteous face. Nor is true courage wanting, if his age Did lend him strength, and power to ingage. What silvan Deity, or Nymph that's nam'd From As the Potamides and Napaeae. spring or As the Potamides and Napaeae. shrubs, was not by him inflam'd? When i'th Maenalian shades, his tender feet Prest downe the willing grasse, Dian' did see't They say, and pardon'd her Atalanta Diana's votary, married to Meleager, to whom she bore Partbeopaeus: the breach of whose vow Dian would have revenged, if the childs beauty had not stopt her. companion; Fitting Cr∣tensian where they were made, as the quivers for the same reason are cal∣led Amyclaean. Dictaean darts, and quivers on His shoulders. He inflam'd with the bold joyes Of war, leaps out, burning to hear the noise Of armes, and trumpets; to besmeare his haire With warlike dust; that captive steeds may bear Him back; asham'd o'th' wood; asham'd to spie His arrows, yet without the guilty die Of humane blood. He shines before the rest In gold and purple cloaths: his loynes are drest In loose robes, girt with Spanish belts. He wore In's Having never yet seen the wars. untry'd shield, the Calydonian boare His Mother slew: On's left hand his bow twangs, On's back plated with maile, a quiver hangs, Fill'd with Cydonean arrows, beautifi'd With amber and with Eastern pearles beside: He rides a lofty horse, whose swiftnesse wins O'th' fearfull deere, trap'd with two Lynxes skins: Now startling at the weight of's Masters armes, Whose blushing cheekes to all mens eyes are charmes. You old Arcadians, borne before the They thought the Moon was daughter to Pallas, as the Sun was son to Hyperion, borne  Moone
Or stars, troop'd under him: Fame sayes, as soone As wand'ring The Goddesse of the earth, taken for the earth it self. Tellus felt mens foot-steps, ye Fetch'd from rough stocks of Before the use of cottages they sheltered their young childen in hollow trees, who by that meanes were conceived to be borne from them. trees, your progenie: Nor bounds of fields, nor house, nor townes were yet, Nor tyes of wedlock: Oakes and Baytrees get Young boyes, and girles; the shady ashes breed: And Elmes drop down a race of humane seed. These wonder'd as they say to see the Being born before the Sun or Moon. light Have changes, and to be eclips'd with night: And gazing after Titans setting ray, Wept, and despair'd to see another day. High All Arcadian Cities, the first is seated very high. Maenalus has naked streets, they come From the All Arcadian Cities, the first is seated very high. Parthenian grove, All Arcadian Cities, the first is seated very high. Rhipe gives some, And All Arcadian Cities, the first is seated very high. Rhodope, and cold All Arcadian Cities, the first is seated very high. Enispe too: Not An Arcadian town, where Pan was worshipped. Tegea, not The Moun∣taine where Maia brought forth Mercury. Cyllene's absent, who Glories i'th' winged God: with these the wood Where So named from Aleus the Arcadian King that built it. Alea Minerva's Temple stood. Swift Two Arcadian rivers: the daughter of the last, Daphne, was like to have been ravished by Apollo. Cliton likewise, and cleare Two Arcadian rivers: the daughter of the last, Daphne, was like to have been ravished by Apollo. Ladon came, Almost thy Father-in-law great Phoeb', the same Did they, which on Lampia's white cliffes dwell: And The poole that feeds Styx with water. Pheneus, thought to send black Styx to hell. An Arcadian Mountaine, where Cibele had her howling Sacrifices. Azan, that houles as lowd as Where Iove had his. Ida, joynes With the The Arcadian City, where Lycaon raign'd. Parrhasians; and ye A Mountaine of Arcadia, where Iove in the shape of Diana ravished Calisto. Nonarines, Borders belov'd of quiver-bearing Iove, Whilst ye beheld, and smil'd to see his Love. Sheepstor'd An Arcadian City full of sheep. Orchonienos, wild A promontory stored with wild beasts. Cynosure
Came to the rendevouz; these heats allure Th' The country named from the commander AEphitus. AEphitian borders; An Ar∣cadian city. Psophis high; with these The mountains joyne, made known by Where he performed two of his miraculous labours. Hercules, Both monster-bearing Which bred the boare. Erymanthus, and Tinkling Whence the Birds were driven by beating on the brazen Cymball which Pallas gave him. Stymphalus. These, were of one land, Arcadians all: But differ in their hue: Some, their bow'd stocks of Paphian Myrtle shew, And fight with shepherds crooks: One's arm'd with's bow, T'other with's smoak-dri'd club: this guards his brow With's helmet: Th'other keeps his Countries right In his Either because u∣sed by Mercury, or by Castor and Pollux. Arcadian hat. This would affright With the sterne visage of a yawning Beare, Throwne o're his head; yet though these forces were Sworne servants to the God of war, they had From neighbouring Mycene receiv'd no aid: Their deadly When Atreus feasted Thy∣stes with the limbs of his owne sonnes, at which the Sun was said to startle, the revenge of which caused much bloudshed after. feat▪ and mid-daies suns affright Was then, those brethren too began to fight. By this time Atalanta heard, that all Arcadia made her son their Generall Toth' wars: Her knees shake, down her arrows sink Beside her: O're the rocks, and steepest brink Of rivers, swifter then the winged wind Shee flies; her cloaths girt up, her hair behind Dishevel'd, scatters with each blast. So when A Tiger robb'd of's whelps, starts from her den, Pursuing th' horseman. When with down-cast eies, And pale, he stood before her: Son (she cries) What has begot this furious desire? How comes thy tender brest thus set on fire?
Canst thou train men for war? canst thou endure The burthen of the field, and walk secure Through push of pike? Though, would thy strength were such! Of late I saw thee, with thy javelin, touch An angry boare? (with feare I saw thee) when Thou sunk'st upon thy knees half down; and then Had not I ply'd my darts, where had been now My Champion for the wars? this polish'd bow, And arrows cannot help thee there, nor yet This dappled steed thou trust'st to: They are great Atchievements: Child, thou scarce canst pay the due To a Nymphs bed, as yet. The Omen's true: I wond'red why Diana's Temple shooke Of late, and she frown'd with a down-cast look; The off'rings fell down from the Temples roof: My bow grew slack upon't, no wound gave proof Of skill, from my dull fingers. Stop thy rage Till thou art grown to a more setled age: Till thy fair cheeks are shaded; and thou'st lost Thy womans face: what thou desirest most, A sword, and armes, I'le give thee then; and vow A mothers tears shan't stop thee longer: Now Uncase at home. Will you his march indure Arcadians? Sprung from trees or quarries sure! More would she: But her son, and th' Captains spread About, speak comfort, and asswage her dread: The trumpets sound: whil'st her imbraces are Scarce stop'd, she leaves him to Adrastus care. On t'other side Cadmus his The Thebanes. Martiall brood Vext with their General's Furies, frighted stood With no small outcry: (for they were alarm'd, That Greece against them all her strengh had arm'd:) And though asham'd o'th' King and's cause, prepare Slowly their force: None had an edge toth' war; Greedy to clasp on's back his fathers shield,
Or trim his warlike steed: (such joyes o'th' field The Souldiers use;) dejected they appear, Fill'd with no rage, or valour, but with fear. One mournes for's bed-rid Parent, whom he leaves As discontent as he: Another grieves, To part with's tender wife, or wretched son In's lap: The Mars. quarrelling God inflamed none. The Thba wals raised by him being now decayed. Amphions stately towers, burying their pride In their own ruines, shew a naked side Worn out with age: And The wall raised by Musick once, was now repaired by inferiour workmen, in which respect it is said to be def. base, dull workmanship Patches that wall, which once to heav'n did skip By sacred Musick. Yet war breathes his rage O're the Boeotian Cities, who ingage Not to protect the treach'rous Kings estate, So much, as to assist a neighbour state. He's like a rav'nous wolfe, that preying stood O're well-fed sheep, glutted with clotter'd blood; His bristled chops with bloody wooll besmear'd, And yawning he returnes from's fold, affear'd Lest th' heardsman, finding it, pursue; he stares About, and flies from his owne guilty fears. Disturbing fame begets fresh cause of doubt: One saies, the Graecian horse quarter about A hilly country in Achaia. Asopis banks; A Boeotian mountaine dedicated to Bacchus. Cithaeron's plund'red, cries Another, so's A neighbour mountaine to Thebes. Theumeson a third replies. Guarded A Boeotian City, where a continuall garrison is kept. Platea too, last night 'twas told Burnt with their watchlights. Every man was bold To say, he saw the Se∣verall omens, which the affrighted people fancied to themselves. Tyrian statues sweate; Dirce run blood, Sphinx in her craggy seat Began to talke againe; new monstrous broods:
Another fright too startled all their bloods. Th'inspired His chiefe Priestesse. Queen of Bacchus silvane traine, Runs from Cytherons top, down to the plaine: Scatt'ring her The mysticall vans, in which they put his oblations. baskets; and with sparkling eyes Shakes here and there her branched torch. Her cries Fill the amaz'd streets: Powrfull Bacchus from Nisa where he was fostered. Nisaean Father Which hat'st thy native Country, and hadst rather Shake warlike A Thracian mount, where the Orgies were celebrated. Ismarus, in the frozen North, With headed Wreath'd about with Ivy, that they might wound the more closely. leavy Javelins: Or call forth Thy spreading vines t'oretop A Thracian King, who to prevent his subjects drunkennesse, cut down all the vines: but in a distraction cut off his own legs. Lycurgus head: Or rage through An Indian river, neer which Bacchus rected hsi columnes. Ganges, or the latest bed Of blushing With a puissant Army of women he conquered all the East. Tethys; the triumphant King O'th' East; or come forth gilt from An Asian river, having golden sands, where Bacchus had a Temple. Hermus spring: But we thy off-spring, whose devotion's paid To thee, (our The harmeles armes used in the Bacchanals. Country weapons being laid Aside;) now wars, and tears, and frights must owne; And Brethrens madnesse, for an unjust Crowne. Let Bacchus fix me, in eternall frost, Or beyond A Nor∣thern hill parting Thrace from Scythia. Caucasus where the armed host Of These use to fight with a dolo∣rous noise called Barritus. Amazonians howle, before Ile trace The monstrous Generalls, and their wicked race. Yet thou compel'st — Another Such as the Bacchae were postest with. rage to Thee Bacchus I When she was initiated into his Orgies. vow'd. Two Parabolically of the two Brethren Etheocles and Polynices. equall bulls I see Push at each other, both of grace alike,
oth o'th' same breed: with angry hornes they strike t one anothers fronts; and cruelly n one another in their rage they die. ut Etheocles who began the quarell with Tydeus, und refused his bro∣thers copartnership. thou art worst; thou art most stain'd with bloud, Who would'st alone injoy thy Grand-sires food, he grasse o'th' common field: Ill nurtur'd cattell! ow fiercely you maintain a bloudy battail! hil'st a new Creon who raigned after the death of the bre∣thren. Captain gains your pastures by it: his said, she's pale, and Bacchus left her quiet. But th' haunted King, now sinking under's fears, And ill at ease, to ask advise o'th' years And knowing blindnesse of A Prophet blinded by Iuno, but enlightned by Iove. Tiresias, went: Men doubtfull do't:) he seeks the Gods intent Not by large The severall waies of divination. sacrifices, or the flight Of birds, or entrails breathing out the right; ark Of the ridling Tripos. answers, Casting of Figures used by Mathematicians. Figures guided by the skies, Nor by the By the dividing of which the  prophesied. smoak which o're the Altar flies; ut tells them, how the Ghosts call'd out, appeare rom the deep gates of death: and do's prepare 'th' royall presence, hellish sacrifice And hidden rites; beneath that bank that lies Where A Boeotian river emptying his chanell nto the Ocean. Ismene meets the sea; torne entrailes, grasse, Sulphur, and many charmes do cleanse the place. An antient wood, decay'd by age there grew, Whose uncrop'd bough's, the Sun-beams never knew. No winters flaws could blast it, it did fear No Southern winds, nor storms from th' Artick The Northern pole, where the Bear-star is placed. bear. Beneath were quiet shades, which did affright With horrid silence, and pale glimpse o'th' light.
Nor wants this grove a Deity, for there Latona's worshipp'd; every tree do's bear Her image; pitch-trees, cedars, oakes beside With sacred darknesse did the Goddesse hide. Her unseen arrows twang here; dogs resort To nightly howlings, when she leaves the Court Of her Pluto, in whose kingdome she is called Hecate, as here Diana. infernall Unkle, and in place Of what she was, puts on Diana's face. But when the hills have tir'd her, and the height O'th' Summer Sun, do's pleasant sleep invite; Here, round about her, she her darts do's stick, And on her quiver rests her stretch'd-out neck. Without, extends the pregnant Where Cadmus sowed the Serpents teeth which converted to Gy∣ants. Martiall field Of Cadmus; he was daring bold that till'd That ground, and furrow'd first the putrid filth, After the The Gyants which slew one another. Brothers fought, i'th' bloudy tilth. At noon-day still, and i'th' close shades of night Th' unhappy Earth strange tumults do's excite; When the black Their Ghosts would quarrell still. Gyants to vaine combates rise, The trembling plow-man from his tillage flies; And frighted Cattell to their stalls doe get. Here ('cause the place, for Stygian rites was fit, And soyles made fat with streams of bloud, do please) Th' old Prophet calls for dark-fleec'd sheep; with these Black-hided herds: From every flock was sent The fairest head: Whil'st The fountain where they used to drink. Dirce did lament, The mountain where the used to feed. Cithaeron's sad, and Either with the Bacchanalian shouts, or the former lowing of cattell. th' ecchoing valleys under At their new Hearing no bleating of sheep, nor lowing of oxe as formerly. silence did begin to wonder. Then Being blind of his eyes. groping with his hand, their horns he crowns
With flowry garlands, and i'th' noted bounds O'th' wood, The manner of infernall sacrifices. large Cups of wine at first he powres 'th' trenched Earth, nine times; with milke, and showres Of honey, mixt with Ghost-alluring gore: And fills, till the dry Earth could drinke no more. Then the sad Priest rols trunks of trees, and bids Three fires be made to Hecate, besides As many more toth' The three Furies. Sisters borne of Hell. Thy heap of pine-trees, Pluto, did excell I'th' ayre from under As all internall sacrifices were placed. ground: neere which there stood Proserpines lesse pile; boughes of Vsed at funerals, and Stygian sacri∣fices, for the weeping boy of that name. Cypresse wood Wreath'd in on every side. And now they The method in sacrificing. share Their lofty Crownes, and place their From hence called immolation. salt-cakes there: Straight fall the Cattell on their Which is the victimation. knives; whose blood Receiv'd in chargers, virgin Daughter to the Prophet Tiresias. Mantho stood To offer: then thrice rounding every fire, (As she had learn'd from her religious Sire) She brings their quivering Guts, and entrailes reaking, Kindling the boughs: when flames he felt, were breaking Out of the crackling leaves, and the sad pile Did blaze (for's cheekes grew hot, and vapours fill His hollow eyeholes:) he cries out: (His voice▪ Made the fire wave, and tremble at the noise.) Ye infernall seats, the Court of hungry death, Which men do fear, and thou whom Ghosts beneath Attend, with plagues for every guilty soul, And dost the lower Region controul, More Pluto brother to Iupiter and Nep∣tune. stern then thy two brothers; At my call▪ Open the gates toth' silent groves, and all The same with Proserpia, the Queen of Hell. Persephone's wast: Call out the crew, that's hid
I'th' hollow night: Send Charon back to guide His full boat over Styx. Come Both good and bad. all together: Trace back more paths then one. Let Brother to Mercury, and copartner in that office. Perseus sever The just Elizian souls, and th'hated Mercury. God Conduct them hither with his powerfull rod. On to'other side, toth' guilty, (which exceed In hell, and which are most of Cadmus breed,) Tisiphone, shaking thrice thy snake-haires, shew The day light, guiding them with flaming Of which venemous tree, the Furies framed their torches. yew: And let not Cerb'rus with his heads affright The Ghosts away, so long depriv'd of light. This said, the Sire, and the Phoebeian maid Prepare attentive souls; no whit affraid, Because inspir'd; only Etheocles Trembling, takes hold o'th' conjuring Prophets fleece Sometimes, and sometimes of his hands, or eyes, And doubtfull would break of the Sacrifice. So th' huntsman strengthning's valour, do's expect A Lion rous'd with noise, within the tract Of the Getulian wood, and grasp'd his dart In's sweaty palme; yet fear congeales his heart; His trembling steps looke, where, how great he is; His roaring's mark'd; blind Care each noise do's prize. Tiresias now, seeing no Ghost appear'd, Say's; witnesse Gods, for whom this fire's prepar'd; And we with our The proper instrument for infernall sacrifices. left hands, full blows did pay To the trench'd Earth. I cannot brooke delay. Am I your Priest chasheer'd? and will you go, If a Thessalian hag command you so, B'Inchantments? Or shall trembling hell looke pale, If A Scythi∣an City famous for Medea. Colchian witches, arm'd with poyson, shall Provoke it? we are slighted: if you have
No mind to raise a body from the grave, Or empty Urnes of their enclosed bones, Polluting By Necromancy. Gods of heav'n, and hell at once: Or mangle bloudlesse faces, taking out The putrid nerves of dead men: Doe not flout My weaker years, I wish you; don't despise The cloud that hangs upon my darkned eyes. We can be angry too; we know, what e're You dread to hear, or know: Did not I feare Apollo, the sun being their chief deity; the other but like stars, receiving their influence from him. Thymbraeus, and the Worlds first Nature taught them there must be one supream. Some think, they esteemed none other for a God, but expressed his severall attributes under the faigned name of their other Deities. Mover, who Must not be His name was ineffable. known, I could vex Hecate too. But I forbear: my quiet age denies. For you — Phoebeian Mantho straight replies, Father, you're heard: The saplesse ghosts doe come, Elysian deeps are open'd; Earth's large wombe Is rent; darke shades, black hell gapes; Ri∣vers of hell. Acheron Casts sulph'rous sands up: smoaky Ri∣vers of hell. Phlegeton Vomits black flames, about his foord: And The infernal river dividing hell from the Elysn fields. Styx Flowing between, forbids the Ghosts to mix. I see the pale Pluto. King sitting on his throne; About, his servant Furies wait upon His dire commands. The dismall bed is seen, And severe chambers of th' infernall Proserpine. Queen: Black death sits in the watch-towre, numbring o're The subjects of his silent Master. More Appear, whose lots the Minos, named from Gortyna, a Cretian city which he governed. Cretian Judge does cast In's An earthen pot, in which the Iudges put their effragies. urne: exacting truth of all that's past, Throughout their lives, too strictly; to proclaime
What plagues they ever gain'd. Why should I name Hells monsters? Scylla's? Centaures, which in vaine Doe rage? or th' Gyans fett'red in a chaine Of solid adamant? or say, where stands AEgaeons lean His vast body is contracted into a thin Ghost. ghost with his hundred hands? No, saies her Sire, my ages strength and guide, Don't speak of that: Who does not know beside Oth' rolling Sisyphus. stone? or the deceitfull Of Tantalus. flood? Or For indevouring to ravish Latona. Tytius whence the Vultures peck their food? Or blind For seeking to im∣brace Iuno. Ixion on his restlesse wheele? I led by Hecate, when good bloud did swell My veines, saw those close seats; ere I was blind, Or had my eyes by Who gave him a double proportion of judgment in requitall of his eyes, which were struck blind by Iuno. Iove fixt in my mind. Rather the Greek and Thebane souls, call hither; And sprinkling With which the ghosts were thought to be delighted, because it coold their tor∣ments. milk foure times, command the other To leave this dismall shade: then tell th' attire And shapes th' appear in, with their hot desire Of shedding bloud; which nation vaunts it best; And teach my blindnesse daughter, all the rest. She does obey, and uses Charms, by which The Ghosts are scatt'red and conven'd: the Witch Medea, 'bate her For they esteemed conjuration of a higher nature, the Ver∣tue proceeding from the Gods. faults, did so before; And Making Ulysses his companions think she had transformed them into swine. Circe jugling in th' AEaean shore. Then to her priestly Father thus she speaks, First Cadmus with his ghastly visage breaks Through the red lake; neer him Harmione keeps, From both whose crowns, a double serpent creeps: The Gyants, Born of the Dragons teeth which was consecrated to Mars. Mars his brood, about him stand,
Whose age was but For instantly they destroyed one another. one day: Each hath his hand Upon his sword, each do's regard his armes, pposing, rushing, plotting others harmes, ith The ghosts quarrel'd as if they were still alive. Live-mens rage; Nor is their drinke so good 'th' The blood flowing there would not satisfie them. furrows, they thirst one anothers blood. ext come their Autonoc, Ino, Semele, Agave. daughters, for their Actaeon, Melicerta, Ptheus. Children crying: ereft Whose son Actaeon was transformed to a hart by Diana. Autonoe; breathlesse With which her husband Athamas slew his son Learchus. Ino, spying he With which her husband Athamas slew his son Learchus. bow still, offering her sweet babe the teat: nd Semele, with Fearing Ioves lightning she defended her wombe although she perished her selfe. armes cross'd o're her great nd pregnant wombe. Then Agave with teares ursues her Pentheus, breaking th' Which she used at the Orgies. Ivy speares, Now dispossest by th' God; she open laies Her bloody breast: He flies through desert wayes Of Styx and Lethe; where his milder Echion who would recompose his son, torne in pieces by his Mother Agave in her fury. Father Weeps for him, and his satter'd limbs do's gather. know sad Slaine by his on Amphion and Zethus in revenge of their mother Auiopa. Lycus: Son to AEolus, who supposing his wife and children were a Lionesse and her whelps, slew Learchus, whose corps afterward he bore upon his shoul∣ders. Athamas I know With's hands behind; on's shoulders he does throw His dead sons corps. Nor hath Actaeon transformed for seeing Diana naked. Aristeus's son Chang'd yet his habit, or ill shape pt-on: Antlets still arme his brows, and darts his hand; He kick's of's dogs, at's wounds which gaping stand. See, envious Tatalus his daughter who compared her off spring with Latona's. Niobe following with her traine, Recounts her Her sons and daughters, slaine by Apollo's revenge. losses in a swelling straine: And not dejected, joyes she has outgone:
The Who could inflict no more upon her in the grave, where she will curse them freely. pow'r o'th' Gods; now thinks her tongue's her own. While the unspotted maid sung thus t'her Sire, His hoary haires raise up his garland higher Standing on end: and some thin bloud do's flow In's wither'd cheekes: on's staffe he leanes not now, Or's daughters hand, but standing bolt upright; Break off thy song, saies he; I want no light: My clouds begin to scatter, the darke mist Breakes from mine eyes. Supream Apollo, is't Thy spirit fils me? What I heard, I see. But marke  the Graecian shadows pensive be, With down-cast eyes: there frowning Acrifius his tyrannicall father. Abas, and Mischievous Who would have slaine innocent Bellerophon. Proetus, mild Iuno's first sacrificer Phoroneus stand: With mangled Whose limbs were presented in a fest to the Gods. Pelops, and In whose chariot race, thirteen were slaine. O Enomaus too, Besmear'd with bloody sand: Their large tears do Bedew their cheekes: Hence I conceive, successe Will crown the Thebanes. But, what meanes this prease Of fighting The Ghosts of the fifty Captaines, which Tydeus before had slaine. souls (as armes and wounds discover) Shewing their heads and breasts all blouded over, And hands lift up, with seeming cries? If I Mistake not they're those fifty: D'ont you spie Chronius, and Chromis, Phegeus, Apollo's priest, as before. Maeon too Grac'd with our baies? Be not enraged so Brave Captaines. Thinke not mortall counsailes durst Conspire your deaths: Th' hard-hearted The Destinies which spi the thred of life. sisters first Had spun your years: You have o're-past your paine; We must feele war, and Tydeus once againe. This said, he drives away the Ghosts that stood With Which shewes they were Captaines, with which they are appeased. Chaplets crown'd, and shews them offer'd blood.
Laius stands on Cocytus bankes alone; Brought back to hell by Mercury who by Ioves command had fetch'd him thence. Lib. 2. Hermes: he squints on His wicked grand-son (For he knew his looke;) No draughts of blood, or other showres he Refusing to be appeased by blood, milke or honey. tooke, As th'other Ghosts; but breathes immortall hate. Tiresias straight leaps out. Thou, whom the State Of Thebes call'd their deserving Generall, Since whose death, no good day did e're befall The founder of Thebes. Amphions towers; Thou, whose bloody slaughter Is full reveng'd in The punishment of O Edipus and his sons. those which follow'd after, And Ghost appeas'd; Oh, whither do'st thou flye? O Edipus wose eyes were out. He whom thou hat'st, a lingring death doth dye: And knocks now at hels thresholds; dawbing o're His empty eye-holes, with black filth, and gore: Depriv'd of day: beleev't, no death's so vile. Why then do'st shun thy harmlesse Nephew? Smile On us: let this blood-offering suffice: And set this war's event before our eyes, That so thou maist affright us. Angry, or That so thou mist prepare us. pittying. Then Ile make good Thy Because he was murthered. deny'd passage over Lethes flood, In the desired Charons ferry-boat. boat; and holy dust Shall cover thy pleas'd ashes; which Ile trust Toth' care of Stygian Gods. These dignities Appease the Ghost, who moistning's Either with the sacrificed blood or with teares. cheekes, replies: Why, coaetanean Tiresias living in Lius's his time. Priest, am I, by thee Raising the Ghosts, call'd to this Augury? And chosen first, to speake of chance to come? When thoughts of what's past, are too burdensome. Brave Nephews! (Fie for shame) must our advice
Be ask'd? Bring to your hellish sacrifice O Edipus after he had killed his Father, marryed his Mother, on whom he begat these sons. Him, him, whose falchion made his Father bleed, And to the womb that bare him, rais'd up seed. Who now the Gods, and the black Furies crew Doth With curses on his sons. tire, and for thee wars to us doth sue. But if I needs must sing such times as these, So far as The Desti∣nies and Furies, interrupted them in the middle of their Oracles. Lachesis and The Desti∣nies and Furies, interrupted them in the middle of their Oracles. Megaera please, Ile speake. War, war, vast troopes on all sides finds: And fatall Mars spurs on the Graecian minds. These must expect Earths As Amphiraus found, who was swallowed up alive. monsters, darts from As Capaneus did, who was struck dead by lightning. heav'n▪ Brave deaths, to which, no Fun'rals may be giv'n▪ Byth' Prohibiting any slaine corps to be buried, before the ghost was appeased. Law: the vict'ry, Thebes, will be thine owne; Fear not; thy brother shan't enjoy thy Crowne. But yet the Furies and that Of murther and incest. double sin, Back't with thy Which appeared in both their destructions. Fathers curse, (woes me!) shall win, Mid'st the sharp swords; This said, he disappears, And's doubtfull riddles left them full of fears. Meane, time cold Where Hercules slew the vast Lion. Nemea, and the thickets where Hercules's fame resounds, the quarters were Oth' Graecian regiments; who are greedy now To get Thebane, named from Cadmus the founder, who was a Sidonian. Sidonian pillage; thinking how To rifle batter'd houses. Phoebus tell, Who turn'd their rage, how stop'd, what crosse befell Them in their journey. The reports of Fame Gives little light at first. Tir'd Bacchus came From warfare on tam'd Having conquer'd all the Est. AEmus, where he taught Arm'd These with the Thraci∣as were taught by him, the art of dressing a vineyard. Getes his Orgies, and two Put for the winters brought
The top of snowy Mountaines formerly covered with snow now planted with Vines. Othrys to looke green: On Mountaines formerly covered with snow now planted with Vines. Rhodope Vines. Icarus was Bacchus's companion, slaine by shepheards, who were drunke, with the wine which he had given them. Icarian shades were seen. And now he drives his vine-spread Chariot, to His Thebes where Semele lived. mothers wals: unbridled Lynxes goe On either hand, and Beasts which use to be harnessed in Mars his chariot. Tygres lick the fome rom reines long steep'd in wine. Behind do come Triumphing Priests, with spoiles of cattell slaine, Halfe slaughter'd wolves, torne beares: Nor was this train More dull; for The companions of Bacchus. Anger, The companions of Bacchus. Fury, The companions of Bacchus. Courage, The companions of Bacchus. Fear, And fiery The companions of Bacchus. Heat still in extreames, was there; With stumbling The companions of Bacchus. steps, Tents like their Vnfixed and tottering▪ King beside. But when he saw, a cloud of dust did hide Trac'd Nemea; and the sun-beames glistred bright Upon their steele, Thebes unprepar'd to fight: Mov'd at the sight (though pin'd in face and breast) The drums and trumpets, and still pipes he ceast, Whose divers tunes fill'd his astonish'd ears; Then thus he spake: This Army here prepares: My ruine, and my Nations: Cruell Greece, (Thus rag'd he) and my Iuno who angry with Semele counselled her to her owne destruction. stepdame plotted this. Could not my Mothers unjust With which at Iupiters appearance she was burnt. flames suffice? Could not the fires, which at my Being untimely then borne, with the death of his mother. birth did rise? And lightnings, which I felt my self? But must Curst shee, strike at the reliques too, and dust Of Ioves lost Concubine? shall she destroy What's left of Thebes? Ile cheat them, to delay: Holla, Companions, haste to yonder plaines. At's word, the harness'd Named in our Poet from  Tygres raise their manes,
And hurry straight toth' field. It was the time, When the faint day perceiv'd the Sun to climbe Toth' height of heav'n; whilst little moysture fill'd Earth's chinkes, and every grove the skie beheld. He cals the water-Nymphs, and thus begins Mid'st of their silent round: Ye rurall Queens, The Rivers Deities, chief parts of my traine, Performe the taske we set: A while restraine The Graecian streames, and founts, and pooles; and stop With looser sands, their winding channels, up: First Nemea's, whence they 'dvance against our towers: Let water flie toth' bottome: all the powers O'th' Sun help on, (if you be willing) now In's height: the stars besides assist my vow: Erigones The dogstar, once son to Erigone, who challenges a share in Bac∣chus from her father Icarus. dog foames still: Go on with mirth, Creepe cheerfully i'th' caverns of the earth: Hereafter to full streames I will invite you, And with choice offer'd presents will requite you: Bold hornefoot Satyres night-thefts Ile forbid, And Who being well liquor'd, used in th night to ravish the Nymphs. Faunes hot rapes: This said, a thin foame did Seeme presently to overspread his mouth: And his green garlands moistures parch'd with drouth. Straight, a dry thirst draines the Graecian, named from King Inach Inachian land, Streames ebbe, on founts and lakes a scum does stand: Deep rivers now were pav'd with hardned mud, Earth pin'd; the corne-eares hanging downeward, stood On wither'd stalkes: The cattell cheated, roare On bankes of rivers, where they swum before. So when The great AEgyptian river, whose overflowing makes the whol Land fruitfull. Nile flowes back to his mighty den, And's His streames fed by the winters showres. winters food within his springs does pen,
ry vallies reake, and AEgypts gaping ground xpects to hear the watry Fathers The rivers Cataracts which fill all the land with noise. sound; ill at their prayer, he feeds the Pharian plaine, nd crownes that year with a rich crop againe. Rivers in emea. Lyrcaeus dries, and poysnous Rivers in emea. Lerna, so reat Rivers in emea. Inachus, so does Rivers in emea. Charadrus too, hich casts up floating stones: and Erasine, hat rests not in his channell; hither joyne moother Asterion: th' others us'd to creepe hrough deserts, and disturbe the shepheards sheepe. nely The fountaine which Hysipyle shewed to the Graecians▪ Langia feeds her silent waves th' Gods appointment, in her secret caves. Archimore's losse, had not yet made her owne is For Langia was afterwards called Archemorus. name, nor was the fame o'th' Goddesse knowne: et gliding through the wood in by-waies, she eserves her streames: Great shall her glory be, hen Graecian Peeres in Solemne  performed b the Graecians every three years in honour to Ar∣morus. Trieterick games, rowne sad First fled from her Country, and now required as a sa∣fice by angry Lycurgus to his sons ghost. Hysipyle's, and Called afterward Arche∣rus because he was the first slaine in these wars. Opheltes Names. Now, (tortur'd thus with heat) they could not bear heir burning shields, nor their strait brest-plates wear. or were their mouths, or throats alone inflam'd, ut inward heat their panting hearts had tam'd. shrivel'd veines, no troubled blood did run, ut clots to their dry ribs: Earth parch'd by th' Sun reaths out hot clouds of dust; no showres of some rop from the horses mouths, which champ upon ry bits, and thrust their curb'd tongues out, obeying or law, nor riders; but inflam'd, run neying bout the field. The King sends scouts to spie
Abroad, if all the Graecian pooles were drie; If m Ainimone had moisture: But, in vaine; Heat drunke up all, nor was there hopes of raine. Like sun-burnt Africks sandy desarts, and Unclouded A City dividing AEthiopia and AEgypt where it never raines. Siene, so appears the land. Wandring at last (as Bacchus had design'd) Among the Woods, Hypsipyle they find O'th' sodaine, sad, yet beauteous: In her face Shin'd Majesty, though none of her owne race, But young Lycurgus, the Graecian Kings son to whom the was nurse. Opheltes hung upon her brest, Lycurg's unhappy son; she poorely drest, With haire neglected, shew'd a grace beyond The power of grief. Adrastus then, aston'd, Spake thus: Great Sylvan Goddesse, (for thy brow Denies thy mortall stock, who pleasant now Under heav'ns fire, seek'st for no waters) aid A neighb'ring people: Whether once a maid Of Dian's traine, she bad thee turne a bride; Or from the skie, some heav'nly Love did slide To make thee fruitfull: (for to Graecian beds The King of heav'n's no As to Io, Danac, &c. stranger:) See the heads Of fainting troops. We thought by th' sword to raze Proud Thebes toth' ground; but our weake fate gives place To tedious thirst now, which infeebles all Our spirits, and tir'd bodies do inthrall. Helpe our weake state; if troubled streame thou know, Or muddy poole: There's nothing is too low For our condition: Thou art sued to, Honour'd now, in the place of Iove, or AEolus. for The windes and raine: Our scatter'd strength restore; Raise our disheartned brests with valour; so May thy sweet babe, with prosp'rous fortune grow. Iove grant a safe returne; how great a prey
Shall be thy off'ring then? I will repay Whole Thebane herds; as many Their hopes promising every particular Souldier a spoile. gifts as men: This Ho∣nouring it, for the benefit, which they found in it. grove shall shine with thy great Altar then. This said, heat does his speech i'th' midst controul, And his dry tongue cannot expresse his soul: So gap'd they all for breath, and look'd agast. The Hypsipile daughter to Thoas King of Lemnos. Lemnian answers with eyes doweward cast; Although from Being grand-child to Bacchus by the fathers side. heav'n my pedegree's deriv'd, How seeme I so to you? Would I had griev'd No more then mortals. Here, rob'd of mine Her two sons, which after in this story find her. own, You see me tend a Nurse-child: 'Tis unknown Who dandles mine, or suckles them. Yet I Had once a Crowne, and royall Sire. But why Discourse I this to you? And stop you thus Tir'd, from your wisht-for waters? Follow us; Come on: perhaps Langia still can shew Continued streames i'th' foord: Shee's us'd to flow, When the hot- The summer Tropick. Crab does entertaine the sun, And th' dog-star shines. With that, she layeth downe Her clinging babe on the next turfe of grasse, (So the Fates pleas'd) lest he might stop her pace, As she led on the Greekes: And heaping flowers Under's unwilling head, she stops his showers Of tears, with her sweet Lullabies. Ev'n so Did The mother of the Gods. Cybele, when she bad her Curates go, And daunce about young Iove: they The Priests either feared Saturns anger, or foresented the majesty of Iove. trembling strike Their Cymbals; Ide does Eccho with the shrike. But the young child laid in the lofty grasse, On earths green lap, groveling upon his face,
Sometimes beates downe the willing spires, and then Growne hungry, cries for's teat, and laughs agen; Or pratling words which quarrell with his lips, Admires the whistling noise o'th' woods; or clips Whats next his reach, or gapes for aire: Thus free From unknowne harmes, securely wandreth he. So did young Mars in the Thracian, from whence Mars had his originall. Odrysian snow, The Mercury. winged God on Maenalus did so: So young untir'd Apollo did before Tread on The Island where he was borne, since called Delos. Ortygia, creeping by the shoare. They breake through shrubs and shady by-wayes: som Inclose their guide; the rest behind her come, And crowd her on: Shee treads the middle ground, With no small speed. And now the Vale does sound With the neer streame, which with a warbling noise Does fill their eares: There, in the Van, with joyes The standard-bearer cries; Harke, waters roare; The Army Eccho's, Waters: So, byth' shoare O'th' Named from Am∣bracia, a City of Epire, a Country of Greece. Graecian Sea, the boate-swaine shouting stand Byth' oares, when th' Master has discover'd land: And th'Earth against them ecchoes to their cry, When worship'd Phoeb', shewes A promontory o the Epirotick Sea. Leucas to their eye. All rush into the foord at once: the first And last could make no difference; equall thirst Could not distingiush any. Steeds do enter Harnest i'th' Chariots; loaden horses venter With men and Armes: The whirlepooles swallow some, Stones trip up others: No respect; or roome Is made for Kings o'rethrowne: No help to save A crying friend: The foaming waters have No rest far from the fount. Ev'n now the flood
as pure, and cleare toth' bottom; now the mud tirr'd up defiles it: Then they breake the banke; read down the grasse: Their thirst though quench'd, they dranke his puddle water still. You'd thinke they are ighting a battell; thinke, that open war aged now i'th' channell, or some City were aken and sack'd by the proud Conquerer. And one o'th' Captaines in the mid'st o'th' flood Begins thus: Nemea, thou most springing wood, mansion fit for Where he was worship't, and Lycurgus father to Archemorus was his Priest. Iove; as dang'rous now As Herc'les found thee, when he brake in two The The Lion which he slew there. monsters crested neck, and prest his tough roud soul in his swolne limbs: Be it enough, That hitherto malitious windes did blow Upon thy peoples enterprise. And oh Thou See the reason, Lib. 2. horned spring, of this eternall river, ntam'd by th' Sun, flow joyfull, swelling ever; rom whatsoever house thy cold head flows: or neither hoary winter lends thee For those rivers which were fed by raine or snow were dried up. snows; Nor th' The rainbow. Bow powres streames, stol'n from another spring; Nor watry Plyads, clouds to feed thee, bring: Thou run'st, thine owne, unconquer'd by the stars. Not either One in Lycia, the other in Troas. Xanthus, nor Phoeb's t Ladon dares Compare with thee, nor threatning A Thessalian City, neer which the Centaures inhabited. Sperchius, nor Monstrous Where Hercules kill'd Nessus. Lycorme: In peace, and clouds of war, le celebrate thy praise at sacred Feasts. Next Iove's thy honour. Welcome but thy guests From war with joy; open kind streames againe T'our weary limbs: Owne thy defended traine.
Argument. Lib. V. Statii Thebaidos. After their thirst was quench'd, Hypsip'les story Is ask'd by King Adrastus; She, though sorry, Replies: I'me borne a Lemnian, Thoas's daughter; Where Venus, by Polixo's mouth, breath'd slaughter To all our males; and all, but Thoas, feel Our swords: Him, Bacchus guides: The Argo keel Touch here, in a storme; Their landing's stop'd, before We knew them; then receiv'd: Two sons I bore To Jason: They depart: I'me banish'd. Here A serpent kill'd Opheltes: Cap'neus's spear Dispatch'd him: She laments: Lycurgus tried Her death; they guard her: Th'infant's deified. THeir thirst now quenc'd i'th' river, roil'd with mud, The bankes were broke, whilst they dranke downe the floud: The mettall'd horse prance fiercer, in the plaine; The foot do shout; mens soules reviv'd again: So did their rage, and wishes; as if fire Mixt with the streame, had kindled their desire To bloody war. In ranke and file they're plac'd, And order'd strictly; as they were listed last Under their leaders, they are bid advance. And now the first dust rais'd; the sun-beames glance Through the thick woods, upon their Armes. So when Hoarse shoales of cranes come from A colour made of the spume of the sea bak'd on the sands. white On whose warme banks they had winter'd. Nile agen,
When winters over, where warme AEgypt had Defended them; they crost the maine, and Being so great a shoale. shade Both Sea and Land: The untract aire does hear Their gagling flight: Now Northern Which in Thrace are usuall. stormes they bear; Swim in thaw'd streames, on bleake A Thra∣cian mountaine. Haeme summering. Adrastus here, incircled with a ring Of Nobles, under an old ash did stand▪ Resting on Polynices Spear, his hand, And spake thus: Thou, who hast the glory, that So many troops to thee do owe their fate, (An honour worthy of heav'ns Soveraign King) Tell us (since we stand quickned by thy spring) Thy stock, or land: derived from what star? Thy Father: yet some God-head can't be far. Though fortune's fled, thy blood does Nobler flow, And Majesty shines in thy afflicted brow. The Lemnian sighes, and shedding modest tears, Shee answers: Gen'rall, you renew my cares, And rub my wounds, to speak o'th' Furies, and Where the women inraged by Venus, who was neglected in their Sacrifices, slew all the Males. Lemnos, and Geniall beds, with weapons stain'd; And all our Males slaine with accursed steel: The horrid fact strikes terrour: now I feel▪ Cold Furies at my heart. Oh Caitiffs, thus Inrag'd! oh night! oh Sire! 'Twas I, (ne're As if she were stain'd with her Nations crimes. blush For your kind guide:) 'Twas She saved her Father Thoas, who alone escaped the destruction. I alone that freed My rescued Father. But these evils need No such long Preface: And your armes controle, With the great resolutions of your soule: This may suffice: I Thoas's daughter, call'd
Hypsip'le, The Lemnian women offended at her mercy shewed to her Father would have slaine her; but she avoiding them fell into the hands of Pirates who sold her to Lycurgus, as appears afterward. serve Lycurgus now inthral'd. This does possesse their soules: and now she shines More glorious, and seemes fit for such Of preser∣ving a whole Army from ruine. designes: Then, all would know her chance: Adrastus first Exhorts her thus: Come on, report the worst Of their base enterprise; thy praise; their grief; How there depos'd, thou sought'st here for relief; (Our Van does march before: for in the wood O'regrowne with shrubs and briars, 'tis not good To passe in a full body:) 'Tis some rest In misery, to have our griefs exprest. Th' Named from AEgeus the father of Theseus. AEgaean waves (saies shee) beat on the shoare Of sea-girt Lemnos; Vulcan tir'd before In fiery AEtna, The Island being dedicated to him. here, takes breath; the Land Is cloth'd with A mountaine of a vast height, between Macedonie and Thrace, overshadowing the Isle Lemnos. Atho's shade, which nigh does stand: Darkning the sea with's woods. The Thracians trace The other side: That Either occasioning our misery, or by their wicked examples of Progne &c. teaching us. fatall shoare of Thrace, Our plague! The Isle was rich in valiant spirits; Not Samos, not Famous for Apollo's birth. resounding Dele inherits More buds of Fame; Not all the coasts, are wash'd By foaming AEgeus. But the Gods have dash'd Our peace: Nor want we guilt: No fires did shine On They were so true servants to Vulcan, that they neglected Venus who abused him. Venus Altars, nor had she a shrine. Thus grief, long since, her heav'nly mind controls, And slow-pac'd punishment creeps on our souls.
The Cyprian city where she was worship'd. Paphos, and th' hundred Altars, she forsooke. Carelesse of face or haire; they say she broke Her coupling Of this Ceston, read Lib. 2. with this she honoured lawfull mrrges. girdle, banishing her payre Of young Idalian Which drew her Chariot: she neglects all pompe and beauty. doves: Nay some declare, They saw the Goddesse, i'th' darke shades of night Weare other flames, and with new darts affright. 'Mongst Furies, she into their chambers breakes, Filling their closest roomes with twining snakes: And terrifies all houses; without pity To her poor Who coninued constant to her, notwithstanding Mars's adulteries. faithfull husbands wretched City. Forthwith all tender Love from Lemnos fled; Hymen's displac'd, his Torches Alluding to the customes of Renegados in an Army, who in this posture, submit to the adverse Generall. trail'd, the bed, The Geniall bed grew cold: No joyes at night; No soft imbraces cherish'd sleep: But spite, Rage, hatred, discord fils the sheets. Our men Are plotting, how to rout proud Thracians, in Th'opposite Coast, and how to triumph over That war-like people: and when they discover Their house or babes, stand on the adverse shoares, They chose Named from AEgon a Thracian mountaine on which they warred. AEdonian cold, where The constellation next the Northern pole. Arctos roares: Or after battaile, in the silent night, Loud torrents breaking from the hills, delight. The woman sad, drench'd night and day in tears, (My virgin years were not then ripe for cares:) Mix'd comfortable words, or gaz'd upon Curs'd Thrace on t'other side. The mid-day Sun Poiz'd then his horses in the height of heav'n, As though they'd stop'd: The even number making them the more ominous. Four thundercracks were giv'n
From the clear skie: Four times black Vulcans de Open'd its flaming top: Th' AEgaean, when The windes were quiet, did worke high, and roare, And with proud swelling waves did beat the shoare. When sodainly The frowardest paricide amongst the Lemnians. Polixo, ripe of age, Carried by th' Furies in a horrid rage Unusually, flies from her cell abroad; Like Thebane Thyas, toss'd by th' Named from the effect, because in his Bacchanals he made his Priests so. frantick God; When's Orgies call, th' The hill where these feasts were celebrated. Idaean pipes invite, And One of the names of Bacchus there called upon. Evan sounds downe from the mountaines heig Thus, with ghast looks, chill'd blood, and roaving eyes, She frights the Forsaken by the men. naked City, with mad cries; And gathers an assembly; knocking at Barr'd portals; with her sons, the Whom soon after she slew. wretches, that Attended her: They all, inrag'd no lesse, Breake out, and to Minerva's Temples presse. Thither we crowd with speed, without respect To order. Straight, this guide t'our bloody fact, With a drawn sword, bids silence; then breakes out I'th' midst, to this discourse: I am about A brave exploit, which heav'n and grief ordaines: Strengthen your souls, ye widowed Lemnians, Forget your sex. If you are griev'd to keep Your naked wals eternally, and weep For wither'd youth, and barren years spun out With lasting tears; I've found a way (no doubt, The Gods propos'd it) to renew your Lost by the absence of your husbands. pleasure; Let but your sorrows your brave courage measure. For tell mee; since three winters hoard the ground, Who, wedlock bands, or sweets of Love has found?
hose breast has warm'd his wife? whose travail has ucina eas'd? whose hopes were swell'd to passe he reckoned moneths? Such peace, as beasts and birds Coupling injoy? Dull souls I shall vengefull swords e put byth' Danaus perswading his fifty daughters in one night to murther their husbands. King in his Greek daughters hands; hilst he, joy'd with their husbands mischief stands, hose secure sleepe is bath'd in their own blood? ut we're tame fooles yet, if you thinke it good o act by neerer presidents; behold, et Thracian Who slew her husband Tereus and her son Itis be∣cause her bed was abused by Philomla. Proce teach you to be bold; hose hands reveng'd her bed, and feasted on Her husband. Neither are you call'd upon y one that's spotlesse. See, my family s full, I've travaild oft: These four which lie Within my lap, their Fathers pride and joy, le slay at once, though tears and kisses stay My rage: Ile mix the brothers gore and slaughter; And whilst they're gasping, send their father after. Dares any kill so many? — More she said; When on the Maine before them, sailes were spread. t was the Returning home after three years wars with the Thracians. Lemnian fleet. Polyxo then oy'd, takes th'advantage: — Are we wanting, when The Gods call on us? see their navy; heav'n, Revenging heav'n these to our wrath has giv'n; And favours our designe. Nor are my dreames aine: with a naked weapon Venus seemes Presented in my sleep; and cries; why loose ye Time thus? cast off these husbands that abuse ye. le light new fires: you shall be better wed: With that, she laies this sword upon my bed; This very sword, beleev't. Take counsell then
Poor wretches, whilst ye may: Behold our men Belabour yonder Sea, untill it foame; Perhaps they bring their Spoken, to inflame their jelousies. Thracian spouses home. This rais'd their jealous envy, with a shout Which strook the stars. An The women fighters; uder their Generall Penhiselea. Amazonian rout You'd thinke did rage in Scythia, or a troope With Which the Amazonians used as Virgil de∣scribes them. half-moone, Targets roar'd; when Mars does ope The gates of Alluding to the Romne Temple of Ian. war, and cals to fight. Nor yet Did severall cries, or differing humours whet Their mindes, as th'rabble use. All rage alike, All would lay houses desolate, and strike At old and young: babes from full teats are pull'd, And through all ages, shall their swords be dull'd. A grove then greene shaded the ground before Minerva's The Temple of Minerva, and its situation. spires: darke of it selfe: but more, A hill o'rehung it: these two shades benighted The Sun: within this place their faith was plighted. Martiall Bellona sister to Mars. Enyo thou wast witnesse: So Was The daughter to Ceres. Proserpine: The Stygian Furies too (Hell opening) came Being alwayes officious in mischief. unask'd. But every where Venus chats, mix'd Love be∣ing but one degree removed from Fury. amongst them: Shee does bear A brandish'd sword: She does inflame their strife. Nor us'd they common blood: Carops'es wife Offers her son: the others, straight addrest, With swords and hands teare his amazed brest: And dipt in's With which they seale their ovenant of mischief. blood they swear their sweet sins over: Whilst the young Ghost about her eyes does hover. At sight of this what horrour seis'd my brest▪ How pale I look'd! So when a Doe's distrest
By bloody wolves, her tender soul commands No strength, but in her speed her comfort stands: Doubtfull she flies, and every step they straine Shee thinkes shee's caught, and hears their snaps in vaine. The fleet arriv'd, and strooke upon the sand I'th' hav'ns mouth; they headlong leap to land. Poor wretches! whom the rage of Thracian war, And th'Oceans boistrous waves thus To perish now more dishonourably by their wives treacheries. long did spare. And now the temples smoake: vow'd Sacrifices Are thither drawn: but a The colour being ominous. darke flame arises From every Altar: Luctatius tels us of a signe in the intrailes, called Deus, which if it be intire, discovers a propitious hea∣ven; but if absent or mutilated, the contrary: but gratis dicit. The absence or dislocation, or speckling of any part of the entrailes is suf∣ficient. Nor doe th'entrailes reake Intirely, but an angry God they speake. Iove brought downe night more slow, and I conceive Out of his mercy, whilst the Fates gave leave, He stop'd the moving heav'ns: Nor ever yet Darkenesse forbore so long, when Sun was set. At last the stars arose and shed their light On Two of the Islands Cyclades, the last overgrown with woods. Paros, Two of the Islands Cyclades, the last overgrown with woods. Thasos, the thick Fifty three Islands, so called from their forme, in the AEgaean sea. Cyclads: Night Onely hung heavily o're Lemnos: here Darke clouds which mantled the black sky, appear. Lemnos alone, toth' wandring sea-mans eye Is undiscern'd. Now leaving house, they lye Spread through their sacred groves: and warme their souls With costly banquets; where their deepest bouls Are cleans'd, with draughts as large. Where they relate Their battels fought on A Thracian river, where they had joyned battell. Strimons bankes: their fate On Thracian moun∣taines where they fought. Rhodope: how in cold Thracian moun∣taines where they fought. AEme they swet. Nay their lewd wives, in gorgeous dresse were set
Among their revels too, and garlands: When Venus, i'th' last night, mollifies the Who loathed their wives formerly, for their ranke savours. men, After long discontents, and grants them rest For a short Be∣ing all slaine before morning. time, in vaine: kindling their breast With dying flames. Now, silent grew the round, And made an end of revelling: the sound Of nights first whispers ceas'd: When sleep beset With shades of's cousin-german Death, and wet With Stygian dew, imbrac'd the dying towne, And pour'd from's Out of which he used to powre his blessings. angry horne, dull slumber downe, Seizing o'th' males: Wives, Mothers, Sisters watch Whetting their steele with joy, and lie at catch For mischief; then attempt a deed so foul: A proper Fury raignes in every soul. A part of India bordering on Scythia. Hiranian tygers so the herds inclose, In Scythian plaines, whom morning hunger does Rouse up, and th'ravenous whelps roare for their paps. Mongst all the shapes of murther, whose mishaps Shall I report? Rash Gorge sets upon Which ee∣monious habit they used in their sacred festivals. Crownd Helim, snorting out his liquor, on His tapestry coverings: Shee, his garments tears, To feele for's wounds; whose wretched sleep forbears At death's approach: He, with a roving cast Of's heavy eyes imbrac'd her: Shee with haste Stab'd him i'th' back, who grasp'd her still, and prest, Untill the point o'th' ponyard raz'd her brest. This stops her rage: He, gentle still and kind, Looks up, with trembling eyes and voice, to find His Gorge, I read th plce —non solvit brbi—, and not — sol sua braci — an agreeing best with the context. culling her unworthy neck. Of none o'th' common peoples death, Ile speak,
hough cruell too; but weepe my kinsmens Fate. aire Cidon why should I thy death relate? r thine, unshav'd Crenaeus, with thy locks catter'd? my foster-brothers, both whose stocks prung from my Father, in a Being the bastard sons of King Thoas. crooked line. Or, whom espous'd I As young Virgins use. feard, brave Gyas, thine? saw him fall byth' bloody Mermidon. r, how the barb'rous mother slew her son popeus, as amongst their Crownes he skips? 're Cydimus, unarm'd Lycaste weeps, Her brother-twin: viewing her image in His falling limbs: She markes his rosie chin, And gold-imbraided haire: But her fierce Mother, With threats inforc'd her then upon her brother, Having first slaine her spouse,) and armes her hand. As Lions brought toth' Keepers soft command, Forget their fiercenesse: no affront or stroke Can their tame souls to wonted rage provoke: So she fell downe upon him; falne, she keeps His blood, which stream'd into her lap: and dips Her torne haire in his wounds. But when I saw Alcimides, her fathers head display, Which The lips moving after death. mutter'd still, and brandish her The old man not having blood enough to paint it red. pale steele; My haire straight stood on end: My soul did feele Strange horrour. 'Twas, me thought, my Thoas dead; That hand seem'd mine. Straight to my Fathers bed Distraught I went. He (for what sleep can seise On so great thoughts?) long since in's bosome weighes What rustling 'twas? (Though's palace stood not nigh The City:) in the dead of night what cry Had frighted rest? I with a trembling tongue Relate their guilt; how At their husbands absence. griev'd; whence raged by Venus. courage sprung;
How none could stop their rage; Then cry'd; away, Wretch'd Sir, they're here; They'le intercept your stay; You for your sex, I for revealing their designe. We both perhaps shall rue it: Mov'd with this He rises from his bed. Our passage is Through the back-lanes of th' City where we spie Muffled in clouds, heaps of night slaughters lie, Who fell, that bloody Vesper in the grove: Here groveling faces with their pillows strove; The rapiers hilt out o'th' clos'd wound appears, And broken truncheons of their weighty spears: Swords pinck'd their cloaths and breasts alike; we view'd Goblets o'rthrowne, with's slaughter Feasts imbru'd. Their wine, like torrents, from their mangled throats, Mingled with blood stream'd back into their pots. Young men lay mixt with old; whose hoary head The sword would rev'rence: Gasping infants spred Upon their groaning sires, i'th' dawne of life Sob out their trembling souls: With equall strife The feasting Whose Kin Perithous, slew the Centaures, who would have ravished his bride a his marriage feast. Lapithans doe riot, in Cold Ossa's top, when with large cups of wine The The Centaures begot by Ixion on a cloud, which was presented in Iuno's place to his imbraces. cloud-borne sons are warm'd. Scarce angry growne They rise and fight, their tables overthrowne. Then Named here fro Thyone, or Semele so called, the mother of Bachus. Bacchus first affrights our sense, i'th' night, Aiding's distrest son Thoas: glorious light Breakes from him sodainly. I knew him well: And yet no With which Bac∣chus is usually adorned. garlands made his temples swell, No yellow grapes did part his haire: He seem'd Clouded, from's eyes Teares being beneath a God. unworthy showres stream'd: And spake: Whilst Fate made powerfull Lemnos thine, And fear'd of other Nations, I did joyne
My care with thy just labour, Son; but now he Destinies have cut their thred in two; No prayers or tears▪ which I have powr'd in vaine efore Ioves throne, could a reprieve obtaine: his dismall honour to his Venus, who had obtained their destruction. daughter's paid, asten your flight; and thou deserving maid, y grand-child, guide thy Father where the shoare uns out, byth' double peere. There, where they roare th' gate, unlucky Venus Forbidding their stage that way. porter stands, Girt with a sword, and whets their rage: (What hands he Goddesse wears! whence grew her martiall Vsually tender, now bloody. spirit!) ommit to th' That ort onely ing open. Deep thy Father: Ile inherit hy cares. This said, he springs i'th' aire againe; nd though darke shades obstruct our sight, a traine Of light cleeres up his path. Those markes I follow, nd recommend my Sire clos'd in a hollow eele, to the Sea-gods, winds, The Deity of that Sea, in which Lemnos and the other tads were seated. AEgeon too mbracing round the Cyclads. Tears did flow t parting, without measure: Till the day- Discovering star, had chas'd the rest away rom th'Easterne heav'n. Then I strange doubts did roul, earfulll, i'th' shoare; whilst my divided soul urst scarce conside in Whose counsell she had followed. Bacchus: Walking thence, left my heart there: Nor could I dispence ith rest, till I had view'd from every hill, hat winds arose, or if the seas were still. The blushing morne breakes, Titan sheds a ray ismantling heav', yet crosse to Lemnos: Day oes guide her Terrified  so bloody a spectacle. frighted steeds into a cloud. hen were their works of darknesse seen; their blood nted their cheeks, fearing the light should peepe, hough all were guilty: Straight they buried deep
Their slaughter'd corps, or with nimble fires Consum'd them. Glutted Venus now retire With all her Furies, from the Towne sh'ad sack'd: And then their leisure serv'd to recollect Their deeds: to tear their haire; and dew their face. Our fruitfull Isle was knowne by th' site, a place Once stor'd with wealth, Armes, Men; inrich'd of late By th' People of Thracia over whom the Lemnians had triumphed. Getick triumph: Now's an empty state, Torne from the world, not byth' Seas breach, nor by The enemies force, or an unluckie skie, There's none alive to plough the ground, there's none To cut the Seas: Houses are silent growne: Blood covers all: black gore the fields does staine: We, onely The female Sex. wee, i'th' spacious streets remaine; And th' angry Ghosts hover about the spires. I too, did build Counterfeiting her fathers funerall. a pile for lofty fires I'th' inner Court o'th' Palace, throwing on't My Fathers Armes, and robes our Kings were wont To wear, and's Scepter: Then I sadly stood Nigh the amaz'd flames: my sword was staind with blood: Where I wept ore the cheat o'th' empty pile, Fearing their If they knew her mercy in the close conveance of King Thoas. rage; and prayd, that by this wile My Fathers Fate, and doubtfull fears of death Might vanish. For these They supposing he had killed her father. merits, they bequeath This punishment, his Kingdome; I must sit I'th' royall Throne: Such faith, my craft did get. Could I refuse then, thus beset? I went: But call the Gods to witnesse my intent, My faith, and my unspotted hands. I gain'd A bloodlesse Empire: ('twas a dire command:) Poor, sad, Having lost all the Males. beheaded Lemnos. Sorrow tore Their waking souls, by this time, more and more:
They sigh aloud: Polyxo's curs'd anon: And now they hate the thought of what they'd done: Altars toth' Ghosts they straight decree to reare, And by their buried ashes often Swearing by their name, being a chief part of divine worship. sweare. So when the trembling heifers see with fear, A Mauritanian Lions which abound there. foe their Captaine teare, Which The towne bull. serv'd them all, and did command the Chase, The pride o'th' herd: They having lost their grace, Dismembred droop; because their King is slaine, The fields, and springs, and the mute drove complaine. But see, the Called Argo, but named here from the mountaine Peliu in Thessaly, where it was built. Pesian ship, with stem of brasse Cutting the waves, through th' Which before this time never bore so great a vessell. untrack'd Seas does passe With spreading sailes: which th' Iason and his companions, named from Minyus a Thessalian King, now sailing to fetch the golden fleeces. Argonauts do guide: The clashing waves do foame on every side: You'd thinke. The Isle Delos, which since Apollo's birth, was fixt and apparent. Ortygia's bottome crack'd, and th' hill Tumbled i'th' Sea: But, when the Ocean's still▪ And th' oares laid by, a sweeter voice salutes Our ears fro'th' keele, then dying Swans, or lutes Touch'd by Phoeb's hand: waves danc'd to th' ship: (At last Twas known:) there The son of O Eager, so brave an artist, that he drew the sas attention after him. Orpheus leaning to the mast Sings, in the midst o'th' mariners, to cleer Their souls from sense of Forgotten, by his melody. pains: Their course they steer Toth' Where Colchis lay. Northerne coast, and borders straightned by Little scatter'd Islands called the Symplegades. Cyanean flats. We judging them by th' eye. A Thracian power from house to house do roule In troops, like droves, or shoales of winged fowle.
Where are the Furies now! we climbe toth' peere, And wals o'th' harbour, whence our prospect's cleere To th' Maine; and scale our lofty turrets; whither They trembling carry stones, and clubs, together With their late husbands Armes, and weapons dy'd With slaughter: Neither are they sham'd, to hide Their wanton cheekes in helmets, and put on Rough breast-plates. Pallas blush'd to thinke upon Their boldnesse, and Mars laugh'd in distant The Thracian mountain where he kept his Rendevouz. AEme. Now their rash madnesse first forsaketh them, Nor seemes it now a ship, but that the Gods By sea sent slow-pac'd vengeance, arm'd with rods. And now they ride a flight-shot from the shoare: When Iove brings clouds, swolne-big with tempests, o're The tackling of the Graecian ship: anon The Sea wrought high; The day had lost the Sun, Mantled with darkenesse: Th' water's black as th' Aire: Whilst labo'ring winds the hollow clouds do teare; And roule the Seas up: Moist'ned gravell heaves Out o'th' black whirle-pooles: all the Oceans waves Hang on the wings o'th' wind; and ready now To wash the stars, the billowes breake in two. The tottering Keele, lesse nimble's, leakie growne; And The statue in the beake which nam'd the ship. Triton plac'd i'th' stem, dives sometimes downe To th' bottom of the gulfe, then strikes the skies. Nor can the strength o'th' Iason and his partners with his ship Argo, were afterward translated to the heavens. Demy-gods suffice. The reeling mast does lash the streame; and teare The curling waves, whose unfixt weight they bear. The oares are tug'd in vaine: yet whilst they find Such labour to encounter Seas and wind; We from the rocks and bulwarkes of the wall With feeble armes let flye our darts, which gall
Some of the Argonauts. Peleus and Some of the Argonauts. Telmon, (how bold we grow!) And Named from Tiryns his native Country. Hericules is aim'd at with a bow. Indangered thus by Seas, and darts, together, Some guard the ship, some ply the pumpe: and other Prepare to fight; whose joynts unweldy faile With The rouling of the ship did hinder their setled courage. motion, nor can tott'ring strength prevaile. We ply our weapons still; our shoures of darts Equall the clouds: huge stakes, and broken parts Of mil-stones, spears, granadoes, streaming bright, Sometimes i'th' Sea, sometimes i'th' ship do light. The cover'd vessel gapes, and the close deck Opening the seames does give a mighty crack. So Iove does batter fields with Northern haile: All sorts of cattell droop; drench'd wings do faile The birds; Cone's lodg'd byth' bitter storme; there fell Streames roaring from the hils, and rivers swell. But when his darted fires the clouds did teare, And the brave Mariners byth' light appear; Our courage shrunke; our husbands Armes fell down From trembling hands, and now our Remem∣bring that we were women. Sex we owne. We see the sons of Telamon and Peleus. AEacus, withall Neptunes son, after King of Samos. Ansaeus, threatning ruine to our wall: And The Champion that afterwards restored the Olympicks. Iphitus with a long spear does stop The ship from rocks: then The supposed son of Amphitryo begot on his wife Almena y Iupiter. Herc'les does oretop Th' astonish'd troop byth' head; and Lest, if with all his weight he should stand on one side, e might o're set it. stradling keep The full barke poiz'd; yet would step downe i'th' deep. But Well deserving the name because he forsooke er for Medea, and afterwards Medea for Creusa. fickle Iason, whom I knew not yet, Throughout the gall'ries, oares, and crowde, does whet
Now great Meeager son to O Enus. O Enides forward, Ida now, Now Taelaus, now Either Castor or Pollux the sons of Tyndars. Tyndarides whose brow Lardourd with froth: With hand and voice aloud He cals on Calais, hid in's Bores who begat Calais and Zethe on Orythia, raises cold stormes and clouds. Fathers cloud, Striving to fasten sailes toth' mast. The Seas, And wals, are shaken with their batteries. Yet can they not beat back the foaming Maine, And from our Towers their spears recoyle in vaine. The chief Pilot of the Argonauts. Tiphys tries all the billows, tyring out Th' Not ea∣sily guided. unruly sterne, then's pale and tackes about: Winding the head, which faine would split upon The rocks, to th' right, and left. Till Iason. AEsons son I'th' foredeck, holds up a Palladian bough Of Olive, which before crown'd The Prophet which with Amphiaraus accom∣panied the Argonauts. Lib. 3. Mopsus's brow, And asks a truce, against his partners mind: But's words are overwhelm'd by th' boystrous wind. This stop'd our Armes: and now some rest was giv'n Toth' breath-lesse winds, & day look'd down from heav'n. Fifty leapt down o'th' sodaine, on our shoare; (The ships being fastned, as they us'd before:) The glory of brave Ancestours; their brow Serene; of an attractive feature; now Their fear and rage had left them. So they say The Deities brake out, a secret way, When entring house, or coast, they thinke it good To tast the sun-burnt A Nation with whom the Gods were often conversant, because of their justice. AEthiopians food. Rivers and hils make roome; their foot-steps grace The earth, whilst The empty heavens lying now lighter upon his shoulders. Atlas finds a breathing space. Here we spie Theseus, proud of A City infeted with a mon∣strous bull, flaine by Theseus. Marathons
Gain'd liberty: with Boreas his Calais and Zete, begot upon Ismarus a Thracian mountaine. sons Th' Ismarian brethren, whose bright Faig∣ned so from their long dangling haire. wings do beat Their temples: and Admetus, once more great Then unrepining Who willingly was his heards∣man. Phoeb': Smooth A most excellent Musitian borne in a most barbarous Coun∣trey. Orpheus, son To rugged Thrace: Thy Meleager son to Calydonian O Eneus. off-spring, Calydon: With Nereus's Peleus who married Tethys the daughter of Nereus. son-in-law: Th' Castor and Pollux borne in O Ebalia a Spartane city. O Ebalian pair, Which tir'd our doubtfull eyes; for both did wear Flame-colour'd cloaks, both shooke their spears, and both Had naked cheeks, their shoulders both uncloath; With the glory of the marching Heroes, whose losse made the Arganauts leave his searching master behind in Mysia. Stars paint their locks alike. The way does c shine. Young d Hylas, following after, does decline Great Herc'les's steps; for though his weight did make him March softly, yet his page could scarce o'retake him; But carrying his With which he killed the Hydra. Lernaean armes, the boy Under his mighty quiver sweats with joy. Now Venus once againe with Loves coole flames Kindles the churlish hearts o'th' Lemnian dames. Queen Iuno then insinuates in their mind The Armes, and garbe o'th' men; their gallant kind: All doores straight open'd to them. Then they heat Their Having not sacrificed since the last mas∣sacre. Altars first and hainous cares forget: They banquet, sleepe secure, had quiet nights; Nay (heav'n design'd it sure,) their guilt delights. Perhaps you long too Gentlemen, to hear My In entertaining Iason. crime-excusing Fate: The Ghosts do bear Me record, and my country- Furies, how
Unwilling, how untainted I did go T'a strangers bed: (Gods answer for me:) yet Iason by's flat'ries could with toyles beset Young As he did Medea, and Creusa afterwards. maides: The river where Me∣dea having slaine her brother Absyrtus, cast him piecemeale before her Father. stain'd Phasis knows his loose desires; You Medea's Country. Colchians furnish'd him with other fires. Now the thaw'd Which seeme to be frozen in his win∣ter absence. stars were warm'd byth' heightned sun, When the swift year, through halfe the girdle run, Gave us new Sons; whose birth did crowne our vows, And Lemnos with All the males being slaine. unlook'd-for off-spring flowes. I likewise, made a mother, brought forth two, My forc'd beds Monument; and did renew Their Grandsires name, from this hard-hearted stranger: Nor since I left them, have I known their danger. If fortune please, a nurse Lycaste bred Them safe, full twenty years have pass'd their head. The rage o'th' Sea was faln, and Southern gales Wait with more calmenesse now upon the sayles. The ship i'th' quiet harbour hates to ride, And draws the cable tite, with which 'tis tied. At this the Arganauts will put to Sea; Fierce Iason cals his comrades: oh, had he In smoother streames pass'd by my coast before, Who thus neglects his babes, and quits the score Of's faith ingaged: Fame saies at distance, Greece Injoyes him now, return'd with Who with his sister Helle, avoyding the rage of their Father Athamas, crossed the seas on the back of a ram with a golden fleece, she was drowned, he escaped to Colchos, where he sacrificed the ram to Mars, and offered the fleece in his Temple, which Iason afterwards by Medea's helpe recovered back to Greece. Phryxus's fleece. At the fixt When they had resolved to hoyse sailes. time, when The ship-ma∣ster who judged of the weather. Tiphys had discover'd
Th' approaching skie, and fiery Betoening a faire morning. rednesse hover'd About the set suns bed; new sighs, alas! Were spent, another fare-well Recalling the memory of that when they stew their husbands. night it was. The day scarce dawn'd, when lofty Iason urges To ship-board, giving the first stroake toth' surges. With longing lookes we follow after these, Plowing the foaming back o'th' spacious seas, From rocks and tops of mountaine: Till the light Had tir'd our wandring eyes; and to our sight The distant waves appear to touch the The sea and skie appearing conter∣minous to them that at distance beheld them. clouds, And th'edge of heav'n the wary surface crouds. A fame was spred, that Thoas crosse the Maine Conveigh'd in's brothers Another AEgea Ile, whither Thoas fled. Chios now did raigne: Whilst I unspotted, kindled Which they conceived were her fathers funerals. empty fires. The bloody rabble grudge; guil whets their ires: They call my deed t'account: Close whispers grow Between them straight: Was' shee alone, could shew Pity t'her friends? We triumph'd o're the slaine: No God nor Fate, which o're the towne does raigne, Commanded Either upbraiding her disobedience, or rather condemning their owne credulity, who were deluded by Polyxo, pretending the gods com∣mand. this. Affrighted at their words (For sad revenge drew neere: My realme affords As little succour:) the crook'd shoare I trace Alone by stealth, leaving th' polluted place: And marke which way my Father fled: but now I met no As formerly, when Bacchus appeared at her Fathers escape. God: For Pirates which did row To shoare, seis'd on me in the silent strand, And brought me thus a Captive to your land. Thus whilst the Lemnian toth' Greeke Captaines speaks, And with her plaints, her force of sorrow breaks;
Her Opheltes, Lycurgus's son to whom shee was nurse. nurse-child is forgot, (so heav'n dispos'd:) Whose heavy eyes, and fainting mouth is clos'd Toth' flowry ground; whilst childish action tires Him to a sleep; clasping the grassy With which he sported before. spires. Meane while, an earth-borne Serpent in the fields Lifts up his crested neck, whose presence yeilds A This creature being alwayes esteemed consecrated to some God. sacred horrour toth' Achaean groves: His monstrous bulke They that fancy not this interpretation of — tractus solutus, — let them call it — wanton folds, — if they like it better. I wish our English tongue could expresse Traction, , more properly. i'th' furrow'd sands, he moves And drags his taile behind; Fire sparkles from His eyes, and on his mouth stands a greene foame Of swollen venom: His three-fork'd tongue is darted Through his three rowes of teeth: His forehead's parted With the sad glory of his glistring scales. The country-man, this Serpent sacred cals To the Inachian Iupiter, whose Priest, Lycurgus the childes Fathers was. Thund'rer, who protects The place, and in these woods his shrine erects, An humble honour. Now the Serpent crawles In winding folds about his Temple-wals: Anon, the oakes o'th' wretched wood are torne, And with's imbraces the tall beeches worne. Oft-times, a rivers bankes on either side, Stretch'd out, he presses: Whilst his scaly hide Dams up the roaring streame. But when the ground Reaks now (as Who in favour of his Country-men the Th∣banes, caused this drought before. Bacchus charg'd) & th'Nymphs are found Panting i'th' dust, upon the earth he glides, With his indented back, and winding sides: Raging with greater danger, sine the fire Kindled his poys'nous thirst: He rols i'th' mire
Of pooles, drie lakes, and springs choak'd up with drouth, And rivers empty channels. With his mouth Turn'd up, now drinks he liquid Ayre; and then Uncertaine what to do, grovels agen Upon the earth, and shaves the Weary either of the heat, or of his burthen. groaning plaine, If any moisture in the grasse remaine; Which withers, blasted with's infectious breath; And where he creepes, his hisses usher death. Such was the Ophihus a constel∣lation of that length, that beginning at Charles's waine, it crosses▪ he Tropicks. snake, which from the Northern ear Divides the skie, and thence extendeth far Within the Southerne Zone. Such was the Python, which by Iuno's command, persecuted Latona from Farnassus to the sea. snake, Whose circles made th'infolded The two tops of Parnassus about which he twined. heads to shake O'th' sacred mount: till pierc'd by Apollo borne in Delos, who to revenge his Mother, slew him. Delus's Arts, With many wounds, he bore a wood of darts. Poor babe, what God allotted thee a Fate So great? Doest thou scarce having past the gate Of life, beneath a foe so powerfull fall? Was't, that the Graecians might hereafter call Thee sacred? worthy of that tombe? The child Byth' taile o'th' Serpent unawares is kill'd. Sleepe soone forsakes his tender limbs, and's eyes Looke up to welcome Fate, and then he dies. But when his dying shrikes the aire hath strooke, And plaints halfe utter'd his pale lips forsooke, (Like those imperfect words, in dreames we speake:) Hypsip'le frighted heard him: But her weake Knees falter'd in her course; her minde foretold The mischief: whilst her roving eyes behold The ground she searches on: Doubling, in vaine Those words her infant knew. He's gone; The plaine
Has lost the markes it had; where the dull snake In a green knot lies gather'd, and does take The spacious field up: Resting's neck upon His winding panch. A trembling seizes on Th' unhappy soul at sight on't; her shrill cries Ring through the wood: Yet still the Serpent lies Unterrified. At last the Graecians hear Her howlings: Parthenopeus, whom our Poet expresses on hoseback. Artas straight the Cavalliere Commanded, flies, and brings the reason: Then Mov'd with their glitt'ring Armes, and noise o'th' men, He rais'd his scaly neck, with visage sowre: But stout Hippomedon with all his power Lifts up a stone, the land-marke; which he flings Through th' aire, with such a force, as warlike slings With milstones pois'd, strong barricadoes shake: Yet his strength's disappointed: For the snake Having shrunke up his tender neck, to's back, Escapes th'approaching blow. The earth does With the violence of the blow which the Serpent escaped. crack: Whilst he in numerous curles hops through the shrubs. But, met by Capaeus with's ashen club, My wounds, he cries out, though shalt never flee; Whether a fierce inhabitant thou be Of this darke grove; or else some God: (and He prosecute▪ his old sacrilgious humour. oh! That Gods tooke any pleasure in thee.) No: Not if a Between whom there is some relation, for the Gyant wres srpents fet. Gyant should thy back bestride. Then flies his quivering spear, and does divide The monstrous gaping jaws, and cuts in two His fork'd tongues poys'nous strings; thence pierces (through His standing mane, and glistering forehead;Having so long a race fom  he next, Dau' with his braines blacke goare, i'th' earth 'tis fixt. Paine had scarce posted through every part, When he with many folds twines round the dart: And bearing it pluk'd out, he flies away
Toth' Gods darke Temples, meas'ring, as he say, The ground with's bulke: his mourning soule does twine, As 'twas hiss'd out, about his masters shrine. The angry pooles of Lerna, neere Either because the Hydra was like him, or perhaps his progenitor. of kin, And Nymphs, that us'd with floures to strew his skin, Where he was bred and lived. Nemea o're which he'ad crawl'd, the Gods of all The groves, and Faunes, (their reeds A token of their sad laments; reeds betokening either their garlands or pipes, for both were made of them. brook) wept his fall. Nay To revenge the serpent which implored his aid before. Iove from AEtna's forge had arm'd his hand, And winter stormes were gather'd o're the land; But that, (the God not As after∣wards, when for his Atheisme he was thunder-struck. ceas'd yet,) Capaneus is Reserv'd to merit greater plagues then this. Yet blasts of lightning glanced up and downe, And By which he w ked out for a Sacrifice. singed the top of's helmet on his crowne. And now th' unhappy Lemnin wandring over The field, freed from the serpent, does discover Upon a distant hillocke, how the grasse With sprinkled drops of blood discolour'd was. Hither with bitter moanes she bends her pace, Raging, and sees the mischief; on the place Of guilt, she fals like lightning: neither words Nor tea res at first, that fatall sight affords. But onely doubling wretched kisses, she Fals on him, seeking where his soul did flee From his warme limbs: Nor's Being bruised together by the ser∣ face, nor's breast appear I'th' place; his skin's torne; all his bones lie bare: With springing shoures of blood his joynts are drown'd; And all his body's one continued wound. So when a crowes nest, and her young ones, laid In a broad oake, by a serpent are destroy'd. The hen returnes, and wondring she don't hear Their cawking noise, sits tittering or'e for fear, And lets the meat she brought fall from her bill,
Since onely bloud, and scatter'd downe does fill Her plunder'd bower. When the poor wretch, dismay'd, Within her lap his mangled limbs had laid, And wrapt them in her locks: Her voice at last Broke loose from greif, and found a way: Her wast Of sighes dissolv'd to words: Oh thou that doest Breake the faire image of the sons I lost Acemorus! thou comfort of my state, And Country left! Grace, to my captiv'd Fate! What guilty gods extinguish'd thee, my joy? Whom I left sporting when I went away, And tumbling on the grasse? Ah! where are found Ty star-like eyes, now, and the tongue-tied sound Of thy halfe words? Thy smiles, and murmurs soft, Which onely I could understand? how oft, Lemnos, and Argos heard'st thou me recite? And with sad lullabies thy sleep invite? Thus I cheer'd up my griefe, suckling this child As 'twere mine owne: But now his mouth is fill'd With showres of milke in vaine, which trickle downe Upon his Either flowing back out of his mouth, or his face it selfe, being likewise wounded. wounds. Now, now, the gods are Fore-warning her: or rather commanding a generall guilt upon the Lemnians, as Polixo informed them. knowne▪ Oh my presaging dreames, and nightly fears! Venus at no time unreveng'd appears I'th' darke, to my affrighted sense. But why Accuse I heaven? Why, ready now to dye Fear I to tell the truth? 'Twas I alone Expos'd thy life. What madnesse seis'd upon My soul? Could such a care be so forgot? Whilst I proud foole, report my Countries lot, And mine owne fame; Lemnos, thy In mur∣ sin I act: 'Twas wondrous piety sure! Captaines, direct Me to the fatall snake: If thankes be due For my unlucky I discovering water to them, whilst she lost the  merit; or if you
Honour my words. Or else dispatch me here: Lest my offensive person should appear To my sad Lycurgus and Euridice whose servant now she was. Princes, and Euridice Bereft. Although in sorrowes combate, she Can hardly overcome me. Shall I go To her, and this unwelcome burthen throw Into her lap? Earth sinke me first below The Center. With these words, she dawbs her brow With dust and bloud: And roules at feet o'th' As all the Generals were called. Kings, Imputing close, to their griev'd souls, the Langia, the guidance to which begot this mis∣chief. springs. And now the King of the Country and Priest to Iupiter. royall Priest, Lycurgus hears The news, which fils him, and the house with tears. From the Persean mountaines Where Ioves Temple stood. sacred top He came; slasht inwards there, he'ad offer'd up To threatning Iove, and shaking's head return'd From th' Altar, where the speckled intrals burn'd. Here he secur'd himselfe from Graecian wars: The Temple stop'd him, though not free from cares. Nor were the gods oraculous replies. And old advice forgot: a voice did rise From th' sacred Where the Oracle was delivered. vault: Which he inter∣preting of himselfe, found it accomplished in his son. Thy bloud, Lycurgus shall Toth' Graecian wars bring the first funerall. This frights him; since Wars Charriot ak'd the ground, He's sad, and startles at the trumpets sound: Yet Being desi∣ous to accompany them if the  envies the Armes mark'd out for ruine, See The faith of  heav'n! Guarded Hipsipyle Brings the torne carkasse forth; and meets the Mother Who brought a traine of howling Matrons with her. But stout Lycurg's dull piety forbears; He's better sp'rited; rage drunke up his tears: And meas'ring with long steps the plaines, he cries: Where's she, that does losse of my blood despise,
Or joys in't? Breaths she still? Companions take her, And drag her quickly hither: I will make her Forget her Lemnian tale, and sire belied, And sacred stock, which bolsters up her pride. Then he rush'd on; and snatch'd a sword in's rage To run her through: But Tydeus does ingage With's shield against his brest; and gnashing cries, Stop, Mad-man, stop thy furious enterprize, Who e're thou art: Nor Capaneus is slack, Nor fierce Hipomedon, with's sword To make a violent thrust as fencers use. drawn back, Nor Arcas with a forward thrust.Parthenopaeus name from Arymanthus the Arcadian mount where he was bred. His eyes Dazled with her bright armes. Then's servants rise To aid their King. Adrastus, in the rout, More calmely, and Amphiaraus, out Of reverence to his partners Whic one wore as Priest to Iupiter, the other as Prophet to Apollo. garland, cries; Forbear I pray, and sheath your swords: there is, One Perseu whence all the petty Kings of Grce, united then, were sprung. Grandsires blood, which makes us all of kin: Don't cherish fury thus: Do thou T Tydeus, whom Adrastus had most power to command. begin. But Tydeus, discompos'd still, thus replies: Dar'st thou, upon thy sons tombe sacrifice The Graecians guide and their preserver; while Being latel  Ungratefull they looke on? (what  fun'rall pile Avenging by't!) A Kingdome is her due; Her father Thos: from A  bright Evan too Her stocks deriv'd. Wil't not content thy pride, That all thy Country-men take armes beside? Thou onely, 'mongst the raging troops, hast peace? But hug it still: Oh may victorious Greece Find thee, lamenting still thy fate, o're's urne. This said; He breaking's anger does returne More modestly: I did not thinke, that you Marching to race the Thebane bulwarks, drew
n enemies force on us: Go on, destroy our brethren; (if you thinke it such a joy:) eason your armes at home: Let impious fires For, what Which might demerit at Ioves hand: This Parenthesis is to be re∣rred to what followes. S vilm tanti premerent &c. —. offence has past?) consume the spires Of Iove, in Who either saved his son nor protected him. vaine long worship'd. I conceiv'd, A Prince and Master, when so justly griev'd, ad power o're's servant: But heav'ns Soveraigne ees this; he sees, and's anger does remaine ure though't be late: This spoke; he lookes about oth' Towne, where war had rais'd another rout. resh fame outstrips the horse-mens speed, and brings A One in the City, the o∣er in the fields where Lycurgus was. double tumult upon both her wings. AEport flies up and downe, Hypsipiles led o execution, and by this time dead. Tis soon By the Graecian army quar∣ing in the towne, who mutinied upon the news. beleiv'd: nor will they stop their anger, ut fire and sword, their houses straight indanger. hey'e overthrow the Kingdome, and subdue Captiv'd Lycurg's, with Iove, and's Altars too: he women shrikes the Ecchoing houses here, nd Conceived  for the deth of Arche▪ flis now  the fear of war  grief inverted turnes its back to fear. ut high Adrastus, in's swift Chariot, flies 'th' mid'st o'th' troops, and shewes before their eyes Thoantis, carried with him: crying thus: old, hold, here's nothing done that's barbarous. Lycurgus no such ruine has deserv'd; ehold, the foundresse of our streame's preserv'd. So when on this side th' East, and Northerne wind, On that, the gloomy Southerne are combin'd o vex the Seas, with divers stormes; the day s banish't, and darke winter bears the sway: Mounted on's steed comes Neptune o're the Maine,
A double Either harnessed double in his watry Charriot, or double shape halfe horse, halfe fish. Triton swims with's froathy raine: But when the faling waves his signall heare, The Sea-Nymph, daughter to Nereus, p or the Sea. Thetis lookes smooth, the hils, and shoares appeare. What God, in pity to their funerall griefe, Prosper'd their vows so much? and did relieve Hypsipiles tears, with joys past expectation? Thou father Bacchus from whom Thoas sprung. Evan, founder of the Nation, Didst bring to Nemea, from the Lemnian strand, The Hypsipyles two sons for whose safety she was so solicitous before. two young Brethren, and strange fate command. They sought their mother then, and did resort Unto Lycurgus's hospitable Court: When the sad messenger came in, to tell The King, how's son byth' stroake o'th' Serpent fell. They therefore troop along: (Oh chance! how dim Mens souls are to fore-see!) and favour him. But when the sound of Lemnos strooke their ears, And Thoas's name, they rush through swords and spears; And weeping, both with greedy armes infold Their mother, where they 'xchange each others soul. She like a rock stands with fixt eyes unmov'd, And dares not Doubing the truth o what she saw. trust the Gods, which she had prov'd. But when their face, and th' Impressed upon their Armes. Argo's stampe she notes On their forsaken swords; and on their coates, Left them for a m¦moriall of their father. Iason imbroider'd picture: sighes depart▪ So great a present does or'echarge her heart, And downe she sinkes: then were her eyes bedew'd With other tears. Signes from the Which seconded the joy of the  sky were shew'd: And whilst the joyfull crowd their shouts do reare, Bacchus his drums and trumpets rend the aire. Oiclides then, when first their rage did breake To silence, and he might be heard to speake, Begins: Thou Neman ruler, and the rest
Peere of Graece, hear what is plaine exprest y Who forbad this war, by this Prophet: Lib. 3. constant Phoeb': this grief of late pursues he Graecian Armes; the Destinies do use o Being constant  occasions of sorrow. winding paths now.: For his death foretold his de∣truction. Thirst does first destroy he river, then the deadly snake, and boy Archemorus, nam'd from our fate: All this y heav'ns supreame decrees appointed is. ake off your edge: Quick armes must be delaid: his infant must have lasting honours paid, o's merit: Let By the solemne games offered to his memory, in the next ooke. couragious hands appease is Ghost with faire oblations. Might it please Apollo to beget mor stops, and fright Our troops with new mischances fro the sight▪ till may the thought of fatall Which he knew would be destructive to all the Army. Thebes abate! ut happy His arents which lived to see their off spring defied, which noe of their redecessours did before them. you, that have out-stript the fate Of your great Parents: hence, shll ages tell our everlasting name, whilst waters dwell Lernas poole, and Inachus shall flow, nd Nemeas shades dance on the fields below: et ot prophaning teares be shed upon is sacred tombe, doe not the Gods bemone: e is inroll'd a God: Nor would he rather njoy the fate of Whose thre ages are famous. Nestors age, or gather The long experience of Ei∣her Primus's, who lived to see Troy sack'd, or rather Titonus's Auro∣s beloved, who live to be so waste wih age, that they seigned him  last to be converted into a grsse-hopper. Phygian years. e ends, and night heav'ns sable mantle weares. Finis Lib. V. Statii Thebaid.
