T1122 12363157 60305
THREE TREATISES Concerning the Scotish Discipline. 1. A Fair Warning to take heed of the same: By the Right Reverend Dr. Bramhall, Bishop of Derrie. 2. A Review of Dr. Bramble, late Bishop of Lon∣don-Derry, his Fair Warning, &c. By R. B. G. 3. A Second Fair Warning, in Vindication of the First, against the Seditious Reviewer: By Ri. Watson, Chaplain to the Right Ho∣norable the Lord Hopton. To which is prefixed, A Letter written by the Reverend Dean of St. Burien, Dr. Creyghton. HAGH: Printed by Samuel Broun, English Book-seller. 1661.
A FAIR WARNING, To take heed of the SCOTISH DISCIPLINE, As being of all others most Injurious to the Civil Magistrate, most Oppres∣sive to the Subject, most Per∣nicious to both. By Dr JOHN BROMWELL Lord Bishop of London-Derie in Ireland. LUKE 9. 35. No man having drunk old wine straight-way desireth new, for he saith, the old is better. HOSEA 2. 7. I will go and return to my first husband, for then was it better with me than now. Printed in the Year 1649.
A FAIR WARNING, To take heed of the Scotish Discipline, as being of all others most Injurious to the Civil Magistrate, most Oppres∣sive to the Subject, most Pernicious to both. CHAP. I. The Occasion and Subject of this Treatise. IF the Disciplinarians in Scotland could rest contented to 1 dote upon their own inventions and magnifie at home that Diana which themselves have canonised, I should leave them to the best School-Mastresse, that is, Experience, to feel where their shoe wrings them, and to purchase Re∣pentance. What have I to do with the regulation of forreign Churches to burn mine own fingers with snuffing other mns Candles? Let them stand or fall to their own Master: It is charity to judge well of others, and piety to look well to our selves. But to see those very men who plead so vehemently against all kinds of tyranny, attempt to obtrude their own dreams not onely upon their fellow-Subjects, but upon their Sovereign himself, contrary to the di∣ctates of his own conscience, contrary to all Laws of God and Man, yea to compel forreign Churches to dance after their pipe, to worship that counterfeit image which they feign to have fallen down from J∣piter, and by force of arms to turn their neighbours out of a possession of above 1400 years, to make room for their Trojan horse of Ecclesiasti∣cal Discipline, (A practice never justified in the world but either by the Turk or by the Pope) This put us upon the defensive part, They must not think that other men are so cowed or grown so tame, as to stand still blowing of their noses, whilst they bridle them and ride them at their pleasure. It is time to let the world see that this Discipline which they so much adore, is the very quintessence of refined Popery, or a greater
Tyranny than ever Rome brouhe forth, Incont with all forms of civil Government, destructive to all sorts of Policy a rack to the con∣science, the heaviest pressure that can fall upon a people, and so much more dangerous, because by the specious pretence of Divine Institution, it takes a way the sight, but not the burthen of slavery. Have patience Reader and I shall discover unto thee more pride and arrogancie through the holes of a threed-bare coat, than was ever found under a Cardinals Cap or a triple Crown. All this I undertake to demonstrate not by some extraordinary practices justified onely by the pretence of invincible necessity (a weak patrociny for general Doctrine) nor by the single opinions of some Capricious fellows but by heir books of Disci∣pline, by the acts of their general and provincial Assemblies by the con∣current votes and writings of their Commissioners. I foresee that they will suggest that through their sides I seek to wound forreign Churches. No, there is nothing which I shall convict them of here, but I hope will be disavowed, though not by all Protestant au∣ctous, yet by all the Protestant Churches in the world. But I must take leave to demand of our Disciplinarians, who it is they brand with the odious name of Erastians in the Acts of their Parliaments and Assem∣blies, Sn. Gr. 16. 7. Dar. Parl. 1648. &c. and in the writings of their Commissioners and reckon them with Papists, Anabaptists, and Independents; Is it those Churches who dis∣arm their Presbyteries of the Sword of Excommunication which they are not able to weeld? so did Erastus; or is it those who attribute a much greater power to the Christian Magistrate in the managery of Ec∣clesiastical affairs than themselves? So did Erastus, and so do all Pro∣testant Churches. The Disciplinarians will sooner endure a Bishop or a Superintendent to govern them, than the Civil Magistrate. And when the Magistrate shall be rightly informed what a dangerous edg'd-tool their Discipline is, he will ten times sooner admit of a moderate Episcopacy, than fall into the hands of such hucksters. If it were not for this Disciplinarian humour, which will admit no latitude in Religion, but makes each nicity a fundamental, and every private opinion an Article of faith, which prefers particular errours be∣fore general truths. I doubt not but all reformed Churches might ea∣sily be reconciled. Before these unhappy troubles in England, all Pro∣testants both Lutherans and Calvinists did give unto the English Church the right hand of fellowship; the Disciplinarians themselves though they preferred their own Church as more pure, (else they were hard-hearted) yet they did not, they durst not condemn the Church of England, either as defective in any necessary point of Christian Piety, or redundant in any thing that might virtually or by consequence over∣throw the foundation. Witnesse that letter which their General Assembly of Superintendents, Assemb. G Ano 1556.
Pastours and Elders sent by Mr. John Knox to the English Bishops, where∣in they stile them Reverend Pastours, fellow-preachers, and joynt oppo∣sers of the Roman Antichrist. They themselves were then far from a party, or from making the calling of Bishops to be Antichristian. But to leave these velitations and come home to the point. I will shew first how this Discipline entrencheth most extreamly upon the right of the civil Magistrate, secondly that it is as grievous and intol∣lerable to the Subject. CHAP. II. That this new Discipline doth utterly overthrow the Rights of Magistrates, to convocate Synods, to confirm their Acts, to order Ecclesiastical affairs, and reform the Church within their Dominions. ALl Princes and States invested with Sovereignty of power doe justly challenge to themselves the right of Convocating National Synods of their own subjects, and ratifying their constitution. And although pious Princes may tolerate or priveledge the Church to convene within their territories annually or triennially, for the exercise of discipline, and execution of constitutions already confirmed, (never∣thelesse we see how wary the Synod of Dort was in this particular,) yet he is a Magistrate of straw, that will permit the Church to convene Can. 50. within his territories, whensoever, wheresoever they list, to convocate before them whomsoever they please, all the Nobles, all the Subjects of the Kingdom, to change the whole Ecclesiastical pollicy of a Common∣wealth, to alter the Doctrine and Religion established, to take away the legall rights and privileges of the Subjects, to erect new tribunalls and courts of Justice, to which Sovereigns themselves must submit, and all this of their own heads, ue of a pretended power given them from heaven, contrary to kown laws and lawfull customs, the Supreme Magistrate dissenting & disclaiming. Synods ought to be called by the su∣preme Ench. cand. S. min. ex decro sal. The Edit. Gron. 1645. pag. 161. Magistrate if he be a Christian, &c. And either by himself, or by such as he shall please to choose for that purpose, he ought to preside over them. This power the Emperours of old did challenge over General Councels, Christian Monarchs in the blindnesse of Popery over National Synods, the Kings of England over their great Councels of old, and their Convo∣cation of later times, The Estates of the united Provinces in the Synod of Dort, this power neither Roman Catholick or Protestant in France dare denie to his King. None have been more punctual in this case then the State of Geneva, where it is expressely provided, that no Synod or Los ordiu Eccles. prin∣ted at Ge∣neva 1562. pag. 66. Presbytery shall alter the Ecclesiastical pollicy, or adde any thing to it, with∣out the consent of the civil Magistrate. Their elders do not challenge an uncontrolable power as the Commissioners of Christ, but ate still called pag. 20.
the Commissioners of the Signiory. The lesser Councel names them with Pagin. 20. the advise of the Ministery, (their consent is not necessary) The great Coun∣cel of 200 doth approve them or reject them. At the end of the year they are presented to the Signiory, who continue them or discharge them as they see cause. At their admission they take an oath, to kep the Ecclesiastical Ordinances of the civil Magistate. The finall determination Pag 9. of doctrinal differences in Religion, (after conference of, and with the Ecclesiasticks,) is referred to the Magistrate. The proclamations published Pag 11. with the sound of trumpet registered in the same book, do plainly shew that the ordering of all Ecclesiastical affairs is assumed by the Signiory. But in Scotland all things are quite contrarie, the civil Magistrate hath no more to doe with the placing or displacing of Ecclesiastical Elders, than he hath in the Electoral Colledge, about the Election of an Emperor. The King hath no more legislative Power in Ecclesiastical causes than a Cobler, that is a single Vote in case he be chosen an Elder, other wie none at all. In Scotland Ecclesiastical persons make repeal, alter their Sanctions eyery day, without consent of King or Councel King Jons proclaimed a Parliament to be held at Edenburgh, and a little before by his letter required the Assembly to abstain from making any Innovatios Octob. 20. 1597. in the Policy of the Church, and from prejudging the decisions of the States by their conclusions, and to suffer all things to continue in the condition they were until the approcing Parliamnt. What did they hereupon? They neglected the Kings letter, by their own Authority they determined all things positively, questioned the Arch-Bishop of St. Andrews upon their own Canons, For collating to benefices, and Voting in Parliament, accord∣ing to the undoubted Laws of the Land. Yea to that degee of sawci∣nes they arrived, and into that contempt they reduced Sovereign power, that twenty Presbyters (no more at the highest sometimes but thirteen, Ass. Ab∣berd. 1600 sometimes but seven or eight) dared to hold and maintain a General Assembly, (as they miscalled it,) after it was discharged by the King, against his Authority, an Insolence which never any Parliament durst yet attempt. By their own Authority, long before there was any Statute made to 1 Book dise. 1. held. that purpose, they abolished all the Festivals of the Church, even those which were observed in memory of the Birth, Circumcision, Resurre∣ction and Ascension of our Saviour. By their own Authority they decreed the abolition of Bishops, requir∣ing them to resign their offices, as not having any calling from Gods word, un∣der pain of Excommunication. And to desist from preacbing until they had a new admission from the General Assembly. And to compleat their own Ass Dun. 1580. folly, added further, that they would dispose of their possessions as the Churches Patrimony in the next Assembly, which ridiculous Ordinance was maintained stifly by the succeeding Synods, notwithstanding the Statute,
that it should be Treason to impugn the Authority of the three Estates, or to Patl. 1584 procure the innovation or diminution of any of them. Which was made on purpose to control their vain presumption. Notwithstanding that them∣selves had formerly approved, and as much as in them lay established Superintendents, to endure for term of life with their numbers, bounds, 1 Book dis∣cip. 4. and 6. head. salaries larger than those of other Ministers, indewed with Episcopal power, to plant Churches, ordain Ministers, assign Stipends, preside in Synods, direct the censures of the Church, without whom there was no Excommunication. The world is much mistaken concerning Epi∣scopacie in Scotland: for though the King and Parliament were com∣pelled by the clamours and impetuous violence of the Presbyters to annex the temporalities of Bishops to the crown, yet the Function it self was never taken away in Scotland, from their first conversion to Anno 203. Christianity, until these unhappy troubles. And these very temporalities were restored by the Act of restitution, and their full power was first 1606. Ass. Glasg. 1610. Parl. Edenb. 1612. established Synodically, and afterwards confirmed by the three Estates of the Kingdom in Parliament. By their own Authority when they saw they could not prevail with all their iterated indeavours and attempts to have their book of di∣scipline ratified, they obtruded it upon the Church themselves, ordaining that all those who had born or did then bear any office in the Church should Ass. Edenb. 1590. subscribe it, under pain of Excommuication. By their own Authority or rather by the like unwarrantable bold∣nesse they adopted themselves to be heirs of the Prelates and other dig∣nities and orders of the Church suppressed by their tumultuous violence, and decreed that all tythes, rents, lands, oblations, yea whatsoever had been given in former times, or should be given in future times to the service of God, was the patrimonie of the Church; and ought to be collected and distri∣buted 2 Book disc. Chap. 9. by the Deasons as the Word of God appoints. That to convert any of this to their particular or profane use of any person, is detestable Sacriledge before God. And elsewhere, Gentle-men, Barons, Earls, Lords, and others 1 Book disc. 6. head. must be content to live upon their just rents, and suffer the Kirk to be resto∣red to her libertie. What this libertie is follows in the same place, all Ibidem. things given in hospitalitie, all rents pertaining to Priests, Chanteries, Col∣ledges, Chappelries, Frieries of all orders, the Sisters of the Seens all Ibidem. which ought to be retained still in the use of the Kik. Give them but leave to take their breath and expect the rest. The whole revenues of the temporalities of Bishops, Deans, and Arch-Deans lands, and all rents per∣taining to Cathedrall Kirks. Then supposing an objection, that the Pos∣sessours had Leases and Estates, they answer, That those who made them were theeves & murtherers & had no power so to alienate the common Good of the Kirk. They desire that all such Estates may be anulled and Ibidem. avoided, that all Collectours appointed by the King or others, may be discharged from intermedling therewith, and the Deacons per∣mitted
to collect the same: yea to that height of madnesse were they come, as to define and determin in their Assembly, (judge whether it be not a modest constitution for a Synod.) That the next Parliament the Ass. Edenb. 1 6 4 7. Church should be fully restored to its Patrimony, and that nothing should be past in Parliament until that was first considered and approved. Let all E∣states take notice of thee pretensions and designs If their project have not yet taken effect, it is onely becaue they wanted sufficient strength hitherto to accomplish it. Lastly by their own Authority, under the specious title of Jesus Christ, King of kings, and Lord of lords, the onely Monarch of his Churc, and un∣der pretence of his Prerogative Royal, they erected their own Courts and Presbyteries in the most parts of Scotland, long before they were legally approved or received, as appeareth by their own Act, alledging that many suites had been made to the Magistrate for approbation of the Policy of the Kirk, which had not taken that happy effect which good men would crave: Ass. Glasg 1 5 8 1 Ass. Edenb. 1 5 9 0 Ass. Edenb. 1 5 9 1. And by another act acknowledging that Presbytertes were then esta∣blished (Synodically) in most parts of the Kingdom. And lastly by the Act of another General Assembly at Edenburg, ordaining that the Disci∣pline contained in the acts of the General Assembly should be kept, as well in Angus and Mernis as in the rest of the Kingdom. You see sufficiently in point of practice how the Disciplinarians have trampled upon the Laws, and justled the civil Magistrate out of his Su∣premacy in Ecclesiastical affairs. My next task shall be to shew that this proceeds not from Inanimadvertence or Passion, but from their Do∣ctrine and Principles. First, they teach that no persons, Magistrates nor others, have power to Vote in their Synods, but onely Eccl sitical. 1  Book disc. Chap. 7. 2 Secondly, they teach that Ecclesiastical persons have the sole power of convening and convocating such Assemblies, All Ecclesiastical assem∣blies have power to convene lawfully together, for treating of things concern∣ing the Kirk. They have power to appoint times and places. Again, National Assemblies of this Countrey ought alwayes to be retained in their own liberties, Chap. 12. with power to the Kirk to appoint times & places. Thus they make it a Li∣berty, that is a Priviledge of the Church, a part of its Patrimony not one∣ly to convene, but to convocate, whomsoever, whensoever, wheresoever. Thirdly for point of Power, they teach, that Synods have the judgement 3 Ass. Edenb. 1 7 0. of true & false Religion, of Doctrine, Heresies, &c. the election, admission, su∣spension, deprivation of Ministers, the determination of all things that pertain to the Discipline of the Church. The judgement of Ecclesiastical matters, causes beneficiary, matrimonial and others. Jurisdiction to proceed to excommuni∣cation against those that rob the Church of its patrimony. They have le∣gislative a Book disc. Chap. 7. Power to make rules and constitutions for keeping good order in the Kirk. They have power to abrogate and abolish all Statutes and Ordinances
concerning Ecclesiastical matters, that are found noisom and unprofitable, and agree not with the time, or are abused by the people. And all this without Chap. 12. any reclamation, or appellation to any Jdge, Civil or Ecclesiastical Fourthly, they teach that they have these priviledges not from the Ma∣gistrate 2 Book disc. Chap. 1. or People, or particular Laws of any other Countrey. The Magi∣state can not execute the censares of the Church, nor prescribe any rule how it should be done, but Ecclesiastical power floweth immediatly from God, & from the Mediatour Jesus Christ And yet further, The Church cannot be govern∣ed Theorema III. imp. E∣denb. 1 6 4 7. decreto Sy∣nodi Theor. 4 Theor. 8. by others, than those Ministers and Stewards set over it by Christ, nor o∣therwise than by his Laws. And therefore there is no power in earth that can challenge to it self a Command or Dominion upon the Church. And again, It is prohibited by the Law of God and of Christ, for tho Christian Magistrate to invade the Government of the Church, and consequently to challenge to himself the right of both Swords spiritual and temporal. And if any Magi∣strate do arrogate so much to himself, the Church shall have cause to com∣plain and exclaim, that the Pope is changed, but the Papacy remains. So if Kings and Magistrates stand in their way, they are Political Popes as well as Bishops are Ecclesiastical. Whatsoever these men do, is in the Name Ther. 2. of our Lord Jesus, and by Authority delegated from him alone. Lastly, they teach that they have all this Power, not onely without the Magistrate, but against the Magistrate, that is, although he dissent, & send out his prohibitions to the contrary, Parliamentary ratifications can Information from. St. nd p. 19 no way alter Church canons concerning the worship of God. For Ecclesiastical Discipline ought to be exercised, whether it be ratified by the civil Magistrate or not. The want of a civil Sanction to the Church, Theor 98. is but like Lucrum cessans, non damnum emergens. As it addes nothing to it, so it takes nothing away from it. If there be any clashing of Juris∣dictions or defect in this kind, they lay the fault at the Magistrates door. It is a great sin or wickednesse, for the Magistrate to hinder the Theor. 82. exercise, or execution of Ecclesiastical Discipline. Now we have seen the pernicious practices of their Synods, with the Doctrines from which they flow; it remains to dispel umbrages where∣with they seek to hide the uglinesse of their proceedings & principles from the eyes of the world. We (say they) do give the Christian Magistrate a political Power to convocate Synods, to preside in Synods, to ratifie the Acts of Synods to reform the Church. We make him the keeper of both tables. Take nothing and hold it fast, here are good words, but they signifie nothing. Trust me whatsoever the Disciplinarians do give to the Magistrate, it is alwayes with a saving of their own stakes, not gi∣ving for his advantage but their own. For they teach that this power of the Christian Magistrate is not private and destructive to the power Theor. 96. of the Church but cumulative, and onely auxiliary or assisting. Besides the power which they call abusively authoritative, but is indeed
ministerial, of executing their decrees, & contributing to their setlement, they ascribe to the Magistrate concerning the Acts of Synods that which every private man hath, a judgement of discretion, but they retain to themselves the judgement of Jurisdiction. And if he judge not as they would have him, but suspend out of conscience the influence of his poli∣tical power, where they would have him exercise it, they will either teach him another point of Popery, that is an implicite faith, or he may per∣chance feel the weight of their Church censures, and find quickly what manner of men they be, as our late gracious King Charls, and before him his Father, his Grandmother, & his great Grandmother did all to their cost. Then in plain English what is this political Power to call Synods, to preside in Synods, and to ratifie Synods, which these good men give to the Magistrate, and magnifie so much? I shall tell the truth. It is a duty which the Magistrate ows to the Kirk, when they think necessary to have a Synod convocated, to strengthen their summous by a civil Sanction, to secure them in comming to the Synod, & returning from Tr. 50. 5. the Synod, to provide them good accommodation, to protect them from dangers, to defend their Rights and Priviledges. To compel ob∣stinate persons by civil Laws and punishments to submit to their cen∣sures and decrees. What gets the Magistrate by all this to himself? He may put it all in his eye, and see never a whit the worse. For they Ibid. declare expresly that neither all the power, nor any part of the power, which Synods have to deliberate of, or to define Ecclesiastical things, (though it be in relation to their own Subjects) doth flow from the Magistrate, but because in those things which belong to the outward man, (mark the reason) the Church stands in need of the help of the Magistrate. Fair fall an ingenuous confession, they attribute nothing to the Magistrate, but onely what may render him able to serve their own turns, and supply their needs. I wish these men would think a little more of the distinction, between habitual and actual Jurisdiction. Af∣ter a School-master hath his license to teach, yet his actuall Jurisdiction doth proceed from the Parents of his Scholars. And though he enjoy a kind of Supremacy among them, he must not think that this extin∣guisheth, either his own filial duty, or theirs. Like this power of presiding politically in Synods is the other power which they give him of reforming the Church, that is when the State of the Church is corrupted, but not when it is pure, as they take it for grant∣ed, that it is, when the Jurisdiction is in their own hands. Although godly Kings and Princes, sometime by their own Authority, when the Kirk is corrupted, and all things out of order, place Ministers, and 2 Book of disc. ch. 10. restore the true service of the Lord, after the example of some godly Kings of Judah, and divers godly Emperours and Kings also in the light of the New Testament; yet where the Ministery of the Kirk is
once lawfully constituted, and they that are placed, do their office faith∣fully, all godly Princes and Magistrates ought to hear and obey their voice, and reverence the Majesty of the Son of God speaking in them. Leave his jugling; who shall judge, when the Church is corrupted; the Magistrates or Church-men? if the Magistrates, why not over you, as well as others? If the Church-men, why not others as well as you? here is nothing to be answered, but to beg the question, that they onely are the true Church. Hear another witnesse, in evil and trouble∣some times, and in a lap ed state of affairs; when the order instituted by God in the Church, is degenerated to Tyranny, to the trampling Theor. 84. and 85. upon the true Religion, and oppressing the Professours of it, when no∣thing is sound the godly Magistrate may do some things, which ordi∣narily are not lawfull &c. But ordinarily and of common right, in Churches already constituted, if a man flie to the Magistrate complain∣ing that he is injured, by the abuse of Ecclesiastical Discipline, or if the Sentence of the Presbyteries displease the Magistrate, either in point of Discipline or of Faith, he must not therefore draw such causes to a civil tribnal, nor introduce a Political Papacy. And as the Magi∣strate Ibid. hath power in extraordinary causes, when the Church is wholly corrupted, to reform Ecclesiastical abuses; so if the Magistrate shall Tyrannize, over the Church, it is lawfull to oppose him, by certain wayes and means, extraordinary; how ever ordinarily not to be al∣lowed. This is plain dealing, the Magistrate cannot lawfully reform them but in cases extraordinary; and in cases extraordinary they may lawfully eform the Magistrate, by means not to be ordinarily allowed, that is by force of arms. See the principles from whence all our miseries; and the losse of our gracious Master, hath flowed; and learn to detest them; They give the Magistrate the custody of both tables, so they do give the same to themselves, they keep the second table, by admonishing him; Theor. 43. he keeps the first table by assisting them: they reform the abuses, of the first table by ordinary right, of the second table extraordinarily. He re∣forms the abuses against the second table; by ordinary right: and the abuses against the first table extraordinarily. But can the Magistrate according to their learning call the Synod to an account for any thing they do, can he remedy the errours of a Synod either in Doctrine or Discipline? No, if Magistrates had power to change, Theor. 97. or diminish, or restrain the Rights of the Church; the Condition of the Church, should be worse, and their liberties lesse, under a Christian Magistrate, than under an Heathen. For (say they) Parliaments and supreme Senates, are no more infallible then Synods, and in matters of Faith and Discipline more Theor. 88. apt to err; And again, the Magistrate is not judge of Spiritual causes contro∣verted in the Church. And if he decre any thing in such businesses, accord∣ing Theor. 82. to the wisdom of the flesh, and not according to the rule of Gods Word,
and the wisdom which is from above, he must give an account of it unto God. Or may the supreme Magistrate oppose the execution of their disci∣plin 2. practised in their Presbyteries, or Synods, by Laws or prohibitions? No it is wickednesse, If he do so far abuse his authority, good Christians Theor. 82. must rather suffer extremities, than obey him. Then what remedy hath the Magistrate, if he find himself grieved in 3. this case? He may desire and procure a review in another National Synod, that the matter may be lawfully determined by Ecclesiastical judgement. Yet upon this condition, that not withstanding the future review, the first sen∣tence Theor. 91. 92. of the Synod be executed without delay, This is one main branch of Popery, and a grosse incrochment upon the right of the Magistrate. CHAP. III. That this Discipline robs the Magistrate of the last appeal of his Subjects. The second flows from this. The last appeal ought to be the Supream 2. Magistrate, or Magistrates, within his or their Dominions, as to the highest Power under God. And where it is not so ordered, the Com∣mon-wealth can injoy no tranquillity, as we shall see in the second part of this discourse. By the Laws of England, if any man find himself grieved with the sentence or consistoriall proceedings of a Bishop, or of his officers, he may appeal from the highest judicatory of the Church to the King in Chancery, who useth in that case to grant Commissions under the great Seal to Delegates expert in the Laws of the Realm, who have power to give him remedy, and to see Justice done. In Scotland this would be taken in great scorn, as an high indignity upon the Com∣missioners of Christ, to appeal from his Tribunal, to the judgement of a mortal man. In the year 1582, King James by his letter, by his mes∣senger, 1582. the Master of Requests, and by an Herald at Arms prohibited the Assembly at Saint Andrews to proceed in the case of one Mongo∣mery, Ass. Saint Andrws, 1582. and Mongomery, himself appealed to Cesar, or to King and Councel. What did our new Masters upon this? They sleighted the Kings letter, his Messenger, his Herald, rejected the Appeal, as made to an incompe∣tent Judge, and proceeded most violenlty in the cause. About four years after this another Synod held at Saint Andrews, proceeded in like Ass. Saint-Andrws. 1582. manner against the Bishop of that See, for Voting in Parliament accord∣ing to his conscience, and for being suspected to have penned a Decla∣ration, published by the King and Parliament at the end of the Sta∣tutes, notwithstanding that he declined their judicature, and appealed to the King and Parliament. When did any Bishops dare to doe such acts? There need no more instances, their book of Discipline it self be∣ing so full in the case, from the Kirk there is no reclamation, or appellation, to any Judge Civil or Ecclsiastical, within the Realm.
CHAP. IV. That it exempts the Ministers from due punishment. THirdly, if Ecclesiastick persons in their Pulpits or Assemblies, shall leave their text and proper work to turn incendiaries, trumpeters of  sedition, stirring up the people to tumults and disloial attempts, in all well ordered Kingdoms and Common-wealths, they are punishable by the ci∣vil Magistrate, whose proper office it is to take cognisace of treason and sedition. It was well said by a King of France to some such sedi∣tious Shebas, that if they would not let him alone in their Pulpits, he would send them to preach in another climate. In the united provinces there want not examples of seditious Oratours, who for controlling their Magistrates too sawcily in the Pulpit, have been turned both out of their Churches and Cities, without any fear of wresting Christs Scep∣ter out of his hand. In Geneva it self, the correction of Ecclesiastical Eccl. Ord. pag. 14. persons (qua tales,) is expresly reserved to the Signiory. So much our Disciplinarians have out-done their pattern, as the passionate writings of heady men out-do the calmer decrees of a stayed Senate. But the Ministers of Scotland have exempted themselves in this case from all secular judgement, as King James (who knew them best of Dc. 15 any man living) wirnesseth. They said, he was an incompetent judge in such cases, and that matters of the Pulpit ought to be exempted from the judgement and correction of Princes. They themselves speak plain e∣nough. It is an absurd thing, that sundry of them, (Commissaries) having no function of the Kirk, should be judges to Ministers, and depose a Book dic. chp. 11. them from their rooms. The reason holds as well against Magistrates, as Commissaries. To passe by the sawcy and seditious expressions of Mr. Dury, Mr. Mellvill, Mr. Ballcanquall, and their impunity. Mr. James At Ed: 1587. Gibson in his sermon taxed the King for a persecutor, and threatened him with a curse, that he should die childlesse, and be the last of his race, for which being convented before the Assembly, and not appearing, he was onely suspended during the pleasure of his brethren, (he should have been suspended indeed, that is hanged.) But at another Assembly, in August following, upon his allegation, that his not appearing was out of his tender care of the rights of the Church, he was purged from his contumacy, without once so much as acquainting his Majesty. The case is famous of Mr. David Blake Minister of St. Andrews, who Minster ∣vid B 1596. had said in his sermon, that the King had discovered the treachery of his heart, in admitting the Popish Lords into the countrie. That all Kings were the devils barus, that the devil was in the Court, and in the guiders
of it, And in his prayer for the Queen he used these words, we must pray for her for ashion sake, but we have no cause, she will never do us any good He aid that the Queen of Englan (Queen Elisabeth) was an  eist, that the Lords of the Session were micreants and bri∣bers, that the Nobility were degenerated, godless, dissemblers, and enemies to the Church, that the Councel were holly glasses, cormo∣rants, and men of no Religion. I ap eal to all the Estates in Europe, what punishment could be evere enough for such audacious virulence? The ish Ambassadour complains of it; Blake is cited before the Councel. The Commissiones of the Church plead, that it will be ill taken, to bring Mers in question upon such trifling delations, as incon∣sistent with the liberties of the Church. They conclude that a Decli∣natour should be used, and a Protestation made against those proceedings, saying it was Gods cause, wheein they ought to stand to all hazards. Ac∣cordingly a Declinatour was framed and presented. Blake desires to be remitted to the Presbytery, as his Odinary. The Commissioners send the copie of the Declinatour to all the Presbyteries, requiring them for the greater corroboration of their doings to subscribe the same, and to commend the cause in hand in their private and publick prayers to God, using their best credit with their flocks for the maintenance thereof. The King justly incensed herewith, dischargeth the meeting of the Commissioners. Notwithstanding this Injunction they stay still and send Delegates to the King, to represent the inconveniences that might in∣sue. The King more desirous to decline their envy, than they his judge∣ment, offers peace. The Commissioners refuse it, and present an inso∣lent petition, which the King rejects deservedly, and the cause was heard the very day that the Princsse Elisabeth, (now Queen of Bohemia) was Christened. The witnesses were produced, M. Robert Ponte in the name of the Church makes a Protestation. Blake presents a second De∣cliatour. The Councel decree that the cause being treasonable, is co∣gnoscible before them. The good King still seeks peace, sends mes∣sengers, treats, offers to remit; But it is labour in vain. The Ministers answer peremtorily by Mr. Robert Brace their Prolocutor, that the li∣berty of Christs Kingdom had received such a wound, by this usurpation of the rights of the Church, that if the lives of Mr. Blake and twenty others had been taken, it would not have grieved the hearts of good people so much, as these injurious proceedings. The King still woos and confers. At last the matter is concluded that the King shall make a Declaration in fa∣vour of the Church, that Mr. Blake shall onely make an acknowledge∣ment to the Queen, and be pardoned. But Mr. Blake refuseth to con∣fesse any fault, or to acknowledge the King and Councel to be any judges of his Sermon. Hereupon he is convicted, and sentenced to be
guilty of false and treasonable slanders, and his punishment referred to the King. Still the King treats, makes propositions unbeseeming his Majesty, once, or twice. The Ministers reject them, proclaim a fast, ai e a tamult in Edenburgh, Petition, prefer Articles. The King de∣pa teth from the Citie, removeth his rts o Juice the people repent, te Ministers persist, and seek to ingage the Subjects in a Covenat for utuall defence. One M. Wash in his Sermon tells the people, that the King was possessed with a devil, yea with seven devils, that the subjes might lawfully rise and take the sword out of his hands. The Seditious in∣couraged from the Pulpit, send a letter to the Lord Hamilton, to come and be their General He noblv refuseth, and sheweth their letter to the King. Hereupon the Ministers are sought for to be apprehended, and flie into England. The Tumult is declared to be trea on by the Estates of the Kingdom. I have urged this the moe largely (yet as succinctly as I could) to let the wold see, what dangerous Subjects these Diciplinarians are, and how inconsistent their principles be, with all orderly Societies. CHAP. V. That it subjects the supreme Magistrate to their censures, &c. FOurthly, they have not onely exempted themselves in their duties of 4 their own function from the tribunal of the Sovereign Magistrate, or Supreme Senate, but they have subjected him, and them (yea even in the discharge of the Sovereign trust) to their own Consistories, even to the highest censure of Excommunication, which is like the cutting of a member from the body Natural, or the out-lawing of a 1 Book d. 7 hed. Subject in the body politick. Excommunication, that very engine, whereby the Popes of old advanced themselves above Emperours. To discipline mst all the Estates within this Rcalm be subject: as well R∣lers, 2 Book dc. Chap. . as they that are ruled. And elswhere, all mea, as well Magi∣strates as Inferiours, ought to be subject to the judgement of General As∣semblies. And yet again, no man that is in the Church, oght to be ex∣empted Th. . from Ecclesiastical censires. What horrid and pernicious mis∣chiefs do use to attend the Excommunication of Sovereign Magi∣strates, I leave to every mans memory or imagination. Such coures make great Kings become cyphers, and turn the tenure of a crown co∣pie-hold, ad voluntatem Dominorum. Such Doctrines might better be∣come some of the Roman Alexanders or Bonifaces or Gregoius or Plus Quintus than such great Professours of Humility, such great disclaimers of Authority, who have inveighed so bitterly against the Bishops for
their usurpations. This was never the practice of any orthodo Bi∣shop, St. Ambrose is mistaken, what he did to Theodosius was no act of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, but of Christian discretion. No, he was better grounded, David said, Against thee onely have I sinned, because he was a King. Our Disciplinarians abhor the name of Authority, but hugge the thing, their profession of humility, is just like that Cardinals hang∣ing up of a fishers net in his dining room, to put him in mind of his dis∣cent, but so soon as he was made Pope he took it down, saying, the fish was caught now, there was no more need of the net. CHAP. VI. That it robs the Magistrate of his Dispensative power. FIfthly, all supreme Magistrates do assume to themselves a power of pardoning offences and offenders, where they judge it to be expe∣dient. 9 He who believes that the Magistrate cannot with a good con∣science dispence with the punishment of a penitent malefactour I wish him no greater censure than that the penal laws might be duly executed upon him, until he recant his errour. But our Disciplinarians have restrained this dispensative power, in all such crimes as are made capital by the judicial Law, as in the case of Bloud, Adultery Blasphemy, &c. in which cases, they say the offender ought to suffer death, as God hath commanded. And, If the life be spared as it ought not to be 1 Book disc. d 9. to the offenders, &c. And, the Magistrate ought to prefer Gods ex∣presse commandment before his own corrupt judgement, especially Ibid. in punishing these crimes which he commandeth to be punished with death. When the then Popish Earls of Angus, Huntley, and Erroll, Ass Edenb. 1594. Parl. Ed. 1594. were excommunicated by the Church, and forfeited for treasonable practices against the King, it is admirable to read with what wisdom and charity and sweetnesse his Majesty did seek from time to time to reclaim them from their errours, and by their unfeigned conversion to the reformed Religion to prevent their punishment. Wherein he had the concurrence of two Conventions of Estates, the one at Falkland, the other at Dumfermling. And on the other side to see with what bitternesse and radicated malice, they were prosecuted by the Presby∣terics, and their Commissioners, sometimes petitioning, that they might have no benefit of law, as being excommunicated, Sometimes threatening, that they were resolved to pursue them to the uttermost, though it should be with the losse of all their lives in one day. That if they continued ene∣mies to God and his Truth, the Countrey should not brook both them and the Lord together. Sometimes pressing to have their estes confisead, and
their lives taken away. Alledging for their ground, that by Gods Law they had deserved death. And when the King urged that the bosom of the Church should be ever open to penitent sinners, they answered, that the Church could not refuse their satisfaction, if it was truly offered, but the King was obliged to do justice. What do you think of those that roar out, Justice, Justice, now a dayes, whether they be not the right spawn of these Bloud-suckers, Look upon the examples of Cain, Esau, Ishmael, Antiochus, Antichrist, and tell me, if You ever find such supercilious, cruel, bloud-thirsty persons, to have been pious to∣wards God, but their Religion is commonly like themselves, stark naught, Cursed be their anger for it was fierce, and their wrath, for Gen. 79. 7. it was cruel. These are some of those incroachments which our Disciplinarians have made upon the rights of all supreme Magistrates, there be sundry others, which especially concern the Kings of Great Brittain, as the losse of his tenths, first-fruits, and patronages, and which is more than all these, the dependence of his Subjects; by all which we see, that they have thrust out the Pope indeed, but retained the Papacy. The Pope as well as they, and they as well as the Pope, (neither barrel better her∣rings,) do make Kings but half Kings, Kings of the bodies, not of the souls of their Subjects: They allow them some sort of judgement over Ecclesiastical persons, in their civil capacities, for it is little (according to their rules) which either is not Ecclesiastical, or may not be reduced to Ecclesiastical. But over Ecclesiastick persons, as they are Ecclesia∣sticks, or in Ecclesiasticall matters, they ascribe unto them no judge∣ment in the world. They say it cannot stand with the word of God, Vindication of Commis∣sioners Jun. 6 1648. that no Christian Prince ever claimed, or can claim to himself such a power, If the Magistrate will be contented to wave his power in Ecclesiastical matters, and over Ecclesiastical persons, (as they are such,) and give them leave to do what they list, and say what they list in their Pulpits, in their Consistories, in their Synods, and permit them to rule the whole Common-wealth, in order to the ad∣vancement of the Kingdom of Christ. If he will be contented to become a subordinate Minister to their Assemblies, to see their de∣crees executed, then it may be they will become his good Masters, and permit him to injoy a part of his civil power. When Sovereigns are made but accessaries, and inferiours do become principals, when stronger obligations are devised, than those of a subject to his Sovereign, it is time for the Magistrate to look to himself, these are prognosticks of insuing storms, the avant curriers of se∣ditious tumults. When supremacy lights into strange and obscure hands, it can hardly contain it self within any bounds. Before our
Disciplinatians be well warmed in their Ecclesiastical Supremacy, they are beginning, or rather they have already made a good progresse in the invasion of the temporal Supremacy also. CHAP. VII. That the Disciplinarians cheat the Magistrate of his Civil Power in order to Religion. That is their sixt in croachment upon the Magistrate, and the verticall 6 point of Jeuitisine. Consider first how many civil causes thev have drawn directly into their Consistories, and made them of Ecclesiastical cognisance, as tra in Bargaining, false wights and measures, opp essing 1 Book dise. 7. head. 2 Book dise. Chap. 7. one another, &c. and in the case of Ministers, bribery, perjury, theft, fighting, sury, &c. Secondly consider that all offences whatsoever are made cognoscible in their Consistoies in case of candal, yea even such as are punishable by the civil sword with death: If the civi sword foolishly spate the life 1 Book disc. . head and Thr. 3. of the offender, yet may not the Kirk be negligent in their office, which is to excommunicate the wicked Thirdly they ascribe unto their Ministers a liberty and power to di∣rect the Magistrate, even in the Managerie of civil affairs: To govern the Common-wealth, and to establish civil laws is prope, to the Ma∣gistrate: To interpret the word of God, and from thence to she v the Magistrate his duty, how he ought to govern the Common-wealth, Theor. 47. 4 and how he ought to use the Sword, is comprehended in the office of the Minister, for the holy Scripture is profitable to shew what is the best government of the Common-wealth. And again all the duties of the second table as well as of the first, between King and Subject, parents and children, husbands and wives, Masters and servants, &c. Vindicat. com. p. 6. are in difficult cases a subject of cognisance and judgement to the Assemblies of the Kik.Thus they are risen up from a judgement of direction to a judgement of Jurisdiction, And if any persons, Magi∣strares or others dare act contrary to this judgement of the Assembly, (as the Parliament and Committee of Estates did in Scotland in the late expedition) thev make it to be an unlawfull ingagement, a sinfull War, contrary to the Testimonies of Gods servants, and decce the par∣ties  knowledge.   .  1648. so offending to be  spered from the communion, and from their offices in the Kirk. I confesse Ministers do well to exhort Christians to be carefull honest, indust ious in their special callings: but fo them to meddle pragmatically with themysteries of particular trades and much more with the mysteries of State, which never came within the com∣passe
of their shallow capacities, is a most audacious insolence, and an insufferable pre umption. They may as well teach the Pilot how to steer his course in a tempest, or the Physitian how to cure the distempers of his patient. But their highest cheat is that Jesuiticall invention, (in ordine ad spiri∣tualia,) they assume a power in worldly affairs indirectly, and in order to the advancement of the kingdom of Christ. The Ecclesiastical Mini∣stery is conversant spiritually about civil things. Again must not duties to Theor. 63. vindication. p. 5. God whereof the securing of religion is a main one, have the Supreme and first place, duties to the King a subordinate and second place? The case was this. The Parliament levied forces to free their King out of pri∣son. A meer civil duty. But the commissioners of the Assembly de∣clare against it, unlesse the King will first give assurance under hand and seal by solemn oath, that he will establish the Covenant, the Presby∣terian discipline, &c. in all his Dominions, and never indeavour any change thereof, least otherwise his liberty might bring their bygone pro∣ceedings Humble advise Edchb. Iune. 10. 248. about the League & Covenant into question, there is their power in ordine ad spiritualia. The Parliament will restore to the King his ne∣gative voice. A meer civil thing. The commissioners of the Church oppose it, because of the great dangers that may thereby come to Re∣ligion. The Parliament name Officers and Commanders for the Ar∣my. vindication. p. 8. A meer civil thing. The Church will not allow them because they want such qualifications as Gods word requires, that is to say in plain terms, because they were not their confidents. Was there ever Church challenged such an omnipotence as this? Nothing in this world is so civil or political, wherein they do not interest themselves, in order to the advancement of the kingdom of Christ. Upon this ground their Synod enacted, that no Scotish merchants Ass. Dund. 1593. should from thenceforth traffique in any of the dominions of the King of Spain, until his Majesty had procured from that King some relaxation of the rigour of the inquisition, upon pain of excommu∣nication. As likewise that the Munday market at Edenburgh should be abolished, It seems they thought it ministered some occasion to the breach of the Sabbath. The Merchants petitioned the king to main∣tain the liberty of their trade, He grants their request but could not protect them, for the Church prosecured the poor merchants with their censures, untill they promised to give over the Spanish trade, so soon as they had perfected their accounts, and payed their Creditors in those parts. But the Shoemakers who were most interested in the Munday mar∣kets with their tumults and threatenings compelled the Ministers to retract, whereupon it became a jest in the City, that the Souters could ob∣tain
more at the Ministers hands, than the King. So they may meddle with the Spanish trade or Munday markets, or any thing in order to Religion. Upon this ground they assume to themselves a power to ratifie Acts of Parliament, So the assembly at Edenburgh enacted, That the Acts made in the Parliament at Edenburgh the 24 of August. 1560, (without either Commission or Proxie from their Sovereign,) touch∣ing Ass. Fdb 1567. Religion, &c. should have the force of a publick Law. And that the said Parliament, so far as concerned Religion, should be main∣tained by them, &c. and be ratified by the first Parliament that should happen to be kept within that Realm. See how bold they make with Kings and Parliaments, in order to Religion. I cannot omit that famous summons which this assembly sent out, not onely to en∣treat, but to admonish all persons truly professing the Lord Jesus with∣in the Realm, as well Noble-men as Barons and those of other estates to meet and give their personal appearance at Edenburgh the 20 of Iuly ensuing, for giving their advise and concurrence in matters then to be proponed, especially for purging the Realm of Popery, establishing the policy of the Church, and restoring the patrimony thereof to the just possessours. Assuring such as did absent themselves that they should be esteemed dissimulate professours, unworthy of the fellowship of Christs flock, who thinks your Scotish Disciplinarians know not how to ruffle it? Upon this ground they assume a power to abrogate and invalidate Laws and Acts of Parliament, if they seem disadvantagious to the Church. Church Assemblies have power to abrogate and abolish all  Book dise. h. 7. statutes and ordinances concerning Ecclesiastical matters, that are found noysom and unprofitable, and agree not with the times, or are abused by the people. So the Acts of Parliament 1584. at the very same time that they were proclaimed, were protested against at the market crosse of Edenburgh by the Ministers, in the name of the Vindication pg. 11.  10. Kirk of Scotland. And a little before, whatsoever be the Treason of impugning the authority of Parliament, it can be no Treason to obey God rather than man. Neither did the General assembly of Glasgow 1638, &c. commit any treason, when they impugned Episcopacy, and Perth-Articles, although ratified by Acts of Parliament, and standing laws then unrepealed. He saith so far true, that we ought rather to obey God than man, that is, to suffer when we cannot act; but to impugn the authority of a lawfull Magistrate, is neither to obey God nor man. God commands us to die in∣nocent rather than live nocent, they teach us rather to live no∣cent, than die innocent Away with these seeds of sedition, these rebellious principles, Our Master Christ hath left us no such
warrant, and the unsound practise of an obscure Conventicle is no safe patern. The King was surprized at Ruthen by a company of Lords and 1582. other conspirators; this fact was as plain Treason as could be imagi∣ned, and so it was declared; (I say declared, not made) in Parliament. 1583. Yet an Assembly Generall (no man gain-saying) did justify that Trea∣son Ass. Edenb. 1582. in order to Religion as good and acceptable service to God, their Soveraign, and native Countrey, requiring the Ministers in all their Churches to commend it to the people, and exhort all men to con∣curre with the actors, as they tendred the glory of God, the full de∣liverance of the Church, and perfect reformation of the Common∣wealth, threatning all those who subscribed not to their judgement with Excommunication. We see this is not the first time that Disci∣plinarian Spectacles have made abominable Treason to seem Religion, if it serve for the advancement of the good Cause. And it were well if they could rest here, or their zeale to advance their Ecclesiasticall Soveraignty, by force of Armes, and effusion of Christian blood, would confine it self within the limits of Scotland: No, those bounds are too narrow for their pragmaticall spirits: And for busie Bishops in other mens Diocesses, see the Articles of Sterling, That the securing and Sept. 27. 1648. Ar. 3 setling Religion at home, and promoting the work of Reformation abroad, in England and Ireland, be referred to the determination of the General Assembly (of the Kirk) or their Commissioners. What, is old Edenburgh turned new Rome and the old Presbyters young Cardinals, and their Consistory a Conclave, and their Committees a Juncto for propagating the faith? Themselves stand most in need of Reformation; If there be a more in the eye of our Church, there is a beam in theirs. Neither want we at home God be praised, those who are a thousand times fitter for learning, for piety, for discretion, to be reformers, then a few giddy innovators. This I am sure, since they undertook our cure against our wills, they have made many fat Church-yards in England. Nothing is more civill, or essentiall to the Crowne, then the Militia, or power of raising Armes: Yet we have seen in the attempt at Ruthen, in their Letter to the Lord Hamilton, in their Sermons, what is their opinion. They insinuate as much in their Theorems, It is lawfull to resist the Magistrate by certain extra∣ordinary Theor. 84. wayes or meanes, not to be ordinarily allowed. It were no dif∣ficult task out of their private Authors, to justifie the barbarous acts that have been committed in England. But I shall hold my selfe to their publike actions and records. A mutinous company of Citizens forced the gates of Halyrood-house, to search for a Priest, and plundr at their pleasure. Mr. Knox was charged by the Councell to have bin the Ann. 1562. author of the sedition; and further, to have convocated his Majesties
Subjects by Letters missive when he pleased. He answered, that he was no preacher of Rebellion, but taught people to obey their Princes in the Lord; [I fear he taught them likewise, that he and they were the competent judges what is obedience in the Lord.] He confessed his convocating of the Subjects by vertue of a command from the Church, to advertise the brethren when he saw a necessity of their meeting, espe∣cially if he perceived Religion to be in peril. Take another instance, The Assembly having received an answer from the King, about the tryall Ass. Eden∣burg. 1593. of the Popish Lords, not to their contentment, resolve all to con∣vene in Armes at the place appointed for the tryall; whereupon some were left at Edenburgh to give timely advertisement to the rest. The King at his return gets notioe of it, calls the Ministers be∣fore him, shewes them what an undutifull part it was in them to levy Forces, and draw his Subjects into Armes without his War∣rant. The Ministers pleaded, That it was the cause of God, in defence whereof they could not be defieient. This is the Presbyterian wont, to subject all causes and persons to their Consistories, to ratifie and abo∣lish civill Lawes, to confirm and pull down Parliaments, to levy For∣ces, to invade other Kingdoms, to do any thing respectively to the ad∣vancement of the good cause, and in order to Religion. CHAP. VIII. That the Disciplinarians challenge this exorbitant Power by Di∣vine Right. BEhold both Swords spirituall and temporall in the hands of the Presbytery, the one ordinarily by common right, the other extra∣ordinarily; the one belonging directly to the Church, the other indi∣rectly; the one of the Kingdome of Christ, the other for his King∣dom, in order to the propagation of Religion. See how these hocas pcases with stripping up their sleeves and professions of plain-dealing, with declaiming against the tyranny of Prelates, under the pretense of humility and Ministeriall duty, have wrested the Scepter out of the hand of Majesty, and jugled themselves into as absolute a Papacy, as ever was within the walls of Rome. O Saviour, behold thy Vicars, and see whither the pride of the servants of thy servants is ascended. Now their Consistories are become the Tribunalls of Christ. That were strange indeed! Christ hath but one Tribunall, his Kingdome is not of this world. Their determinations passe for the Sentences of Christ. Alas there is too much faction, and passion, and ignorance in their Presbyteries. Their Synodall Acts go for the Lawes of Christ. His Lawes are immutable, mortall man may not presume to alter them,
or to adde to them; but these men are chopping and changing their constitutions every day. Their Elders must be looked upon as the Com∣missioners of Christ. It is impossible! Geneva was the first City where this discipline was hatched, though since it hath lighted into hucksters hands. In those dayes they magnified the platform of Geneva, for the pattern sbewed in the mount. But there, the Presbyters at their ad∣mission take an oath, to observe the Ecclesiasticall Ordinances of the small, great, and generall Councels of that City. Can any man be so stupid, as to think, that the high Commissioners of Christ swear fealty to the Burgers of Geneva? Now forsooth their Discipline is become the Scepter of Christ, the Eternall Gospel. (See how successe exalts mens desires and demands.) In good time, where did this Scepter lye hid for 1500. yeers, that we cannot finde the least footsteps of it in the meanest village of Christendome? This world drawes towards an end; was this discipline fitted and contrived for the world to come? Or how should it be the Eternal Gospel? When every man sees how different it is from it self, in all Presbyterian Churches, adapted and accommodated to the civill policy of each particular place where it is admitted, except onely Scotland, where it comes in like a Conqueror, and makes the Civill Power stoop and strike topsaile to it. Certain∣ly, if it be the Gospel, it is the fifth Gospel, for it hath no kindred with the other foure. There is not a Text which they wrest against Epis∣copacy, but the Independants may with as much colour of reason, and truth, urge it against their Presbyteries. Where doth the Gospel distinguish between temporary and perpetuall Rulers? Between the Government of a person, and of a corporation? There is not a Text which they produce for their Presbytery, but may with much more reason be alledged for Episcopacy, and more agreeable to the analogie of faith, to the perpetuall practice and belief of the Catholick Church, to the concurrent Expositions of all Interpreters, and to the other Texts of holy Scripture; for untill this new modell was yesterday devised none of those Texts were ever so understood. When the pra∣ctise ushers in the doctrine, it is very suspicious, or rather evident, that the Scripture was not the rule of their reformation, but their subse∣quent excuse. This (jure divine) is that which makes their sore in∣curable, themselves incorrigible, that they father their own brat upon God Almighty, and make this Mushrome which sprung but up the other night, to be of heavenly descent. It is just like the doctrine of the Popet infallibility, which shuts the door against all hope of reme∣dy. How should they be brought to reform their errors, who beleeve they cannot erre, or they be brought to renounce their drowsy dreams, who take it for granted, that they are divine revelations!
And yet when that wise Prince, King Iames, a little before the An. 1596. Nationall Assembly at Perth, published in print 55. Articles or Que∣stions, concerning the uncertainty of this Discipline, and the vanity of their pretended plea of divine right, and concerning the errours and abuses crept into it, for the better preparation of all men to the ensu∣ing Synod, that Ministers might study the point beforehand, and speak to the purpose; they who stood affected to that way were extremely perplexed. To give a particular account, they knew well it was im∣possible; but their chiefest trouble was, that their foundation of di∣vine right, which they had given out all this while to be a solid rock, should come now to be questioned for a shaking quagmire. And so without any opposition they yeelded the bucklers. Thus it continued untill these unhappy troubles, when they started aside again like bro∣ken bowes. This plant thrives better in the midst of tumults, then in the times of peace and tranquillity. The Elme which supports it, is a factious multitude, but a prudent and couragious Magistrate nips it in the bud. CHAP. IX. That this Discipline makes a monster of the Commonwealth. VVE have seen how pernicious this Discipline (as it is main∣tained in Scotland, and endeavoured to be introduced into England by the Covenant,) is to the supreme Magistrate, how it rob him of his Supremacy in Ecclesiasticall affaires, and of the last appeals of his own Subjects, that it exempts the Presbyters from the power of the Magistrate, and subjects the Magistrate to the Presbyters, that it restraines his dispensative power of pardoning, deprives him of the dependance of his Subjects, that it doth challenge and usurp a power paramount both of the Word and of the Sword, both of Peace and War, over all Courts and Estates, over all Laws Civill and Ecclesi∣asticall, in order to the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, wher∣of the Presbyters alone are constituted rulers by God, and all this by a pretended divine right, which takes away all hope of remedy, untill it be hissed out of the world; in a word, that it is the top-branch of Popery, a greater tyranny, then ever Rome was guilty of. It remains to show how disadvantagious it is also to the Subject. First, to the Common-wealth in generall, which it makes a Mon∣ster, like an Amphisbaina, or a Serpent with two heads, one at either end. It makes a coordination of Soveraignty in the same Society, two supremes in the same Kingdom or State, the one Civill, the other Ecclesiasticall, then which nothing can be more pernicious, either to
the consciences, or the estates of Subjects, when it falls out (as it often doth) that from these two heads issue contrary commands, If the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battel? 1 Cor. 1. 1. Much more when there are two Trumpets, and the one sounds an Al∣arm, the other a Retreat. What should the poor Souldier do in such a case? or the poor Subject in the other case? If he obey the Civill Magistrate, he is sure to be excommunicated by the Church; if he o∣bey the Church, he is sure to be imprisoned by the Civill Magistrate; What shall become of him? I know no remedy, but according to Solomons sentence, the living Subject must be divided into two, and 1 Kin. 3. 25. the one half given to the one, and the other half to the other. For the Oracle of Truth hath said, that one man cannot serve two Masters. But in Scotland every man must serve two Masters, and (which is worse) many times disagreeing Masters. At the same time the Civill Magi∣strate hath commanded the Feast of the Nativity of our Saviour to be observed, and the Church hath forbidden it. At the same time the King hath summoned the Bishops to sit and Vote in Parliament, and the Church hath forbidden them. In the year 1582. Monsieur-le-mot, a Knight of the Order of the 1582. Holy Ghost, with an associate, were sent Ambassadours from France into Scotland: The Ministers of Edenburgh approving not his Mes∣sage, (though meerly Civill,) inveigh in their Pulpits bitterly against him, calling his White Crosse the badge of Antichrist, and himself the Ambassadour of a Murtherer. The King was ashamed, but did not know how to help it; The Ambassadours were discontented and desired to be gone: The King willing to preserve the ancient Amity between the two Crownes, and to dismisse the Ambassadours with content, requires the Magistrates of Edenburgh to feast them at their departure; so they did; But to hinder this feast, upon the Sunday Febr. 16. preceding, the Ministers proclame a Fast to be kept the same day the Feast was appointed; and to deteine the people all day at Church; the At Saint Giles Church. three Preachers make three Sermons, one after another without in∣termission, thundring out curses against the Magistrates and Noble∣men which waited upon the Ambassadors by the Kings appointment. Neither stayed they here, but pursued the Magistrates with the censures of the Church, for not observing the Fast by them proclaimed; and with much difficulty were wrought to abstaine from Excom∣municating of them; which censure, how heavy it falls in Scotland, you shall see by and by. To come yet neerer, the late Parliament in Scotland injoyned men to take up Armes for delivery of their King out of prison; The Commissioners for the Assembly disallowed it; and at this present how many are chased out of their Country? How
many are put to publike repentance in sackeloth? how many are ex∣communicated, for being obedient to the Supreme Ludicatory of the Kingdom, that is, King and Parliament? Miserable is the condition of that people where there is such clashing and interfereing of Suprem Judicatories and Authorities. If they shall pretend that this was no free Parliament: First, they affirm that which is not true; either that Parliament was free, or what will become of the rest? Secondly, this plea will advantage them nothing; for (which is all one with the former) thus they make themselves Judges of the validity or invali∣dity of Parliaments. CHAP. X. That this Discipline is most prejudiciall to the Parliament. FRom the Essentiallbody of the Kingdom we are to proceed to the repraesentative body, which is the Parliament. We have already seen, how it attributes a power to Nationall Synods to restrain Par∣liaments, and to abrogate their Acts, if they shall judge them pre∣judiciall to the Church. We need no other instance, to shew what small account Presbyteries do make of Parliaments, then the late Parliament in Scotland. Notwithstanding that the Parliament had declared their resolution to levy forces vigorously, ad that they did ex∣pect as well from the Synods and Presbyteries, as from all other his Ma∣jesties good Subiects, aready obedience to the commands of Parliament, and Committee of Estates. The Commissioners of the Assembly not satisfied herewith, do not onely make their proposalls, that the grounds of the Warre and the breaches of the Peace might be March, 22. cleared, that the union of the Kingdomes might be preserved, that the popish and prelaticall party might bee suppressed, that his Majesties offers concerning Religion might be decla∣red unsatisfactory, that before his Majesties restitution to the exer∣cise of his Royall power, he shall first engage himself by folemn Oath under his hand and Seal, to passe Acts for the settlement of the Covenant and Presbyterian Government in all his Dominions, &c. And never to oppose them, or endeavour the Change of them, (An usurer will trust a bankrupt upon easier tearms, then they will do their Soveraign,) and lastly, that such persons onely might be in∣trusted, as had given them no cause of jealousie, (which had been too much, and more then any estates in Europe will take in good part from half a dozen Ministers,) But afterwards by their publick De∣claration to the whole Kirk and Kingdom, set forth that not being sa∣tisfied Declar.
in these particulars, they do plainly dissent and disagree, and de∣clare that they are clearly perswaded in their consciences, that the En∣gagement is of dangerous consequence to true Religion, prejudiciall to the Liberty of the Kirk, favourable to the Malignant party, inconsistent with the union of the Kingdom; Contrary to the word of God and the Covenant, wherefore they cannot allow either Ministers or any other whatsoever to concu and cooperate in it, and trust that they will keep themselves free in this businesse, and choose affliction rather then ini∣quitie. And to say the Truth, they made their word good. For by their power over the Church-men, and by their influence upon the people, and by threatening all those who engaged in that action with the censures of the Church, they retarded the Levies, they deterred all preachers from accompanying the Army to do divine offices. And when Saint Peters keyes would not serve the turn, they made use of Saint Pauls sword, and gathered the countrey together in arms at Machleene-Moore to oppose the expedition. So if the high court of Parliament will set up Presbytery, they must resolve to introduce an higher court then themselves, which will overtop them for eminency of authority, for extent of power, and greatnesse of priviledges, that is, a Nationall Synod. First for authority, the one being acknowledged to be but an hu∣main convention, the other affirmed confidently to be a divine insti∣stution. The one sitting by vertue of the Kings writ, the other by vertue of Gods writ. The one as Councellers of the Prince, the other as Ambassadours and Vicars of the sonne of God. The one as Burgesses of Corporations, the other as Commissioners of Iesus Christ. The one judging by the law of the land, the other by the holy Scriptures. The one taking care for this temporall life, the other for eternall life. Secondly for power, as Curtius saith, ubi multitudo vana religione capta est, melius vatibus suit quam ducibus paret, where the mul∣titude is led with superstition, they do more readily obey their Prophets then their Magistrates. Have they not reason? Pardon us O Magistrate, thou threatenst us with prison, they threaten us with hell fire. Thy sentence deprives us of civill prorection, and the bene∣fit of the law, so doth theirs indirectly, and withall makes us stran∣gers to the common-wealth of Israel. Thou canst out-law us, or horn us, and confiscate our estates, their keyes do the same also by conse∣quence, and moreover deprive us of the prayers of the Church, and the comfortable use of the blessed Sacraments. Thou canst deliver us to a Pursevant, or commit us to the Black Rod, they can deliver u over to Sathan, and commit us to the prince of darknesse.
Thirdly for priviledges, the priviledges of Parliament extend not to treason selony, or breach of peace, but they may talke treason, and act treason, in their pulpits and Synods without controlment. They may securely commit not onely petilarciny but Burglary, and force the dores of the pallace Royall. They may not onely break the peace, but convocate the Subjects in armes, yea give warrant to a particular person, to onveen them by his letters missives, according to his discretion, in order to religion. Of all which we have seen instances in this discourse. The priviledges of Parliaments are the Graces and Concessions of man, and may be taken away by humane Authority, but the priviledges of Synods they say are from God, and cannot without Sactiledge be taken away by mortall man. The two Houses of Parliament can not name Commissioners to sit in the intervalles, and take care ne quid detrimenti capiat respublica, that the Common∣wealth receive no prejudice; But Synods have power to name vicars Generall, or Commissioners, to sit in the intervalles of Synods, and take order that neither King nor Parliament nor people do incroach upon the Liberties of the Church. If there be any thing to do, they are (like the fox in Aesops fables,) sure to be in at one end of it. CHAP. XI. That this Discipline is oppressive to particular persons. TOwards particular persons this Discipline is too full of rigour, like Dracos lawes that were written in blood. First in lesser saults, inflicting Church censures upon sl ight grounds, As for an un∣comely Scot. Leit. p. 57. 58. gesture, for a vain word, for suspition of covetousnesse or pride, for superfluity in raiment, either for cost or fashion, for keep∣ing a table above a mans calling or means, for dancing at a wedding, 1 Book dis. 7. head. or of servants in the streets, for wearing a mans hair ala mode, for not paying of debts, for using the least recreation upon the Sabbath, though void of scandall, and consistent with the duties of the day. I wish they were acquainted with the practise of all other Protestant Countries. But if they did but see one of those kirmesses which are observed in some places, the pulpit, the consistory, the whole King∣dom would not be able to hold them. What digladiations have there been among some of their sect about starch and cuffes, &c. just like those grave debates which were sometimes among the Francis∣cans, about the colour and fashion of their gowns? They do not al∣low men a latitude of discretion in any thing. All men, even their Superiours must be their slaves or pupils. It is true they begin their censures with admonition, And if a man will confesse himself a de∣linquent,
be sorry for giving the Presbyters any offence, and con∣form himself in his hair, apparrell, diet, every thing, to what these rough hewen Catos shall prescribe, he may escape the stool of repent∣ance, otherwise they will proceed against him for contumacy, to Ex∣communication. Secondly, this discipline is oppressive in greater saults. The same man is punished twice for the same crime first by the Magistrate ac∣cording to the lawes of God and the land, for the offence: then by the censures of the Church for the scandall. To this agrees their Sy∣nod, Nothing forbids the same fault in the same man to be punished one Theor. 63. way by the politicall power, another way by the Ecclesiasticall; by that under the formality of a crime with Corporall or pecuniary punishment, by this under the formality of scandall with spirituall censures. And their book of Discipline, If the civill sword foolishly spare the life of the offender, yet may not the Kirk be negligent in their office. Thus their 1 Book. 9. head p. 44. Liturgy in expresse termes, All crimes which by the law of God de∣serve death, deserve also Excommunication. Yea, though an offender abide an assise, and be absolved by the same, yet may the Church in∣joyn him publick satisfaction. Or if the Magistrate shall not think sit in his judgement, or cannot in conscience prosecure the party Scot lit. 48 upon the Churches intimation, the Church may admonish the Magi∣strate publickly. And if no remedy be found, excommunicate the 47. offender, first for his crime, and then for being suspected to have cor∣rupted the judge. Observe first that by hook or crook they will bring all crimes whatsoever, great and small, within their Iurisdiction. Se∣condly, observe that a delinquents triall for his life is no sufficient sa∣tisfaction to these third Cato's. Lastly, observe that to satisfie their own humour, they care not how they blemish publickly the reputation of the Magistrate upon frivolous conjectures. Thirdly, adde to this which hath been said, the severity and ex∣treame rigour of their Excommunication, after which sentence no person (his wife and family onely excepted) may have any kinde of conversation with him that is excommunicate, they may not eate with him, nor drink with him, nor buy with him, nor sell with him, 1 Book dis. 7. h a. they may not salute him, nor speak to him, [except it be by the li∣cense of the Presbytery,] His children begotten and born after that sentence, and before his reconciliation to the Church, may not be admitted to baptisme, untill they be of age to require it, or the mother or some speciall friend being a member of the Church pre∣sent the childe, abhorring and damning the iniquity and obstinate contempt of the Father. Adde further that upon this sentence letters of horning (as they use to call them in Scotland) do follow of
course, that is an out-lawing of the party, a confiscation of his goods, a putting him out of the Kings protection, so as any man may kill him, and be unpunished; yea, the party excommunicate is not so much as cited to hear those fatall Letters granted. Had not David reason to pray, Let me fall into the hands of the Lord, not into the hands of men, for their mercies are cruell. Cruell indeed, that 55. Articl. 1596. when a man is prosecuted for his life, perhaps justly, perhap unjustly, so as appearing and hanging are to him in effect the same thing; yet if he appeare not, this pitifull Church will Excommunicate him for contumacy: Whether the offender be convict in judgement, or b fugi∣tiv from the Law, the Church ought to proceed to the sentence of Ex∣communication; as if the just and evident fear of death did not purge Scot. Li 49 away contumacy. CHAP. XII. That this Discipline is hurtfull to all orders of men. LAstly, this Discipline is burthensome and disadvantagious to all orders of men. The Nobility and Gentry must expect to follow the fortune of their Prince. Vpon the abatement of Monarchy in Rome, remember what dismall controversies did presently spring up between the Patricii and Plebci. They shall be subjected to the cen∣sures of a raw heady novice, & a few ignorant Artificers; they shall lose all their advowsons of such Benefices as have cure of soules, as they have lately found in Scotland) for every Congregation ought to choose their own Pastour. They shall hazzard their Appropriations and Ab∣bey-lands: A Sacrilege which their Nationall Synod cannot in con∣science tolerate, longer then they have strength sufficient to over∣throw it. And if they proceed as they begin, the Presbyters will in a short time either accomplish their designe, or change their soyle. They shall be bearded and maited by every ordinary Presbyter, wit∣nesse that insolent speech of Mr. Robert Bruce to King Iames, Sir, I see your resolution is to take Huntley in favour; if you doe, I will oppose; You shall choose whether you will lose Huntly or me; for us both you can∣not keep. It is nothing with them for a pedant to put himselfe into the ballance with one of the prime and most powerfull Peers of the Realme. The poor Orthodox Clergy in the meane time shall be undone, their straw shall be taken from them, and the number of their bricks be doubled: They shall lose the comfortable assurance of an undoubt∣ed succession by Episcopall Ordination, and put it to a dangerous que∣stion, whether they be within the pale of the Church: They shall be reduced to ignorance, contempt, and beggery; They shall lose an an∣cient Liturgy, (warranted in the most parts of it by all, in all parts of
it by the most publike formes of the Protestant Churches, whereof a short time may produce a parallel to the view of the world,) and be enjoyned to prate and pray non-sence everlastingly. For howsoever formerly they have had a Liturgy of their owne, as all other Chri∣stian Churches have at this day; yet now it seems they allow no prayers, but extemporary. So faith the information from Scotland, Motus Br∣tanici. 171 It is not lawfull for a man to tye himself, or be tyed by others, to a pre∣script form of words in prayer and exhortation. Parents shall lose the free disposition of their own children in marriage if the childe desire an husband or a wife, and the parent 1 Book. dis: 9. head. gainst and their request, and have no other cause then the common of men have, to wit lack of goods, or because the other party is not of birth high enough, upon the childes desire, the Minister is to travail with the parents, and if he finde no just cause to the contrary, may admit them to maerriage. For the work of God ought not to be hin∣dered by the corrupt affections of worldly men. They who have stripped the father of their Countrey of his just right, may make bold with fathers of families, and will not stick to exclude all other fathers, but themselves out of the fifth commandement. The doctrine is very high, but their practise is yet much more high, The Presbyteries will compell the wronged parent to give that childe as great a portion as any of his other children. It will be ill newes to the Lawyerrs to have the moulter taken away from their Mills upon pretence of scandall, or in order to Reli∣gion, to have their sentences repealed by a Synod of Presbyters, and to receive more prohibitions from Ecclesiasticall Courts, then ever they sent thither. All Masters and mistresses of families, of what age or condition soever, must come once a year before the Presbyter, wish their housholds, to be ex∣amined 1 Book dis. 9 head. personally whether they be fit to receive the Sacrament, in respect of their knowledge, and otherwise. And if they suffer their children or ser∣vants to continue in wilfull ignorance (What if they cannot help it?) they must be excommunicated. It is probable, the persons catechised could often better instruct their Catechists. The common people shall have an High-Commission in every pa∣rish, and groan under the Arbitrary decees of ignorant unexperien∣ced Governours, who know no Law but their own wills, who observe no order but what they list; from whom lyes no appeale but to a Synod, which for the shortnesse of its continuance can afford which for the condition of the persons wil afford them little relief. If there arise a private jar between the parent and the child, or the husband and the wife, these domesticall Iudges must know it, and censure it.
Scire volunt secreta dous, atque inde timeri. And if there have been any suit or difference between the Pastor and any of hi flock, or between Neighbour and Neighbour, be sure it will not be forgotten in the sentence. The practice of our Law hath been, that a Iudge was rarely permitted to ride a circuit in his owne countrey, least private interest or respects might make him partiall. Yet a Country is much larger then a Parish and a grave learned Iudge is presumed to have more temper then such home-bred fel∣lowes. Thus wee see what a Pandoras box this pretended holy Dis∣cipline is, full of manifold mischiefes, and to all orders of men most pernicious. CHAP. XIII. That the Covenant to introduce this Discipline is void and wicked, with a short Conclusion. BVt yet the conscience of an Oath sticks deep. Some will plead, that they have made a Covenant with God, for the introducti∣on of this Discipline, Oaths and Vowes ought to be made with great judgement, and broken with greater. My next task therefore must be to demonstrate this clearly, that this Covenenant is not binding, but meerly void, and not onely void but wicked; so as it is necessary to break it, and impious to observe it. The first thing that cracks the credit of this new Covenant is, that it was devised by strangers, to the dishonour of cur Nation, imposed by Subjects, who wanted requisite power upon their Soveraign and fellow-subjects, extorted by just feare of unjust sufferings. So as a may truly say of many who took this Covenant, that they sinned in pronouncing the words with their lips, but never consented with their hearts to make any vow to God. Again, error and deceit make those things voluntary to which they are incident, especially when the errours nor meerly negative by way of concealement of truth, when a man knowes not what he doth, but positive, when he beleeves he doth one thing, and doth the clean con∣trary, and that not about some inconsiderable accidents, but about the substantiall conditions. As if a Physitian, either out of ignorance or malice, should give his Patient a deadly poyson under the name of a cordial, and bind him by a solemn oath to take it, the Oath is void, ne∣cessary to be broken, unlawfull to be kept; if the patient had known
the truth, that it was no cordiall, that it was poyson, he would not have swom to take it. Such an errour there is in the Covenant with a witnesse, to gull men with a strange, unknown, lately devised plat∣forme of Discipline, most pernicious to the King and Kingdom, as if it were the very institution of Christ, of high advantage to the King and Kingdom, to gull them with that Covenant which King James did sometimes take, as if that and this were all one, whereas that Co∣venant issued out by the Kings Authority, this Covenant without his Authority, against his Authority; that Covenant was for the Lawes of the Realm, this is against the Lawes of the Realm; that was to maintain the Religion established, this to overthrow the Re∣ligion established: But because I will not ground my Discourse upon any thing that is disputable, either in matter of Right, or Fact; And in truth, because I have no need of them, I sorgive them these ad∣vantages, onely with this gentle memento, That when other forraign Churches, and the Church of Scotland it self (as appeares by their pub∣like Liturgy used in those dayes) did sue for aid and assistance from the Crown and Kingdom of England, they did not go about to obtrude their owne Discipline upon them, but left them free to choose for themselves. The grounds which follow are demonstrative; First, no man can dispose that by vow, or otherwise, either to God or man, which is the right of a third person without his consent: Neither can thenfe∣riour oblige himselfe to the prejudice of his Superiour, contrary to his duty, without his Superiours allowance: God accepts no such preten∣ces, to seem obsequious to him, out of the undoubted right of another person. Now the power of Armes, and the defence of the Lawes, and protection of the Subjects by those Armes, is by the Law of Eng∣land clearly invested in the Crowne. And where the King is bound in conscience to protect, the Subject is bound in conscience to assist. Therefore every English Subject owes his Armes and his Obedience to his King, and cannot dispose them as a free gift of his owne; nor by any act of his whatsoever diminish his Soveraignes right over him, but in those things wherein by Law he owes subje∣ction to his Prince, he remaineth still obliged, notwithstanding any Vow or Covenant to the contrary; especially when the subject and scope of the Covenant is against the known Lawes of the Realm. So as without all manner of doubt, no Divine or Learned Casuist in the world dissenting, This Covenant is either void in it selfe, or at least voided by his Majesties Proclamation, prohibiting the takirg of it, and nullifying its obligation. Secondly, It is confessed by all men that, that an Oath ought not to
be the bond of iniquity, nor doth oblige a man to be a transgressour. The golden rule is, in malis promissis rescinde fidem, in turpi voto mu∣ta decretum, To observe a wicked engagement doubles the sinne: Nothing can be the matter of a Vow or Covenant, which is evident∣ly unlawfull. But it is evidently unlawfull for a Subject or Subjects to alter the Lawes established by force, without the concurrence, and against the commands of the Supreme Legislator, for the intro∣duction of a forraign Discipline. This is the very matter and subject of the Covenant. Subjects vow to God, and swear one to another, to change the Lawes of the Realm, to abolish the Discipline of the Church, and the Liturgy lawfully established, by the Sword, (which was never committed to their hands by God or man,) without the King, against the King, which no man can deny in earnest to be plain rebellion, And it is yet the worse, that it is to the main prejudice of a third order of the Kingdom, the taking away whose rights without their consents, without making them satisfaction, cannot be justified in point of conscience. (Yea though it were for the greater conveni∣ence of the Kingdom, as is most falsely pretended,) And is harder measure then the Abbots and Friers received from Henry the eight, or then either Christians or Turkes do offer to their conquered enemies. Lastly a supervenient oath or covenant either with God or man, cannot take away the obligation of a just oath precedent. But such is the Covenant, a subsequent oath, inconsistent with, and destructive to a precedent oath, that is the oath of Supremacy, which all the Church men throughout the Kingdome, all the Parliament men at their admission to the house, all persons of quality throughout Eng∣land have taken. The former oath acknowledgeth the King to be the onely supreame had, (that is civill head to see that every man do his duty in his calling,) and Governour of the Church of England, The second oath or covenant, to set up the Presbyterian Government as it is in Scotland, denieth all this virtually, makes it a politicall pa∣pacy, acknowledgeth no governours but onely the Presbyters. The former oath gives the King the supream power over all persons in all causes, The second oath gives him a power over all persons, (as they are subjects,) but none at all in Ecclesiasticall causes, This they make to be sacriledge. By all whih it is most apparent, that this Covenant was neither free nor deliberate, nor valide, nor lawfull, nor consistent with our former oathes, but insorced, dceitfull, invalide, impious, rebellious, and contradictory to our former ingagements, and consequently ob∣ligeth no man to performance, but all men to repentance. For
the greater certainty whereof I appele, upon this stating of the case, to all the learned Casuists and Divines in Europe, touching the point of common right; And that this is the true state of the case, I appeal to our adversaries themselves. No man that hath any spark of in∣genuity will denie it. No English-man who hath any tolerable de∣gree of judgement, or knowledge in the laws of his countrey, can denie it, but at the same instant his conscience must give him the lie. They who plead for this rebellion, dare not put it to a triall at law, they doe not ground their defence upon the lawes, But either upon their own groundlesse jealousies and fears, of the Kings in∣tention to introduce Popery, to subvert the lawes, and to enslave the people. This is to run into a certain crime, for fear of an un∣certain. They who intend to pick quarrels, know how to feign suspicions. Or they ground it upon the successe of their arms, or upon the Sove∣raigne right of the people, over all lawes and Magistrates, whose Representatives they create themselves, whilest the poor people sigh in corners, and dare not say their soul is their own, lamenting their former folly, to have contributed so much to their own undoing. Or lastly upon Religion, the cause of God, the worst plea of all the rest to make God accessary to their treasons, murthers, cove∣tousnesse, ambition. Christ did never authorise Subjects to plant Christian Religion, much lesse their own fanticall dreams, or fan∣tasticall deviles, in the blood of their Soveraigne, and fellow sub∣jects. Speak out, is it lawfull for Subjects to take up arms against their Prince meerly for Religion? or is it not lawfull? It ye say it is not lawfull, ye condemn your selves, for your Covenant testifieth to the world, that ye have taken up arms, meerly to alter Religion, and that ye bear no Allegiance to your King, but onely in order to Re∣ligion, that is in plain terms, to your own humours and conceits. If ye say it is lawfull, ye justifie the Independents in England, for sup∣planting your selves, ye justifie the Anabaptists in Germany, Iohn of Leyden and his cue. Ye break down the banks of Order, and make way for an inundation of blood and confusion in all Countreys. Ye render your selves justly odious to all Christian Magistrates, when they see, that they owe their safety not to your good wills, but to your weaknesse, that ye want sufficient strength to cut their throats. This is fine doctrine for Europe, wherein there is scarce that King or State, which hath not Subjects of different opinions and communions in Religion. Or lastly if ye say, it is lawfull for you to plant that which ye apprehend to be true Religion by force of arms,
but it is not lawfull for others to plant that which they apprehend to be true Religion by sorce, because yours is the Gospel, theirs is not. Ye beg the question, and make your selves ridiculously partiall by your overweening opinion, worse then that of the men of China, as if yee only had two eyes, and all the rest of the world were stark blind. There more hope of a fool, then of him that is wise in his own eyes. I would to God we might be so happy as to fee a Generall Coun∣cell of Christians, at least a Generall Synod of all Proteftants, and that the first Act might be to denounce an Anathema Maranatha, against all brochers and maintainers of seditious principles, to take way the scandall which lyes upon Christian Religion, and to shew that in the search of piety, we have not lost the principles of humanity. In the mean time, let all Christian Magistrates, who are principally concerned, beware how they suffer this Cockatrice egge to be hatch∣ed in their Dominions. Much more how they plead for Baal, or Baal-Berith, the Baalims of the Covenant. It were worth the inqui∣ring, whether the marks of Antichrist do not agree as eminently to the Assembly Generall of Scotland, as either to the Pope, or to the Turk: This we see plainly, that they spring out of the ruines of the Civill Magstrate, they sit upon the Temple of God, and they advance themselves above those whom holy Scripture calleth Gods. FINIS.
A REVIEW OF DOCTOR BRAMBLE, Late Bishop of LONDENDERRY, HIS FAIRE WARNING Against the Scotes Disciplin. By R. B. G. Printed at DELF, By Michiel Stael, dwelling at the Turf-Market 1649.
For the right Honourable the Noble and potent Lord JOHN Earle of Cassils, Lord KENNEDY, &c. one of his MAJESTIES privie counsel, and Lord Iustice gene∣rall of Scotland. RIGHT HONORABLE. MY long experience ofyour Lordships sinceer zeale to the truth of God, and affection to the liberties of the Church and Kingdome of Scotland, against all ene∣mies whomsoever; hath imboldened me to offer by your Lordships hand to the view of the publick, my following answer to a very bitter enemy of that Church and King∣dome for their adhaerence to the sacred truth of God and their own just liberties. At my first sight of his Book and many dayes thereafter I had no purpose at The Author reasons of his wryting. all to medle with him: your Lordship knowes how unprovided men of my present condition must be, either with leasure, or accommodations, or a minde suitable for wryting of books. Also Doctor Bramble was so well knowne on the other side of the Sea, the justice of the Parliament of England and Scotland having unanimously condemned him to stand upon the highest pi∣nacle of infamy, among the first of the unpardonable incendiaries, and inthe head of the most pernicious instruments of the late miseries in Britaine and Ireland: and the evident falshood of his calumnies were so clearly con∣futed long ago in printed answers to the infamons Authors whence he had borrowed them; I saw lastly the mans Spirit so extreame saucy, and his pen so wespish and full of gall, that I judged him unworthy of any answer. But understanding his malions boldnes to put his Book in the hand of his Majesty, of the Prince of Orange, and al the eminent personages of this place who can reed English; yea to send it abroad unto all the Universities of these Provin∣ces, with very high and insinuating commendations, from the prime favourers of the Episcopall cause: hearing also the threats of that faction to put this their Excellent and unanswerable peece, both in Dutch, Frensh, and Latine; that in the whole neighbouring World the reputation of the Scotes might thereby be wounded, killed, and buried, without hope of recovery; I found it necessary, at the desire of diverse friends, to send this my review after it, hoping that all who shall be pleased to be at the paines of comparing the re∣ply with the challenge, may be induced to pronounce him not only a rash, un∣timous, malicious, but also a very false accuser. This much justice doe I ex∣pect from every judicious and aequitable comparer of our wrytes, upon the hazard of their censure to fall upon my side. The Praelats are unable by reason to de∣fend Episco pacy. His invectives against us are chiefly for three things; our Discipline, our Covenant, our alleadged unkindnes to our late Soveraigne. My apology for the first is that in disciplin we maintaine no considerable conclusion, but what
is avowed by all the Reformed Churches, especially our Brethren of Holland and France, as by the approbatory suffrages of the Universities of Leyden, Vtrecht and others, to the theorems whereupon our adversarie doth build his chief accusations, may appeare. If our practise had aberred from the common rule, the crookednes of the one ought not to praejudge the straightnes of the o∣ther: though what our adversary alleadgeth of these aberrations is nothing, but his owne calumnious imputations: the chiefe quarrel is our rule it selfe, which all the reformed harmoniously defend with us, to bee according to Scripture; and the Episcopall declinations, to bee beside and against the line or the word, yea Antichristian. If our Praelats had found the humour of disputing this maine cause to stir in their veines, why did they not vent it in replyes to Didoclavius and Gersome Bucerus, who for long thirty yeares have stood unanswered? or if fresher meats had more pleased their tast, why did not their stomacks venture on Salmasius or Blondels books against Episcopacy? If verbal debates had liked them better then wryting, why had none of them the courage to accept the conference, with that incomparably most learned of all knights now living or in any bygone age Sir Claud Somayis; who by a person of honnour about the King, did signify his rendines to prove before his Majesty, against any one or all his praelaticall divines, that their Episcopacy had no warrant at all in the word of God, or any good reason? But our friends are much wiser then to be at the trouble and hazard of any such exercise; the artifices of the court are their old trade, they know bet∣ter Cheir stron∣ge  are  of . how to watch the seasons, and to distribute amongst themselves the how∣res of the Kings opportunities, when privatly without contradiction they may instill in his tender mind their corrupt principles, and instruct him in his cabine, how safe it is for his conscience, and how much for his honor ra∣ther to ruine himselfe, his family and all his Kingdomes with his own hands, then to desert the holy Church, that is the Bishops and their followers; then to joine with the rebellious Covenanters, enemies to God, to his Father, to to Monarchy that the embracing of the Barbarous Irish, the pardoning of all their monstruous murders, the rewarding of their expected merits with a free liberty of Popery, and accesse to all places of the highest trust, though contrary to all the Lawes which England and Ireland has knowne this hun∣dred yeares; all this without and before any Parliament, must be very con∣sistent, with conscience, honor and all good reason. Yea to bind up the soule of the most sweet and ingenuous of Princes, in their chaines of their slavery for ever, they have fallen upon a most rare trick, which hardly the inventions of all their praedecessors can pararel. They rest not satisfied, that for the upholding of their ambition and greed, they did harden our late So∣veraigne The  in  to his very last in their Errours, and without compassion did dryve him on to his satal praecipice, unles they make him continue after his death to cry loud every day in the eares of his Son in his later will and testament, to follow him in that same way of ruine; rather then to give over to serve . the luts of the praelaticall clergy. They have gathered together his Majesties last papers, and out of them have made a book, whereupon their best pens
have dropped the greatest eloqution, reason and devotion was among them; by way of essayes; as it were to frame the heart of the Son by the fingers of the dying Father to piety, wisedome, patience, and every virtue, but ever & anone to let fall so much of their own ungracious dew, as may irrigat the seeds of their praelaticall Errors and Church interest; so farre as to charge him to perseveer in the maintainance of Episcopall governement upon all ha∣zards, without the change of any thing except a little p. 278. and to assure that all Covenanters are of a faction engaged into a Religious rebellion, who may never be trusted till they have repented of their Covenant; and that till then never lesse loyalty justice or humanity may be expected from any, then from them; that if hee stand in need of them hee is undone, for they will devoure him as the Serpent does the dove. These and the like pernicious maximes framed by an Episcopall hand, of purpose to separat for ever the King from all his covenanted subjects, how farr they were from the heart, language and wrytings of our late Soveraigne, all who were aquainted with his carriage and most intime affections at New-Castle, in the Isle of Wight and thereafter, can testify, But it is reason when the Praelats doe frame an image of a King that they should have liberty to place their owne image in its forheade, as the statuary of old did his, in the Boss of Pallas targe, with such artiice that all her worshipers were necessitat to worship him and that no hand was able to destroy the one without the dis∣solution and breaking in peeces of the other; yet our Praelats would know, that in this age there be many excellent Engyneers, whose witty practicks transcend the most skilfull experiments of our Auncestors: and what ever may be the ignorance or weaknes of men, wee trust the breath of our Lords mouth will not faile to blow out the Bishop from the Kings armes, without any detriment at all to royalty, Allwayes the wicked and impious cunning of these craftsemen is much to be blamed who dare be bold to insert and en∣grave themselfes so deeply in the images of the Gods as the one cannot be intended to be picked out of the other more then the Aple from the eye, un∣les the subsistance of both be put in hazard. The other matter of his rayling against us is the solemne league and cove∣nant; The only crane of the Covenant, is that it extir∣pate praelacy. when this nimble and quick enough Doctor comes assisted with all the reasons the whole University of Oxford can afford him, to demonstrat it as he professes in his last Chapter, to be wicked, false, void, and what not; wee find his most demonstrative proofes to be so poor and silly that they infere nothing of his conclusion. To this day no man has shewed any errour in the mater of that covenant; as for our framing and taking of it, our adversa∣ries drave us thereunto, with a great deale of necessity; and now being in it, neither their fraud nor force may bring us from it againe, for we feare the oath of God. After much deliberation we found that covenant the sove∣raigne meanes to joyne and keep together the whole orthodox party in the three Kingdomes, for the defence of their Religion and Liberties which a popish, praelaticall and malignant faction with all their might were over∣tarning who still to this day are going on in the same designe, without any visible change, in the most of their former principles. And why should any
who loves the King hate this covenant, which is the straytestty the world can devise, to knit all to him and his posterity, if so be his Majestie might be pleased to enter therein; but by all meanes such a mischiefe must be aver∣ted, for so the roote of Episcopacy would quickly wither without any hope of repullulation; an evill farr greater in the thoughts of them who now mannage the conscience of the Court thē the extirpation of Monarchy the eversion of all the three Kingdomes or any other earthly misery. As for the third subject of the Warners fury against us, our unkindnes to The Bi∣shops are most justly cast out of England. the late King, if any truth were in this false challenge, no other creature on earth could be supposed the true cause thereof, but our unhappy praelats: all our grievances both of Church and State, first and last, came princi∣pally from them: had they never been authors of any more mischiefe, then what they occasioned to our late Soveraigne, his person, family and Do∣minions this last dozn of yeares, there is abundant reason of burying that their praeter and Antiscripturall order in the grave of perpetuall infamy. But the truth is, beside more auncient quarrels, since the dayes of our fathers the Albigenses, this limb of Antichrist has ever been witnessed against; Wickleif, Huss, and their followers were zealous in this charge, till Luther and his disciples got it flung out of all the reformed world, except England; where the violence of the ill advised princes did keep it up for the perpetuall trouble of that land, till now at last it hath well neare kicked downe to the ground there, both Church and Kingdome. As for the point in hand we deny The Scots were never injurious to their King. all unkindnes to our King whereof any reasonable complaint can be framed against us. Our first contests stand justified this day by King and Parliament in both Kingdomes. When his Majestie was so ill advised as to bring downe upon our borders an English army for to punish our refusing of a world of novations in our Religion contrary to the lawes of God and of our country, what could our land doe lesse then lie downe in their armes upon Dunce law for their just and necessary defence? when it was in their power with ease to haue dissipat the opposit army, they shew themselves most ready upon very easy conditions to goe home in peace, and gladly would have rested there, had not the furious Bishops moved his Majestie without all provocation, to breake that first peace and make for a second invasion of Scotland, only to second their unreasonable rage: was it not then necessary for the Scots to arme againe? when they had defeate the Episcopall Army and taken New-castle though they found nothing considerable to stand in their way to Lon∣don, yet they were content to lie still in Northumberland, and upon very meane tearnes to returne the second time in peace. For all this the praelats could not give it over, but raised a new Army and filled England with fire and sword, yea well neere subdued the Parliament and their followers and did almost accomplish their first designes upon the whole Isle. The Scots then with most earnest and pitifull entreaties were called upon by their Brethren of England for helpe, where unwilling that their brethren should perish in their sight and a bridge should be made over their carcasses for a third warre upon Scotland, when after long tryall they had found all their intercessions with the King for a moderat and reasonable accommodation
slighted and rejected they suffered themselves to be perswaded to enter in co∣venant with their oppressed and fainting brethren, for the mantainance of the common cause of Religion and liberty, but with expresse Articles for the preservation of royalty in all its just rights in his Majestie and his posterity; what unkindnes was heer in the Scots to their King? When by Gods blessing on the Scotes helpe the opposit faction was fully subdued, his Majestie left Oxford with a purpose for London, but by the seve∣rity The Scotes selling of the King is a most false ca∣lumnie. of the ordinances against his receivers, he diverted towards Linn, to ship for Holland or France; where by the way fearing a discovery and surprise, he was necessitate to cast himselfe upon the Scotes army at New-wark; upon his promise to give satisfaction to the propositions of both Kingdomes, he was received there and to New-castle: here his old oathes to adhaere unto Epis∣copacy hindred him to give the expected satisfaction. At that time the prime leaders of the English army were seeking with all earnestnes occasion to fall upon the Scots, much out of heart and reputation by Iames Grahame and his Irishes incursions, most unhappy for the Kings affaires: Scotland at that time was so full of divisions that if the King had gone thither they were in an evi∣dent hazard of a present war both within among themselfes, and without from England: our friends in the English Parliament whom we did, and had reason to trust, assured us that our taking the King with us to Scotland, was the keeping of the Sectarian Army on foot, for the wracke of the King, of Scorland, of the Presbyterian party in England; as the sending of his Ma∣jestie to one of his houses neer London,, upon the faith of the Parliament of England, was the only way to get the Sectaryes disarmed, the King and the people settled in a peace, upon such tearmes as should be satisfactory both to the King and the Scots and all the wel-affected in England. This being the true case was it any, either unjustice, unkindnes or imprudence in the Scots to leave the King with his Parliament of England? was this a sel∣ling of him to his enemies? the monyes the Scots received at their departure out of England had no relation at all to the King, they were scarce the sixth parte of the arreares due to them for bygon service; they were but the one halfe of the sume capitulat for, not only without any reference to the King, but by an act of the English Parliament excluding expresly from that Treaty of the armies departure all consideration of the disposall of the Kings per∣son. The unexpected evills that followed in the Armies rebellion, in their seasing on London, destroying the Parliament, murthering the King, no mortall eye could have forseen. The Scots were ever ready to the utmost of their power to have prevented all these mischiefes with the hazard of what was dearest to them; notwithstanding of all the hard measure they had of∣ten received both from the King and the most of their friends in England. That they did not in time and unanimously stur to purpose for these ends they are to answer it to God, who were the true Authors; the innocency of the Church is cleered in the following treatise. Among the many causes of these miseries the prime fountaine was the venome of Episcopall principles which some serpents constantly did infuse by their speaches and letters in the eares and heart of the King to keep him of from giving that satisfaction to
his good subjects which they found most necessary and due; the very same cause which ties up this day the hands of covenanters from redressing ali pre∣sent misorders could they have the King to joyne with them in their cove∣nant, to quit his unhappy Bishops, to lay aside his formall and dead Litur∣gie, to cast himselfe upon the counsels of his Parliaments it were easy to prophecie what quickly would become of all his enemies: but so long as E∣piscopall and malignant agents compasseth him about (though all that comes neer may see him as lovely hopfull, and promising a prince for all naturall endowments as this day breaths in Europe or for a long time has swayed a Scepter in Britaine) yet while such unlucky birds nest in his Cabin and men so ungraciously principled doe daily besiege him, what can his good people doe but sit downe with mournfull eyes and bleeding hears, till the Lord amend these otherwise remediles and insuperable evills? but I hold heer least I transgresse to farr the bounds of an Epistle? I account it an advantage to have your Lordship my judge in what The reason of the dedi∣ation. heere and in my following treatise, I spake of Religion, the liberties of our country and the Royall Family: I know non fitter then your Lordship, both to discerne and decerne in all these matters. Me thinks I may say it without flattery (which I never much loved either in my selfe or others) that among all our Nobles for constancy in a zealous profession, for exemplary practise in publick and privat duties; the mercy of God has given to your Lordship a reputation second to none. And for a rigid adhaerence to the Rights and Pri∣viledges of your Country, according to that auncient disposition of your most Noble Family, noted in our Historians, especially that Prince of them Georg Buchanan, the Tutor of your Grand-Father, I know none in our Land who wil pretend to goe before you, and for the affairs of the King, your interest of blood in the Royall Family is so well known, that it would be a strange im∣pudency in me, if in your audience I durst be bold wittingly to give sinistrous information. Praying to God that what in the candid ingenuity & true zeale of my spirit, I present under your Lordships patrociny unto the eye of the World, for the vindication of my mother Church and Country, from the Sicophantick accusations of a Stigmatised incendiary may produce the inten∣ded effects, Hague this 28 May 7 Iunie. 1649. I rest your Lordships in all Christian duety, R. B. G.
CHAP. I. The proelaticall faction continue resolute, that the King and all his people shall perish, rather then the praelats, be not restored to their former places of power, for to set up Popery, Profani∣ty, and Tirranny, in all the three Kingdomes. WHile the Comissioners of the Church The unsea∣sonablenes of Doctor Brambles warning. and Kingdome of Scotland, were on their way to make their first addresses to his Maje∣stie, for to condole his most lamentable af∣flictions, and to make offer of their best af∣fections and services for his comfort, in this time of his great distresse; it was the wisedome and charity of the praelaticall party, to send out Doctor Bramble, to meet them with his Faire Warning. For what else? but to discou∣rage them in the very entry from tendering their propositi∣ons, and before ever they were heard, to stop his Majesties eares with grievous praejudice, against all that possibly they could speake; though the world sees that the only apparent fountaine of hope upon earth, for recovery of the wofully confounded affaires of the King, is in the hands of that Anti∣praelaticall nation: but it is the hope of these who love the welfaire of the King and his people, of the Churches and Kingdomes of Britain, that the hand of God, which hath bro∣ken all the former devices of the Praelats, shall crush this their engine also. Our warner undertaketh to oppugne the Scotes discipline The irra∣tional way of the war∣ners wri∣ting. in a way of his owne, none of the most rational. He does not
so much as pretend to state a question, nor in his whole book to bring against any maine position of his opposites, either Scripture, father or reason, nor so much as assay to answer any one of their arguments against Episcopacy; onely hee culs out some of their by-tenets, belonging little or nothing to the maine questions, and from them takes occasion to gather together in a heape all the calumnies which of old, or of late their knowne enemies out of the forge of their ma∣lice and fraud, did obtrude on the credulity of simple peo∣ple: also some detorted passages from the bookes of their friends, to bring the way of that Church in detestation with∣out any just reason. These practises in our warner, are the less pardonable, that though he knowes the chiefe of his allegations, to bee The most of his stuffe is borrowed and long agoe con∣futed. but borrowed from his late much beloved Comerads Master Corbet in his Lysimachus Nicanor, and Master Maxewell in his Issachars Burden, yet he was neither deterred by the strange punishments, which God from heaven inflicted vi∣sibly on both these calumniatores of their mother Church, nor was pleased in his repeating of their calumnious argu∣ments, to releeve any of them from the exceptions under the which they stand publickly confuted, I suppose to his own distinct knowledge, I know certainly, to the open view ofthousands in Scotland, England and Ireland; but it makes for the warners designe to dissemble here in Holland, that ever he heard of such books as Lysimachus Nicanor, and Is∣sachars Burden, much lesse of Master Baylies answer to both, printed some yeares agoe at London, Edinburgh and Amsterdam, without a rejoinder from any of that faction to this day. The con∣ bitternes of the warners spirit. How everlet our warner be heard. In the very first page of his first chapter, wee may tast the sweetnes of his meek Spirit: at the verie entrie, he concludeth but without any
pretence to an argument there or else where, the discipline of the Church of Scotland to be their owne invention, where∣on they dote, the Diana, which themselves have canonized, their own dreams, the counterfeyt image which they faine hath fallen down from Iupiter, which they so much adore, the very quintessence of refined popery, not only most injurious to the civill Magistrat, most oppressive to the subject, most perni∣cious to both; but also inconsistent with all formes of civill governement, destructive to all sorts of Policy, a rack to the conscience, the heaviest pressure that can fall on a people. So much truth and sobernes doth the warner breath out in his very first page. Though he had no regard at all to the cleare passages of Holy Scripture, whereupon the Scotes doe build their Anti-Episcopall tenets; nor any reverence to the harmony of the reformed Churches, which unanimously joyne with the Scotes in the maine of their discipline, especially in that which the Doctor hates most therein, the rejection of Episcopacy: yet me thinks some little respect might have appeared in the man to the authority of the Magistrat, and civil Lawes, which are much more ingeminated by this worthy divine o∣ver all his book, then the holy Scriptures. Can hee so soon forget that the whole discipline of the The war∣ner stricks at the Sco∣tes disci∣pline through the Kings sides. Church of Scotland, as it is there taught and practised, is established by acts of Parliament, and hath all the strength which the King and State can give to a civil Law? the war∣ner may wel be grieved, but hardly can he be ignorant, that the Kings Majestie this day does not at all question the ju∣stice of these sanctions: what ever therefore be the Doctors thoughts, yet so long as hee pretends to keep upon his face the maske of loyalty, he must be content to eat his former words, yea, to burne his whole book: otherwise hee layes, against his own professions, a slander upon the King, and
His Royal Father, of great ignorance, or huge unjustice, the one having established, the other offring to establish by their civill lawes, a Church discipline for the whole nation of Scotland, which truly is the quintessence of Popery, per∣nicious and destructive to all formes of civill governement, and the heaviest pressure that can fall on a people. All the cause of this choler which the warner is pleased to speake out, is the attempt of the Scotes, to obtrude their In the threshold hee stum∣bles on the Kings con∣science. discipline upon the King, contrary to the dictats of his own conscience, and to compell forraigne Churches to embrace the same. Ans. Is it not presumption in our warner, so soone to tell the world in print what are the dictats of the Kings conscience, as yet he is not his Majesties confessor, and if the Clerk of the Closet had whispered some what in his ear, what he heard in secret, hee ought not to have proclaimed it without a warrant; but we doe altogether mistrust his re∣ports of the Kings conscience: for who will beleeve him, that a knowing and a just King will ever be content, to command and impose on a whole Nation by his Lawes, a discipline contrary to the dictats of his owne conscience. This great stumble up on the Kings conscience in the first page, must be an ominous cespitation on the threshold. The other imputation had no just ground: the Scotes did The Scots never of∣fered to impose any thing u on En∣gland. never medle, to impose any thing upon forraigne Churches, there is question of none, but the English; and the Scotes were never so presumptuous, as to impose any thing of theirs upon that Church. It was the assembly of divines at West∣minster, convocat by the King and Parliament of England, which after long deliberation, and much debate, upani∣mously concluded the Presbiterian discipline in all the parts thereof, to be agreable to the word of God: it was the two Houses of the Parliament of England without a contrary voice, who did ordaine the abolition of Episcopacy, and
the setting up of Presbyteryes and Synods in England and Ireland. Can heere the Scotes be said to compell the English to dance after their pype, when their own assembly of di∣vines begins the song, when the Lords and Commons as∣sembled in the Parliament of England concurre without a discording opinion, when the King himselfe for perfecting the harmony offers, to adde his voice for three whole yeares together? In the remainder of the chapter the warner layes upon the The elder praelats of England were E∣rastians, and more, but the younger are as much an i-Erastian as the most riged of the Pres∣bytery. Scotes three other crimes: first, That they count it Erastia∣nisme to put the governement of the Church in the hand of the Magistrat. Answ. The Doctors knowledge is greater then to bee ignorant, that all these goe under the name of Erastians, who walking in Erastus ways of flattering the Magistrat, to the prejudice of the just rights of the Church, run yet out much beyond Erastus personall tenets; I doubt if that man went so far as the Doctor heere and else where, to make all Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction, but a part of the Magistrats civill power, which for its execution, the su∣preame Governours of any state may derive out of the foun∣taine of their supremacy to what ever hands civill or Ec∣clesiastick themselfes think fit to commit it. Let the Doc∣tor adde to this much knowledge, but a little ingenuity, and he shall confes that his Brethren the Later Bishops, who claime Episcopacy by divine right, are all as much against this E∣rastian Caesaro-papisme, as any Presbiterian in Scotland. The elder Bishops indeed of England and all the Lawes there for Episcopacy seeme to be point blank according to the Erastian errours: for they make the crowne and royall supremacy the originall, root and fountaine whence all the discipline of the Church doth flow: as before the days of Henry the eight it did out of the Popes head-ship of the Church under Christ. How ever let the Doctor ingenuously
speake out his sence, and I am deceived, if he shall not ac∣knowledge, that how grosse an Erastian so ever himselfe and the elder Bishops of England might have been, yet that long agoe, the most of his praelatical friends have become as much opposit to Erastianisme, as the most rigid of the Presbiterians. The other crime he layes to the charge of the Scotes is, The Sco∣tes first and grea∣test crime is irrecon∣ciliablenes with Rome. that they admit no latitude in Religion, but will have every opinion afundamentall article of faith, and are averse from the reconciliation of the Protestant Churches: Ans. If the warner had found it seasonable to vent a little more of his true sence in this point, he had charged this great crime far more home upon the heade of the Scotes: for indeed though they were ever far from denying the true degrees of impor∣tance which doe cleerly appeare among the multitude of Christian truthes, yet the great quarrell heer of the warner and his freinds against them, is that they spoiled the Canter∣burian designe of reconcealing the Protestant Churches not among themselfes, but with the Church of Rome. When these good men were with all earnestnes proclaming the greatest controversies of Papists and Protestants, to be up∣on no fundamentalls but only disputable opinions, wherein beleefe on either side was safe enough, and when they found that the Papists did stand punctually to the Tenets of the Church of Rome, and were obstinately unwilling to come over to England, their great labour was that the English and the rest of the Protestants, casting aside their needlesse be∣leefe of problematick truths, in piety, charity and zeale, to make up the breach and take away the shisme, should be at all the paines to make the journey to Rome. While this de∣signe is far advanced and furiously driven on in all the three Kingdomes, and by none more in Yreland then the Bishop of Derry, behold the rude and plaine blewcapes step in to
the play and marre all the game: by no arte, by no terrour can these be gotten alongs to such a reconciliation. This was the first and greatest crime of the Scotes, which the Doctor here glances at, but is so wyse and modest a man as not to bring it above board. The last charge of the Chapter is, that the Scotes keep not The Scotes were ever anti epis∣copall. still that respect to the Bishops of England, which they were wont of old in the beginning of Queen Elizabeths reigne. Ans. In that letter cited by the warner from the generall assembly of Scotland. 1566. Sess. 3. there is no word of ap∣probation to the office of Episcopacy: they speake to the Bi∣shops of England in no other quality or relation, but as Mi∣nisters of the word, the highest stile they give them is, re∣verend Pastors and Brethren; the tenour of the whole Epistle is a grave and brotherly admonition to beware of that fatall concomitant of the most moderat Episcopacy, the trou∣bling of the best and most zealous servants of Christ for idle & fruitles Ceremonies. How great a reverence the Church of Scotland at that time carried to praelacy, may be seen in their supplication to the secret counsell of Scotland, in that same assembly the very day and Session wherein they write the letter in hand to the Bishops of England. The Arch-Bishop of S. Andrews being then usurping jurisdiction over the ministry by some warrant from the state, the Assembly was grieved, not only with the popery of that Bishop; but with his auncient jurisdiction, which in all Bishops, Popish and protestant, is one and the same: That jurisdiction was the only matter of their present complaint; and in relation there∣to they assure the counsel in distinct tearmes, that they would never be more subject unto that usurped tiranny the they would be to the devill himselfe: So reverend an opinion had the Church of Scotland at that time of Episcopall jurisdiction. But suppone that some fourscore yeares agoe, the Scotes
before they had tasted the fruits of Protestant Bishops, had The Prae∣lates lately were found in the act of intro∣ducing Po∣pery, in∣to the Church, and Tiran∣ny into the Kingdom. judged them tolerable in England, yet since that time by the long tract of mischiefes, which constantly has accompanied the order of praelacy, they have been put upon a more ac∣curat inspection of its nature, and have found it not only a needles, but a noxious and poysonous weed, necessare to be plucked up by the root, and cast over the hedge. Beside al its former malefices, it hath been deprehēded of late in the very act of everting the foundations, both of Religion and governement, of bringing in Popery and Tiranny, in the Churches and States of all the three Kingdomes, (Canter∣burian self conviction cap. 1.) And for these crimes, it was condemned, killed, and buried in Scotland, by the unanimous consent of King, Church and Kingdom: when England thereafter both in their Assembly and Parliament, without a discording voice had found it necessary, to root out that unhappy plant, as long agoe with great wisedome, it had been cast out of all the rest of the reformed Churches, had not the Scotes all the reason in the World, to applaud such pious just and ne∣cessary resolutions of their English Brethren, though the warner should call it the greatest crime? CHAP. II. The Presbiterians assert positively, the Magistrats right to con∣vocat No con∣troversie in Scotland betwixt the King and the Church, a∣bout the convoca∣ting of Sy∣nods. Synods, to confirme their acts, to reforme the Chur∣ches within their dominions. IN the second Chapter the warner charges the Scotes pres∣bytery, with the overthrowing the Magistrats right in
convocating of Synods. When he comes to prove this, he for∣gets his challenge: and digresses from it to the Magistrates power of choysing elders and making Ecclesiastick lawes, avowing that these things are done in Scotland by Ecclesi∣astick persons alone, without consent of the king or his counsel. Ans. It seemes our Warner is very ignorant of the way ofthe Scotes discipline, the ordinary and set meetings of all assemblies both nationall and provincionall since the first reformation are determined by acts of Parliament, with the Kings consent, so betwixt the King and the Church of Scotland, there is no question for the convocating of ordi∣nary assemblies, for extraordinary, no man in Scotland did ever controvert the Kings power to call them when and where he pleased: as for the inhaerent power of the Church to meet for discipline, alswell as for worship, the Warner fals on it heereafter, we must therefore passe it in this place. What hee meanes to speake of the Kings power in choy∣sing The war∣ners Eras∣tian and Tirannick principles, hated by the King. elders or making Ecclesiastick Lawes, himselfe knowes: his Majestie in Scotland did never require any such privi∣ledge, as the election of elders, or Commissioners to Par∣liament, or members of any incorporation, civill or Eccle∣siastick, where the Lawes did not expresly provide the no∣mination to be in the crowne. The making of Ecclesiastick Lawes in England, alswell as in Scotland, was ever with the Kings good contentment, referred to Ecclesiastick as∣semblies: but the Warner seemes to be in the mind of these his companions, who put the power of preaching, of admi∣nistring the Sacraments and discipline in the supreame Ma∣gistrat alone, and derives it out of him as the head of the Church to what members he thinks expedient to commu∣nicat it: also that the legislative power alswell in Ecclesia∣stick as civill affairs, is the property of the King alone. That the Parliaments and generall assemblies are but his arbitrary
counsels, the one for matters of the state, the other for matters of the Church, with whom or without whom hee makes acts of Parliament and Church cannons, according to his good pleasure, that all the offices of the Kingdome, both of Church and State are from him, as he gives a Com∣mission to whom he will to be a sheriffe or justice of peace, so he sends out whom he pleaseth to preach & celebrate Sa∣craments by virtue of his regal mission. The Warner and his Erastian friends may well extend the royall supremacy to this largenes, but no King of Scotland was ever willing to accept of such a power though by erroneous flaterers, sometimes obtruded upon him, (see Canterburian self con∣viction. cap. ult.) The Warner will not leave this matter in generall, he dis∣cends The War∣ners igno∣rant and false re∣port of the Scotes procee∣dings. to instance a number of particular incroatchments of the Scots Presbiters upon the royall authority: wee must dispence in all his discourse with a small peckadillo in reaso∣ning, hee must bee permitted to lay all the faults of the Presbiterians in Scotland upon the back of the Presbitery it selfe, as if the faylings of officers were naturall to, and inse∣parable from their office: mis-kenning this little more of un∣consequentiall argumenting, we will goe through his parti∣cular charges, the first is, that King James anno 1579, re∣quired the generall assembly, to make no alteration in the Church-Policy, till the next Parliament, but they contem∣ning their Kings command, determined positively all their discipline without delay, and questioned the Arch-Bischop of Sainct Andrews for voting in Parliament according to the undoubted Lawes of the Land, yea twenty Pres∣biters did hold the generall assembly at Aberdeen after it was discharged by the King. Ans. The Warner pos∣sibly may know, yet certainly he doth not care what he writes in these things to which hee is a meere stran∣ger:
the authentick registers of the Church of Scotland convinces him heire of falshood. His Majestie did write Bishops were abo∣lished and Presbyte∣ries set up in Scot∣land with King Iames consent. from Stirling to the generall assembly at Edinburgh 1579, that they should ceasse from concluding any thing in the discipline of the Church, during the time of his minority; upon this desire the assembly did abstaine from all conclusi∣ons, only they named a committee to goe to Striveling for conference which his Majestie upon that subject. What followeth thereupon? I. Immediatly a Parliament is called in October 1579, and in the first act declares and grantes jurisdiction unto the Kirk, whilk consistes in the true preach∣ing of the word of Jesus Christ, correction of maners, and administration of the true Sacraments, and declares that there is no other face of Kirk, nor other face of Religion then is presently by the favour of God established within this realme, and that there be no other jurisdiction Ecclesiasti∣cal acknowledged within this realme then that whilk is, and shalbe within the samen Kirk, or that which flowes therfra, concerning the premisses. II. In Aprile 1580. Proclama∣tion was made ex deliberatione Dominorum Consilii in name of the King, charging all Superintendentes and Commissio∣ners and Ministers serving at Kirkes. To note the names of all the subjectes alsweel men as women suspected to be Papistes or—and to admonish them—to give Confession of their faith according to the Forme approved by the Par∣liament, and to submitte unto the discipline of the true Kirk within a reasonable space—: and if they faile—that the Superintendents or Commissioners presente a role or catalogue of their names unto the King and Lords of Secret Counsell whereby they shalbe for the time, between and the 15 day of Iulie nixt to come, to the end that the actes of Parliament made against such persones may be execute. III. The shorte Confession wes drawen up at the Kings
command, which was first subscrived by his royall hand, and an act of Secret Counsell commanding all subjectes to sub∣scrive the same; as is to be seen by the Act printed with the Confession, wherein Hierarchie is abjured, that is (as hath been since declared by Nationall assemblies and Parliamen∣tes both called and held by the King) episcopacie is abjured. IV. In the assemblies 1580 and 1581 that Confession of faith and the second book of discipline (after debating many praeceding years) were approved (except one chapter de dia∣conatu) by the Assemblie, the Kings Commissioner being al∣wayes presente, not finde we any thing opposed then by him: yea then at his Majesties speciall direction about fifty classical Presbyteries were set up over all Scotland which remaine un∣to this day, Was there heer any contempt of the royall authority? About that time some noble men had gote the revenues of the Bisshop-rickes for their private use; and because they could not enjoy them by any legal right, therefore for elu∣ding the Law, they did effectuate that some Ministers should have the title of this or that Bishopricke; and the revenues were gathered in the name of this titulare or tulchan Bishop, albeit hee had but little part: e. g. Robert Montgomerie Minister at Sterline was called Arch-Bishop of Glasgow: and so it can bee instanced in other Bishop-rickes and abba∣cies. Now this kind of praelats pretended no right to any part of the Episcopall office, either in ordination or jurisdic∣tion: when some of these men began to creep in to vote for the Church in Parliament, without any Law of the State, without any commission from the Church, the generall assembly discharged them, being Ministers, to practise any more such illegall insolencies, with this ordinance of the Church, after a little debate, King James at that time did shew his good satisfaction.
But the Warner heere jumps over nolesse then twenty se∣ven The inno∣cency of the much maligned assembly of Aber∣deen. years time from the assembly at Edinburgh 1579, to that at Aberdeen 1605, then was King James by the English Bi∣shops perswasion resolved to put down the generall assem∣blies of Scotland, contrary to the Lawes and constant prac∣tise of that Church, from the first reformation to that day. The act of Parliament did bear that once at least a yeare the assembly should meet, and after their busines was ended they should name time & place for the next assembly. When they had met in the yeare 1602, they were moved to ad∣journe without doing any thing for two whole yeares to 1604, when then they were conveened at the time and place agreed to by his Majestie, they were content upon his Ma∣jesties desire without doing any thing againe to adjourne to the nixt yeare 1605, at Aberdeen, when that dyet came his Majesties Commissioner offered them a Letter: To the end they might be an Assembly and so in a Capacity to receave his Majesties Letter, with the Commissioners good pleasure they sate downe, they named their Moderator and Clark they received and read the Kings letter commanding them to rise, which they obeyed without any farther action at all but naming a dyet for the nixt meeting according to the Lawes and constant practise of Scotland, hereupon by the pernicious counsel of Arch-Bishop Banckroft at London, the King was stirred up to bring sore trouble upon a number of gracious Ministers. This is the whole matter which to the Warner heir is so tragick an insolence, that never any Par∣liament Christmas and other superstiti∣ous festi∣vals aboli∣shed in Scotland, both by Church and State. durst attempt the like. See more of this in the Hi∣storicall vindication. The nixt instance of our Presbiteryes usurpation upon the Magistrat is their abolition, (before any statute of Parliament thereupon) of the Church festivals in their first book of disci∣pline. Ans. Consider the grievousnesse of this crime, in
the intervall of Parliaments, the great counsel of Scotland in the minority of the Prince entrusted by Parliament to rule the Kingdome, did charge the Church to give them in wryte their judgement about matters Ecclesiasticall: in obedience to this charge the Church did present the counsel with a wryte named since the first book of disciplin: which the Lords of counsel did approve, subscribe and ratify by an Act of State: a part of the first head in that wryte was that Christmas, E∣piphany, purification, and other fond feasts of the virgin Mary, as not warranted by the holy Scriptures, should bee laid aside. Was it any encroachment upon the Magistrate for the Church to give this advice to the privy counsell when earnestly they did crave it? the people of Scotland ever since have shewed their ready obedience to that direc∣tion of the Church founded upon Scripture, and backed from the beginning with an injunction of the state. His third instance of the Church of Scotlands usurpation The friends of Episcopa∣cy thryves not in Scotland. upon the Magistrat is, their abolition of Episcopacy in the assembly 1580, when the Law made it treason to impugne the authority of Bishops, being the third estate of the King∣dome. Ans. The Warner seemes to have no more know∣ledge of the affairs of Scotland, then of Japan or Utopia, the Law hee speakes of was not in being some yeares after 1580, how ever all the generall assemblyes of Scotland are authorised by act of Parliament, to determine finally with∣out an appeale in all Ecclesiastick affaires: in the named as∣sembly Lundie the Kings Commissioner did sit and consent in his Majesties name to that act of abolition, as in the nixt assembly 1581, the Kings Comissioner Caprinton did erect in his Majesties name the Presbiteryes in all the Land; it is true, three yeares thereafter a wicked Courtier Captaine James Stuart, in a shadow of a closse and not summoned Parliament, did procure an act to abolish Presbiteries and
erect Bishops, but for this and all the rest of his crimes that evill man was quickly rewarded by God before the world, in a terrible destruction: these acts of his Parliament the very nixt yeare were disclaimed by the King, the Bishops were put downe, and the Presbitry was set up again, and ne∣ver more removed to this day. The Warners digression to the perpetuity of Bishops in Scotland, to the acts of the Church and State for their re∣stitution, is but to shew his ignorance in the Scotes story: what ever be the Episcopall boastings of other Nations, yet it is evident that from the first entrance of Christian Religion into Scotland, Presbiters alone without Bishops for some hundred yeares did governe that Church: and after the re∣formation their was no Bishop in that Land, but in tittle and benefice till the yeare 1610; when Bancroft did consecrat three Scotes Ministers, all of them men of evill report, whom that violent Commissioner the Earle of Dunbar in the cor∣rupt and null assembly of Glasgow, got authorised in some pairt of a Bishops office; which part only and no more was ratified in a posterior Parliament. Superintendents are no where the same with Bishops much lesse in Scotland where for a time only till the Churches were planted, they were used as ambulatory Commissioners, and visitors to preach the word, and administer the Sacraments for the supply of vacant and unsetled congregations. The fourth instance is the Churches obtruding the second The se∣cond book of disciplin why not al ratified in Parlia∣ment. book of discipline, without the ratification of the State. Ans. For the Ecclesiastick enjoining of a generall assemblyes de∣crees a particular ratification of Parliament is unnecessary; generall acts of Parliament commanding obedience to the acts of the Church, are a sufficient warrant from the State, be∣side, that second book of disciplin was much debated with the King, and at last in the generall assembly 1590, his con∣sent
was obtained unto it: for in that assembly where unani∣mously the subscription of the second book of disciplin by all the ministers of the Kingdome was decried, his Majestie some time in person and alwayes by the chancelor his Com∣missioner was present, and in the act for subscription Sess. 10. Augusti 8. it is expresly said that not only all the Ministers but also all the Commissioners praesent did consent, among which Commissioners the chancelor, his Majesties Commis∣sioner was chief. But neither the King nor the Church could get it to passe the Parliament in regaird of the opposition, which some States-men did make unto these parts thereof, which touched on their owne interest of unjust advantage, this was the only stick. The next instance of the Churches encroachement is their usurpation of all the old rents of the clergy, as the Churches The War∣ners hipo∣crisy, cal∣ling that a crime, which himselfe counts a virtue. patrimony, and their decerning in anassembly that nothing in the nixt Parliament should passe before the Church were fully restored to her rents. Ans. Consider heere the Warners hypocrisie and unjustice, he challenges the Presbi∣terians for that which no praelate in the world did ever esteem a fault, a meer declaration of their judgement that the Church had a just right to such rents, as by law and long possession were theirs, and not taken away from them by any lawfull meanes. What if heere they had gone on with the most of the praelaticall party to advance that right to a jus divinum? what if they had put themselves by a com∣mand from Court, into the possession of that right, with∣out a processe, as diverse of the Warners friends were begun lately to doe in all the three Kingdomes? but all that he can here challenge the Scotes for, is a meere declaration of their simple right, with a supplication to the Regent his grace, that hee would indeavour in the nixt Parliament, to procure a ninth part of the Churches patrimony, for the mantainance
of the ministry, and the poore of the country: for all the rent that the Churches then could obtaine or did petition, was but a third of the thirds of the benefices or tithes. That ever any assembly in Scotland did make any other addresse to the Parliament for stipends then by way of humble suppli∣cation, it is a great untruth. The last instance is, the erecting of Presbyteries through al the Kingdome, by an act of the Church alone. Ans. I have showne already the untruth of this alleadgeance; the proofe heere brought for it, is grounded only upon an ambiguous word which the Warners ignorance in the Scotish disciplin and Presbitery (though the maine subject of his booke) permits him not to understand. The Presbyteries were set up by the King after the assembly 1580, but the second booke of discipline of which alone the citation speaks, how ever enjoind by many assemblies, yet it could never be got∣ten ratified in any Parliament, only because of these parts of it which did speake for the patrimony of the Church, and oppugne the right of patronages. How well the Warner hath proven the Presbiterian prac∣tises The War∣ner a grosse E∣rastian. to be injurious to the Magistrate we have considered, possibly he will bee more happy in his nixt undertaking, in his demonstrations that their doctrinall principles doe tram∣ple on the Magistrats supremacy and Lawes; their first prin∣ciple hee takes out of the second book of disciplin. Cap. 7. That no Magistrat nor any but Ecclesiastick persons may vote in Synods. Ans. Though I find nothing of this in the place cited, yet there is nothing in it that crosseth either the Laws or the Kings supremacy: for according to the acts of Parliament of Scotland both old and late and the constant practise of that Church, the only members of Pres∣byteries are Ministers and ruling elders. Is it the Warners minde to vent here his super-Erastianisme, that all Ecclesia∣stick
assemblies Classicall, Provinciall, nationall are but the arbitrary Courts of the Magistrat for to advise him in the execution of his inhaerent power about matters Ecclesia∣sticall; and for this cause, that it is in his arbitrement to give a decisive voyce in all Church assemblies, to whom and how many so ever hee will? Though this may bee the Warners minde, as it hath been some of his friends, yet the most of the praelaticall party will not mantaine him heerein. How ever, such principles are contrary to the Lawes of Scotland, to the professions also and practises of all the Princes and Magistrats that ever have lived there. But the Warner heere may possibily glaunce at another Praelatical principles impossibi∣litate also∣lid peace, betwixt the King and his Kingdoms principle of his good friends, who have been willing lately to vent before al Britaine in print their Elevating the supre∣macy of Soveraignes so far above Lawes, that what ever peo∣ple have obtained to bee established by never so many assem∣blies and Parliaments and confirmed with never so many great seales of ratification, and peaceably injoyed by never so long a possession, yet it is nothing but commendable wisedome and justice for the same Prince who made the first concessions or any of his successors when ever they find themselfes strong enough, to cancell all and make void what ever Parliaments, Assemblies, royall ratifications, and the longest possession made foolish people beleeve to be most firme and unquestionable. To this purpose Bishop Max∣wel (from whom much of this warning is borrowed) doth speak in his Sacro-Sancta regum Majestas. Though this had been the Cabine divinity of our praelats, yet what can be their intentions in speaking of it out in these times of confu∣sion, themselves must declare: for the cleare consequente of such doctrine seemes to be a necessity either of such Warners perpetuall banishment from the Courts and eares of Sove∣raignes, or else that subjects be kept up for ever in a strong
jealousy, and feare that they can never be secure of their liberties, though never so well ratified by Lawes and pro∣mises of Princes any longer then the sword and power re∣maines in their owne hand to preserve what they have ob∣tained. Such Warners so long as they are possessed with such maximes of state, are cleare everters of the first funda∣tions of trust betwixt Soveraignes and subjects, they take away all possibility of any solid peace of any confident setle∣ment in any troubled state, before both parties be totally ruined or one become so strong that they need no more to feare the others malcontentment in any time to come. Our second challenged principle is that wee teach the whole power of convocating assemblies to be in the Church. Erastian praelats evert the legall foundati∣ons of all govern∣ment. Ans. The Warners citations prove not that we maintaine any such assertion, our doctrin and constant practise hath been to ascribe to the King a power of calling Synods, when and wheresoever he thought fit, but that which the Warner seemes to point at is, our tenet of an intrinsicall power in the Church to meet, as for the word and Sacraments so for dis∣ciplin; in this all who are Christians, old and late, the prae∣laticall and Popish party as well as others, goe along with us to mantaine in doctrine and practise, a necessity even in times of persecution, that the Church must meet for the worship of God and execution of Ecclesiastick disciplin among their owne members. In this the doctrine and practise of the Scots is according to their setled lawes, uncontroverted by his Ma∣jestie. If the Warner will mantaine, that in reason and con∣science al the Churches of the world are oblidged to dissolve and never more to meet when an erroneous Magistrat by his Tyrannous edict commands them to doe so, let him call up Erastus from the dead to be disciplined in this new doc∣trine of the praelats impious loyalty. The third principle is that the judgment of true and false
doctrine of suspension and deprivation of Ministers belong∣eth to the Church. Ans. If this be a great heresie it is to be The finall determi∣nation of all Eccle∣siastick causes by the Lawes of Scot∣land, is in the gene∣rall assem∣bly. charged as much upon the state as upon the Church, for the acts of Parliament give all this power to the Church, neith∣er did the lawes of England or of any Christian state, popish or protestant, refuse to the Church the determination of such Ecclesiastick causes; some indeed doe debate upon the power of appeales from the Church, but in Scotland by the law, as no appeale in things civill goes higher then the Parliament so in matters Ecclesiastick none goes above the generall as∣sembly. Complaints indeed may goe to the King and Parlia∣ment for redresse of any wrong has been done in Ecclesiastick Courts, who being custodes religionis may by their coercive power command Ecclesiastick Courts to rectifie any wrong done by them contraire to Scripture, or if they persist take order with them. But that two or three praelats should be∣come a Court of delegats, to receave appeales from a gene∣rall assembly, neither Law nor practise in Scotland did ever admit, nor can the word of God or any Equity require it. In the Scotes assemblies no causes are agitat but such as the Parliament hath agreed to bee Ecclesiastick and of the Churches cognisance: no Processe about any Church rent was ever cognosced upon in Scotland but in a civill Court: its very false that ever any Church censure, much lesse the highest of excommunication did fall upon any for robbing the Church of its patrimony. The divine right of discipline, is the tenet of the most of praelats. Our fourth challenged principle is that wee maintain Ec∣clesiastick jurisdiction by a divine right. Ans. Is this a huge crime? is there divine in the world, either Papist or Potestant, except a few praelaticall Erastians, but they doe so? If the Warner will professe (as it seemes hee must) the contradiction of that which he ascribes to us, his avowed te∣net must bee that all Ecclesiastick power flowes from the
Magistrat, that the Magistrat himself may execute all Church censures, that all the Officers appointed by Christ for the governement of his Church, may bee laid aside, and such a kind of governors bee put in their place, as the Magistrate shalbe pleased to appoint: that the spirituall sword and Kei∣es of heaven belong to the Magistrate by vertue of his su∣premacy, als wel as the temporall sword and the Keies of his earthly Kingdome: our difference heere from the War∣ner will not (I hope) be found the greatest heresie. Our last challenged principle is, that wee will have all our All the power of the Church in Scot∣land is le∣gall, and with the Magistrats consente. power against the Magistrat, that is, although hee dissent. Ans. It is an evill comentare that al must be against the Ma∣gistrate, which is done against his consent: but in Scotland their is no such case: for all the jurisdiction which the church there does enjoy, they have it with the consent of the Magi∣strat: all is ratified to them by such acts of Parliament as his Majestie doth not at all controvert. Concerning that odious case the Warner intimats, whither in time of persecutiō, when the Magistrat classheth with the Church, any Ecclesiastick disciplin be then to be exercised; himselfe can better answer it then we, who with the auncient Christians doe think, that on all hazards (even of life) the church may not be dissolved, but must meet in dens and caves and in the wildernes for the word and Sacraments and keeping it selfe pure by the divine ordinance of discipline. Having cleered all the pernicious practises and all the The pre∣lats rather then to lay aside their owne inte∣rest, will keepe the King and his people in misery for ever. wicked Doctrines, which the Warner layes upon us, I think it needles to insist upon these defenses which he in his aboun∣dant charity brings for us, but in his owne way, that he may with the greater advantage impugne them: only I touch one passage whereupon he make injurious exclamations: that which Mr. Gilespie in his theoremes wryts; when the Ma∣gistrate abuses his power unto Tyranny and makes havock
of all, it is lawfull to resist him by some extraordinary wayes and meanes, which are not ordinarily to bee allowed: see the principles from which all our miseryes and the losse of our gracious Master have flowed. Ans. Wee must heere yeeld to the Warner the great equity and necessity that every doctrine of a Presbyter, should be charged on the Presbytery it selfe, and that any Presbyter teaching the lawfulnesse of a Parliaments defensive armes is tantamont to the Churches taking of armes against the king. These small unconsequen∣ces wee must permit the Warner to swallow downe without any stick, however wee doe deny that the maxime in hand was the fountaine of any our miseryes, or the cause at all of the losse of our late Soveraigne. Did ever his Majestie or any of his advised counsellers declare it simply unlawfull for a Parliament, to take armes for defence in some extraordinary cases, however the unhappines of the Canterburian Prelats did put his Majestie on these courses, which did begin and promote all our misery, and to the very last these men were so wicked as to refuse the lousing of these bands which their hands had tyed about his misinformed conscience, yea to this day they will not give their consent; that his Majestie, who now is, should say aside Episcopacy, were it for the gay∣ning the peaceable possession of all his three Kingdomes, but are urgers of him night and day to adhaere to their errours, up∣on the hazard of all the miseries that may come on his person, on his family and all his people: yet few of them to this day durst be so bold as to print with this Warner, the unlawful∣nes of a Parliaments armes against the Tyranny of a Prince in any imaginable case, how extraordinary soe∣ver.
CHAP. III. The Lawes and customes of Scotland admitte of no appeal from the generall assembly. IN this chapter the challenge is, that there are no appeales Appeals in Scot∣land from a generall assembly were no lesse irra∣tionall then illegall from the generall Assembly to the King, as in England from the Bishops Courts to the King in Chauncery, where a Commission uses to be given to delegats, who discusse the appeales. Ans. The warner considers not the difference of the Government of the Church of Scotland from that which was in England. what the Parliament is in the State, that the generall assembly is in the Church of Scotland: both are the highest courts in their owne kind. There is no appeale any where in moderat Monarchies to the Kings person, but to the King in certaine legall courts; as the Warner here con∣fesseth the appeale from Bishops lyes not, to the King in his person, but to the King in his court of Chauncery. As no man in Scotland is permitted to appeale in a civil cause from the Lords of Session; much lesse from the Parliament; so no man in an Ecclesiastick cause is permitted by the verie civil Law of Scotland to appeale from the general assembly. According to the Scots order & practise, the King in person or else by his high Commissioner sits als usually in the generall assembly, as in Parliament. But though it were not so, yet an appeale from a generall assembly to be discussed in a Court of delegats, were unbeseeming and unreasonable, the one Court consisting of above two hundred, all chosen men the best and most able of the Kingdome; the other but of two or three, often of very small either abilities or integrity, who yet may be more fitt to decerne in an Ecclesiastick cause then a single Bishop over his officiall, the ordinary trusted in
all acts of jurisdiction for the whole dioces. But the Scots way of managing Ecclesiastick causes is a great deale more just, safe and Satisfactory to any rationall man then that old popish order of the English, where all the spirituall juris∣diction of the whole dioces was in the hand of one merce∣nary officiall without all reliefe from his sentence, except by an appeale, as of old to the pope and his delegats, so therafter to the King, though never to be cognosced-upon by himselfe, but as it was of old by two or three delegats, the weakest of The Churches just severi∣ty against Montgo∣mery and Adamson was ap∣proven by the King and the parties themselfe. all courts, often for the quality and ever for the number of the judges. Two instances are brought by the Warner to prove the Church of Scotlands stopping of appeals from the generall Assembly to the King, the cases of Montgomery and A∣damson: if the causes and events of the named cases had been wel knowne to the Warner, as he made this chapter disproportionally short, so readily he might have deleted it al together. Both these men were infamous not only in their Ministeriall charges but in their life & conversation; both became so insolent that contrary to the established order of the Church & Kingdome, being suborned by wicked states∣men, who in that day of darknes had wel neer brought ruine both to King and country, would needs take upon them the office of Arch-Bishops. While the assembly was in proces with them for their manifold and high misdeameanors, the King was moved by them and their evill patrons, to shew his high displeasure against the assemblyes of the Church. they for his Majesties satisfaction sent their Commissioners and had many conferences; whereby the pride and contempt of these prelats did so encrease, that at last they drew the sen∣tence of excommunication upon their own heads: the King after some time did acknowledge the equity of the Church proceedings, and professed his contentment their with:
both these unhappy men were brought to a humble confessi∣on of their crimes, and such signes of repentance, that both after a renunciation of their titulare Bishopriks were read∣mitted to the function of the ministry, which they had deser∣ted. Never any other before or after in Scotland did appeale from the generall assembly to the King: the late excommu∣nicat praelats in their declinatour against the assembly of Glasgow, did not appeale as (I remember) to the King, but to another generall assembly to bee constitute, according to their own Popish and Tyrannical principles. CHAP. IV. Faulty Ministers in Scotland are lesse exempted from pu∣nishment, then any other men. The pride of prelats lately, but never the Presbitery did ex∣empt their fel∣lows from punish∣ment for their civil faults. THE Warner in his fourth Chapter offers to prove, that the Scottish discipline doth exempt Ministers from pu∣nishment for any treason or sedition they can act in their pulpits. Ans. This challenge is like the rest, very false. The rules of the Church discipline in Scotland obliges Churchmen to bee subject to punishment, not only for every fault for which any other man is lyable to censure, but ordaines them to bee punished for sundrie things, which in other men are not at all questionable: and what ever is censurable in any, they appoint it to be much more so in a Minister. It is very untrue, that the pulpits in Scotland are Sanctuaries for any crime, much lesse for the grievous crimes of sedition and treason. Let the Warner remember, how short a time it is, since an Episcopall chayre or a canonicall coate did priviledge in England and Ireland from all cen∣sure
either of Church or State, great numbers, who were no∣toriously knowne to be guilty of the foulest crimes. Was e∣ver the Warners companion Bishop Aderton challenged for his Sodomy, so long as their commune patrone of Canterbury did rule the court? did the warner never heare of a prelate very sibb to Doctour Bramble, who to this day was never cal∣led to any account for flagrant scandals of such crimes as in Scotland are punishable by the gallows? the Warner doth not well to insist upon the Scots Clergie exempting them∣selfe from civill punishments: no where in the world are Churchmen more free of crimes deserving civil cognisance then in Scotland: and if the ears and eyes of the world may be trusted, the popish clergy this day in Italy and Spaine are not so challengeable, as the praelaticall divines in England and Ireland lately were for many grosse misdemeanors. But why does the Warners anger run out so farre as to the preachers in Holland? is it because he knoweth the Church The War∣ner is inju∣rious to the Mini∣sters of Holland. disciplin in Holland to be really the same with that he op∣pugnes in the Scots, and that all the reformed Churches doejoyne cordially with Scotland in their rejection of E∣piscopacy? is this a ground for him to slander our Brethren of Holland? Is it charity for him a stranger to publish to the world in print that the ministers in Holland are seditious oratours, and that they saucily controll the Magistrats in their pulpits? Their crime seemes to be, that for the love of Christ their master, they are zealous in their doctrin, to presse upon the Magistrat as well as upon the people the true prac∣tise of piety, the sanctification of the sabbath day, the sup∣pression of heresy and shisme, and repentance for the sins of the time & place wherein they live. This is a crime whereof few of the Warners friends were wont to be guilty of: their shamefull silence and flattery was one of the great causes of all the sins and calamities that have wracked the three King∣domes:
the streame of their sermons while the enjoyed the pulpit, was to encourage to superstition and contempt of piety, to sing asleepe by their ungracious way all, that gave eare unto them. The man is impatien, t to see the Pastors of Holland or any where, to walk in another path then his own, and for this cause would stirre up their Magistrats against them: as it was his and his Brethrens custome to stirre up the Magistrats of Britan and Ireland to imprison, banish, and heavily vex the most zealous servants of God, only for their opposition to the praelats profanity and errours. The War∣ner (I hope) has not yet forgotten, how Doctor Bramble and his neighbour Lesly of Down did cast out of the Ministry, and made flee out of the Kingdome, men most eminent for zeale, piety and learning, who in a short time had done more good in the house of God, then all the Bishops that ever were in Ireland, I meane Master Blaire, Master Levingston, Ma∣ster Hamilton, and Master Cuningham, and others. The Warner needed not to have marked as a singularity of Geneva, that there all the Ecclesiasticks, quâ tales, are punishable by the Magistrats for civil crimes; for wee know none of the reformed Churches, who were ever following Rome in exeeming the Clergy from saecular jurisdiction, ex∣cept it were the Canterburian Praelats: who indeed did skarre the most of Magistrats from medeling with a canonical coat though desiled with drunckenesse, adultery, scolding, fighting, and other evils, which were too common oflate to that order. But how does hee prove, that the Scots Ministers exempt The pre∣tended de∣claration of King Iames, was Bishop A∣damsons lying libel. themselves from civill jurisdiction? first (saith he) by the de∣claration of King James 1584. Ans. That declaration was not from King James, as himselfe did testify the yeare thereafter under his hand, but from Master Patrike Adam∣son, who did acknowledge it to bee his owne upon his death
bed, and professed his repentance for the lyes and slaunders, wherewith against his conscience hee had fraughted that in∣famous libell. His second proofe is from the second booke of discipline Though alwayes in England yet never in Scot∣land had Commis∣sarie any jurisdicti∣on over Ministers. Chapter II, It is absurd that Commissaties haveing no func∣tion in the Church, should be judges to Ministers to depose them from their charges. Ans. Though in England the Commissary and officiall was the ordinary judge to depose and excommunicat all the Ministers of the diocese, yet by the Lawes of Scotland no Commissaries had ever any juris∣diction over Ministers. But though the officialls jurisdiction together with their Lords the Bishops were abolished, yet doth it follow from this, that no other jurisdiction remaineth whereby Ministers might be punished either by Church and State, according to their demerits? is not this strongly reasoned by the Warner? His third proofe is the case of James Gibson, who had rai∣led Iames Gibson was never absolved by the Church from his Proces. in pulpit against the King, and was only suspended, yea thereafter was absolved from that fault. Ans. Upon the complaint of the Chancelor the alleadged words were con∣demned by the generall assembly: but before the mans guil∣tines of these words could bee tryed, hee did absent himselfe: for which absence he was presently suspended from his Ministry: in the nixt assembly he did appeare and clear∣ed the reason of his absence to have been just feare and no contumacy, this hee made appeare to the assemblyes satis∣faction, but before his processe could be brought to any issue, he fled away to England, where he died a fugitive never re∣stored to his chardge, though no tryell of his fault was per∣fected. The fourth proofe is Mr. Blacke his case: heereupon the Master Blacks ap∣peale from the coun∣sel cleered. Warner makes a long and odious narration. If wee interro∣gat him about his ground of all these Stories, he can produce
no warrant but Spots-woods unprinted book: this is no au∣thentick register whereupon any understanding man can re∣ly, the writer was a profest enemy, to his death, of the Scot∣tish disciplin, he spent his life upon a Story for the disgrace of the Presbytery and the honour of Bishops: no man who is acquainted with the life or death of that Author will build his beleefe upon his words. This whole narration is abun∣dantly confuted in the historicall vindication, when the Warner is pleased to repeat the challenge from Issachars burden hee ought to have replyed something after three yeares advisement to the printed answer. The matter (as our registers beare) was shortly thus, in the yeare 1596 the Popish and malignant faction in King James his court grew so strong that the countenance of the King towards the Church was much changed, and over all the Land great feares did daily increase of the overthrow of the Church discipline established by Law. The Ministers in their pulpits gave free warning thereof, among others Mr. Black of Saint Andrews, a most gracious and faithful Pastor, did apply his doctrine to the sins of the time; some of his E∣nemies delated him at Court for words injurious to the King and Queen: the words hee did deny and all his honest hea∣rers did absolve him by their testimony from these calum∣nies: of himselfe hee was most willing to be tryed to the ut∣termost before all the world, but his Brethren finding the libelled calumnies to bee only a pretence and the true inten∣tion of the Courtiers therein was, to stop the mouthes of Mi∣nisters, that the crying sins of the time should no more bee reproved in pulpits, they advised him to decline the judge∣ment of the counsel, and appeale to the generall assembly, as the competent judge according to the word of God and the Lawes of Scotland, in the cause of doctrin; for the first instance they did never question, but if any thing truely
seditious had been preached by a Minister that he for this might be called before the civill Magistrat and accordingly punished but that every Minister for the application of his doctrine according to the rules of scripture to the sins of his hearers for their reclaming, should be brought before a ci∣vill court at the first instance, they thought it unreasonable and desired the King in the nixt assembly might cognosce upon the equity of such a proceding. The Ministers had many a conference with his Majestie upon that subject, often the matter was brought very neare to an amicable conclusi∣on, but because the Ministers refused to subscribe a band for so great a silence as the Court required against his Maje∣sties countenancing of treacherous Papists, and favouring the enemies of religion, a seveer Sentence was pronounced not only against Master Black, but also all the Ministers of Edinburgh. In the meane time malcontented States-men did adde oyle to the flame, and at the very instant while the Ministers and The tu∣mult of the seven∣teenth day of Decem∣ber was harmelesse and no Mi∣nister guil∣ty of it. their friends are offering a petition to his Majestie, they subborne a villane to cry in one part of the streets the Mini∣sters are slain, and in another part of the streets that the King was killed: whereupon the People rush all out to the streets in their armes, and for halfe an howr at most were in a tu∣mult, upon meere ignorance what the fray might be, bur without the hurt of any one man: so soone as it was found that both the King and Ministers were safe, the people went all peaceably to their houses. This is the very truth of that innocent commotion, whereupon the Warner heere and his fellowes elsewhere make all their tragedies. None of the Ministry were either the authors or approvers thereof, though diverse of them suffered sore troubles for it.
CHAP. V. No Presbyterian ever intended to excommunicat any su∣preame Magistrat. THE Warner in his fifth chapter chardges the Scotes for The prae∣lats ordi∣narly, but the Pres∣bytery never were for rash ex∣communi∣cations. subjecting the King to the censure of excommunication and bringing upon princes all the miseries which the popes excommunications of old wont to bring upon Anathema∣tised Emperours. Ans. It does not become the Warner and his fellowes to object to any the abuse of the dreadfull sentence of excommunication, no Church in the world was ever more guilty of that fault then the praelats of England and Ireland, did they ever censure their own officialls for the pronouncing of that terrible sentence most profanly against any they would, had it been for the non-payment of the smallest summes of mony. As for the Scotes, their doctrine and practise in the point of excommunication is as conside∣rat as any other church in the world, that censure in Scot∣land is most rare and only in the case of obstinacy in a great sin: what ever be their doctrine in generall with all other Christians and as I think with the praelaticall party them∣selves, that the object of Christian doctrine Sacraments and disciplin is one and the same, and that no member of Christ, no sone of the Church, may plead a highnes above admo∣nitions and Church censures, yet I know they never thought it expedient so much as to intend any processe of Church a∣nimadversion against their Soveraigne. To the worlds end I hope they shal not have againe greater grievances and tru∣er causes of citation from their Princes then they have had already. It may be confidently beleeved that they who upon so pregnant occasions did never so much as intend the
beginning of a processe against their King, can never be supposed in danger of any such proceeding for time to come. How ever, we love not the abused ground of the Warners flattering of Princes to their owne great hurt: is it so indeed The Prae∣lats flatter Princes to their ruine. that all the sins of princes are only against God, that all Kings are not only above all lawes of Church and State but when they fall into the greatest crimes that the worst of men have ever committed, that even then their sins must not be against any man or against any law? such Episcopall doctrin spurrs on princes to these unhappy praecipies, and oppressed people unto these outrages that both fall into inextricable calamities. CHAP. VI. It grieves the Praelats that Presbyterians are faithfull Watch∣men, to admonish Princes of their duty. THE sixth Chapter is spent on an other crime of the Pres∣bytery; it makes the Presbiters cry to the Magistrat for ju∣stice The Scots Ministers preaching for justice, was just and neces∣sary. upon capitall offenders. Ans. What hes Presbytery to doe with this matter were it never so great an offence: will the Warner have all the faults of the praelaticall faction, flow from the fountaine of Episcopacy? this unconsequentiall reasoning will not be permitted to men below the degrees of Doctors. But was it a very great crime indeed for Ministers to plead the cause of the fatherlesse and widowes, yea the cause of God their Master and to preach unto Magistrats, that according to Scriptures murtherers ought to die, and the Land bee purged from the staine of innocent blood? when the shamefull impunity of murther made Scotland by
deadly feuds, in time of peace a feild of warre and blood, was it not time for the faithfull servants of God to exhort the King to execute justice, and to declare the danger of most frequent pardons drawne from his hand often against his heart by the importunity and deceitfull information of powerfull solicitors, to the great offence of God against the whole land, to the unexpressible griefe and wrong of the suffering party, to the opening also of a new floodgate of more blood which by a legall revenge in time easily might have been stopped? Too much pitty in sparing the wilfull shedders of innocent blood ordinarlie proves a great cruel∣ty, not only towards the disconsolat oppressed who cry to the vicegerents of God the avenger, for justice in vaine, but also towards the soule of him who is spared and the life of many more who are friends either to the oppressor or op∣pressed. As for the named case of Huntly let the world judge, Huntlyes notorious crymes. whether the Ministers had reason often to give Warning a∣gainst that wicked man and his complices. Beside his apos∣tacy and after-seeming-repentance his frequent relapses into avowed popery, in the eighty eight he banded with the King of Spaine to overthrow the religion and government of the whole Iland and after pardon, from time to time did renew his treasonable plots for the ruine of Britain: hee did commit many murders, he did invade under the nose of the King, the house of his Cousin the Earle of Murray, and most cruelly murdered that gallant Nobleman, hee appea∣red with displayed Banner against the King in person, he killed thereafter many hundreds of the Kings good people, when these multiplyed outrages did cry up to the God of heaven, was is not time for the men of God to cry to the jud∣ges of the earth to doe their duty, according to the war∣rant of many Scriptures? what a dangerous humour of flat∣tery
is this in our Praelats, not only to lull asleep a Prince in a most sinfull neglect of his charge, but also to cry out upon others more faithfull then themselves for assaying to breake of their slumber by their wholesome and seasonable admo∣nitions from the word of God? The nixt challenge of the Scotes Presbyters is that they Never any question in Scotland betwixt the King and the Church, for Tythes and patro∣nages. spoile the King of his Tythes, first fruits, patronage and dependence of his subjects. Ans. The Warner understands not what he writes, the Kings Majestie in Scotland never had, never craved any first fruits: the Church never spoi∣led the King of any Tythes, some other men indeed, by the wickednesse most of Praelats and their followers, did cou∣sin both the King and the Church of many Tythes: but his Majestie and the Church had never any controversie in Scot∣land about the Tythes: for the King, so far as concerned himselfe, was ever willing that the Church should enjoy that which the very act of Parliament acknowledgeth to bee her patrimony. Nor for the patronages had the Churh any plea with the King: the Church declared often their minde of the iniquity of patronages, wherein they never had from the King any considerable opposition, but from the Nobi∣lity and gentry the opposition was so great, that for peace∣sake the Church was content to let patronages alone, till God should make a Parliament lay to heart what was incum∣bent for gracious men to doe, for liberating congregations from their slavery of having Ministers intruded upon them by the violence of Patrones. Which now at last (blessed be God) according to our mind is performed. As for the de∣pendence of any vassals upon the King, it was never que∣stioned King James a∣vowes himselfe a ater of Erastianis∣me. by any Presbyterian in Scotland. What is added in the rest of the Chapter, is but a repeti∣tion of that which went before, to wit, the Presbyters deny∣ing to the King the spirituall government of the Church,
and the power of the keyes of the Kingdome of heaven: such an usurpation upon the Church, King James declared un∣der his hand (as at length may be seen in the Historicall vin∣dication) to be a sinne against the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which puts in the hand of the Magistrat the power of preaching and celebrating the Sacraments: a power which since that time no Magistrat in Britaine did assume, and if any would have claimed it, none would have more opposed, then the most zealous patrones of Episcopacy. The injurious invectives, which the Warner builds upon this his Erastian assertion, wee passe them as Castles in their aire, which must fall and evanish for want of a foundation. Only before I leave this Chapter, let the Warner take a good Sentence out of the mouth of that wyse Prince King James, to testifie yet farther his minde against Erastianisme. His Majestie in the yeare 1617 having come in progresse to visit his auncient Kingdome of Scotland, and being present in persone at a publick disputation in Theologie in the Universitie of St. Andrews, whereof also many both Nobles and Church-men of both Kingdomes were auditors; when one of those that acted a part in the disputation, had affirmed and went about to maintaine this assertion that the King had power to depose Ministers from their Ministeriall function. The King him∣self as abhorring such flatterie, cried out with a loud voice, Ego possum deponere Ministri caput, sed non possum deponere ejus officium. CHAP. VII. The Presbyterie does not draw from the Magistrat any paritie of his power by the cheate of any relation. IN the seventh chapter the Warner would cause men be∣lieve many more of the Presbyteries usurpations upon the
civill Magistrate. The first is that all offences whatsoever The Pres∣bytery co∣gnosceth only upon scandals, and that in fewer civil things then the Bishops∣courts were wont to meddle with. are cognoscible in the consistory upon the case of scandals. Ans. First the Presbyterie makes no offence at all to come before the consistory, but scandall alone. Secondly these civill offences (the scandall whereof comes before the Pres∣bytery) are but very few, and a great deale fewer than the Bishops officiall takes notice of in his consistoriall court. That capitall crimes past over by the Magistrate should bee censured by the Church, no society of Christians who have any discipline, did ever call in question. When the sword of the Magistrat hes spared a murderer, an adulterer, a Blasphemer; will any ingenuous, either praelaticall or popish divine, admitte of such to the holy table without signes of repentance? The Warners second usurpation is but a branch of the first, that the Presbyterie drawes directly before it selfe the cogni∣sance of fraud in barganing, false measures, oppression and in the case of Ministers, brybing, usury, fighting, per∣jury, &c. Ans. Is it then the Warners minde, that the notorious slander of such grosse sins does not deserve so much, as an Ecclesiastick rebooke? Shall such persons with∣out admonition be admitted to the holy communion? Se∣condly the named cases of fraud in barganing, false measu∣res, oppression, come so rarely before our Church-judica∣tories that though these thirty yeares I have been much con∣versant in Presbyteries, yet did I never see, nor doe I re∣member that ever I heard any of these three cases brought before any church assembly. In the persone of Ministers, I grant, these faults which the canons of the Church in all times and places make the causes of deprivation are cog∣nosced upon in Presbyteries, but with the good liking (I am sure) of all both papifts and praelats, who themselves are free of such vices. And why did not the Warner put in a∣mong
the causes of church mens deprivation from office and benefite, adultery, gluttonny and drunkennes? are these in his, &c. which he will not have cognoscible by the Church in the persons of Bishops and Doctors? The Warners third challenge amounts to an high crime, that Presbyterian Ministers are bold to preach upon these scriptures which speake of the Magistrats duty in his office, or dare offer to resolve from scripture any doubt, which per∣plexeth the conscience of Magistrats or people, of Husband or Wife, of Master or Servant, in the discharge of their Christian duty one to another. What ever hath been the negligence of the Bishop of Derry, yet I am sure, all the preaching Praelats and Doctors of England pretended a great care to goe about these uncontroverted parts of their ministerial function, and yet without medling with the My∣steries of State, or the depths of any mans particulare vocati∣on; much lesse with the judgement of jurisdiction in politi∣call or aeconomicall causes. As for the Churches declaration against the Late engage∣ment; The Churches proceed∣ings in the late enga∣gement cleered from mistakes. did it not well become them to signify their judge∣ment in so great a case of conscience, especially when the Parliament did propone it to them for resolution, and when they found a conjunction driven on with a cleerly malig∣nant partie, contrary to solemne oathes and covenants, unto the evident hazard of Religione and them who had been most eminent instruments of its preservation; was it not the churches duty to give warning against that sinne, and to exhort the ring leaders therein to repentance? But our Warner must needs insist upon that unhappy en∣gagement, and fasten great blame upon the Church for gi∣ving any advice about it. Ans. Must it be Jesuisitisme, and a drawing of all the civill affaires to the Churches barre in ordine ad Spiritualia, for an assembly to give their advice
in a most eminent and important case of conscence, when earnestly called upon in a multitude of supplications from the most of the Congregations under their charge; yea when required by the States of the Kingdome in severall expresse messages for that end? It seemes, its our Warners conclusi∣on, if the Magistrat would draw all the Churches in his ju∣risdiction to a most unlawfull warre, for the advancement of the greatest impiety and unjustice possible, wherein nothing could be expected by all who were engaged there∣in but the curse of God; if in this case a doubting Natione should desire the assemblies counsel for the state of their sou∣les, or if the Magistrate would put the Church to declare what were lawfull or unlawfull according to the word of God, that it were necessary heer for the servants of God to be altogether silent, because indeed warre is so civill a busi∣nes, that nothing in it concernes the soule, and nothing a∣bout it may be cleered by any light from the word of God. The truth is, the Church in their publick papers to the Par∣liament, declared oftner then once, that they were not a∣gainst, but for an engagement, if so that Christian and friend∣ly treaties could not have obtained reason, and all the good people in Scotland were willing enough to have hazarded their lives and estates, for vindicating the wrongs done, not by the Kingdome of England, but by the sectarian party there, against God the King, covenant and both Kingdo∣mes: but to the great griefe of their hearts, their hands were bound and they forced to sit still, and by the over great cunning of some, the erroneous mis-perswasions of others and the rash praecipitancy of it, that engagement was so spoiled in the stating and mannaging, that the most religi∣ous with peace of conscience could not goe along nor en∣courage any other to take part therein. The Warner touches on three of their reasons: but who will looke upon their pu∣blick
declarations, shall find many more, which with all faithfullnesse were then propounded by the Church, for the rectifying of that action, which, as it stood in the state and management, was cleerly foretold to be exceeding like to destroy the King and his friends of all sorts in all the three Kingdomes. The irreparable losses and unutterable cala∣mities which quickly did follow at the heeles, the misbe∣leefe and contempt of the Lords servants and the great dan∣ger religion is now brought unto in al these Kingdomes, hes, I suppose, long agoe brought griefe enough to the heart of them whose unadvised rashnes and intemperate fervour did contribute most for the spoiling of that designe. The first desire about that engagement which the Warner gives to us, concernes the security of religion. In all the de∣bate of that matter, it was aggreed (without question upon all hands, that the Sectarian party deserved punishment for their wicked attemptes upon the Kings persone, contrary to the directions of the Parliamentes of both Kingdomes, and that the King ought to be rescued out of their hands, and brought to one of his houses for perfecting the treaty of peace which often had been begunne: but here was the question; Whither the Parliament and Army of Scotland ought to de∣clare their resolutiones to bring his Majestie to London with honour, freedome and safty, before he did promise any se∣curity for establishing Religion; The Parliaments of both Kingdomes in all their former treaties had ever pressed upon the King a number of propositions to be signed by his Maje∣stie before at all he came to London: was it then any fault in the Church of Scotland to desire the granting but of one of these propositions concerning Religion and the covenant, before the King were brought (by the new hazard of the lives and estats of all the Scottish nation) to sit in his Parliament in that honnor and freedome which himselfe did desire? There
was no complaint, when many of thirty propositions were pressed to be signed by his Majestie for satisfaction and secu∣rity to his people, after so great and long desolations: how then is an out-cry made, when all other propositions are postponed, and only one for Religion is stuck upon, and that not before his Majesties rescue and deliverance from the hands of the sectaries, but only before his bringing to Lon∣don in honor freedom and safety? This demande, to the Warner, is a crime, and may be so to all of his beleefe, who takes it for a high unjustice, to restraine in any King the abso∣lute power by any condition: for they doe mantaine that the administration of all things both of Church and state does reside so freely and absolutly in the meere will of a Sove∣raigne, that no case at any time can fall out, which ought to bound that absolutnesse with any limitation. The second particular the Warner pitches upon, is the Kings negative voyce; behold how criminous we were in the point; When some (most needlesly) would needs bring into debate the Kings negative voyce in the Parliament of England, as one of the royall praerogatives to bee maintai∣ned by our engagement: it was said, that all discourse of that kynde might bee laid aside as impertinent for us: if any debate should chance to fall upon it, the proper place of it was, in a free Parliament of England; that our Lawes did not admit of a negative voyce to the King in a Parliament of Scot∣land; and to presse it now as a prerogative of all Kings, (be∣sides the reflection it might have upon the rights of our Kingdome,) it might put in the hand of the King a power to deny all and every one of these things, which the Parlia∣ments of both Kingdomes had found necessary for the setling the peace in all the three dominions. Wee marvail not, that the Warner heere should taxe us of a great errour, seeing it is the beleefe of his faction, that every King hath not onely
a negative but an absolute affirmative voyce in all their Par∣liaments, as if they were nothing but their arbitrary coun∣sels for to perswade by their reasons but not to conclude nor impede any thing by their votes; the whole and intire power of making or refusing Lawes being in the Prince alone, and no part of it in the Parliament. The Warners third challenge against us about the ingage∣ment is, as if the Church had taken upon it to nominate the officers of the army; and upon this he makes his invectives. Ans. The Church was farre from seeking power to nomi∣nate any one officer: but the matter was thus; when the State did require of them, what in their judgement would give satisfaction to the people, and what would encourage them to goe along in the ingagement? one and the last parte of their answer was, that they conceived if a Warre shalbe found necessarie, much of the peoples encouragement would depend upon the qualification of the commanders, to whom the mannaging of that great trust should be commit∣ted: for after the right stating of the Warre, the nixt would be the carying on of it by such men who had given constante proofe of their integrity. To put all the power of the King∣dome in their hande, whose by past miscariadges had given just occasion to suspect their designes and firmenesse to the interest of God before their owne or any other mans, would fill the hearts of the people with jealousies and feares, and how wholsome an advice this was, experience hath now too cleerly demonstrate. To make the world know our further resolutiones to medle with civile affaires, the Warner is pleased to bring out a∣gainst us above 80 yeares old stories, and all the stuffe which our malicious enemy Spotsewood can furnish to him: from this good author he alledges that our Church discharged merchants to traffique with Spaine, and commanded the
change of the mercat dayes in Edenburgh. Ans. Both these calumnies are taken of at length in the Historicall Vin∣dication. After the Spanish invasion of the yeare eighty eight, many in Scotland kept correspondence with Spaine for treacherous designes: the Inquisitors did seduce some, and persecute others of our merchants in their traffique, the Church did deale with his Majestie to interceed with the Spa∣nish King for more liberty to our country men in their tra∣ding: and in the meane time while an answer was returned from Madrile, they advertised the people to be warry, how they hazarded their soules for any worldly gaine which they could find about the inquisitors feet. As for the mercat dayes, I grante, it was a great griefe to the Church, to see the sabbath day profaned by handy la∣bour The Church medled not with the man∣day mer∣cat but by way of supplica∣tion to Parlia∣ment. and journeying, by occasion of the munday-mercats in the most of the great tounes: for remedie heerof, many supplications have been made by the Assembly to the Par∣liament: but so long as our Bishops satte there, these peti∣tiones of the Church were alwayes eluded: for the praelats labour in the whole Iland was to have the sunday no Sab∣bath, and to procure by their Doctrine and example the profanation of that day by all sorts of playes, to the end people might be brought back to their old licentiousnes and ignorance, by which the Episcopall Kingdome was advan∣ced. It was visible in Scotland, that the most eminent Bi∣shops were usual players on the Sabbath, even in time of divine service. And so soone as they were cast out of the Par∣liament, the Churches supplications were granted, and acts obtained for the carefull sanctification of the Lords day, and removing of the mercats in all the land from the Mun∣day to other dayes of the week. The Warners nixt challenge of our usurpation is, the as∣sembly at Edinburgh 1567 their ratifying of acts of Parlia∣ment,
and summoning of all the country to appeare at the The Church once for safty of the infant Kings life, with the concur∣rence of the secrete counsel did cal an extraordi∣nary meet∣ing. nixt assembly. Ans. If the Warner had knowne the histo∣ry of that time, he would have choysed rather to have omit∣ted this challenge, then to have proclaimed to the world the great rottennesse of his own heart; at that time the condition of the Church and Kingdome of Scotland was lamentable, the Queen was declared for popery, King James's Father was cruelly without any cause murthered by the Earle of Bothwell; King James himselfe in his infancy was very neare to have been destroyed by the murtherer of his Father, there was no other way conceivable of saftie for Religion for the infant King, for the Kingdome, but that the Protestantes should joine together for the defence of King James against these popish murtherers. For this end the generall assembly did crave conference of the secrete counsel: and they with mutual advise did call for a meeting of the whole Protestant party: which did conveen at the time appointed most fre∣quently in an extraordinary and mixed assembly of all the considerable persons of the Religion, Earles, Lords, Bar∣rons, Gentlemen, Burgesses and Ministers, and subscribed a bond for the revenge of King Henryes death, and the de∣fence of King Iames his life: This mixed and extraordinary assembly made it one of the chiefe articles in their bond to de∣fend these Actes of the Parliament 1560 concerning religi∣on, and to endeavour the ratification of them in the nixt en∣suing Parliament. As for the assemblies letter to their Brethren for so frequent a meeting at the nixt extraordinary assembly, it had the authority of the secret counsel; it was in a time of the greatest necessity, when the Religion and liberties of the land were in evident hazard from the po∣tent and wicked counsels of the popish party, both at home and abroad; when the life of the young King was daily in vi∣sible danger from the hands of them who had murthered his
Father, and ravished his Mother. Lesse could not have been done in such a juncture of time by men of wisedom and courage, who had any love to their Religion, King and country: but the resolution of our praelats is to the contrary, when a most wicked villaine had obtained the connivance of a Queen to kill her husband, and to make way for the killing of her Son in his Cradle, and after these murders to draw a nation & Church from the true Religion, established by Law, into popery; and a free Kingdome to an illegall Tyranny; in this case there may be no meeting, either of Church or State, to provide remedies against such extraor∣dinary mischiefes. Beleeve it, the Scotes were never of this opinion. What is subjoined in the nixt paragraph of our Churches By the lawes and customes of Scot∣land the Assembly praecieds the Par∣liament in the refor∣mation of Ecclesias-tical abu∣ses. praesumption to abolish acts of Parliament; is but a repeti∣tion of what is spoken before. Not only the lawes of Scotland but equity and necessity referres the ordinary reformation of errours and abuses in Religion to the Ecclesiasticall assem∣blies: what they find wrong in the Church, though ratified by acts of Parliament, they rectify it from the word of God, and thereafter by petition obtaines their rectification to be ratifyed in a following Parliament, and all former acts to the contrary to be annulled. This is the ordinary Methode of proceeding in Scotland and (as I take it) in all other States and Kingdomes. Were Christians of old hindred to leave paganisme and embrace the Gospell, till the emperiall la∣wes for paganisme and against Christianity were revoked? did the oecumenicall and National Synods of the auncients stay their reformation of heresies and corruptions in reli∣gion, till the lawes of State (which did countenance these errors) were cancelled? Was not popery in Germany France and Britaine so firmely established, as civil lawes could doe it? It seems, the Warner heer does joyne with his Brother
Issachar, to proclaime all our Reformers in Britaine France and Germany, to be Rebells for daring by their preachings and Assemblies to change these things, which by acts of Parliaments had been approven, before new Parliaments had allowed of their reformation. Neverthelesse this plea is foolishly intended against us, for the Ministers protestation against the acts of Parliament 1584, establishing (in that houre of darknes) iniquity by a law, and against the acts of the Assembly of Glasgow declaring the unlawfulnesse of Bi∣shops and ceremonies; which some Parliaments upon Epis∣copall mis-information had approven: both these actions of the Church were according to former Lawes and were rati∣fied afterward by acts of Parliament yet standing in force which for the Warner (a privatman, and a stranger) to challenge, is to contemne much more grossly the law, then they doe, whom here he is accusing of that crime. By the nixt Story the Warner will gaine nothing, when The Church parte in the road of Ruth∣ven clec∣red. the true case of it is knowne. In King Iames minority, one Captaine Iames Stuart did so farre prevail upon the tender and unexperienced yeares of the Prince, as to steale his countenance unto acts of the greatest oppression; so farre that Iames Hamelton Earle of Arran (the nixt to the King in blood, in his health a most gallant Prince, and a most zealous professor of the true Religion) in time of his sick∣nes, when he was not capable to commit any crime against the State, was notwithstanding spoiled of all his lively hood and liberty: his Lands and honour with the dignity of high Chancelor of Scotland were conferred on that very wicked Tyrant Captain Iames, a number of the best affected and prime nobility impatient of such unheard-of oppressiones, with meere boasts and no violence at the road of Ruthven chased away that unhappy chancelor from the Kings perso∣ne, this his Majestie for the time professed to take in so good
part that under his hand he did allow it for good service, in his letters to the most of the Neighbour princes: he dealt also with the secrete counsel and the chiefe judicatories of the land, and obtained from them the approbation of that act of the Lords as convenient and laudable, promising likewise to ratify it in the nixt ensuing Parliament. When the Lords for their more abundante cleering required the Assemblies declaration there upon, the Ministers declined to medle at all with the case; but the Kings Majestie sent his Commissioners to the Assembly, entreating them withall earnestnesse to declare their good liking of that action, which he assured them was for his good, and the good both of the Church and Kingdome: for their obedience to the Kings importunity they are heer railed upon by the wise Warner. It is true, Captaine Iames shortly after creept in againe into Court, and obtained a sever revenge against the authors of that action, before a Parliament could sit to approve it, but within a few monthes the same Lords with some more did at Striveling chase againe that evill man from the Court: whither he never more returned, and this their action was ratified in the nixt Parliament, and so stands to this day unquestioned by any but such as the Warner, either out of ignorance or malice. I am weary to follow the Warner in all his wandrings; at the nixt loupe he jumps from the 1584 to the 1648, skip∣ping The inte∣rest of the generall assembly of Scot∣land, in the reforma∣tion of England. over in a moment 64 yeares. The articles of Strive∣ling mentions that the promoving of the worke of Refor∣mation in England and Ireland, bee referred to the generall assembly, upon this our friend does discharge a flood of his choler: all the matter of his impatience heere is, that Scot∣land when by fraud they had been long allured, and at last by open violence invaded by the English Praelats, that they might take on the yock of all their corruptions, they were
contented at the earnest desire of both the houses of Parlia∣ment, and all the wel-affected in England, to assist their Brethren, to purge out the leaven of Episcopacy, and the Service book with all the rest of the old corruptions of the English and Irish Churches; with the mannaging of this so great and good an Ecclesiastick worke, the Parliament of Scotland did intrust the generall assembly. No mervaile that Doctor Bramble a zealous lover of all the Arminianisme, Popery and Tyranny, of which his great patron Doctor Lade stands convicted yet without an answer to have been brin∣ging in upon the three nations, should bee angry at the dis∣coverers and dis-appointers of that most pious work as they wont to style it? What heere the Warner repeats, it is answered before, The vio∣lent ap∣prehension of Masse-Priests in their act of idola∣try repro∣ved by the Warner. as for the two Storyes in his conclusion, which he takes out of his false Author Spots-wood, adding his owne large am∣plifications; I conceive, there needs no more to be said to the first, but that some of Iohn Knocks zealous hearers un∣derstanding of a Masse-Priest at their very side committing idolatry contrary to the Lawes, did with violence break in upon him and sease upon his person and Masse-cloathes, that they might present him to the ordinary Magistrat to receave justice according to the Law; This act the Warner wil have to be a huge rebellion, not only in the actors, but also in Iohn Knocks, who was not so much as present thereat. What first he speaks of the Assemblies convocating the people in armes to be present at the tryall of the popish Lords and their avowing of that their deed to the King in his face we must be pardoned to mistrust the Warner heerin upon his bare word without the releefe of some witnes, and that a more faithfull one then his Brother in evill, Mr. Spotswood, whom yet heere he does not professe to cite. Against these popish Lords after their many treasons and bloody murders
of the lieges, the King himselfe at last was forced to arme the people; but that the generall assembly did call any unto armes we require the Warners proofe that we may give it an answer. CHAP. VIII. The chiefe of the Praelats agree with the Presbyterians about the divine right of Church discipline. THE Warners challenge in this chapter is that we man∣taine our discipline by a Iure divino, and for this he spe∣wes out upon us a sea of such rhetorick, as much better be∣seemed. Ans. Mercurius Aulicus then either a Warner or a praelate. In this challenge he is as unhappy as in the rest, it is for a matter wherein the most of his owne Brethren (though our Adversaries) yet fully agree with us that the discipline of the Church is truely by divine right, and that The War∣ner and his Praelatical Erastian brethren are obli∣ged by their owne principles to advise the King to lay asi∣de Episco∣pacy and set up the Praesbyte∣ry in all his domini∣ons. Jesus Christ holds out in scripture the substantials of that Governement whereby he will have his house to be ruled to the worlds end; leaving the circumstantials to be determi∣ned by the judicatories of the Church according to the ge∣nerall rules, which are clear also in the word for matters of that nature. In this neither Papists nor the learndest of the Praelats find any fault with us; yet our Warner must spend a whole Chapter upon it. It is true as we observed before the elder Praelats of Eng∣land in Edwards & Elizabeths dayes, as the Erastians now, did mantaine that no particular Governement of the Church was jure divino, and if this be the Warners mind, it were ingenuity in him to speake it out loud, and to endeavour
to perswade his friends about the King of the truth of this te∣net, he was never imployed about a better and more seaso∣nable service: for if the discipline of the Church be but hu∣mano jure then Episcopacy is keeped up upon no conscience, conscience being bottomed only upon a divine right, so Epis∣copacy wanting that bottom may well be laid aside at this time by the King for any thing that concernes conscience since no command of God nor warrant from scripture tyes him to keep it up. This truely seemes to be the maine ground whereupon the whole discourse of this Chapter is builded. Is it tolerable that such truthes should be concealed by our Warners against their conscience, when the speaking of them out might be so advantagious to the King and all his Kingdomes, how ever wee with all the reformed Churches doe beleeve in our heart the divine right of Synods and Pres∣byteries, and for no possible inconvenient can be forced to deny or passe from this part of truth, yet the Warner heere joynes with the elder Praelats who till Warner Banckrofts ad∣vancement to the sea of Canterburry did unanimously deny Episcopacy to be of divine right, and by consequent affir∣med it to be moveable, and so lawfull to be laid aside by princes, when so ever they found it expedient for their af∣faires to be quyte of it, why does not the warner and his Brethren speake plainly their thoughts in his Majesties eares? why do they longer dissemble their conscience, only for the satisfaction of their ambition, greed, and revenge? sundry of the Praelaticall divines come yet further to joyne fully with Erastus in denying not only Episcopacy and all other particular formes of Church government to be of di∣vine institution, but in avowing that no governement in the Church at all is to be imagined, but such as is a part of the civill power of the Magistrat. The Warner in the Chapter and in diverse other parts of his booke seemes to agree with
this judgment: and upon this ground if he had ingenuity he would offer his helping hand to untie the bonds of the Kings conscience, if heere it were straytened, by demonstrating from this his principle, that very safely without any offence to God and nothing doubting for conscience sake, his Majestie might lay aside Episcopacy and set up the Presby∣tery so fully as is required in all his dominions though not upon a divine right which the Presbyterians beleeve, yet upon Erastus royall right which the Warner here and else∣where avouches. What the Warner puts heere again upon the Presbyterie, the usurpation of the temporall sword in what indirect rela∣tion The prae∣laticall party were late∣ly bent for Popery. so ever, its probation in the former chapter was found so weake and naughty, that the repetition of it is for no use: only wee marke that the Warner will have the Presbitery to be an absolute papacy, for no other purpose but to vent his desire of revenge against the Presbyterians, who gave in a challenge against the Praelats, especially the late Canterbu∣rians, among whom Doctor Bramble was one of some note, to which none of them have returned to this howre an an∣swer; that their principles unavoidably did bring backe the pope. For a Patriarch over all the westerne Churches, and among all the Patriarches of the whole Catholick Church a primacy in the Roman, flowes cleerly out of the fountaine of Episcopacy, according to the avowed doctrine of the En∣glish praelats: who yet are more liberall to the pope in gran∣ting him beside his spirituall super-inspection of the whole Catholick Church, all his temporall jurisdictions also in the patrimony of St. Peter, and all his other faire principalities within and without Italy. There is no ceremony in Rome that these men stick upon: for of all the superstitious and idolatrous ceremonies of Rome, their images and altars and adorations before them are incomparably the worst; yet
the Warners friends without any recantation we have heard of, avow them all; even an adoration of and to the altar it selfe. As for the doctrines of Rome what points are worse then these which that party have avowed in expresse tear∣mes, a corporall presence of Christs body upon the Altar the Tridentine justification, free-will, finall apostacy of the Saints: when no other thing can be answered to this our sore challenge, it is good to put us off with a Squib that the Presbyterie is as absolute papacy as ever was in Rome. The Presbyterian position which the Warner heere offers not to dispute but to laugh at, that Christ as King of his Church according to his royall office and Scepter hes ap∣pointed the office-bearers and lawes of the house, is accorded to by the most and sharpest of our adversaries, whether En∣glish or Romish, as their owne tenet: howbeit such foolish consequences, that all acts of Synods must be Christs Lawes, &c. neither they nor wee doe acknowledge. His declamations against the novelty of the Presbyterie in The Prae∣lats pro∣fesse now a willing∣nes to a∣bolish at least three parts of the former Episcopa∣cy. the ordinary stile of the Jesuites against Protestants, and of the pagan Philosophers against the Christians of old, who will regarde: our plea for the Praesbyterie is, that it is scriptu∣rall; if so; it is auncient enough: if not; let it be abolished. But it were good, that heer also the Warner and his friends would be ingenuous, to speake out their minds of Episcopa∣cy. Why have they all so long deceived the King, in assu∣ring him that English Episcopacy was wel warranted both by Scripture and antiquity. Be it so (which yet is very false) that something of a Bishop distinct from a Presbyter had any footing in Scripture, yet can they be so impudent, as to af∣firme, that an English Bishop in his very flesh and blood, in his substantiall limbs was ever knowne in the World till the pope was become Antichrist? A Bishop by virtue of his of∣fice a Lord in Parliament, voycing in all acts of State, and
exercising the place of a high Thesaurer, of a Chancelor, or what ever civill charge the favour of a Prince did put upon him; a Bishop with sole power of ordination and jurisdicti∣on, with out any Presbytery; a Bishop exercising no ju∣risdiction himselfe in any part of his dioces, but devolving the exercise of that power wholly upon his officials & Com∣missaries; a Bishop ordaining Presbyters himselfe alone, or with the fashionall assistance of any two Presbyters, who chaunce to be neare; a Bishop the only Pastor of the whole dioces, and yet not bound to feed any flock, either by word or Sacrament, or governement, but having a free liberty to devolve all that service upon others, and himself to wayte at court so many yeares as he shall think fit. This is our En∣glish Bishop not only in practise but in law, and so was hee defended by the great disputants for praelacy in England. But now let the Warner speake out, if any such treasure can more be defended or was ever knowne in scripture, or The porti∣on of Epis∣copacy, which yet is stuck to, cannot be kept up upon any principle either of honour or con∣science. seen in any Christian Church for 800. yeares and above, af∣ter the death of Christ. I take it indeed, to be conscience, that forces now at last the best of our Court-divines to devest their Bishop of all civill imployment in Parliament court or Kingdome, in denying his solitarines in ordination, in re∣moving his officiall and Commissary courts, in taking away all his arches, Arch - Bishops, Arch - Deacons, deane and Chapter and all the, &c. in erecting Presbyteries for all ordinations and spirituall jurisdiction. It is good that conscience moves our adversaries at last to come this farre towards us: but why will they not yet come nearer, to acknow∣ledge that by these their to lately recanted errours they did to long trouble the world; and that the little which yet they desire to keepe of a Bishop is nothing lesse then that English Bishop but a new creature of their own devising ne∣ver known in England which his Majestie in no honnour is
obliged to mantaine for any respect either to the lawes or customes of England, and least of all, for conscience? While the Warner with such confidence avowes, that no The smal∣lest porti∣on of the most mo∣derat E∣piscopacy is contrary to scrip∣ture. text of Scripture can be alleadged against Episcopacy, which may not with more reason be applyed against the Presbytery; behold I offer him here some few, casting them in a couple of arguments, which according to his great pro∣mises, I wish, he would answer at his leasure. First I doe reason from Ephesians 4. 11: all the officers that Christ has appointed in his Church for the Ministry of the word, are either Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors or Doctors: but Bishops are none of these fyve: Ergo they are none of the officers appointed by Christ for the Mi∣nistry of the word. The Major is not wonte to be questio∣ned: the minor thus I prove; Bishops are not Apostles, E∣vangelists, nor prophets: for its confessed, all these were extraordinary and temporary officers: but Bishops (say yow) are ordinary and perpetuall: our adversaries pitch upon the fourth, alleadging the Episcopall office to be pastorall; but I prove the Bishop no Pastor thus; no Pastor is superior to o∣ther Pastors in any spirituall power: but according to our ad∣versary, a Bishop is superior to all the Pastors of his dioces in the power of ordination and jurisdiction. Ergo. The doubt heer is only of the Major, which I prove Argumento à pari∣bus: no Apostle is superior to an Apostle, nor an Evange∣lists to an Evangelist, nor prophet to a prophet nor a Doc∣tour to a Doctour in any spirituall power according to scrip∣ture. Ergo no Pastor to a Pastor. Againe I reason from 1. Tim. 4. 14. Math: 18. 15. 1. Cor. 5. 4. 12. 13, What taks the power of ordination and jurisdiction from Bishops, destroyes Bishops: as the removall of the soule kills the man, and the denyall of the forme takes away the subject; so the power of ordination and jurisdiction the essentiall forme, whereby the
Bishop is constitute and distinguished from the Presbyter and every other Church officer, being removed from him, he must perish: but the quoted places take away cleerly these powers from the Bishop: for the first puts the power of or∣dination in the Presbytery, and a Bishop is not a Presbytery; the second puts the power of jurisdiction in the Church; and the third in a company of men which meet together: but the Bishop is not the Church nor a company of men met toge∣ther: for these be many, and he is but one persone. When the Doctors learning hes satisfied us in these two, he shall receave more scripturall arguments against Episco∣pacy. The Prae∣lats una∣ble to an∣swer their opposits. But why doe wee expect answers from these men, when after so long time (for all their boasts of learning and their visible leasure) none of their party hes hade the cou∣rage, to offer one word of answer to the Scriptures and Fa∣thers, which in great plenty Mr. Parker and Mr. Didoclave of old, and of late that miracle of learning most noble So∣mais, and that Magazin of antiquity Mr. Blondel have prin∣ted against them? What in the end of the Chapter the Warner addes of our trouble at King James his fiftie and five questions 1596, and of our yeelding the bucklers without any opposition till the late unhappy troubles; we answer that in this as every where else the Warner proclaines his great and certaine knowledge of our Ecclesiastick story: the troubles of the Scots divines at that time were very small, for the matter of these questi∣ons, all which they did answer so roundly, that ther was no more speach of them therafter by the propounders: but the manner and time of these questions did indeed perplex good men, to see Erastian and Prelaticall counsellors so farr to prevaile with our King, as to make him by captious questi∣ons carpe at these parts of Church-discipline, which by sta∣tuts of Parliament and acts of Assemblyes were fully establi∣shed.
Our Church at that time was far from yeelding to Episco∣pacy: Prelacy was ever grievous to Scot∣land. great trouble indeed by some wicked States-men was then brought upon the persones of the most able and faithfull Ministers, but our land was so far from receiving of Bishops at that time, that the question was not so much as proposed to them for many yeares thereafter, it was in Ann. 1606 that the English Praelats did move the King by great violence to cast many of the best and most learned Preachers of Scotland out of their charges, and in Ann. 1610, that a kind of Epis∣copacy was set up in the corrupt assembly of Glasgow; under which the Church of Scotland did heavily groane till the yeare 1637, when their burdens was so much increased by the English praelaticall Tax-masters, that all was shaken of together, and divine justice did so closly follow at the heeles, that oppressing praelacy of England as to the great joy of the long oppressed Scotes, that evill root and all its branches was cast out of Britaine, where wee trust, no shadow of it shall ever againe be seen. CHAP. IX. The Common-wealth is no monster, when God is made So∣veraigne, and their commands of men are subordina∣ted to the clear will of God. HAving cleered the vanity of these calumnious challenges, wherewith the Warner did animate the King and all Magistrates against the Presbyterians, let us try if his skill be any greater, to inflame the people against it. Hee would make the World beleeve that the Presbyterians are great transsubstantiators of whole Common-wealths into beasts,
and Metamorphosers of whole Kingdomes of men, into Ser∣pents with two heads; how great and monstrous a Serpent must the Presbytery be, when shee is the Mother of a Dragon with two heads. But it is good, that she has nothing to doe with the procreation of the Dragon with seven heads, the great Antichrist, the Pope of Rome: this honour must bee left to Episcopacy: the Presbytery must not pretend to any share in it. The Warners ground for his pretty fimilitude is, that the There is no Lord∣ship but a meer ser∣vice and ministry in the Pastors of the Church Presbyterians make two Soveraignities in every Christian State, whose commands are contrary. Ans. All the evill lyeth in the contrariety of the commands: as for the double Soveraignity, ther is no shew of truth in it: for the Pres∣byterians cannot bee guilty of coordinating two Soveraigni∣ties in one State, though the Praelats may wel be guilty of that fault; since they with there Masters of Rome mantaine a true hierarchie, a Spirituall Lord-ship, a domination and principality in their Bishops above all the members of the Church, but the Presbyterians know no , no dominion, no Soveranity in Church officers, but a meer ministry un∣der Christ. As for the contrariety of commands, its true: Christs Ministers must publish all the commands oftheir So∣veraigne Lord, whereunto no command of any temporall Prince needs or ought to be contrary; but if it fall out to bee so, it is not the Presbytery; but the holy Scriptures, which command rather to obey God then man. Dare the Warner heere oppose the Presbyterians? dare he mantaine a subordi∣nation of the Church to the State in such a fashion, that the cleer commands of God published by the Church ought to give place to the contrary commands of the State? if the Warner must needs invert and contradict Christ ruling of this case, let him goe on to preach doctrine point blank to the Apostles, that it is better to obey men then God. It falls
out as rarely in Scotland as any where in the world, that the Church and State run contrary wayes; but if so it happen, the commune rules of humane direction towards right and wrong judgement must be followed: if a man find either the Church or the State or both command what he knowes to be wrong (for neither the one nor the other hath any infallibi∣lity) their is no doubt but either or both may be disobeyed, yet with this difference, that for disobedience to the Churches most just commands, a man can not fall under the smallest temporall inconvenient without the States good pleasure, but for his disobedience to the most unjust commands of the State he must suffer what ever punishment the law does in∣flict without any releefe from the Church. Two instances are brought by the Warner, of the Church and States contrary commands: the first the King comman∣ded Edenburgh to feast the frensh Ambassadours, but the Church commanded Edenburgh to fast that day when the King desired them to feast. Ans. Heer were no so contra∣ry commands, but both were obeyed, the people did kepe the humiliation, and some of the Magistrats that same day did give the banquet to the frensh Ambassadours as the King commanded; that for this any Church censure was inten∣ded against them it is a malitious calumny, according to the author of this fable his owne confession, as at length may be seen in the unloading of Issachars burden. As for his second instance, the difference of the Church The War∣ner is ful of calum∣nious un∣truths. and State about the late ingagement we have spoken to it in the former chapter at length: the furthest the Church went was by humble petitions and remonstrances to set before the Parliament the great danger, which that ingagement (as it was stated and mannaged) did portent to religion, the Kings Person & whole Kingdom, when contrary to their whole some advices the ingagement went on, they medled not to oppose
the act of State further then to declare their judgement of its unlawfulnesse, according to the duty of faithfull watch∣men Ezek. 33. It is very false that the Church has chased any man out of the country, or excommunicated any for fol∣lowing that engagement, or have put any man to sack∣cloath for it, unto his day. Neither did ever any man call the freedome of the late Parliament in question, how unsa∣tisfied soever many were with its proceedings. When the Warner heapes up so many untruths in a few lines, in things done but yesterday before the eyes of thou∣sands, we shall not wonder of his venturing to lye confident∣ly in things past long before any now living were borne: but there are a generation of men who are bold to speake what makes for their end upon the hope that few wil be at the pains, to bring back what hes flowne from their teeth to the touch∣stone of any solide tryall. CHAP. X. The Nature of the Presbytrie is very concordant with Par∣liaments. IN the tenth chapter the Warner undertakes to shew the antipathy of Presbyteries to Parliaments; albeit there bee no greater harmony possible betwixt any two bodies, then betwixt a generall assembly and Parliament, a Presbyterie and an inferior civill court, if either the constitution or end or dayly practise of these judicatories be looked upon: but the praelaticall learning is of so high a flight, that it dare un∣dertake to prove any conclusion: yet these men are not the first, that have offered to force men to beleeve upon unan∣swerable
arguments though contrary to common sence and and reason that snow is black and the fire cold and the light dark. For the proofe of his conclusion he brings backe yet a∣gaine The eight desires of the Church about the ingage∣ment were just and necessary. the late engagement: how often shall this insipide col∣wort be set upon our table? Will the Warner never be filled with this unsavory dish? The first crime that here the War∣ner marks in our Church against the late Parliament in the matter of the ingagement is, their paper of the eight desires: upon this he unpoureth out all his good pleasure, not willing to know that all these desires were drawne from the Church by the Parliaments owne messages, and that well neare all these desires were counted by the Parliament it self to be very just and necessary: Especially these two which the wise Warner pitches upon as most absurd for the first a security to religion from the King upon oath under his hand and seale: where the question among us was not for the thing it self, but only about the time, the order and some part of the matter of that security. And for the second, the quali∣fication of the persons to be imployed, that all should be such who had given no just cause of Jealousy; no man did question, but all who were to have the managing of that warre should be free of all just causes of Jealousy, which could be made appeare not to halfe a dossen of Ministers, but to any competent judicatory according to the lawes of the Kingdome. The Warner has not been carefull to informe himselfe, where the knot of the difference lay, and so gives out his owne groundlesse conjectures for true Historicall narrations, which he might easily have helped by a more attentive reading of our publick declarations. The second fault he finds with our Church is, that they proclaime in print their dissatisfaction with that ingagement as favourable to the malignant party, &c. Ans. The
Warner knows not that it is one of the liberties of the Church of Scotland established by law and long custome to keep the It is one of the li∣berties of the Church of Scot∣land to publish declarati∣ons. people by publick declarations in their duty to God, when men are like to draw them away to sin according to that of Esay. 8. v. 12. 13. What in great humility piety and wise∣dome was spoken to the world in the declaration of the Church concerning that undertaking, was visible enough for the time to any who were not peremptor to follow their owne wayes: and the lamentable event since has opened the eyes of many, who before would not see, to acknow∣ledge their former errours: but if God should speake never so loud from Heaven, the Warner and his party will stoppe their cares: for they are men of such gallant Spirits, as scorne to submit either to God or men, but in a Romane constan∣cy they will be ever the same though their counsels & wayes be found never so palpably pernicious. The third thing the Warner layes to the charge of our The leavy was never offered to be stopped by the Church. Church is, that they retarded the leavies. Ans. In this also the Warner shewes his ignorance or malice: for how sore soever the Levy (as then stated & mannaged) was against the hearts of the Church, yet their opposition to it, was so cold-rife and small, that no complaint needs bee made of any retardment from them. So soone as the commanders thought it expedient, there was an Army gotten up so nu∣merous and strong, that with the ordinary blessing of God was aboundantly able to have done all the professed ser∣vice: but where the aversion of the hearts of the Church and the want of their prayers is superciliously contemned, what mervaile, that the strongest arme of flesh bee quickly bro∣ken The Church was not the cause of the ga∣thering at Mauchlin Moore. in peeces? The fourth charge is most calumnious, that the Church gathered the country together in armes at Mauchline moor to oppose the expedition. Ans. No Church man was the
cause of that meeting a number of yeomen being frighted from their houses, did flee away to that corner of the Land, that they might not be forced against their conscience to goe as souldiers to England: while their number did grow, and they did abide in a body for the security of their persons, up∣on a sudden a part of the Army came upon them: some Mi∣nisters being neare (by occasion of the communion at Mau∣chlin the day before) were good instruments with the peo∣ple to goe away in peace. And when the matter was tryed to the bottom by the most Eagle-eyed of the Parliament, no∣thing could be found contrary to the Ministers protestation, that they were no wayes the cause of the peoples convening or fighting at Mauchlin. The paralell that the Warner makes betwixt the generall The assem∣bly is help∣full and not hurt∣full to the Parlia∣ment. assembly and Parliament is malicious in all its parts. For the first, though the one Court be civill, and the other Spiritu∣all, yet the Presbyterians lay the authority of both upon a divine fundation, that for conscience sake the Courts civil must be obeyed in all their Lawfull commands, alsewell as the assemblyes of the Church; God being the author of the politick order as well as the Ecclesiastick, and the revenger of the contempt of the one alswell as of the other. But what doth the Warner meane, to mock at Ministers for carrying themselves as the Ambassadors of Christ, for judging accor∣ding to the rule of Scripture, for caring for life eternall? is he become so shamefullie impious, as to perswade Ministers to give over the care of life eternall, to lay aside the holy Scrip∣ture, and deny their ambassage from Jesus Christ? behold what Spirit leads our praelats, while they jeere the World out of all Religion, and chase away Ministers from Christ, from Scripture, from eternall life. Of the second part of the parallell, that people are more ready to obey their Ministers then their Magistrats what shall
be made? all the power which Ministers have with the people is builded on their love to God and religion: how much so ever it is, a good Statseman will not envy it: for he knowes that God and conscience constraine Ministers to imploy all the power they have with the people to the good of the Ma∣gistrat, as the deputy and servant of God for the peoples true good. The Warner heer understands best his owne meaning, while he scoffes at Ministers for their threatning of men with hells fire. Are our Praelats come to such open proclamations of their Atheisme, as to printe their desires to banish out of the hearts of people all feare not only of Church-censures, but even of hell it selfe? whither may not Satan dryve at last the instruments of his Kingdome? The third parte of the paralell consists of a number of unjust and false imputations before particularly refuted. What he subjoines of the power of the generall Assembly The ap∣ointment of comit∣tees is a right of every court as well Ec∣clesiastick as civil. to name Comittees to sit in the intervalls of Assemblies, it is but a pcore charge: is it not the dayly practise of the Parliaments of Scotland to nominat their Comittees of State for the intervalls of Parliament? Is it not ane inhaerent right to every Court to name some of their number to cognosce upon things within their owne spheare at what ever times the court it selfe finds expedient; how ever the judicatories of the Church by the lawes of the Kingdome being authorized to meet when themselves think fit both ordinarly and pro renata, their power of appointing Comittees for their owne affaires was never questioned: and truely these Comittees in the times of our late troubles when many were lying in waite to disturbe both Church and State, have been for∣ced to meet oftner then otherwise any of their members did desire: whose diversion from their particular charges (though for attendance on the publick) is joyned with so great fashery and expence, that with all their heart they could
be glade to decline it, if feare of detriment to the Church made not these meetings very necessary. CHAP. XI. The Presbytery is no burden to any honest man. THE bounds and compasse of the Warners rage against There is no rigour at all in the Pres∣bytery. the Presbytery is very large; not being content to have incensed the King and Parliament against it, he comes downe to the body of the people, and will have them beleeve the speciall enimity of the Scots discipline against them, first because it inflicts Church censures upon every one for the smallest faults. Ans. The faults which the Warner men∣tions may well be ane occasion of a private advice in the eare, but that any of them did ever procure the smallest censure of the Church, it is a great untruth: no man who knowes us, will complaine of our rigour, heer we wish we were able to refute upon as good reason the charge of our laxenes in the mouth of sectaries as we are that of our strictnes in the mouth of Erastianes. Wee would know of the Warner, what are these Sabbath recreations, which he saith are void of scandal, and consistent with the dutyes of the day; are they not the stage playes and the other honest pastimes, wherewith his friends were wonte to sanctify the Lords day, as no more a Sabbath then any other day in the yeare, and much lesse then diverse popish festivalls? An Aposteme in the lowest gutt will shew it selfe by the unsavory vapours, which now and then are eructat from it. That ever in Scotland there was one word of debate about starch and cuffs, is more then the Warner can prove.
The second oppression, whereby the Presbytery trods Crimes till repen∣ted of ought to keep from the holy table. the people under foot is a rare cruelty; that persons, for grievous crimes whereof the Magistrate takes notice, are called to Ecclesiastick repentance. Will the Doctor in his fury a∣gainst us, run out upon all his owne friends for no appea∣rance of a fault? Will either the English or popish praelats admit murtherers, whoores or theeves to the holy table without any signes of repentance? Is not the greatest crime the ground of the greatest scandal? Shall small scandals be purged away by repentance, and the greatest be totally past by? The Warner heer may know his owne meaning but others will confesse their ignorance of his minde. The third grievance he would have the people conceive Excom∣munica∣tion in Scotland is not in∣jurious to any. against the Presbytery is, the rigour of their excommunica∣tion; in this also the Warner seemes to know little of the Scots way, let excommunication be so seveer in Scotland as is possible, yet the hurt of it is but small: it is so rare an acci∣dent, men may live long in Scotland, and al their life never see that censure execute; I have lived in one of the greatest Ci∣ties of that land and for fourty seven yeares even from my birth to this day, that censure to my knowledge or hearing was never execute there in my dayes but twice; first upon ane obstinat and very profane Papist; and nixt on some hor∣rible scandalous praelats. Againe when any is excommuni∣cated by the Church, we goe no further with them then Pauls commande: 2. Thes. 3. 14. only they who are not tyed to them by naturall bonds, abstaine from familiar and unne∣cessary conversation, to bring them by the sence of this shame to repentance for their sins. Thirdly the civil inconvenientes which followe that cen∣sure come along from the State and the acts of Parliament, for which the Church ought not to be challenged; especially by praelats who wont to allow their officials to excommuni∣cat
whole incorporations of people for a small debt of mony, and to presse the contemners of that frivolous and profane sentence, with all the civil inconvenientes they could. Fourth∣ly what ever be the laws in Scotland against them who con∣tinues long in the contempt of Excommunication, (which are not inflicted but for great sins and after a long processe) yet certainly their execution is very farre from all cruelty, as they who know the proceedings of that land, will beare witnes. What he objects about fugitives; it is true, when a pro∣ces is begunne, a fugitive may have it concluded, and sent after him; but we count not that man a fugitive from disci∣pline or contumacious as the Warner quarrels us, who upon just feare to hazard his life does not compear. CHAP. XII. The Presbytery is hurtfull to no order of men. PRaelaticall malice is exorbitant beyond the bounds of all The War∣ners out∣rage a∣gainst the Presbytery▪ shew of moderation: was it not enough to have calum∣niat the Presbytery to Kings, Princes and Soveraignes, to Parliaments and all Courts of Justice, to people and all particular persons, but yet a new chapter must be made to shew in it the hurtfullnes of Presbytery to all orders of men: wee must have patience to stand a little in the unsavoury aire of this vomite also. The Prae∣lats were constant oppressors of the No∣bility and gentry. Unto the nobility and gentry the Presbitery must be hurt∣full, because it subjecteth them to the censures of a raw hea∣dy novice and a few ignorant artificers. Ans. Its good that our praelats are now turned pleaders against the oppression
of the Nobility and gentry: its not long since the praelatical clergy were accustomed to set their foule feet on the necks of the greatest peeres of the three Kingdomes with to high a pride and pressure; that to shake of their yock, no suffering, no hazard has been refused by the best of the Nobility and gentry of Britaine: but natures and principles are so easy to be changed, that no man now needs feare any more oppres∣sion from the praelats, though they were set downe again and wel warned in their repaired throns. But to the challenge we answer, that the meanest Elder∣ship The way of the Sco∣tes Pres∣bytery is incompa∣rably bet∣ter then that of the English E∣piscopacy. of a small Congregation in Scotland consists of the Pa∣stor, and a dozen (at least) of the most wise pious and lear∣ned that are to be found in the whole flock; which yet the Warner heer makes to be judges but of the common people in matters of smallest moment. But for the classicall Pres∣bytery, to which he referres the Ecclesiasticall causes of the Nobility and gentry, and before whom indeed every Church processe of any considerable weight or difficulty does come, though it concerne the persons of the meanest of the people, this Presbytery does consist ordinarly of fifeteen Ministers (at least) and fifeteen of the most qualified noblemen, gent∣lemen and Burgesses, which the circuit of fifteen parishes can affoord, these (I hope) may make up a judicatory of a great deale more worth then any officiall court, which con∣sists but of one judge, a petty mercenary lawyer, to whose care alone the whole Ecclesiastick jurisdiction over all the Nobility and gentry of diverse shyres is committed, and that without appeale as the Warner has told us, except it be to a Court of delegats; a miserable releefe that all the Nobili∣ty, gentry and Commons of a Kingdome, who are op∣pressed by Episcopall officials, have no other remedie but to goe attende a Committee of two or three civilians at London deputed for the discussing of such appeales.
The Presbyterian course is much more ready, solide and equitable: if any grievance arise from the sentence of a Pres∣bytery, a Synode twice a yeare doth sit in the bounds, and attends for a week, or if need be, longer, to determine all appeales, and redresse all grievances: now the Synode does consist of all the Ministers within the bounds, which ordi∣narly are of diverse whole shyres as that of Glasgow, of the upper and neather ward of Clidsedaile, Baerranfrow, Lennox, Kile, Carrick and Cunninghame; also beside Ministers, the constant members who have decisive voice in Synodes, are the chiefe Noblemen, Gentlemen and Burgesses of all these shyres, among whom their be such parts for judgment as are not to be found nor expected in any inferiour civil Court of the Kingdom, yet if it fall out so, that any party be grieved with the sentence of a Synode, there is then a farther and fi∣nall appeale in a Generall assembly, which consists of as many Burgesses and more Gentlemen from every shire of the Kingdome then come to any Parliament: beside the prime Nobility and choisest Ministry of the land; having the Kings Majestie in persone, or in his absence, his high Commissioner to be their praesident. This meeting yeerly (or oftner, if need be) sits ordinarly a month; and if they think fit, longer: the number, the wisedome, the eminency of the members of this Court is so great, that beside the unjustice, it were a very needlesse labour to appeal from it to the Parlia∣ment, for (as we have said) the King or his high Commissio∣ner, sits in both meetings albeit in a differēt capacity: the num∣ber and qualification of knights and Burgesses is ever large as great in the assembly as in the Parliament: only the difference is, that in the Parliament all the Nobility in the Kingdom sit without any election and by virtue of their birth, but in the Assembly only who for age, wisedome and piety are cho∣sen by the Presbyteries as fittest to judge in Ecclesiastick af∣fairs
but to make up this oddes of the absence of some Noble∣men, the Assembly is alwayes adorned with above ane hun∣dred of the choisest Pastors of the whole land, none where of may sit in Parliament: nothing that can conciliate authority to a Court, or can be found in the Nation, is wanting to the generall assembly; how basely so ever our praelats are pleased to trample upon it. The second alledged hurt which the Nobility have from All questi∣ons about patrona∣ges in Scotland are now ended. the Presbytery, is the losse of their patronages by congre∣gations electing their Pastors. Ans. Howsoever the judg∣ment of our Church about patronages is no other then that of the Reformed divines abroad, yet have our Presbyteries alwayes with patience endured patrons to present unto va∣cant Churches, till the Parliament now at last hath taken away that grievance. The Nobilities last hurt by the Presbytry is their losse of The pos∣sessors of Church lands were ever feared for Bishops, but never for the Presby∣tery. all their impropriations and Abey-lands. Ans. How Sy∣cophantick an accusation is this? for who knowes not, how farre the whole generation of the praelaticke faction doe ex∣ceed the highest of the Presbyterians in zeale against that which they call Sacriledge? never any of the Presbyterians did attempt either by violence, or a course of Law, to put out any of the Nobility or gentry from their possessions of the Church-lands, but very lately the threats and vigorous activity of the praelats, and their followers were so vehement in this kinde, that all the Nobility and gentry who had any interest, were wackned (to purpose) to take heed of their rights. In the last Parliament of Scotland when the power of the Church was as great as they expect to see it againe, though they obtained the abolition of patronages, yet were the possessors of the Church-lands and tythes so little har∣med that their rights therto were more cleerly and strongly confirmed, then by any praeceding Parliament.
The fourth hurt is that every ordinary Presbyter wil make himselfe a Noblemans fellow. Ans. No where in the World does gracious Ministers (though meane borne men) receive more respect from the Nobility then in Scotland: neither any where does the Nobility and gentry receive more duely their honour then from the Ministers there. That insolent speach fathered on Mr. Robert Bruce is demonstrat to be a fabulous calumny in the historicall vindication. How ever the Warner may know that in all Europe where Bishops have place, it hes ever, (at least these 800 yeares) been their nature to trample under foot the highest of the Nobility. As the Pope must be above the Emperour, so a little Cardinal Bellarmin can tell to King Iames, that hee may well be counted a companion of any Ilander King: were the Bishops in Scotland ever content, till they got in Parlia∣ment the right hand and the nearest seates to the throne, and the doore of the greatest Earles, Marquesses and duks? was it not Episcopacy, that did advance poore and capricious pedants to strive for the whyte staves & great Seales of both Kingdomes, with the prime Nobility; and often overcome them in that strife? In Scotland I know, and the Warner will assure for England and Ireland, that the basest borne of his brethren hes ruffled it in the secreet counsel, in the roy∣all Exchequer, in the highest courts of justice, with the greatest Lords of the Land: its not so long, that yet it can be forgotten, since a Bishop of Galloway had the modesty to give unto a Marquise of Argile, tanta mont to a broadly The prae∣lats conti∣nue to an∣null the being of al the refor∣med Chur∣ches for their want of Episco∣pacy. in his face at the counsel table. The Warner shall doe well to reckon no more with Presbyters for braving of Noble∣men. The nixt hee will have to bee wronged by the Presbytery are the orthodoxe clergy. Ans. All the Presbyterians to him (it seemes) are heterodoxe; Episcopacy is so necessary
a truth that who denies it, must be stamped as for a grievous errour with the character of heterodox. The following words cleere this to be his mind, they losse (saith hee) the confortable assurance of undoubted succession by Episcopall or∣dination: what sence can be made of these words, but that all Ministers who are not ordained by Bishops, must lie un∣der the confortlesse uncertainty of any lawfull succession in their ministeriall charge, for want of this succession through the lineall descent of Bishops from the Apostles; at least for want of ordination by the hands of Bishops, as if unto them only the power of mission and ordination to the Ministry were committed by Christ: because of this defect the Presbyterian Ministers must not only want the confort of an assured and undoubted calling to the Ministry, but may very well know and be assured that their calling and Ministry is null. The words immediatly following are scraped out after their printing: for what cause the author lest knoweth: but the purpose in hand makes it proba∣ble, that the deletted words did expresse more of his mind, then it was safe in this time and place to speake out: it was the late doctrine of Doctor Brambles prime friends, that the want of Episcopall ordination did not only annuall the calling of all the Ministers of France, Holland, Zwit-zerland, and Germany, but also did hinder all these societies to be true Churches: for that popular Sophisme of the Jesuits our prae∣lats did greedily swallow; where are no true Sacraments, there is no true Church; and where is no true Ministry, there are no true Sacraments; and where no true ordination, there is no true ministry; and where no Bishops, there is no true ordination: and so in no reformed country but in England and Ireland where were true Bishops, is any true Church. When Episcopacy comes to this height of elevation, that the want of it must annull the Ministry, yea null the Church and
all the Reformed at one strock, is it any mervaill, that all of them doe concurre together for their own preservation, to abolish this insolent abaddon and destroyer? and notwith∣standing all its ruine have yet no disconfort at all, nor any the least doubt of their most lawfull ordination by the hands of the Presbytry. After all this was writen, as heer it stands, another copie The Prae∣lats are so baselie injurious to all the reformed Churches that their selses are ashamed of it. of the Warners book was brought to my hand wherin I found the deleted line stand printed in these distinct tearmes, and put it to a dangerous question whither it be within the payle of the Church, the deciphering of these words puts it beyond all peradventure that what I did conjecture of the Warner and his Brethrens minde, of the state of all the reformed Church∣es, was no mis-take, but that they doe truely judge the want of Episcopall ordination to exclude all the Ministers of other Reformed Churches, and their flocks also from the lines of the true Church. This indeed is a most dangerous question: for it stricks at the root of all. If the Warner out of remorse of conscience had blotted out of his book that er∣rour, the repentance had been commendable: But he hes left so much yet behind unscraped out, as does shew his minde to continue what it was, so that feare alone to pro∣voke the reformed heere at this unseasonable time, seemes to have been the cause of deleting these too cleare expressi∣ons of the praelaticall tenet against the very being and subsis∣tence of all the Protestant Churches, which want Episcopa∣cy, when these mē doe still stand upon the extreame pinacle of impudency and arrogance, denying the Reformed to be true Churches, and without scuple averring Rome as shee stands this day, under the counsel of Trent, to be a Church most true, wherin there is an easy way of salvation, from which all separation is needlesse, and with which are-uni∣on were much to be desired? That gracious faction this day
is willing enough to perswade, or at least to rest content without any opposition that the King should of himselfe without and before a Parliament, (though contrary to ma∣ny standing Lawes) grant under his hand and seale a full li∣berty of Religion to the bloody Irish, and to put in their hands, both armes, Castles and prime Places of trust in the State; that the King should give assurance of his endeavour, to get all these ratified in the nixt Parliament of England, these men can heare with all moderation and patience: but behold their furious impatience, their whole art and indu∣stry is wakned, when they heare of any appearance of the Kings inclination towards covenanting Protestants: night and day they beate in his Majesties head, that all the mis∣chieves of the world does lurke in that miserable covenant, that death and any misfortune, that the ruine of all the King∣domes ought much rather to bee imbraced by his Majestie, then that prodigious Monster, that very hell of the Cove∣nant, because forsooth it doth oblige in plane tearmes the taker to endeavour (in his station) the abolition of their great Goddesse, praelacy. The nixt hurt of Ministers from the Presbytry, is, that by it they are brought to ignorance, contempt and beggery. The gene∣rality of the Epis∣copal cler∣gy have ever been covered with igno∣rance, beg∣gery, and contempt. Ans. Whither Episcopacy or Presbytry is the fittest instru∣ment to avert these evills, let reason or experience teach men to judge. The Presbyteriall discipline doth oblige to a great deale of severer tryalls in all sort of learning requisite in a divine before ordination then doth the Episcopall: let either the rule or practise of Presbyterian and Episcopall or∣dination be compared or the weekly Exercises and monthly disputations in Latine upon the controverted heads be look∣ed upon which the Presbytry exacts of every Minister after his ordination all the dayes of his life: for experience let the French, Dutch and Scots divines who have been or yet are,
be compared with the ordinary generation of the English Clergie, and it will be found, that the praelats have not great reason so superciliously to look downe with contempt upon their Brethrens learning. I hope, Cartwright, Whi∣taker, Perkins, Reynolds, Parker, Ames, and other Pres∣byterian English were inferior in learning to none of their opposits: some of the English Bishops has not wanted good store of learning, but the most of them (I beleeve) wilbe con∣tent to leave of boasting in this subject, what does the Warner speake to us of ignorance, contempt and Beggery? does not all the world know, that albeit some few, scarce one of twenty, did brook good benefices, yea plurality of them whereby to live in splendor at Court, or where they listed in their non-residency, neverthelesse it hath been much com∣plained, that the greatest parte of the priests, who had the cure of soules thorow all the Kingdome of England, were incomparably the most ignorant, beggerly and contemp∣tible clergy, that ever have been seen in any of the reformed Churches? neither did we ever heare of any great study in the Praelats to remeed these evils, albeit some of them be pro∣vident enough for their owne families. Doctor Bramble knowes who had the skill before they had sitten seven yeare in their charge to purchase above fifeteen hundred pounds a yeare for themselves and their heirs what somever. The third evil which the Ptesbytery brings upon Minis∣ters is that it makes them prat and pray nonsence everlast∣ingly. The Prae∣lats conti∣nue to hate preaching and prayer but to ido∣lize a po∣pish ser∣vice. Ans. It is indeed a great heartbrake unto igno∣rant, lazy and unconsciencious Ministers to be put to the paines of preaching and prayer, when a read service was wont to be all their exercise: but we thought that all indiffe∣rently ingenuous men had long agoe been put from such impudence. It was the late labour of the praelats by all their skill to disgrace preaching and praying without booke, to
cry up the Liturgy as the only service of God, and to idolize it as a most heavenly and divine peece of write, which yet is nought but a transcript of the superstitious breviary and idolatrous missall of Rome. The Warner would doe well to consider and answer after seven years advisement Mr. Bailie his pararell of the service with the missall and Breviarie, be∣fore hee presente the world with new paralels of the English liturgy, with the directories of the Reformed Churches. Is it so indeed, that all preaching and praying without book is but a pratting of non-sence everlastingly, why then con∣tinues the King and many well minded men to be deceived by our Doctors, while they affirme that they are as much for preaching in their practise and opinion as the Presbyterians, and for prayer without book also, before and after sermon, and in many other occasions? it seemes these affirmations are nothing but grosse dissimulation in this time of their low∣nesse and affliction, to decline the envy of people against them for their profane contempt of divine ordinances; for wee may see heere their tenet to remaine what it was, and themselves ready enough, when their season shall be fitter, to ring it out loud in the eares of the World, that for divine service people needs no more but the reading of the liturgy, Vide la∣dnsium. cap. 7. that sermons on week dayes and Sundayes afternoon must all be laid aside, that on the Sabbath before noone Sermon is needlesse, and from the mouths of the most Preachers very noxious; that when some learned Schollars are pleased on some festivall dayes to have an oration, it would be short and and according to the Court paterne, without all Spirit and life for edification; but by all meanes it must bee provided, that no word of prayer either before or after be spoken, ex∣cept only a bidding to pray, for many things even for the welfare of the soules departed; and all this alone in the words of the Lords prayer. If any shall dare to expresse the
desires of his heart to God in privat or publick in any words of his own framing hee is a grosse Puritan, who is bold to offer to God his own nonsence rather then the auncient, and well advised prayers of the holy Church. The Warner is heer also mistaken in his beleefe, that ever the Church of Scotland had any Liturgy, they had and have still some formes for helpe and direction, but no ty ever in any of them by law or practise: they doe not condemne the use of set formes for rules, yea nor for use in beginners, who are thereby endeavouring to attaine a readinesse to pray in their family out of their owne heart in the words which Gods spirit dytes to them; but for Ministers to suppresse their most confortable and usefull gift of prayer by tying their mouth unto such formes which themselves or others have composed wee count it a wrong to the giver, and to him who has re∣ceived the gift, and to the gift, and to the Church for whose use that was bestowed. In the nixt place the Warner makes the Presbytry injuri∣ous Episcopall warrants for clan∣destin mar∣riages, rob Parents of their chil∣dren. to parents, by marying their children contrary to their consent, and forcing them to give to the disobedient as large a portion as to any other of their obedient children, and that it is no mervail the Scots should doe these things who have stripped the King the father of their country of his just rights. Ans. By the Warners rule all the actions of a nation where a Presbytry lodges must be charged on the back of the Pres∣bytry. II. The Parliament of Scotland denyes, that they have stripped the King of his just rights; while he was stirred up and keeped on by the praelaticall faction to courses de∣structive to himselfe and all his people; after the shedding of much blood, before the exercise of all parts of his royall go∣vernment, they only required for all satisfaction and secu∣rity to religion and liberties, the grant of some few most e∣quitable demands. The unhappy Praelats from the begin∣ning
of our troubles to this day finding our great demande to runne upon the abolition of their office, did everpresse his Majestie to deny us that satisfaction, and rather then Bishops should be laid aside they have concluded that the King himselfe, and all his family and all his three King∣domes shall perish: yet with all patience the Scotes con∣tinue to supplicat and to offer not only their Kingdome, but their lives and estats and all they have for his Majesties ser∣vice upon the grant of their few and easy demands; but no misery either of King or people can overcome the desperat obstinacy ofPraelaticall hearts. As for parents consent to the mariage of their children, how tenderly it is provided for in Scotland it may be seen at length in the very place cited. It was the Bishops, who by their warrants for clandestine mariages, and dispensations with mariages without warrant have spoiled many parents of their deare children: with such abhominations the Pres∣bytery was never acquainted; all that is alleadged out of that place of our discipline is, when a cruel parent or tutor abuses their authority over their children, and against all reason for their owne evill ends perversely will crosse their children in their lawfull and every way honest desires of mariage; that in that case the Magistrats and Ministers may be intreated by the grieved childe to deale with the unjust parent or tutor, that by their mediation reason may be done. I beleeve this advice is so full of equity, that no Church nor State in the world will complaine of it: but how ever it be, this case is so rare in Scotland that I professe, I never in my life did know, nor did heare of any child before my dayes, who did assay by the authoritative sentence of a Magistrate or Minister to force their parents consent to their marriage. As for the War∣ners addition of the Ministers compelling parents to give portions to their children, that the Church of Scotland haths
any such canon or practise its an impudent lie, but in the place alledged is a passage against the sparing of the life of adul∣terers, contrary to the Law of God: and for the excom∣munication of Adulterers, when by the negligence of the Magistrat their life is spared, this possibly may be the thorne in the side of some which makes them bite and spurne with the heele so furiously against the Authors and lovers of so severe a discipline. The Presbyteries nixt injury is done to the Lawyers, Sy∣nodes & other Ecclesiastick Courts revoke their Sentences. Ans. No such matter ever was attempted in Scotland; fre∣quent prohibitions have been obtained by curtisan Bishops, against the highest civil judicatories in England, but that e∣ver a Presbitry or Synode in Scotland did so much as assay to impede or repeale the proceedings of any the meanest ci∣vil court, I did never heare it so much as alleaged by our ad∣versaries. The nixt injury is against all Masters, and Mistresses of fa∣milies, Serious ca∣techising is no Episco∣pal crime. whom the Presbytery will have to be personally exa∣mined in their knowledge once a yeare, and to be excom∣municat, if grosly and wilfully ignorant. Ans. If it bee a crime for a Minister to call together parcels of his congrega∣tion to be instructed in the grounds of Religion, that ser∣vants and children and (where ignorance is suspected,) others also may be tryed in their knowledge of the Catechisme; or if it bee a crime that in family-visitations oftener then once a yeare the conversation of every member of the Church may be looked upon; we confesse the Ministers of Scotland were guilty thereof, and so farre as we know the generality of the Episcopall faction may purge themselves by oath of any such imputation: for they had somewhat else to doe, then to be at the pains of instructing or trying the Spirituall State of every sheep in their flocks: we confesse likewise, that it is
both our order and practise to keep off from the holy table, whom wee find groslly and wilfully ignorant: but that ever any for simple ignorance was excommunicat in Scotland, none who knowes us will affirme it. The last whom he will have to be wronged by the Presby∣tery Church sessions are not high com∣missiones. are the common people, who must groane under a high commission in every parish, where ignorant governors rule all without Law, medling even in domesticall jarres be twixt man and wife, Master and Servant. Ans. This is but a gybe of revenge for the overthrow of their Tyrannous high Commission-Court, where they were wont to play the Rex at their pleasure above the highest subjects of the three King∣doms, and would never give over that their insolent dome∣neering court, till the King and Parliaments of both King∣domes did agree to throw it down about their eares. The thing he jeares at, is the congregationall Eldership, a judi∣catory which all the Reformed doe enjoy to their great con∣fort as much as Scotland. They are farre from all arbitrary judications; their Lawes are the holy Scripture and acts of superior Church-judicatories, which rule so clearly the ca∣ses of their cognisance, that rarely any difficulty remaines therein: or if it doe, immediatly by reference or appeal it is transmitted to the Classes or Synode. The judges in the lowest Eldership (as wee have said before) are a doszen at least, of the most able and pious who can bee hade in a whole congregation to joine with the Pastors one or more as they fall to be: but the Episcopall way is to have no disci∣pline at all in any congregation: only where there is hope of a fyne, the Bishops officiall will summon before his owne learned and conscientious wisedome, who ever within the whole dioces have fallen into such a fault as hee pleaseth to take notice of: as for domestick infirmities, Presbyterians are most tender to medle therein; they come never before
any judicatory, but both where the fault is great, and the scandal thereof flagrant, and broken out beyond the wals of the family. These are the great injuries and hurts which the Church discipline has procured to all orders of men in the whole re∣formed world, when Episcopacy has been such an innocent lambe, or rather so holy an angel upon earth, that no harme at all has ever come by it to any mortall creature: a misbe∣leeving Jew will nothing misdoubt this so evident a truth. CHAP. ULT. The Warners exceptions against the covenant are full of con∣sidence but exceeding frivolous. THough in the former Chapters the Warner has shewed out more venome and gall then the bagge of any one mans stomack could have been supposed capable of, yet as if he were but beginning to vomite, in this last Chapter of the covenant a new flood of blacker poyson rusheth out of his pen. His undertaking is great, to demonstrat cleerly that the covenant is meerly void wicked and impious. His first clear demonstration is, that it was devised by strangers, im∣posed by subjects, who wanted requisite power, and was extorted by just feare of unjust suffering, so that many that took it with their lips, never consented with their hearts. Ans. This cleer demonstration is but a poor and evill argu∣ment: the Major, if it were put in forme, would hardly be granted, but I stand on the minor as weake and false for the covenant was not devised by strangers, the Commissioners The Cove∣nant was not disho∣nourable to union. of the Parliament of England together with the Commissio∣ners of the Parlia ment and generall assembly of Scotland
were the first and only framers thereof, but they who gave the life and being to it in England were the Lords and Com∣mons assembled in Parliament at West-Minster by the Kings call, and at that time acknowledged by his Majestie without any question about the lawfullnes of their constitution and authority: these men and that Court were not I hope great strangers in England. The covenant was not imposed upon the King: but the Parliaments of both Kingdomes made it their earnest desire unto his Majestie, that he would be plea∣sed to joyne with them in that Covenant, which they did judge to be a maine peece of their security for their Religion and liberties in all the three Kingdomes. As for their impo∣sing of it upon the subjects of England, an ordinance of Par∣liament (though the King consent not) by the uncontrover∣ted lawes of England, is a sufficient authority to crave obe∣dience of all the subjects of England, during the continuan∣ce of that Parliament. The last part of the demonstration is dishonorable indeed to the English Nation if it were true, it was no dishonour to England to joyne with their brethren of Scotland in a Cove∣nant for mantainance of their Religion and Liberties: but for many of the English to sweare a covenant with their lippes, from which their heart did dissent and upon this diffe∣rence of heart and mouth to plead the nullity of the oath, and to advance this plea so high as to a cleer demonstration, this is such a dishonour and dishonesty, that a greater can∣not fall upon a man of reputed integrity, Especially when the ground of the lie and perjury is an evident falshood: for the covenant was not extorted from any flesh in England by feare of any unjust suffering; so far was it from this, that to this day it could never be obtained from the Parliament of England, to enjoyne that covenant upon any by the penul∣ty of a two pence.
The Warners second demonstration is no better then the Covenan∣ters were not de∣ceived, but under∣stood what they sweare. first, the ground of it is, that all oathes are void which have deceipt and errour of the substantiall conditions incident to them. This ground had need to be much better cautioned, then heere it is, before it can stand for a major of a clear de∣monstration: but how is the minor proved? behold how much short the Warners proofes are of his great boastings. His first argument is grounded upon an evident falshood, that in the Covenant we sweare the lately devised discipline to be Christs institution. Ans. There is no such word nor any such matter in all the Covenant: was the Warners ha∣tred so great against that peece of write, that being to make cleare demonstrations against it, hee would not so much as cast his eye upon that which he was to oppugne, Covenan∣ters sweare to endeavour the reformation of England, ac∣cording to the word of God and the best reformed Churches, but not a word of the Scotes Presbytery, nor of any thing in any Church even the best reformed, unlesse it be found ac∣cording to the paterne of Gods holy word. The second ground of his demonstration is also an evi∣dent errour, that the covenant in hand is one and the same The War∣ner unwit∣tingly comends the Cove∣nant. with that of King Iames. Ans. Such a fancy came never in the head of any man, I know; much lesse was it ever wri∣ten or spoken by any: that the Covenant of King Iames in Scotland 1580, should bee one and the same with the Cove∣nant of all the three Kingdomes 1643, whatsoever iden∣tities may appeare in the matter and similitude, in the ends of both; but the grossest errors are solide enough grounds for praelaticall clear demonstrations. Yet heere the War∣ner understands not how hee is cutting his own vines; his friends in Scotland will give him small thanks for at∣tributing unto the nationall Covenant of Scotland, (that Covenant of King Iames) these three properties, that it
was issued out by the Kings authority, that it was for the maintenance of the Lawes of the realme, and for the main∣tenance of the established Religion: tyme brings adversa∣ries to confesse of their own accord long denyed truthes. But the Characters, which the Warner inprints upon the solemne league and Covenant of the three Kingdomes, wee must bee pardoned to controvert, till he have taken some leasure to trie his wilde assertions. First that the league is against the authority of the King, secondly that it is against the Law; and thirdly that it is for the overthrow of Religion. The man cannot think, that any should beleeve his dictats of this kind without proofe, since the expresse words of that league do flatly contradict him in all these three positions. His gentle memento, that Scotland, when they sued for aid from the crowne of England, had not the English dis∣cipline obtruded upon their Church, might heer have been spaired: was not the English discipline and liturgy obtruded upon us by the praelats of England with all craft and force? did we ever obtrude our disciplin upon the English? but when they of their owne free and long deliberate choice had abolished Bishops and promised to set up Presbytery, so far as they had found it agreable to the word of Cod, were wee not in all reason obliged to encourage and assist them in so pious a work? In the nixt words the Warner for all his great boasts fin∣ding the weaknes of all the former grounds of his seconde The King did not clame the sole and absolute possession of the mi∣litia. demonstration, he offers three new ones: which doubtles will doe the deid: for he avowes positively that his follo∣wing grounds are demonstrative, yet whosoever shalbe pleased to grip them with never so soft an hand shall find them all to be but vanity and wind. The first, after a num∣ber of prosyllogismes rests upon these two foundations, first that the right of the militia resides in the King alone: second∣ly
that by the covenant the militia is taken out of the Kings hands; and that every covenanter by his covenant disposes of himselfe and of his armes, against the right which the King hath into him. Ans. The Warner will have much adoe to prove this second so, that it may be a ground of a clear demonstration: but for the first that the power of the militia of England doth reside in the King alone, that the two houses of Parliament have nothing at all to doe with it, and that their taking of armes for the defence of the liberties of England or any other imaginable cause against any party countenanced by the Kings presence against his lawes must be altogether unlawfull; if his demonstration be no clearer, then the ground where upon he builds it, I am sure, it will not be visible to any of his opposits: who are not like to be convinced of open rebellion by his naked assertion, upon which alone he layes this his mighty ground. Beleeve it, he had need to assay its releefe with some colour of ane argu∣ment; for none of his owne friends will now take it of his hand for ane indemonstrable principle, since the King for a long time was willing to acknowledge the Parliaments jointe interest in the militia, yea to put the whole militia in their hands alone for a good number of yeares to come: so farre was his Majestie from the thoughts, that the Parlia∣ments medling with a parte of the militia, in the time of e∣vident dangers, should be so certainly and clearly the crime of rebellion. The Warners second demonstrative ground wee admit without question in the major, that where the matter is evi∣dently unlawfull, the oath is not binding; but the applica∣tion of this in the minor is very false. All that hee brings to make it appeare to be true, is that the King is the supreame Legislator, that it is unlawfull for the subjects of England to change any thing established by Law, especially to the
prejudice of the Praelats without their own consent, they being a third order of the Kingdom; otherwise it would be a harder measure then the Friers and Abbots received from Henry the eight. Ans. May the Warner be pleased to con∣sider The change of lawes in England ordinarly beginne by the two houses without the King. how farre his dictats heere are from all reason, much more from evident demonstrations. That the burden of Bi∣shops and ceremonies was become so heavy to all the three Kingdomes, that there was reason to endeavour their lay∣ing aside, he does not offer to dispute; but all his complanit runnes against the manner of their removall: this (say I) was done in no other then the ordinary and high path-way, whereby all burdensome Lawes and customes use to be re∣moved. Doth not the Houses of Parliament first begin with their ordinance before the Kings consent be sought to a Law? is not an ordinance of the Lords and Commons a good war∣rant to change a former Law during the sitting of the Parlia∣ment? The Lawes and customes of England permit not the King by his dissent to stoppe that change. I grant for the tur∣ning The King did really consent to the aboli∣tion of Bishops. an ordinance to a standing Law, the Kings consent is required, but with what qualifications and exceptions wee need not heere to debate, since his Majesties consent to the present case of abolishing Bishops was obtained well neere as farre as was desired; and what is yet lacking, wee are in a faire way to obtaine it: for the Kings Majestie long agoe did agree to the rooting out of Episcopacy in Scotland, he was willing also in England and Ireland to put them out of the Parliament, and all civil courts, and to divest them of all civil power, and to joyne with them Presbyteries for or∣dination and spirituall jurisdiction; yea to abolish them to∣tally name and thing, not only for three yeares but ever till he and his Parliament should agree upon some setled order for the Church. was not this Tantamont to a perpetuall abo∣lition for all and every one in both houses having abjured E∣piscopacy
by solemne oath and Covenant, the Parliament was in no hazard of agreing with the King to re-erect the fallen chaires of the Bishops: so there remained no other, but that either his Majestie should come over to their judge∣ment, or by his not agreing with them, yet really to agree with them in the perpetuall abolition of Episcopacy, since the concession was for the laying Bishops aside ever, till hee and his houses had agreed upon a settled order for the Church. If this be not a full and formall enough consent to the ordinance of changing the former Lawes anent praelats, his Majestie, who now is, easily may and readily would supply all such defects: if some of the faction did not con∣tinually, for their own evill interests, whisper in his eares pernicious counsel, as our Warner in this place also doeth by frighting the King in conscience from any such consent, for this end he casts out a discourse, the sinshews whereof are in these three Episcopall maximes. First that the legislative power is sollie in the King, that is according to his Brethrens The Prae∣lats would flatter the King into a Tyran∣ny. Cōmentary, that the Parliament is but the Kings great coun∣sel of free choyce, without or against whose votes hee may make or unmake what Lawes he thinks expedient; but for them to make any ordinance for changing without his con∣sent of any thing that has been, or instituting any new thing, or for them to defend this their legall right and custome (time out of mind) against the armes of the Malignant party, no man may deny it to be plaine rebellion. II. That the King and Parliament both together cannot The prae∣lats takes to them∣selves a negative voice in Parlia∣ment. make a Law, to the praejudice of Bishops without their own consent, they being the third order of the Kingdome: for albeit it be sacriledge in the Lords and Commons, to clame any the smallest share of the legislative power, (this i them were to pyck the chiefest jewel out of the Kings Crowne) yet this must be the due priviledge of the Bishops, they must
be the third order of the Kingdome, yea the first and most high of the three, far above the other two temporall States of Lords and Commons; their share in the Legislative pow∣er must be so great, that neither King nor Parliament can passe any Law without their consent, so that according to their humble protestation, all the Lawes and acts, which have been made by King and Parliament, since they were expelled the house of Lords, are cleerly voide and null. That the King and Parliament in divesting Bishops of The Prae∣lats grieve that Monks and Friers, the Pope and Car∣dinals were casten out of England by Henry the eight. their temporall honour and estats, in abolishing their places in the Church, doe sin more against conscience then did Henry the eight and his Parliament, when they put down the Abbots and the Fryers. Wee must beleeve that Henry the eight his abolishing the order of Monks was one of the acts of his greatest Tyranny and greed: wee must not doubt, but according to Law and reason, Abbots and priours ought to have kept still their vote in Parliament, that the Mona∣steryes and Nunryes should have stood in their integrity, that the King and Parliament did wrong in casting them down, and that now they ought in conscience to be set up againe, yea that Henry the eight against all reason and conscience did renounce his due obedience to the Pope, the Patriarch of the West, the first Bishop of the universe, to whom the superinspection and government of the whole Catholick Church in all reason doth belong. Though all this be heere glaunced at by the Warner, and elsewhere hee prove it to be the declared mind of his Brethren, yet we must be pardoned not to accept them as undenyable principles of cleare demonstrations. The just supremacy of Kings is not pre∣judged by the Cove∣nant. The last ground of the Doctors demonstration is, that the covenant is ane oath to set up the Presbyterian govern∣ment in England at it is in Scotland and that this is contrary o the oath of Supremacy; for the oath of Supremacy makes
the King the only supreame head and governour of the Church of England, that is, the civil head to see that every man doe his duty in his calling; also it gives the King a su∣preame power over all persons in all causes: but the Presby∣tery is a politicall papacie, acknowledging no governours but only the Presbyters: it gives the King power over all per∣sons as subjects, but none at all in Ecclesiastick causes. Ans. Is there in all this reasoning any thing sound? First what article of the covenant beares the setting up of the Presbyterian government in England as it is in Scotland? II. If the oath of supremacy import no more then what the Warners expresse words are here, that the King is a civil head, to see every man doe his duty in his calling, let him be assured that no Presbyterian in Scotland was ever con∣trary to that supremacy. III. That the Presbytery is a pa∣pacy, and that a politicall one, the Warner knowes it ought not to be graunted upon his bare word. IV. That in Scot∣land no other governors are acknowledged then Presbyters, himselfe contradicts in the very nixt words, where he tells that the Scots Presbytery ascribes to the King a power over all persons as subjects. V. That any Presbyterian in Scotland makes it sacriledge to give the King any power at all in any Ecclesiastick cause; it is a senselesse untruth. The Warners arguments are not more idle and weake, The War∣ners inso∣lent vanity. then his triumphing upon them is insolent: for he concludes from these wise and strong demonstrations, that the poor covenant is apparently deceitfull, unvalide, impious, re∣bellious, and what not? yea that all the learned divines in Europe wil conclude it so, & that all the covenanters them∣selfes who have any ingenuity, must grant this much; and that no knowing English man can deny it, but his owne conscience will give him the ly. Ans. If the Warner with any seriousnesse hath weighed this part of his owne write, and
if his mind goe along with his pen, I may without great presumption pronounce his judgment to be none of the most solide. His following vapours being full of aire we let them eva∣nish, only while he mentioneth our charging the King with intentions of changing the Religion and government, we answer, that we have been most willing alwayes to ascribe to the King good intentions but withall we have long avo∣wed that the praelaticall party have gone beyond intentions to manifest by printed declarations and publick actions their former designe to bring Tiranny upon the States, and po∣pery upon the Churches of all the three Kingdomes: and that this very write of the Warners makes it evident, that this same minde yet remaines within them without the least shew of repentance. So long as the conscience of the court is mannaged by men of such principles, it is not possible to free the hearts of the most understanding, from a great deale of Jealousy and feare to have Religion and lawes still over∣turned by that factione. But the Warner commands us, to speake to his Dilemma, whither we think it lawfull or unlawfull for subjects to take The cove∣nant is not for propa∣gating os Religion by armes. armes against their prince meerly for Religion. We answer, that the reasons whereby he thinks to conclude against us, on both sides are very poor, if we shall say, it is unlawfull; then he makes us to condemne our selfes, because our co∣venant testifies to the world, that we have taken up armes meerly to alter Religion, and that we beare no alleadgance to our King but in order to Religion, which in plaine tear∣mes is to our owne humours and conceits. Ans. There be many untruthes here in few words, first how much reality and truth the Warner and some of his fellowes beleeves to be in that thing which they call Religion, their owne heart knowes; but it can be no great charity in him to make the
Religion of all covenanters to be nothing but their owne humours and conceits. Secondly it is not true that Covenan∣ters beare no alleadgance to the King but only in order to religion. III. The Parliament of England denied that they took up armes against their King, though to defend them∣selves against the popish praelaticall and malignant faction, who were about to destroy them with armes. IV. They have declared, that their purpose was not at all, to alter Religion but to purge it from the corruptions of Bishops and ceremonies that to long had been noxious unto them. V. They have oft professed that their armes were taken for the defence of their just liberties, whereof the preservation and reformation of Religion was but one. The other horne of his Dilemma is as blunt in pushing as the former. If we make it lawfull (saith he) to take up armes for Religion, we then justify the independents and Ana∣baptists; wee make way for any that will plant what ever they apprehend to be true Religion by force, and to cut the throat of all Magistrats, who are in a contrary opinion to them; that it is a ridiculous partiality for any to priviledge their own Religion as truth and Gospell. Ans. Whether The War∣ners black Atheisme. will these men goe at last, the strength of this reason is blak atheisme, that their is no realty of truth in any Religion, that no man may be permitted to take his Religion for any thing more but his owne apprehension, which without ridi∣culous folly he must not praeferre to any other mans appre∣hension of a contrary Religion: this is much worse then the pagane Scepticisme, which turned all reality of truth into a meer apprehension of truth, wherein their was no certainty at all: this not only turnes the most certaine truths, even these divine ones of Religion, into meer uncertaine concep∣tions; but which is worse, it wil have the most orthodoxe beleever so to think, speake and act, as if the opinions of
Independents, Anabaptists, Turks, Jews, Pagans or grosse Atheists were as good, true and solide as the beleefe of Moyses or Paul, were of the truths revealed to them from heaven. Secondly we say that subjects defence of their Religion and liberties established by Law, against the violent usurpation of Papists, Praelats or Malignants, is not the planting of Religi∣on by arms; much lesse is it the cutting of the throats of al Ma∣gistrats, who differ in any point of Religion. The Prae∣lats con∣demne the defensive armes of the Dutch & Frensh Prote∣stants. III. In the judgement of the praelaticall party, the defensive armes of the Protestants in France, Holland, and Germany, must be als much condemned as the offensive armes of the Anabap∣tists in Munster, or of the sectaries this day in England. Can these men dreame that the World for their pleasure will so farre divest themselves of all Religion and reason, as to take from their hands so brutish and Atheisticall maximes. The Prae∣lats decline the judge∣ment of counsels. He concluds with a wish of a generall counsel, at least of all protestant Churches for to condemne all broatchers of seditious principles. Ans. All true covenanters goe before him in that desire, being confident that he and his fellowes as they have declined al ready the most solemne assemblies of their owne countries, upon assurance of their condemna∣tion; so their tergiversation would be als great, if they were to answer to an oecumenick Synod. The Prae∣lats over∣throw the foundatiōs of Prote∣stant Re∣ligion. What (I pray) would the Warner say in a counsel of protestants for the practise of his party pointed at in his last words? I meane their purging the Pope of Antichristianisme, of purpose to make way for a recon∣ciliation, yea for a returne to Rome, as this day it lyes under the wings of the Pope and Cardinals. The Prae∣lats are stil perempto∣rie to de∣stroy the King and all his Kingdoms if they may not be resto∣red. Also what could they answer in a Christian counsel unto this charge, which is the drift of this whole Book, that they are so farre from any re∣morse for all the blood and misery, which their wickednes (most) has brought on the former King and all his King∣domes these eleven yeares, that rather then they had not
as the Covenant and generall assembly in Scotland destroyed as an Idoll and Antichrist, they wil chuse yet still to im∣broyle all in new calamities? This King also and his whole Family, the remainder of the blood and Estats in all the three Kingdomes, must be hazarded for the sowing together of the torne mytres, and the reerecting of the fallen chayres of Praelats. If Bishops must lie still in their deserved ruines, they perseveer in their peremptory resolution, to have their burials sprinckled with the ashes of the royall Family and all the three Kingdomes. FINIS.
ERRATA. GOod Reader, the Authors absence from the Presse the whole time of the impression, and the Printers unacquain∣tance with the English language, has occasioned not onely many mispunctations and literall faults, but also diverse gros∣ser Errata such as the following which thou art intreated to mend with thy Pen: PAg. 4. lin. 23. for had read hath. pag. 9. lin. 8. for Provincio∣nall read Provinciall. p. 11. l. 30. for whereby r. where. p. 15. l. 19. for pairt r. part. p. 20. l. 19, for can r. doth. l. 30. for pote∣stant r. Profestant. pag. 22. l. 19. for these r. the. p. 23. l. ult. for over r. or. for trusted r. trustee. p. 27. l. 4. for impatien, t r. impa∣tient. l. 18. dele, and. p. 28. in marg. for commissarie r. commis∣saries. l. 14. for and r. or. l. 29. for chardge r. charge. p. 31. l. 1. for chardges r. charges. l. 25. for citation r. irritation. p. 32. l. 10. for praecipies r. praecipices. p. 35. in tit. of chap. 7. for paritie r. part. p. 36. l. 2. for scandals r. scandal. p. 37. l. 2. for benefiter. benesice. p. 38. l. 10. for nation r. souldier. l. 11. for their souls r. his soule. p. 48. c. 8. l. 4. dele Ans. p. 49. l. 18. for Warner r. Doctor. p. 51. l. 13. for the r. his. p. 52. l. 16. for treasure r. Bishop. p. 55. in tit. of chap. 9. for their r. the. p, 56. l. 31. for Christ r. Christ his. l. 32. for point blank to r. point blanck. contrare to. p. 59. l. 1. dele and. l. 1. for unpoureth r. vapoureth l. 17. for where r. heere. p. 65. l. 5. for continues r. continue. l. 6. for are r. is. p. 66. l. 3. for to r. so. l. 9. for warned. r. warmed. p. 67. l. 16. for in. r. to. p. 68. l. 5. for or. r. which. l. 16. for last. r. nixt. p. 70. l. 18. for lest. r. best. l. ult. for null the Church and r. the verie being of. p. 71. l. 1. for Reformed r. Reformed Churches. p. 73. l. 23. for charge r. chaire. p. 74. l. 6. for service r. service book. l. 28. dele, and. p. 75. l. 16. dele, and to the gift. p. 76. l. ult. for haths. r. hath. p. 78. l. 24. for doszen r. dozen. p. 82. l. 5. for inprints. r. imprints. p. 84. l. 9. for complanit r. complaint. p. 85. l. 7. for aside ever r. aside for ever. l. 16. for sinshews r. sinews.
ΑΚΟΛΟΥΘΟΣ OR A SECOND FAIRE WARNING To take heed of the SCOTISH DISCIPLINE, In vindication of THE FIRST, (Which the Rt. Reverend Father in God, THE Ld. BISHOP OF LONDON DERRIE Published A. 1649.) Against a schismatical & seditious REVIEWER R. B. G. One of the bold Commissioners from the REBELLIOVS KIRKE IN SCOTLAND To His Sacred MAJESTIE K. CHARLES the SECOND when at the HAGE, BY RI. WATSON Chaplane to the Rt. Hoble. THE LORD HOPTON. HAGH, Printed by SAMUEL BROUN, English Bookeseller. 1651.
To the R. Honorable. the LORD HOPTON Baron of Straton, &c. One of the Lords of His Majeties most honourable Privie Councel. Mr LORD: VPon discoverie of a late motion in some sheetes, I found my booke to have been hitherto but in a trance, which receiving as I thought, (but knew not from whence) a mortal wound before it ap∣peared in the encounter, I gave over long since for downe right dead & buried in the presse. When it recovered spirits enough to crave my hand, I could not denie it so small a courtesie as to helpe it up. In that it lookes not so vivide and fresh complexioned as heretofore it might, it shares but in the ordinarie effects of such misse-fortune. If resuming what it was speaking a twelve-moneth since, be censured for im∣pertinencie to these times, & (it may be) laughed at by some
for prophesying of things past the possibilitie of their suc∣cesse, the fault may be theirs that disordered the leaves when well suited, and the failing not mine, who undertoke not against all changes of mindes, or alterations of counsels, or preventions of causes running on then visiblie to the same is∣sues I assign'd them in my conjecture. But these exceptions, My Lord, though they clip the fringe, neither unshape, nor shorten the garment I intended as the proper guise for Scotish Presbyteric to be seene in the very same with that wherein the Rt. Reverend Bishop of London Derrie had well clad her, soone afterward not onelic undecentlie discompos'd, but rent in pieces by the rudenesse of an angrie furie, one of those sixc evil spirits that haunted (in the night of sorrow) with both tempting and torrisying apparitions, His Royal MA∣jESTIE and your H. H. at the Hage. From whose prae∣vailing violence no rescue could be offered but by repelling the tempest of his language, wherewith he thought to keepe all Antagonists at a distance, and by blowing in his face the fire & stinking sulphure of his breath. If your Lordship please to passe a litle through the smoke, and take no offense at the smell which in a neare approach will be found to be litle of my making, Truth & reason will be beter discerned in a rea∣dinesse to entertaine you, as some longer traine of Authoritic had likewise if Fathers & Councels in this pilgrimage of ours had been, to a just number, within my reach, and some later Writers at the pleasure of my call. The stand, or at least some impediment in the march, of these Bloudie Presbyters, which this forlorne hope will, in some likelihood cause for a time may by your Lordship, unpraejudic'd, be taken for an hapie augurie of the absolute defeate unquaestionablie to follow, if occasion require, by a greater strength, and that under the
conduct of beter experience in these polemical affaires. In the interim though I humblic crave the honour and power of your patronage (wherof from your integritie and constancie in Gods cause & the Kings, I praesume), I assume not the bold∣nesse to constitute your Lordship any partic in the libertie I take, beyond forward expressions, to declare what may be thought some singularitie in my sence. If any small Politician, whose conscience is squared by no religion at all but what plainlie lies in the image-worship of his temporal designes, will be (which I must looke for to be) quaestioning the pru∣dence of my speaches, I thanke God he hath no priviledge to give judgement against the sinceritie of my thoughts. I can no longer conceale, My Lord, how much I am troubled to see our Churches diffusive charitie mistaken, the precious balme, which she ever liberallie poured into the wounds of her neighbours, cast by some of their hands like common oyle upon her domestike flames purposelie to consume her; And the skirt, she often spread over their nakednesse, cut of, with an unhandsome intent to laugh at her shame, had she not an under garment of innocencie to praevent them. To behold, after so many yeares cantonizing our Religion amongst Pro∣testant Congregations of different opinions, (reconcil'd in nothing but, or nothing more then, in a negative to the Papist) our selves, in the end, at a sad losse for protection (or indeed free permission) from any, now neceslitated to seeke it. This makes me so many times in this discourse turne her away from all new names and professions arising whether from pro∣testations or Covenants, to the unconsoederate Catholike Christia∣nitie among the Ancients where she is sure to have the safest sanctuarie of truth for her doctrine & practice, though she can expect no armed assistance from the dead to maintaine the
distressed Members of her communion. If this must be in∣terpreted a schismatical inclination, let me be left in my hold upon the hornes of this altar, while others rise from their knees to sit downe, out of good felloship, at the Tables; and drinke of all waters they care not what, so draw'n from a cisterne of the Reformed, forsaking or vilifying, for the time, that clearer Chrystal fountaine of their owne. Whereas would they enter, as they are quaestionlesse obliged, an un∣animous resolution to demand every where the publike exer∣cise of their canonical devotion, they would either, upon the grant, reape more comfort in continuing the worship of their Fathers, or, upon unworthie denial, more reason to scruple at such a facile conjunction with them, who disclaiming their prayers can not be thought serious when they praetend an harmo∣nie in that faith by which they are exhibited unto God. And (to put your Lordship in minde of a late instance delivered on good credit) who maligning our persons, & mocking at our calamities in their Scholes, are very unlikelie so to alter their mindes as to turne their Barbarous reproach into any bro∣therlie kisse or Christian welcome, when they step but the next doore into their Temples. I confesse, My good Lord, this Magisterial advice may beter become the mouth of some Elder Pastour, who is likelie to have more sheep wandring from his fold then he who can scarce properlie be said to have had any in his charge yet none such, I hope, hath reason to take amisse my modest endeavour, while he is otherwise imployed, to recover those I finde stragling within my call. It being upon due consideration to be feared, that after some few yeares (if there must be yet more of our miserable disper∣sion) with out an universal industrious circumspection of yong and old, as we have broken our pipes, we may throwe
away our whistles, and fold up our time with our armes in a comfortlesse discourse about the flockes we once had which now alas are got into other pastures; Invite strangers to fight for our Churches while our owne Congregations are instituted to forget the holinesse in the separation of such places, the sa∣cred distance of the meanest from worke-or ware-houses, and the fairest from Piatz'as of pleasure or Exchanges for their bar∣gaines. If what I speake, My Lord, be truth, I shall not hearken to them that may tell me it is misse placed, my conscience suggesting that the climate & season hath too often been here∣tofore neglected; If false, I have a spunge as readie as ever I had a pinne to wipe out all but my shame, which shall be set forth, at your Lordships pleasure, in an English sheet, though it never will be brought unto the Scotish stoole to do its pe∣nance. In attendance on which sentence, if neither your Lord∣ships approbation nor pardon must be expected, I stoup downe to acknowledge my selfe, aswell in submission to your censure as execution of your commands: MY LORD, Your Lordships Most humblie devoted servant RI: WATSON.
D. Hieron. Praefat. in Lib. Esdr. Legant qui volunt; qui nolunt, abjiciant. Horat. —quae nivali pascitur Algido Devota quercus inter & ilices; Aut crescit Albanis in herbis Victimae, Pontisicum secures Cervice tinget—
AN ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE HAd Mr. Baylie contein'd himselfe within the li∣mits My reason for refuting his Epistle. of an Epistle, I had there left him to cano∣nize his Living Lord & all his familie, & with what dexteritic he pleas'd to rubb his honourable head piece into a good conceit of his Review. But since the great Diana in his booke, so gloriouslie bespangled with the counterfeit Alchymie of the late Scotish Storie, is lead hither to be magnified by any superstitious inadvertent reader, & his Lordships hand made use of onely to hold the candle, by the false light of his name & pretended vertues the better to com∣mend Her Godesse-ship to publike view; I can not passe by without looking in to see the sight, & spend my verdict upon the motions that attend it. And that His Lordship may not be mistaken to stand altogether for a shadow, I first cast my eye upon the potent Lord Iohn, & must plainly tell his admirer The Rewie∣wers vani∣tie in gi∣ving titles inconsistent with the praesent condition & practice of his Lord. Mr. Baylie, he had better deserved the honour of this title, if he had imploy'd his power, as he was in dutie & by oath oblig'd, in the vindication of His Ma∣jestie, & His Royal Father, of ever blessed memorie, as he hath most dishonoura∣blie & impotentlie against them both. Nor is it much for his credit in the head of this Epistle to be styled one of His Majesties Privie Councel, & in the heart of His Kingdome to be one of the publike conspiracie against him, of a Lord justice general to become a special Injusticiarie in his countrey. The Reviewers long experience of his sincere zeale, &c. argues him to be none of the late illuminates, & gives us some hopes the he hath proceeded upon the dictates of his conscience, though unhappilie erroneous: long ha∣bits The Earle of Cassils no late Illu∣minate. though at first contracted by the perversenesse of the will, by perpetuitie becoming very essicacious in imposing fallacies upon the understanding, so
that he which doth ill may hereby be aswell perswaded that what he doth is good, as he that often tells a lie hath at length himselfe believ'dit to be a truth. His rigid adhaerence to the praetended rights & priviledges of his Countrey being professed haereditarie, takes off some what from the personal imputa∣tion, No credit for his sa∣milie to be commended by Bucha∣nan. yet with all demonstrates that it is not all bloud Royal which runnes in His Lordships veines, nor it may be all bloud Noble, having so ample testimonie from him, who had allwayes some dregs of the Common thoare in his inke & whose power is cankerd with envious invectives against them, that have not layd their honour in the vulgar dust, & levell'd Majestie as well as Nobi∣litie with the people. Whose Ghost will not thanke the Reviewer for calling him, Prince of Historians, being so litle enamourd with titles of that nature, Very Im∣proper to style Buc∣hanan Prince. that he accounted them, where they were more properlie due, Legitimi regni gra∣vissima pe∣stis. Praet. ad Dial. de jur. Reg. the filth of flaterie, & the plague of all legitimate praerogative. His exemplarie practice in publike-private duties is indeed some what sin∣gular, my selse having seen him very zcalouslic penning downe such slender (to omit what I might call in the Reviewers language praeter The Re∣viewers ser∣mon divi∣nttie. & anti-scrip∣turall divinitie, as was not fitting for any Novice or Catechumen in Religion to owne, much lesse for so grave a Theologue to preach, & so well exerciz'd an adultist to register for his use. I commend beter the exemplarie practice of the Reviewers brother Presbyter, who seem'd to take a sound nap in the meane time, hoping, it may be, to be better inspired in his dreame. This He may well count it an advan∣tage to have the E. Cas∣sils his jud∣ge. potent Lord, thus qualified & brought up to his hand, I can not blame Mr. Baylie for chusing him to be his patron, (who discernes with his eyes & decernes by his dictates) who being judge & partie, both will quaestionlesse doe right like a Lord Justice in the businesse. The An ho∣nour for the Bp. to be calld by the Rev: un∣pardona∣ble incen∣diaire. praejudice the Reviewer would here at first cast upon the person of the Bishop will advance his owne reputation but a litle in high way Rheto∣rike, not advantage him one whit with any of those judicious & aequitable comparers he expects; who being able to instruct themselves, upon these many late yeares experience, that what Mr. Baylie calls that Church & Kingdome is onely a praevalent partie of Schismatikes & Rebells, what adhaerence to the sa∣cred truth of God an obstinate perseverance in an execrable covenant, which hath tied up the hands of many a poor subject from the enjoyment of all the just liberties the established lawes of Scotland hold out to him; will looke upon the Bishop as a couragious affertour of Gods truth, the Churches puritie, the Kings supremacie, the subjects libertie, & if for that condemned by an unani∣mous faction in both Kingdomes, will commend his zeale, reverence his name, and ranke him with the prime Fathers of the Church, who so soon en∣deavoured to stop that deluge of miserie wherewith Britanie & Ireland have been most unhapilie overwhelmed. For the dirtie language he useth here & otherwhere extreme sawcie spirit, stigmatiz'd incendiarie, &c. I desire the Reader to take notice I shall sweep it The Rev's uncleanlie language.
out of his & my way, yet if he thinkes it may serve his turne, as well as the garlike heads did Cario & his master in the Comoedie, the Printers boy shall throw Aristoph. Plut. it by itselfe at the backe side of my replie in a piece of white paper, that he may not sowle his fingers. What the Reviewer calls Boldnesse was prudence & seasonable caution in The active boldnesse of the Scotish Presbyteri∣ans in Hol∣land, &c, the Bishop to praesent his booke to the eminent personages & in this place, obser∣ving the indesatigable industrie of Mr. Baylie & his brethren of the mission, very frequentlie in their persons, perpetuallie by many subtile & active instru∣ments they imploy'd before & after their coming hither, insinuating into the hearts & affections of all people here, of what sexe or condition soever, in Courts, Townes, Vniversities, Countrey, praepossessing them with the Justice of their cause, the innocencie of their proceedings, the moderation of their demands, the conformitie of their practice & designe to the praesent discipline & Government of the Church & presbyterie in these Provinces. And great pitie it is that all peo∣ple, nations & languages have it not translated into their owne dialect, that a discoverie of this grand imposture may be made to them who are so insolentlie summon'd to fall downe & worship this wooden idol of the discipline, & threat∣ned the aeternal fierie furnace if they refuse it. In the next Paragraph the Reviewer drawes Cerberus like his threeheaded monster out of hell, The three headed monster in controversie Discipline, Covenant, & unkindne's to our late sove∣raigne. —[Sen. Her. Fur. Novos Resumit animos victus, & vastas furens Quassat catenas.]— His The Sco∣tish Disci∣pline vrey different from that in Holland & France. Apologie for the first, being the conformitie I mentioned principally with the Brethren of Holland & France, whom he would very faine flater into his partie, & make the Bishop whether he will or no fall foule upon them, whom His Lordship hath scarce mentioned in all his tract: And I having no rea∣son not desire to enlarge the breach shall say no more then this, (because some what he will have sayd) That if their discipline harmoniouslie be the same particularlie in those extravagancies His Lordship mentions, (which to my knowledge they denie) & for alleging which, they are litle beholding to Mr. Baylie, they are all alike concerned, yet having as learned Apologists of their owne, when they finde themselves agriev'd, will in their owne case very like∣ly speake their pleasure. No Re∣formed Church calls regu∣lar Episco∣pacie An∣tichristian. In the interim I must require his instance where any Reformed Church hath declared regular Episcopacie which we call Apo∣stolical, Antichristian. What particular persons of Mr. Baylies temper may have publish'd must not passe for an Ecclesiastical decrce. And if all, even in those Churches he mentions, might freelie speake their minde, I believe that order would have their Christian approbation as it is in any reformed Countreys established. Many emincnt persons in those Chur∣ches have approv'd of it Vindic: of K. Ch. p. 125. some such relation was made not long since about certain Divines of the Religion in France, & some that came from other parts to the Synod of Dust. And Apost. In∣stit. of Epis∣copacie.
I can acquaint the Reviewer with the like piece of charitie bestowed by P. Me∣lin in the letters, that passed from him to Bishop Andrewes, beside what Mr. Chillingworth (as I take it) hath collected out of him & Beza in favour both of name & thing, though not to the same latitude we extend them. And (which will not be alltogether impertinent to adde) I doe not remember I have heard that Causabon & Vossius, no obscure men in the French & Dutch Chur∣ches, were at any time by their presbyterie excommunicate for becoming limbes of the English Antichrist, Praebendaries of the Archiepiscopall Church of Canterburie with us. But if the Reviewer here begin to cant, & distinguish Episcopal declinations different from Epis∣copacie. between Episcopacie & Episcopal declinations, (for that indeed is the expression that he useth) I must ingenuouslie acknowledge that there may be some pra∣cticall declinations in Episcopacie which may be Antiapostolical & Antichristian, beside & against the line of the Word, the institution of Christ & his Apostles; but I know none such in the Churches of England, Scotland, or Ireland, if there have been any they are not our rule, & by his owne then must not be stated to be the controversie between us. The Presbyterian aberrations which Presbyteria aberrations. the same with Pres∣byterie. the Bishop hath observed, are for the most part taken from the crookenesse of the Discipline it selfe, which in the very Acts of their Assemblies, he findes not so straight as to run parallel with the word of God, or practice of the true Ca∣tholike Church, & whether what His Lordship cites to that purpose be calum∣nious imputations or no will best appeare in the procedure of our discourse. But the Reviewer takes it ill that Didoclave, Gerson, Bucer, Salmasius & The prae∣sent con∣cernment greater to reveale the Scotish Dis∣cipline, the refute old adversaries of Episco∣pacie. Blondel were not rather replied to, then the mysteries of the Kirke Discipline revealed. This poor tricke of diversion will not take. If what hath been writ in the behalfe of Episcopacie stand firme notwithstanding these or any other stormes that passe over, it requires no such frequent reparations. The holie cause indeed will shortlie need such auxiliaries as these. He doth well there∣fore to call for them in time. Sr. Claud Somays like∣lie to be no great friend to the Dis∣cipline. And yet it may be the imcomparable knight will not be charm'd by a litle mercenarie breath into the reare of a distressed beggarlie engagement. He hath been since better informed of many fraudulent practices in the Kirke, & so well satisfied about the state of our affaires, that Mr. Baylie is litle pleased (for all his sugar candi'd commendations) with the earnest he hath allreadie given to imploy his pen & paines about a better subject for the future. And 'tis a mere fiction, what he so confidentlie averres, of He offe red no dis∣pute with the Kings Chaplaines about Epis∣copacie. Sr. Claud Somayi's offering to dispute with the Divines by a Person of honour about the King, a person of reverence, then not farre from him having told me that His Majestie knowes not any thing of the buisinesse, nor did the Divines about him heare of any thing to that purpose. Therfore let his person of honour come out from behind the curtaine, & vouch his credit to be such as quolibet contradicente we must believe him: when he appeares in his colours & makes good any such offer as is mention'd, I presume I may say that no apprehensions of trouble & hazard will deterre such judicious and lear∣ned Champions from entring upon any just & reasonable vindication of truth.
In the meane time they doe but the dutie of their places in their Royal atten∣dance They trans∣gresse not the dutie of their place by infor∣ming the Kings con∣science about. (which the Reviewer calls the Court artifice & their trade) if they watch the seasons & distribute the houres of the Kings opportunities, wherein privatelie (to avoyd the importune intervention of other civile businesse, not to decline I know not what contradiction, which they are not in that case reasonablie to ex∣pect from their modest fellow servants of the laitie, & I hope there are no Clerical Disciplinarians there about) to instill into His Majesties tender mind how unsafe it is for his soul, & how litle for his honour, to desert the Holie Church, that is the Episcopal doctrine & government which came into the world with Christianitie it selfe, hath for 1500 yeares enjoy'd a joint haereditarie suc∣cession, The Primi∣tive Doct∣rine & Dis∣cipline. & aequi-universall diffusion with the same, to joyne with a crew in a Northerne corner of rebellious Covenanters, if yow will have it so, for ought hitherto can be judg'd enemies to God, to his Father, & to Monarchie it selfe, if he will take it upon his Father or Grandfathers word. To put him sarther Eikôn Basiliké cap. 14. Praeserva∣tion of the Church. in mind that his Martyr'd Father sayd, There are wayes enough to repair the breaches of the state without the ruine of the Church, (it is the Episcopal Church that he meanes) To instruct him that he may as conscientiouslie pardon the Irish as the Pardo∣ning the Irish & to∣lerating their Reli∣gion. Scots, & reward with a limited libertie of their Religion; & what other gracious encouragements he pleaseth, the first fruits of their vo∣luntarie submission to his government, without imposing the slaveric of any co∣venant, or conditioning for a toleration in his other Kingdomes. And this to be (as it is) in reference to a Parliament to be conven'd so soon as the state of that Kingdome will admit. To assure him that this is very consistent with conscience, honour, Eikôn. Basilikè. conscience, honour, rea∣son, law. & all Good reason, & for ought they know, repugnant to no law, yea, to linke the soul of the most sweet & ingenuous of Princes (too sweet, too ingenuous indeed to have to deale with the rough-hev'd Covenan∣ters of the mission) with those Inclining his mind to the Coun∣sels of his Father. Golden chaines let downe from heaven, & rea∣ched out by the hand of a tender hearted father to his sonne, in those peer∣lesse Counsels which the most prudent advice in the last Testaments of all his praedecessours can not parallel. To tell him then, That his necke Cant. 4 4. is like the tower of David, builded for an armourie, whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mightie men. The Bishops Eikôn Basilikè penned wholely by K. Ch. 1. not a sylla∣ble of it by the Bishops. unlckie foot, as he calls it, is visible onely in Mr. Baylie's margin, As close as he & others follow upon the sent, not the least tracke in e'ikôn Basilikè will in the end be found by them, nor by the whole packe of bloud-hounds other where. But to be sure here as well as in 100 Pamphlets beside is the foule Scotish Presbyterian paw, which besmear'd His Royal Majestie while he liv'd, & would now spoyle that pretious oyntment, & cast as ill a savour as it can upon his sa∣cred memorie being dead. Not the Bishops, God not they the supporter of the Matyr'd King. but God, it may be some∣time by their subordinate Ministrie, strengthened our Royal Soveraigne to
his last, in that which the lampe of natural reason, the leading starre of Ca∣tholike Antiquitie, the bright sun in the firmament of the Word & above all, that inexpressible light streaming from the spirit of God revealed to him to be the safe sanctuarie of truth. Not the Bishops, but the The hard-hearted Sco∣tish Presby∣terians. Presbyterian Scots hardened their hearts to thrust their native King out of their protection, & with out any compassion did drive him from Newcastle to Holme∣bie the fatal praecipice to K. Ch. 1. Holmebie, which appeares to be the fatal praecipice where he fell. And these same men conti∣nue after his Endea∣vours to make it such to K Ch. 2. death to crie loud in the cares of his sonne to take that direct path to his ruine, rather then root or branch, or slip shall be left of the Praelatical Cler∣gie, whom they would faine have lie like dung upon the face of the earth, & make a fat soile to pamper the Presbyterian in his lusts. Their His best way to prae∣vent it is consorting with his Fa∣thers booke. gathering together His Majesties papers, (if they must needs have the honour of causing them to be presented in a booke, with out a page or syllable of their owne) was but binding up that bundle of myrrhe which should lie all night in the Virgin breast of his Royal sonne, who maugre all the ma∣lice of his enemies, hath that beloved for his comfort. That fall Wherein is divine wisdome & Counsel. of ungra∣cious dew, as the Reviewer Diabolically calls it, came from an higher region then the Bishops. It was the judgement of God given to the King, & by him his righteousnesse to the Kings sonne. It is he that here comes downe like raine into this fleece of wool, this most soft, sweet, & ingenuous of Princes, & in gentle drops waters that pretious piece of red earth by his praecepts. And may this dew so prosper with him, that the Ps. 72. following words may have their ac∣complishment in his reigne. In his time may the righteous flourish, & abun∣dance of peace then & afterward, even so long as the Moon endureth. May his dominion be (as it ought) from the one sea to the other, & from the floud to the end of that alter orbis, that litle world of his Kingdomes divided by the floud from the greater. May they that dwell in the Wildernesse of errour con∣test no longer, but kneel before him & his enemies licke the dust of his feet. But by the way 'tis worth Gods providence in ordering his commen∣dations of this booke to proceed out of the mouth of the Revic∣wer. the readers observing, & however causeles∣slic praejudiced, may invite him to be conversant in that most excellent booke, which in the midst of that gall that drops from his pen, whose heart & hand were bent to blot it out of the opinion of men, hath by the providence of God such a Chrystal streame of commendation to the world, for Eloution, Reason, Devotion, for Imitable essayes of piety, wisdome, patience, & every ver∣tue confessed; And he that will not be swayed with one word without reason, hath his Majesties sense from the mouth of his enemie, about the danger of the Covenant & the faction that stands for it, And may take it for the timous burning of a dying martyr, & have a care that among too many serpents & so few doves, his innocencie be not swallowed with the rest. What followes may be worth His Majesties notice, The Re∣viewers sc∣aesonable advertish∣ment to the King. being the assertion of no other man then Mr. Baylie, not long since a pretended commissioner for the Covenant. That the same hand that penned the 27 th. Chapter in the booke entituled Eikôn Basilike, (which he calls Episcopal, but His Majestie
knowes very well to be Regal) did it on purpose to separate him for ever from all his covenant subjects. And how K. Ch. 1. no Presby∣terian in heart nor tongue at Newcastle & the Isle of Wight. neare that came to the heart, language, & writings of our late Soveraigne, let them who were best acquainted with his ca∣riage & most intime affections at Newcastie & in the Isle of Wight speake their conscience. For the two former we have more authentike eare testimonies then the Reviewer, & the last is demonstrative out of all the papers that passed from him. To lay aside for the time those against which Mr. Baylie is, more maliciouslie, then ignorantlie, praejudic'd. His severall His pa∣pers to Mr. Henderson against it. printed letters to Mr. Henderson speake his sense about Presbyterie at Newcastle, & some what more at large may in due time, what he thought of it at the Isle of Wight. These, with other undeniable evidences, may render the Reviewer a mere Sceptike, if not rather a knight of the post unto the world. How it concernes Kings when they take in hand Pallas target to have the face of No Bi∣shop No King. Episcopacie on the bosse, King Iames that had most of her wisdome, could best tell. The experience whereof being too deare bought by his Martyr-sonne, & commended in his Testament to our Soveraigne, the Praela∣tes need not take up the old statuaries cunning to contrive it. To be sure Ovid. Met. lib. 5. fab. 1. this both Perseus, or Presbyter, here paints a Gorgons head, on every page of his booke, & twists every line with a serpent, hoping to make stones & stockes of his readers, who must submit to his authoritie in silence, & stand fixt in what antike postures he assignes them. What ever some may doe out of igno∣rance & weaknesse, we hope the providence of God will keep the King out of the Scotish Presbyters hands, & the breath of his mouth blow all such flies & lice out of his quarters. And thus much shall serve by way of answer or paraphrase upon what the Reviewer hath brought in apologie for the Discipline of the Kirke. In the next place he becomes a nimble The Re∣viewers false pro∣fession in publike con∣trarie to conscience & vulgar knowledge. advocate for the idol worship of the Covenant. Where I am glad to finde him acknowledging any such thing as reason fram'd by the Vniversitie of Oxford against it, having, not long since, heard this consident averre, (without a blush as I take it) in his chamber-con∣venticle at the Hague (where not any one that was present but knew what he sayd to be most notoriouslie false, except a poore 'sillie creature or two that might be decoy'd in upon designe) That not any thing hitherto had been obje∣cted against the Covenant, whereas he could not be ignorant then, more then now, that this, with many other learned & rational tracts, had been long since published against it, & for ought I know must stand unanswered to this day. Which affected falsitie so amused me & others at that time, that had not some prudential motives restrain'd us, we must have offered him some affront in the place. And at this it so praejudiceth me against his credit, as I beleeve not a line in his booke for which he brings me no beter authoritie then his word. What he spake then he hath much adoe to refraine from printing now, onely mollisies The same speach now printed in effect. it with his canting about the mater. To this day, he sayth, no man hath shewed any errour in tbe matter of the Covenant. I am sure not any clause
in its literal or mystical sense hath escap'd the discussion of those acute An∣tagonists it hath found: & what this chymical matter should be, that is of so subtile an extraction, I can not guesse. For the forming & taking it he prae∣tends a necessitie their adversaries imposed which necessitie was nothing else but No necessi∣tie for the Scots to en∣ter into a Covenant which is. their owne just jealousies & feares that an uncertaine multitude, the necessa∣rie instruments, & indeed sole slaves to doe the worke, could not be kept con∣stant to the cause with out the awfull superstition of an oath. Which false fire is pursued with a thunderclap from the pulpit, whence damnation's day∣lie threatned to the infringers. And being thus driven into an airie castle which these engineers have fortified by the Mathematical subtiltie of their words, he sayth, neither fraud nor force shall reduce them, for they feare forsooth No oath of God but the Devil. the oath of God. Which God is no other then that Baal Berith, that Jupiter Foederatus, to whom the Israelites made a shamefull desection after Gidcons death, Judg. 8. 33. 'Ethekan e'autoîs tòn Báal diathéken, so the septuagint ren∣ders it. They set up to themselves Baal the Covenant that is the false God or Devil of the Covenant. And yet this Mirio puts it to the quaestion, & seemes to wonder Why any that love the King should hate the Covenant, the whole No wonder why the lo∣vers of the King are no Cove∣nanters. designe & practice of which hath been so apparentlie destructive to his Royal Father & all the loyal subjects that he hath. Nay with all it is too well known, how many true The Cheat of the Co∣venant. lovers of the King, but too deceitfull lovers of themselves, who, through feare or covetousnesse, hoping to praeserve their estates & li∣berties, have been consin'd into this courteous Covenant, & then by their jea∣lous or wanton masters, have been stript naked, turnd out to beg their bread, & regaine their souls & credit as they could. So that this straight tie can in some cases we see play fast & loose, & the strictnesse of it, whereof we have had so sad an experiment, will be found onelie by the hands of the holie lea∣guers (for such we know were the newnam'd Independents at first) to bind Religion, Majestie, & Loyaltie to the blocke, & then lay the axe to the root of them all, & stifle them from repullulating if they can. Therefore they that manage the conscience whether of Court, or Citie, or Countrey, doe well if they possesse their Religious votaries with a particular full sense of the inevitable miserie that will follow them if they be catchd in this noose & advise them to whip all such sawcie beggars, such Whying Covenanters from their gates. The next taske of the Reuiewers Engineer-ship is to draw an out worke a∣bout the open The Scot-Presbyti∣rian open unkindnesse that is trea∣son against the late King. unkindnesse (treason pretilie qualisied in the terme) against the (observe he sayth not our) late King, which he makes of so large a compasse, that all the Presbyterian credit he can raise will never be able to maintaine it for an houre: which this skillfull officer foreseeing, despaire puts him first upon a salie, where the Ghosts of Wicklisfe, & Husse, & Luther, & with a brazen piece of falshood, his Disciples are draw'n out to assault his dangerous enemie in his trench. For (which he knowes Bishops in other Re∣formed Churches. as well as I can tell him) there are other parts of the Reformed world beside England, & those of Luthers Disci∣ples, that keep up Episcopacie The Re∣viewers in constancie. to this day. And forgetting in part what he
hath sayd allreadie & minding lesse, what he shall babble otherwhere about the businesse, he tells us here 'tis the violence of ill advised Princes, which when he pleaseth, he makes the Policie of the Bishops themselves that hath kept up this limbe of Antichrist, he meanes the Episcopal order in England. Since the first Reformation whence hath come the perpetual trouble in our land the Hi∣storie of the Schismatical Puritan will sufficientlie satisfie any man that will search. And how the Church & Kingdome are now at last come so neare the ground the Disciplinarian practices will evidence. But the Scotish Presbyterie that gave the first kicke at the miter, & hath since lift up the other leg against the Crowne, may chance to catch the fall in the end, having now much adoe to light upon its feet. Having K. Ch. 1 never justi∣fied the Sco∣tish contests. made his retreat he begins to endeavour the maintaining of his masterpiece by degrees, & tell us, Their first contests stand justified this day by King & Parliament in both Kingdomes Ans: And must so stand, I say not ju∣fied, till King & Parliament meet once againe in either to consider, whether with out a new ratification by their favour, your after contests make not a just forfeiture of their gracious condescension to your first. His Majestie of ever blessed memorie hath told you His charitie & Act of Pacification sorbids him to reflect on Eikôn Basilikè Ch. 13. former passages. Which argues some such passages to have been as were not very meritorious of his favour. And though his Royal cha∣ritie may silence, it doth not justisie your contests by that Act. The borders of Scotland being as well His Majestics as yours (though you keep to your Presbyterian The King may bring an armie to the Scotish borders. style, which affords no proprietie to others then themselves, & yeilds very litle communitie to Kings, the King, our borders) I hope it was free for him to move toward them as he pleas'd. If your resi∣stance to the Magistrates he deputed made him for the securitie of his per∣son come attended with an armie for his guard; or if the rod & axe could inflict no paenal justice by vertue of the judge's word upon a banded com∣panie of miscreants at home, & therefore sent abroad to crave the regular assistance of the sword; no lawes of God nor your Countrey dictates any just or necessarie defense, which is nothing but an unjustifiable rebellion: Nor can Dunce law Alawe a∣bove Dunce law. so justifie your meeke lying downe in your armes, but that, if the King would have made his passage to you with his sword, you might have justlie been by a more learned law helpt up with a halter about your necke. The novations in Liturgie & Canons contrarie neither to the lawes of God nor Scotland. Religion were not such a world, but that two words, Li∣turgie & Canons may compasse it. What was in them contrarie to the lawes of God hath a blanke margin still that requires your proofe, & that any were to the lawes of your Countrey will never be made good, having the King & Lords of the Counsel, I meane those of your Kingdome that did approve them. The power in The Re∣viewers brag K. Ch. 1. gave the Scots too easie condi∣tions. your armie to dissipate the Kings is but a litle of Pyrgopoly∣nices breath. The easie conditions given you to retreat may be attributed to His Majesties mercie & aversenesse from bloud, not to his apprehension of your power.
The Kings second coming toward you with an armie He had good reason to raise a secound ar∣mie against them. was upon no fu∣rious motion of the Bishops, who had no stroke in his Councel for warre, but upon the fierie trial you put him to by that many flagrant provocations, wherewith you & other incendiaries nearer home daylie environ'd him, who fearing the precedent accommodation by peace might afford respite for a farther more particular discoverie of the principal actours in & contributers toward the late warre, & expose many considerable brethren to a legal trial, notwithstanding the agreement contracted; impatient ambition having all∣readie been too much impeded by observing the easie conditions you men∣tion made the first breach, & according to the right account first rais'd a mi∣litarie power, which His Majestie had very good reason to suppresse. The successe you had by your first impression upon part of His Majesties Armie at New-bourne, & your easie purchace of the Towne of New-Castle was not such as cleard the passage to London, The Scots suc∣cesse at New bourne ope∣ned not a passage for them to London. without the farther hazard of which you were too well payd for your stay in Northumberland, & instead of a rod that was due, you caried too honourable a badge at your backes of His Majesties meekncsse, when the second time you returned in peace. What passed after your packing away The Pr. Scotish Re∣bellion co∣pied by the English. to the raising of the new armie you speake of you may reade & blush, if you have any grace, in the former part of His martyr'd Majesties booke, if you have none, you may, as I beleeve you doe, laugh in your slovenlie slecve to see your prompt scholars come to so good perfection, & copie your owne rebellion to the life. The Bishops then were litle at leisure to looke abroad to any such purpose, being happie if they could get an house for their shelter from the threats & stones that flew very thicke about their cares, the rabble rout at London by that time being well inform'd what effectual weapons stones & stooles, & such like as surie on a sodaine could furnish, had been against blacke gownes & white sleeves at Edenburgh before. That any armie could at that time be raised, when the Kings K. Ch. 1 his raising an armie a signe of di∣vine pro∣vidence. Forts, Ma∣gazines, Militia, Navie, were seizd into the hands of your Rebell brethren, was a special marke of divine providence cleare in so happie successe, as he that ran might then have read their ruine writ by the fingar of God had not the blacke cloud of our sinnes eclips'd that light, blotted out that handwri∣ting, & shour'd downe vengeance upon our heads. That such earnest & pitifull entreatics The Re∣bells faint in their faith not∣withstan∣ding the re∣velations they pre∣tend to. should be made to strengthen the arme of flesh, by Gods people, in Gods cause, after such divine revelation that this was the appointed time wherein Christs Kingdome was to be exalted on earth, that the Saints should flourish, laugh, & sing at the downefull of that man of sinne, &c. Is a note me thinkes that spoyles all the harmonie of the rest. That upon such earnest entreaties the Scots The Prerb. Scots coming in no condition of the peace were oblig'd to come in is not to be found among all those easie conditions made & their double former returning in peace.
Their feare of a third Their guilt made them feare a third warre. warre to passe over their brethrens carkasses to themsel∣ves is a strong argument of their guilt, that their advise & some other assi∣stance had passed over the late agreement made between His Majestie & them to promote that horrid rebellion against him. That so many intercessions Their worke of supereroga∣tion in in∣terceding. with the King for a moderate & reasonable accom∣modation had been used by them, was a relique of Poperie they kept not∣withstanding the roformation they had made, & they did truely supercrogate in that worke, no law of the three Kingdomes (I take it) making them umpires between the King & his subjects, nor is i yet revel'd to the world what divine authoritie they had (as was pretended in their Remonstrance) to come in the name of our Lord & Master Their Re∣monstrance. Iesus Christ, to warne the King that the guilt which cleav'd so fast to his throne & soul was such, as if not timelie re∣pented would involve him & his postcritie under the wrath of the everliving God. For how moderate, how reasonable They mediate for no reasona∣ble accom∣modation. accommodation they mediated appeares in the 19 propositions, to the substance of every one of which their unreaso∣nable brethren adhaered to the end. That they were at any Were never sligh∣ted nor re∣jected. time slighted & rejected is a mere calumnie of the Reviewer', he would have told us when, & where, if he could. That al they ask'd was not granted, Were justlie den∣jed. was upon unanswerable reasons, which His Ma∣jestie render'd in his publike Declarations about the Treaties, &c. That they & their fainting Cove∣nants the common road for fae∣ctions. brethren were so easilie perswaded to enter into a Covenant together is no great mervaile, His Majestie tells them. Solemne leagues & Covenants… are the common road used in all factions & powerfull perturbations of state or Church… by such as ayme to subdue all to their owne will & power, under the disguizes of holic combinations. The expresse articles in the Covenant, for the praeservation of Royaltie, &c. are spun so fine, & woven so thin, as that white vaile can not hide the face of that blacke rebellious divel that is under it. Whereof they being conscious that had been very well acquainted with the mysterie, no lesse then an whole Remonst. about the Treaty in the Isle of wight. armie together, conduct us to the per∣fect beholding the sweet countenance of this late Baal Berith as he lies. We crave (say they) leave to beleeve that an accommodation with the King, in the way & termes you are upon, or any as all, as the case now stands, that shall im∣plie his restitution; or shall not provide for his subjection to trial & judgement, would first not be just before God or man, but many wayes evill. Secondlie, would not be safe. 1. The Covenant engaging to the maters of religion, & pub∣like interests primarilie & absolutelie (marke that) with out any limitation, & after that to the preservation of the Kings person & authoritie, but with this restriction, (marke this too) viz. In the preservation of the true religion & liberties of the Kingdomes. In this case, though a Cavallier might make it a question, yet who will not rationallie resolve it, That the preceding maters of re∣ligion & the publike interest, are to be understood as the principal & supreme ma∣ters
engaged for, & that of the Kings person & authoritie as inferiour & subor∣dinate to the other. 2. That where persons joyning to make a mutuall covenant, if the absent parties shall oppose it & the maters contein'd in it, surelie that per∣son excludes himselfe from any claime to any benefit therefrom while he continues so refusing & opposing. So that you see notwithstanding the expresse articles for The Cove∣nant destru∣ctive to all the Royal line. the preservation of Royaltie. His Majestie may be brought to his trial, & all his posteritie too, when the holie brethren can catch them, be murder'd at their owne gates according to the expresse sense of severall articles in the Co∣venant for maintenance of religion, & libertie. And what unkindnesse was here in the Scots to their King? Besides, whosoever will take the paines to com∣pare the particulars in the Scotish Remonstrance which they brought in their The charge Against K. Ch. 1. ta∣ken out of the Pr. Scots Remon∣strance. hands when they came in upon the Covenant, with those in the accursed Court proceeding against His late Royal Majestie may be able to doe Dorislaw, Steel, Cooke, &c. some litle courtesie in their credit & pleade for them that they drew not up, but onelie transscribed a charge brought long since from Eden∣burgh to London. And yet what unkindnesse was here in the Scots to their King? There is yet one thing more whereof upon this mention of Remonstrance & Covenant I can not but advertize my reader having but lightlie touch'd The Presb. Scots wicked Impostours, no messean∣gers of Christ. upon it before. That whereas the Scots in their Covenant confesse before God & the world many sinnes whereof they were guiltie, & for which they desire to be humbled. Viz. That they had not as they ought valued the in aestimable benefit of the Gospell. That they had not laboured for the puritie & power there∣of; That they had not endeavoured to receive Christ in their hearts (marke that) nor to walke worthie of him in 'their lives; These men tell the King in their re∣monstrance, That they come in the name of their Lord & Master Iesus Christ, to warne him about the guilt of I know not what sinnes they there heape together upon his soul. A very likelie storie to beleeve, That Christ had sent them into England with this covenanting paper in their hands; who had shut him out of doores very latelie, & would not receive him into their hearts. Notwithstanding all the pretended glorious successe, obteined more by The Kings partie not subdued when His Majestie left Oxford. the name then exploits of the Scotish armie, the opposite partie was not so fullie subdued, but that the multitude of garrisons, (beside Newarke which might have cost them deare) surrender'd after His Majesties leaving Oxford make a great flame in the Burning bush which your zealous friend Iohn Vicars hath kindled. You will hardlie perswade any your judicious comparers of this your preface with the many treacherous practices you had used, that His Majestie in the The King not necessi∣tated to cast himselfe upon the Scots. greatest necessitie would not have chosen rather to have cast himselfe into the mercilesse yet more mercisull armes of the sea, then without the strongest de∣liberate engagement into the perfidious & more fluctuating armie of the Scots. Nor yet had all your underhand oathes & promises prevaild for the unhappie credulitie of a most pious & prudent King, if some better credit in all likeli∣hood, had not interposed it selfe, which it may be was more deceiv'd then it
deceived. Therefore your storie about London, Lin, Holland & France is a greater circuit then his Majestie toke in his designed journey to Newarke. He had promised all reasonable satisfaction before. The promise of satisfaction that caried him thence to New-Castle might have long before been his conduct to London if Religion & Reason might have been permitted to goe along which him. That he gave not what you expected, that is to say his Royal soul to the Di∣vel, his old oathes might very well hinder him, for I pray tell me why a King His Reli∣gious adhe rence to his old oathes. as well as a Rebell may not feare the oath of God. It is not unlikelie that the prime leaders of the English armie were at that time wearie of your companie, who fill'd the best of their quarters, & did least of your service, Nor that you were out of heart as wel as reputation by the signal victories to a mitacle all most obteined against you, by, not your companion good Sir James Grahame, but the Thrice renowned Marquesse Mon∣trosse, whose proceeding had been most successefull & happie, & may they still be for His Majesties affaires. If there were such divisions in Scotland, what could better compose thém then the personal presence of the King? but this was not according to the The Kings presence might best have com∣posed the divisions in Scotland. Kingdomes libertie meant in the third article of the covenant, In the preser∣vation of which, that is, so farre as you thought fit to make consistent with which, & in the defense of what they call the true Religion, which you tooke for granted he never intended to complie with, you had fworne to de∣fend the Kings Majesties person, & that is one of the forenam'd expresse ar∣ticles to that purpose. The hazard of a warre weighed heavier in the balance of your counsels then the hazard of his Royal person in the hands of his irre∣coucileable enemies, forgeting that the orke of righteousnesse in performance of your promises would have been a more lasting peace, & the effect of Isai. 32. 17. that righteousnesse, quietnesse & assurance for ever. The sectarian Armie which you scarce durst have call'd so at that time, had otherworke then to goe into Scotland but that your hollow-hearted profes∣sions His garri∣sons surren∣dered upon the counter. feit profes∣sions of the Pr. Scots. to the King, who was in no very indifferent case to make sure condi∣tions of advantage to himselfe, made him order the surrender of his garri∣sons into their hands. So you sav'd His Majestie from the racke to bring him to the scaffold, And you with your Brother-Presbyters escap'd the like tor∣ture then, but if you goe on to stretch your conscience till it cracke, we shall see as well the punishment as the guilt of that murder glowing at your heart. After two such accidental confessions wherein your Armie demonstrati∣velie shew'd themselves either false foolishlie credulous or cowards at best They obte∣ine no ter∣mes satis∣factorie to the King. you reckon up several conveniences of His Majesties being in one of his houses neare London, when it had been ever before pretended to the poor deluded people that he was to be brought to his Parliament in London. And this you did upon the fayth of that Parliament, which you say kept up a sectarian Ar∣mie against you. A very good argument to prevaile with you for their credit. Upon such termes as should be satisfactorie to the King, particularlie mentioned
in the paper deliverd to the King by the Committe of Estates upon the 15 of May 1646. & noted in that of Iune 8. to the speaker of the House of Peers, sub∣scribed By his affectionate friends & humble servants, Lauderdail, Iohnston, Henrie Kennedie (your owne potent good Lord, &c.) That if His Majestie should delay to goe about the readiest wayes, & meanes to satisfie both his King∣domes, they would be necessitated for their owne exoneration to acquaint the Com∣mittee of both Kingdomes at London that a course might be taken by joint advice of both Kingdomes, for attempting the just ends expressed in the solemne league & Covenant By which His Majestie was to bring satisfaction to them & you, not (as you say) to receive termes satisfactorie to himselfe. Wherein because he made not what hast was required, you exonerated your selfe of all the malice you had unto his person & made an end of his dayes, which was just the end you aim'd at in the Covenant. This being the true case, you aske, Whether it were any injustice? Yes, to imprison his person by confining him to an house, & to weaken his power Their inju∣stice, un∣kindnesse imprudence by robbing him of his garrisons, Whether any unkindnesse? Yes, to give up your native King, who you confesse cast himselfe on your protection, to them who were so far from affording him any of his palaces neare London, that it was death for any man to harbour him in his house. What imprudence it was, let the best politician of you all speake, because ablest to judge; Or the worst, who by this time can evidence, how besotted you were to your utter disrepute & destruction; What advantage at that time you had to lay the fairest colour upon the foulest fact that ever you committed & win the world, by an after∣game, into an high opinion of your trust; What, to gaine the length of your line in the libertie of Religion or lawes; And, as for wealth & honour, you might, upon such a merit, in all likelihood, have had, what the vastest am∣bitious Helluo could aske, or three luxuriant Kingdomes could yeild you. Whereas now you have ript up your false hearts, & throw'n your guilt in the face of the sun; so that the sound of your rebellion is gone into all lands, & your treacherie travailes in a poverbe even to the ends of the earth; Your Re∣ligion hath many times since struggled for life, which the mercie, or tempo∣rizing subtilitie of your sectarian enemie hath preserv'd, & your lawes have taken their libertie from his sword; He deteines at this time the wages of your wickednesse in his house, & your honour not long since kissed his foot, & by fower Commissioners humblie waited on him to his doores. But you come to a closer question, Whether the deliverie of the Kings per∣son were a selling of him to his enemies? Ans: It may be such for all that you Their deli∣verie of the Kings per∣son was a selling him to his Ene∣mies. say against it. Your Masters are not allwayes wont to pay your arreares upon single service, I hinted even now that your miscariages of late have cut you off a good sume that is behind, which by Ordinance of Parliament is to be disposed otherwayes. Let the capitulation have been in reference to what it will, & the Act of what you call the English Parliament exclude the disposal of the King; we know
that was the subject of many papers that pass'd between you, which were penned with so much collusion & cunning, that any broker might see a bar∣gaine was driving between craftie merchants, till, having clapt hands, the one brought his rich commoditie to Holmebie, & the other pay'd his money at New-Castle. The unexpected evil (for I must alter the number & admit of none but the They might have pre∣vented the murder tha followed. murder of the King) that followed, which no mortal eye could foresce any mor∣tal heart might fore scare, & the well affected brethren have prevented, if they pleas'd. The Armies rebellion is very nonsignificant language from your pen, unlesse figurativelie expressing the vengeance of God upon that rebel∣lious citie, which with her golden cup had made the Land drunke, & the Na∣tions mad with the abundance of her wine. Ier. 51. 7. What you call destroying the Parliament was but the plucking up & thro∣wing out of the way that rotten root, the stocke & fairest branches whereof had been cut downe by the keen axe of a violent vote long before. How readie these Scots (which the Reviewer must vindicate) were to the They were not readie to the utmost of their po∣wer. utmost of their power to have prevented the mischiefe in the murder of the King, & what hazard they ran of what was dearest to them appeares by their hast to come in to Duke Hamiltons partie, & the large contributions they gave to∣ward the raising an armie to that purpose. To make good the proverbe. Murder will out, the next words implie the Reviewers confession. The hard measure they had often receiv'd from the King stucke then in their stomakes, & An old grudge the reason why they were not. would not out till now, with their malice impostumated in his bloud. That they did not in time, & unanimouslie stirre to purpose for that end, they are in∣deed to answer it to God, who were the true authours thereof. And who they were let the Scotish pulpits (I meane not their Presbyters) speake out. The innocencie of the Church is not cleard in the following treatise to be so much as Pilates, they can not wash their hands in it, nor their mouth. They made the S. Matth. 27. 24. tumults they never asked what evill he had done, & this Royal bloudwill be upon them & upon their children. But here comes up a second part of their venemous vomit (for though The Kings not gran∣ting all de∣mands. they cast the temptation upon the serpent, they charge the original sinne upon the King) The King gave not his good subjects satisfaction by granting all their demands which they found most necessarie & due, This they say [by the mouth of the Reviewer] was the cause of the many miseries, & if there be any connex∣ion, was the cause why they stirred not in time, & what's the meaning of this but Caiphas's expedit? It is very expedient very necessarie he die for these people, & (thankes good Presbyter Scot) pay this debt of satisfaction in his bloud Which conclusion is no sooner dispatched, but like very logical Rebells, they fall presentlie on making a new syllogisme, & prepare a second argu∣ment of the axe. The very same cause ties up this day the hands of Covenan∣ters—could They beare the like grudge a∣gainst K. Ch. 2. they have (that is they can not have) the young King to joyne with them in their covenant, to quit his unhappie Bishops, to lay aside his formal
& dead liturgie & the satisfaction to his good subjects which they finde necessa∣rie & due; He hath drawn some what beside his limbes from the loynes of his father; though the serpent hath not reach'd him the fruit of the forbiden tree, he hath transmitted as much malignance in In libro Cap. 1▪ the barke. Ergo when they get him into their hands (which God forbid) tis but talking a litle with the Pharisees & Priests, taking the money according to the covenant, They have made the premises & may then, sit at home with their hands in their pockets, being well assur'd the conclusion must follow, quia expedit, It is very expedient another man, because another King (which the hand of heaven powerfullie prevent.) To draw him into the net, this decoy ducke courts His Majestie with more The Revie∣wers politi∣ke staterie. truth then good meaning; for he puts it into a parenthesis I'observe, that when hereafter it shall be left out, the Scotish Reviewer & Remonstrances may not jarre in their expressions. [A lovelie, hopefull, & promising Prince, for all naturall endowments, as this day breathes in Europe, or for a long time has sway'd a Scepter in Britaine] And yet this lovelie Prince without taking the Covenans &c. shall not breath nor sway the scepter in Scotland. With which & some other ungracious principles a nest of these unluckie Northerne birds did latelie besiege him, not in his cabin, [for his fathers worke lay upon their hands, when he was there they wanting then the iron instrument to cut the silver cord of his life] but in his Royal bedchamber at Ecclesiast. 12. 6. the Hague. And going home, it should seem by the weeping crosse, they & the good people, because they can doe no more, sit downe with mourn∣sull eyes, till occasion be administer'd that by Dunce law (which holds as well against the sonne as the Father) they can doe no lesse then lie downe in their armes for their just & necessarie defense. But they hold here & 'tis time I think, for they have transgress'd too farre the bounds of an epistle.
CHAPTER I. The Scots bold address with the Covenant to K. Ch. 2 Their partie inconsiderable. The Bishops method, language, & matter asserted. The quaestion in con∣troversie unawares granted by the Reviewer. WHile Sixe walking Images, the pretended Commissio∣ners The unsea∣sonablenesse of the Scots coming to the King at the Hague. of the Church & Kingdome of Scotland, that is to say, a selected packe of the most zealous disciplinarian faction, which had fairlie wrought the destruction of both, were, with the greatest impudence that ever was heard of, pressing into His Majesties sad & most discon∣solate retirement at the Hague, when he held backe the face of his throne, & had spread his cloud upon it, When his face was foule with weeping, Iob 26. 9. Iob 16. 16. & on his eyelids the shadow of death; While, with the highest crueltie that could be, instead of condoling his most lamentable afflictions, beyond the tyrannie of Jobs comforters, they were going about not onelie to lay open in his sight, but to thrust violentlie that bloudie axe (the Covenant I meane) which had cut off his Royal Fathers head, into his hands; This reverend & resolute Prelate steps in between them & the Court, throwes in their eyes the guilt not onelie of their late actions, but of their old Antimonarchical as well as Antiprelaticall go∣vernment it selfe, not so much hoping to amuze them, or stop them in their progresse to the King (whose adamantine face, & elephan∣tine feet, he knew would breake through all the briars & thornes that the hand of truth could cut out of that Northerne wildernesse of errour, & lay, though ne'r so thicke, in their way) as to set the marke of that beast in their forhead, which destroyes root & branch of Religion & Lawes, of Regall & Apostolical government, yea & of the libertie of the people, that all well affected to any of these or themselves might have seasonable warning to get out of their way, or gather strength to hunt this wild monster out of the world.
Which accurate Remonstrance of the Bishops carying with it the highest authoritie of their Assemblie acts provincial & general, of The seaso∣nable suc∣cesse of the Bishops Warning. the concurrent sense in the writings of many their deified Divines prevail'd with all impartial & advertend persons to bring this glit∣tering Godesse of the Scotsh discipline to the touch, to discover all the dirt & drosse whereof every limbe of her is made, & reduc'd many, her before incautious worshipers, to a better practice of their du∣tie, & opinion of the Catholike truth. So that the shrine trade being very likelie to goe downe, & the craftsmen's gaine to faile, this Demetrius, as it hapens, at a distance from the great companie of his brethren, adviseth onelie with one of his tribe & 3. or 4. the idolatrous worshipers of his imaginations, & cries aloud in print Magna est Diana, Great is Diana of the Scots. yea, so great he makes her in the very first page of his booke as if she were Queen of heaven & earth, no other divine providence but hers able to re∣cover, as he speakes, the wofullie confounded affaires of the King, & no other nations hands upon the earth but the Antiprelatical be the instruments to effect it. Whereas they are at this time the most inconsiderable faction in His Majesties Dominions, being kept at a bay by the present tyran∣nie in England, having such distractions & divisions among them∣selves, The Scotish Presbyte∣rians an in∣considerable partic. so intermingled with a Royal & Independent partie, that let them talke or write what they will; they can make no muster roll of their owne strength, & durst they speake out their desires, or could their guilt permit them an assurance of securitie & protection, they would with all their hearts take sanctuarie in the person, aswell as hitherto they have done an abused authoritie from the name, of their King, & cast themselves with their covenant, & their claimes, to all former concessions, even touching their discipline, at his foot. But desperatione ultima in furorem animus convertitur, instead of that they turne despaire into madnesse, hoping onelie for some miracle to be wrought by the hand of God, that they may have companie in their ruyne. Naturali quodam deploratae mentis affectiu morientibus, gratis∣simum Sen Con∣rov. Iob 8. est commori. But we are told the hopes of such hypocrites shall perish, That they shall be cut of, & their trust be but a spiders web. Having done his crie, he begins to chop logike with the Bishop, complaines of his method, though most apposite to the purpose, The Bishops method ap∣posite to his matter. calls for Scripture, Fathers, Reason, as if disciplinarian practical in∣stances required the strength of any of the three, unlesse the ver∣tuous precedents of Father Iohn of Leyden, or Kniperdolin should come in, as they may in judgement against the Scots. He admits of the His proose o by tenets
Bishops proofes (& I am very glad he doth) but as by tenets, belonging litle or nothing to the main question: Whereas if The overthrowing the rights of Magistrates to convocate Synods, &c. Chapt. 2. Subjecting the supreme to their censures. chap. 5. Chcating him of his civile power in order to religion. ch. 7. be but by tenets; Their challenging this exorbitant power by divine right. ch. 8. That the exercise of it is hurtfull to all orders of men. chap. 12. Belong litle or nothing to the maine questions about the discipline, it should seem we must climbe heaven for the height of the controversie, & see whe∣ther it will suffer God any more then the King, to sit sure in his throne, & have the supreme government of the world. The heape of calumnics he mentions is a faythfull collection of historicall narra∣tions, which requires not the credulitie of the simple, but the search of sedulous people, if distrusted, who may take the other bookes in their way, & satisfie themselves about what passages he pretends to be detorted. If any of the Bishops allegations are coincident with them in Lysi∣machus His allega∣tions con∣firm'd by others. Nicanor & Isachars burden, they have two witnesses at least to quit them at the barre, & need not stand to the mercie of Iudge Baylie for their pardon. Whatsoever were the sufferings of the au∣thours Mr. Corbet & Mr. Maxwell the Reverend Arch-Bishop of Towmond, truth & integritie ought not to be danted, The hand The Revie∣wers rash & uncharita∣ble judge∣ment about the ends af Mr. Corbe & Arch-Bishop Maxwell. of heaven is not allwayes guided by the mouth, nor Gods judge∣ments discernd by the eye of the Disciplinarian brethren, though most commonlie we heare of no lesse then the murder of the best men, when they make themselves dispensers of his punishments. I am crediblie informed that Mr. Corbet was murderd by the Irish, the Arch-Bishop, stript naked & left desperatelie wounded, but by Gods mercie recover'd & since died a natural death. What spirit it is that hath cosind Mr. Baylie into this uncharitable beliefe of Gods strange punishments in their ends, or rather fram'd contrarie to his conscience this rash judgement in his mouth I leave to the Chri∣stian reader to conjecture. Had the like befallen any couple of his brethren, he would have writ with their bloud some red letters in the Calendar, & made them currentlie passe for two Martyrs of the discipline. If what the Bishop & they have jointlie published be fullie aswered by Mr. Baylie in his booke printed at London, Edenburgh & His vanitie in mentio∣ning the frequent impressions of his book. Amsterdam, because the weight of the presse addes every time more strength to his arguments, for I know not else to what purpose he mentions the severall impressions) he might have sav'd this labour of Reviewing, & publish'd a fourth editon of it at Delfe. After so much praejudice the Bishop is beholding to you for his
hearing, & since you have tasted the sweetnesse of his spirit, & sobernesso His lan∣guage more bitter then the Bishops & his hast greater to vent it. of his language in his first page, you doe well to spit out the bitter∣nesse of your owne in a mad epistle before your booke. If any regard had been wanting in his Lordship to the passages of Scrip∣ture whereupon you build your Antiepiscopal tenets, the quotations would have been some what more numerous in your Review. That no reverence should be required to the harmonic of the Reformed he takes care No regard wanting in the Bishop to Scripture nor reve∣rence to th Reformed Churches. in the third paragraph of his booke where he sayth, he hopes there is nothing whereof he convicteth you but will be disavowed… by all the Protestant Churches in the world, which it should seem they may doe & yet agree with you in the maine of your discipline, for you calld all those but by∣tenets ev'n now. That they doe so beyond a non admission, to a re∣jection of our Episcopacie as Antichristian (between which as I take it there is some difference) I desire you to tell us where. What respect the Bishop beares to the Civile Magistrate & lawes, appea∣res best by his vindication of just authoritie to them both against Nor respect to the Ma∣gistrate and lawes. your disciplinarian incroachments. His Lordship doth not forget by what authoritie your discipline is established though the extravagance of your practices stands not justified by that which you pretend to. If your rule doth, it doth not quit it selfe of censure, in reference to its reception otherwhere, because vested with the power of a civile law in Scotland; nor is that law unalterable when a future Par∣liament may take into consideration the inconveniencies that ac∣companie it. The Bishop need not be grieved▪ being as ignorant as your selfe (& you are enough, as King knowing as you would seem) that His Majestie doth not at all question the justice, because he doth not the legalitie of these sanctions. Therefore his Lordship may thinke on, & speake on when he pleaseth more about this bussinesse, & yet vouch with out a maske loyaltie in his face, nor (for ought you draw from him) need his veines be so emptie, nor his stomake so sharpe set as to eate his former words, much lesse be so desperate as to burne his whole booke, the consistence of it with his toughts, & professions laying no slan∣der upon the King, & his Royal Father of ignorance, & injustice, the one having The Bishop no slanderer of the King nor his Roy∣al Father. established, the other offering to establish by your civile lawes such a Church disci∣pline as is mentiond, both having done it upon most unreasonable importunitie, without any know'n inclination to, or approbation of the same, Farther, what a slander this would prove, upon your grounds (beyond the irreverence toward any actions of a King) which is haled hither in a forced consequence by the cords of your malice may be guessed by the Royal Father's confession in his soli∣tude. If any shall impute my yeilding to them [the Scots] as my failing, & Eikôn Ba∣silikôn ch. 17. sinne, I can easilie acknowledge it; but that is no argument to doe so agaie, or
much more For the Royal sonne, His Majestie now being. you say, he hath not yet gone beyond an offer, therefore His Martyr'd Fathers The Revie∣wers seaso∣nable ad∣vertisse∣ment abou the Kings late offer, to the Scots. poenitential acknowledgement of his failing, & sinne join'd to your seasonable admonition, That there can be no such actual concession, but upon the peril of ignorance, or buge injustice, except he ownes it aswell to be the religious dictate of his conscience, as a poltike in∣dulgence upon necessitie of state, may probablie move him at leisure to deliberate, & whatsoever he shall determine to doe in this, (wherein God direct him for the best) aswell for his owne sake, as the saftie of his Kingdomes make him cautious hereafter how the importunitie of the mission gets ground upon his goodnesse, when all his grants shall be so publikelie registred as conscientious acts, &, by such barbarious pens, deliver'd to posteritie as sealed with his soule. The Bishops presumption in that which followes is none but what No rsb presump∣tion in the Bishop. from the grounds of modest Christian charitie may be raised, viz. That a knowing & a just King (such as your owne character renders him) will acknowledge that contrarie to the dictates of his conscience, which is proved contrarie to the lawes of God, & man, And this may be proclaimed, if not prohibited without being his Confessour or taking it from the Clerke of the closet in any whisper. Nor doth your mistust of reports beare authoritie enough, to make His Majesties conscience passe for Presbyterian, no more then that for a command, or imposition by law which was by your petitionarie violence ravish'd from his passive innocencie into a grant. So that you see in the very beginning you stum∣ble at a strawe, & being to finde somewhat worse in your way, you were best life your legs higher in your progresse. How much the Disciplinarian Scots have contributed from the The Scots endeavours to impose their disci∣pline upon England. beginning toward the alteration of Religion in England, is too large a storie to be inserted in this dispute. Their old account the Rt Reverend Arch-Bishop Bancroft cast up in his Dangerous positions, & English Scotizing Discipline. their later arreares ruu very high in the historie of our times, beginning with his religious & learned successour, The losse of whose head is not more to be imputed to the peoples clamours, then the Scotish papers. Whatsoever they did before, I hope they can not denie themselves to be one of the horned beasts, which together with their English brethren make the supporters of the Presbyterian Rebells scutcheon in the Cove∣nant. This in their remonstrance upon their last inroad into En∣gland, when their fainting brethren with the cause were giving up the ghost, they tell the King plainlie they shall zealouslie & constantlie in their
severall vocations endeavour with their estates & lives to persue & advance. This pursuance was against the King & Bishops, which with the Convo∣cation of divines are the true & full representatives of the Church of England. The assemblie of Divines were but locusts & caterpillars brought together at Westminster by a Northerne wind. The lawes of England convocate no such creatures nor in such a maner. King & Parliament were mere names, had then, & there, no real being, & so no breath to such a purpose, nor those in the two Houses after∣ward more then the heads on the top of them in any politike capaci∣tie to ordaine the abolition of Episcopacie. Beside, what the Assemblie did de∣liberate & debate, poor mechanike people 'tis very well know'n they did as daylie labourers, & sacrilegious hirelings, spend the thred of their time in your service, & payd the price of their souls for a sequestration or two the Covenanting brethren's pillage of the Church. So that if they began the song, you know by whom they were payd for their paines, & if they danc'd not after your pipe, poor scraping wretches they came at your call, & how soever you were in a medley together, to be sure your Covenanting Divel had got you all into a circle, & will better distinguish you when he calls to you for his rekoning. But, by your favour good Sir, His Majestie kept out, K. Ch. 1. in no bar∣monie with the Prcby∣terians. & for the very three yeares you mention told you plainlie he would make one in the practike harmonie of the Catholike Church. That permission (for it was no more) necessitie extorted, & though he could not at that time get you all into Bedlam, he thought in thrce yeares you would pipe & dance your selves wearie & then be content to give way to a better solemnitie of the Cathedral musike to come in. In the meane time estates & lives engag'd in the advancement of the Covenant by the sword, the end thereof being to setle discipline, was medling with & imposing upon our Church. Quod erat demonstrandum. The Bishop you see gives a shrewd guesse who they are you en∣deavour All Prote∣stants im∣plied to be Erastians as well as the Episco∣pal by Mr. Baylic. to brand with the name of Erastians, & how all Protestans Churches, even such as are not Episcopal, must be beholding to you for that title because they come not up to the rigour of your Disci∣pline. Wherein Erasttus slaterd the Magistrate to the prejudice of the just rights of the Church, concernd you aswell to prove as to mention, & then to have draw'n a parallel of the like flaterie in the Bishop. Your doubting argues you ignorant or negligent, & confir∣mes my beleefe that you have travail'd as litle in Erastus's doctrines as his wayes, & gone no farther then the title of his booke. What His Lordship asserts about the supremacie of the Civile Magistrate, & Ecclesia∣stike jurisdiction derived from thence is but what he & all his brethren have
sworneto, & not one of the late Bishops retracted who claim'd Episcopacie by divine right, nor were they at daggers drawing with that horrible word Erastian Caefaro-papisme, having a farre more monstrous crea∣ture, call'd Scoto-Presbytero-Papisme, to encounter. Our lawes are the same aswell to the latter as the elder Bishops, & if their sub∣jection to them must be accounted such an errour, the next pedlars pack that you open we may looke to finde Christianitie bundeli'd up into a sect. The Bishop hath more charitie in him then to become an accuser of his friends, & so much ingenuitie as to heare your sense, not onelie speake his owne about their writings, which when you bring in any particular instance shewing them to joyne with the most rigid Presbyterians in opposing Erastus about the Magi∣strates power, you may looke for your answer Here the Reviewer, I can not say for want of a pare of spectacles The Revie∣wer not ac∣quainted with the late contro∣versie be∣tween us & the Papists. (for who is more blinde then he that will not see) is pleas'd to over looke the whole bodie of the Bishops charge against them, & instead of quiting himselfe to any purpose, recriminates onelie upon other mens scores, having, as it seemes, been very slenderlie acquainted with the late controversies between the Papists & us, & not sounded the depth of the question, as it was stated by our later most learned writers, particularlie that most glorious martyr the Right Reverend Arch-Bishop of Canterburie with the rational & subtile Mr. Chillingworth, who between them having clear'd the well of that dirt which defil'd commonlie the fingars of them that went to draw water at it before, made the face of truth appeare at the botome to any that came impartiallie to behold it. But the Bi∣shop mentioning nothing hearebout, I have no authoritie farther to enlarge, being oblig'd onelie to put Mr. Baylie in mind that in his next Review he give account to the world. Why the Scotish Presbyterie comes not into the harmonie of all Protestants both Lutharans & Calvinists, who give unto the English Episcopal Church the right hand of fellowship & why he & his later Brethren out do etheir forefathers, who durst not condemne her either as defective in any necessarie point of Christian pietie, or redundant in any thing that might virtuallic or by consequence overthrow the foundation. The No Canter-burian de∣signe but what was forged at Edenburg. Canterburian designe was forged at Edenburgh into a passe for the Scots to come over the borders. The Prelatical partie might charitablie wish, but never rationallie hope to see all Christian Churches uni∣ted in truth & love, so long as the perverse Presbyterie confines all Religion to it selfe. For whatsoever the blew caps came in, we know when they went out they caried many vvainloades of somevvhat clse beside the spoile of the blacke-caps reconciliation vvith Rome,
& so long as such bootie is to be had, they want more power, then will, to set up a new controversie in England. But while they are thinking of that, I must put them in mind of what we have in hand, & notwithstanding Mr. Baylies pretense assure him King James, who had trouble enough with them, makes good upon his owne expe∣rience, that every nicitie is a fundamental among them, & every toy takes up as great a dispute, as if the Holie Trinitie were question'd …De Basilik. dor. minimis Politiae Ecclesiasticae quaestiunculis tantum excitant turbarum ac si de sa∣crosancta Trinitate ageretur. As touching your answer to the last charge, you cunninglie omit The Scots heretofore gave no so bad lan∣guage to the English Bi∣shops. what is found in the letter, a word at least of approbation to the office of Episcopacie, in that Bishops are call'd guides, or leaders of Christs flocke, wherein a superintendence, Prelacie, or precedence is own, they being Pastorum Pastores, for by the flocke there is mean'd the inferiour Ministerie, not Laitie, otherwise that text of St. Peter is unfitlie applied, Feed the flocke of Christ, which is committed to your charge, caring 1. Pet. 5. 2 for it not by constraint e'piscopôuntes mi a'nagkastôs [e'piscopôuntes is being Bishops over it] where a'nagkastôs must relate to the Ministers who were constrained to weare the cap, surplice, & tippet, or else be deprived of all Ecclesiastical function as your Assemblie complaines at the very be∣gining of the letter. Yet had they writ no more then you produce, & had been of the same minde with you now, it would follow ne∣cessarilie that you acknowledge several members of Antichrist Mi∣nisters of the word, reverend Pastours & brethren of the Kircke. Which give me but under your hand in your next. My Lord of Derrie I presu∣me will use you, as his profess'd brother very kindlie, & trouble you no more about that businesse. I must adde this; Mr. Knox, as futious otherwise as he was, before Queen Elizabeths time when as your Historian relates in his life, K. Edward VI. offered him a Bi∣shoprike, he resus'd it with a grave severe [yet not so severe] speach saying the title of Lordship & great state had quid commune cum Antichristo, somewhat common with Antichrist, he sayd not the office of an English Bishop was Antichristian, nor his person a limbe of Antichrist him∣selfe. What the same Assemblie sayd or did about the Arch-Bishop of Though they acted enough a∣gainst their Bishops at h. St. Andrewes was in the midst of their freanzie, when, as by their actions may be judged, they had alreadie made good what they threatned, & were become subjects or slaves to the tyrannie of the Devil. Whose title their successours, have these last ten yeares renewd, & payd a greater homage then ever, to that Lord. What you suppone is a grant of the question, That some 80. yeares
agoe the Scots might admit the Protestant Bishops tolerable in England, the law being still the same upon which they are founded, & if their pra∣ctice be not, which is more then you prove, whatsoever it may de∣tract from their persons, it derogates no thing from the continu∣ance of their office. Neither hath your inspection been so accurate of its nature, but that like unskillfull physicians, ye have cast away that balme of Gilead whereby the health of the daughter of Gods people must be re∣covered, Ierr. 8. 22. & like ignorant simplers, have throw'n over the hedge for a noxious eed that Soveraigne plant which God ordain'd for the perpetual service & sanitie of his Church. As for those crimes which you mention, though you will never be The crime alleged not the grounds of K, Ch. 1. his conces∣sions against Episcopacle in Scotland able to make them good against the Reverend Prelates of any the three Kingdomes, yet for shame say not for those you got the consent of the King to condemne, kill & burie in your countrey the sacred order of Episcopacie in that Church. His Majestie having not expressed the least word or syl∣labe to that purpose. The most that ever he yeilded was this. For it should be considered that Episcopacie was not so rooted, & setled there [in Scot∣land] as tis here [in England] nor I (in that respect) so strictlie bound to con∣tinue it in that Kingdome as this: for what I thinke in my judgement best, I may not thinke so absolutelie necessarie for all places, & at all times. Not so rooted & setled, not so absolutelie necessarie implies no act of everting the foundations both of Religion & Government &c. nor can such an act be so pleasing to Kings, nor that order, which is wholelie imployed therein, win so much upon their affections & judgements as to make them professe to the world they thinke it best, as you see our King of blessed memorie hath done. When England thereafter, as you terme it, did root out that unhappie plant, they danc'd after the Scotish pipe, though England was neither in that Episcopacie in England not put downe by a legal As∣semblie, & Parliament thing, calld an assemblie, nor in any full & free Parliament that did it. They were but a few rotten members, that had strength enough then to articulate their malice in a vote, but have since given up the ghost being cut downe by the independencie of the sword, & their presbyterie with them, for a Stinking weed throw'n over the hedge, or Severu's wall, into Scotland, where they, & their blew-bottle brethren are left to lie unpittied on the dunghill together. The rest of the ReformedChurches otherwhere did never cast out, what they never had, such an happie plant as regular Episcopacie in their grounds, those that have (as some such I have told you there are) carefullie keep it. The one part hath been more wise in their actions, the other more charitable to us in their words. Let the Scots ap∣plaud, or clap their hands when they please, there is an act behind, the plays' not yet done.
CHAPTER II. The Scottish Discipline overthrowes the right of Ma∣gistrates to convocate Synods, & otherwise to order Ecclesiastical affaires. THe Bishop doth not forget his challenge about the Magistrates right in The Revie∣wer kno∣wes not good logike when he meetes with it. convocating Synods. But if Mr. Baylie's eyes be too old to see a good, argument in an enthymem, let him take it out of an explicite syllogisme, which may fairlie be draw'n out of His Lordships first & second paragraph in this Chapter. MAJ. That Discipline which doth countenance the Church to convene within the Magistrates territories, whensoever, wheresoever they list: To call before them whomsoever they please, &c. doth over∣throw the Magistrates right to convocate Synods. to confirme their Acts, &c. MIN. But this new Discipline doth countenance the Church to convene within the Magistrates territories, whensoever, wheresoever they list, &c. Ergo, CONCL. This new Discipline doth overthrow the Magistrates right to con∣vocate Synods, &c. The Major his Lordship proves from that know'n Soveraignite of power wherewith all Princes, & States are indued; From the warinesse of the Synod of Dort, Can. 50. From that decree out of Ench. Cand s. min. Synods ought to be called by the supreme Magistrate, if he be a Christian, &c. From the power the Emperours of old did challenge over General Councels; Christian Monarches in the time of Poperie over National Synods; The Kings of England over their Convocations: The Estates of the Vnited Provinces. From the professions of all Catholikes & Protestants in France, very particularlie & liberallie the State of Geneva, where the ordering of all Ecclesiastike affaires is assumed by the Seigniorie. The Minor, he takes for granted, is know'n out of all the procee∣dings in the Presbyterie; which from time to time have thus con∣ven'd, & convocated themselves, & therefore His Lordship onelie intimates it in his first paragraph, yet afterward proves it in part by an Assemblie, meeting when it had been prohibited, & sitting after it was discharged by the King, which the 20. Presbyters did at Aberdene
Anno 1600. And all this with the Reviewer, is to forget the challenge, because he hath forgot his logike, & the new light hath dazeld the eye of his old intellectual facultie to discerne. The truth of it is, this was a litle too hot for Mr. Baylies fingars, because it makes such cleare instances about the Synod of Dort & Geneva, wherein they dif∣fer from the Scotish Presbyterie, which he will not owne because he every where denies, & therefore takes no notice of it as he goes. Nor can any ignorance of the way of the Scotish Discipline be imputed to the The Bishop not ignorant of the way of the Sco∣tish Disci∣pline. Bishop, who produceth, so numerouslie, the practical enormities thereof, & strikes at the very foundation as infirme, because contra∣rie to the know'n lawes & lawfull custome:, the supreme Magistrate dissenting & disclaiming. For what he pretends to have been unquestionablie au∣thentike by vertue of Parliament Acts & the Kings consent since the first re∣formation, I have otherwhere successivelie evidenc'd, up as farre as the unhappie beheading of Marie Queen of Scots in England, (to which the rest may be hereafter annexed) to have no other strength then what rage & violence could afford it. The power which he sayth The Revie∣wers Sophy∣strie. every man in Scotland gives the King, without controversie, to call extra∣ordinarie Assemblies when he pleaseth, takes not away, in its hast, the maine part, of the Bishops objection, implying no negative to this. That the Presbyteric, hath often extraordinarilie assembled without the Kings leave, nay against his command, nor will they be checkt in that rebellious li∣cense by his power. What the Bishop meanes to speake of the Kings power in chusing Elders, &c. The Bishops meaning a∣bout the Kings power in chusing Elders. Mr. Baylie might know, but that still he hath no mind to take notice, That in the former paragraph His Lordship spake of a seigniorie, a Civile Magistrate at Geneva, to which at the end of the yeare are presented the Elders, & by that continued or discharged. The Civile Magistrate in Scotland hath no more power in placing or displacing, (which before was calld conti∣nuing or discharging) the Elders, then in the election of the Emperour, whose inhaerent right he conceives to be as good there as at Geneva, there∣fore if the lawes do not expresselie provide it, they are such, he thinkes, as tend to the overthrowing of that right. This His Lord∣ship meanes as part of that he was to prove, being a clause in the title of this Chapter. Your closing with the Parliament, which the Bishop hath not men∣tion'd, Ecclesiasti∣ke lawes. is but to beget a wonder by making an hermaphroditc of the question which before was but single in your sexe. You are not so u∣nited, but that I can untwist you, &, though against your will, con∣sider, in this case, the Presbyterie by it selfe. The making of Ecclesia∣stike lawes in Scotland (as for England it shall not be here disputed, as
desirous as you are to be wandring from home) was never, in ju∣stice, nor with any Kings content, referred, so absolutelie, to Ecclesiastike Assemblies, as not to aske a ratification from the crowne. What the The head of the Church. Bishops minde is about the head of the Church will be clearlie rendred when just Authoritie demands it, but His Lordship thinkes not good to be catechiz'd by every ignorant Scotish Presbyter, nor give ans∣wer to every impertinent question he puts in. If your fingars itch to be handling the extrinsccal power in the Minister derivative from the supremacie of the King you were best turne over Erastus & the learned Grotius, after which I guesse we shall heare of you no more. Your Assemblies are Arbitrarie but at Assembies are the Kings arbi∣trarie Coun∣sels. Royal pleasure otherwise then as by your covenanting sword you cut of their relation to the King & his great Councels. So that your Kings were willing to accept, & had good reason to assume, more then ever you would give them. How you robd them of their right by your multipli'd rebellions see Scotish-Presbyterian selfe conviction in my Epitome of your storie. The Bishop had reason to instance in particu∣lars. If the Bishop had left this matter in generall, your hue & crie to be sure, had gone after him for particulars. His reasoning stands not to the courtesie of your indulgence, being grounded upon the Acts of your Assemblies, whose backes had been long since broke with the weight, of no peckadillos in disputing, but high & mightie villanies in rebelling, had it not the strength of the whole lay Presbyterie to sup∣port it. Though by the way I must tell you, The failings of your offi∣cers may be taken as naturall to, & inseparable from your office, when, ha∣ving been so noto riouslie publike, they passe without your censure, or dislike. So that this mote, as much as you miskenne it, will prove a beame in your eye, & of such consequence in this argument, as you will scarce finde the way through the most hainous particu∣lars that follow. The first of which layes such a blocke in your way, as you can The Assem∣blie contest with the King about his com∣mand. not step over, till you have as good as acknowledged one of the principal articles in that charge. You confesse His Majestie did write from Stirling to the General Assemblie at Edenburgh 1579. that they should cease from concluding any thing in the discipline of the Church, during the time of his minoritis. And how well you obey'd it, we may collect by what followes. Vpon this desire [dutifull subjects would have taken it for a command] the Assemblie did abstaine srom all conclusions [that we shall see presentlie] onelie they named a Committee to goe to Striveling for conference with His Majestie upon that subject. Any man that is acquainted with your Assemblie logike will know that this clause with the onelie, if
it passe not for a conclusion, caries the force of two praemises with it; And he must be very ignorant in your storie that hath not found all your conferences with your Kings to have been contests. Whether this was so or no, I leave to the discretion of the reader, when he sees what you say followed thereupon. Immediatelie a Parliament is called in Octob. 1579. And in the first Act declares & grants jurisdiction unto the Kirke…. And declares that there is no other face of a Kirke, nor other face of Religion, then is praesentlie, by the favour of God established within this Realme, And that there be no other jurisdiction Ecclesiasticall acknowledged within this Realme, then that whilke is & shall be within the samen Kirke, or that which followes therefra concerning the praemises. Now let us lay all this together. The young King is resolved to have no medling with the discipline, yet no sooner doth he see your Commissioners sweet faces, but im∣mediatelie a Parliament is called And in that Parliament your Disci∣pline must have the primacie In the Acts; And that leading Act must not onelie establish what you have at hand, but, upon the engage∣ment of Regal & Parliamentarie power, purchase all future possi∣bilities of your pleasure, & give your invention a patent to play the wanton. There must be some witch craft sure in your Committee, & (by your relation) a magicke spell to retrive on such a sodaine, the Kings wandring affections to the Discipline. But when I finde His Majestie professing, that after ten yeares of age Conf. as Hapt. Court. And. Mel∣vin Epist. ad Th. Bez. 1579. K. I. & his Nobilitie against the Discipline. Vindic. Epist. Hieron. Philadelph The Revie∣wer & his brethren agree not in their storie. Duo folia dilac erata & in ignem conjecta. you never had his heart. A brother of yours lamcnting that for five yeares before this you had had a perpetual conflict with the Bishops, & ever got the worst. That most of the Nobilitie, upon several interests, were at this time bent against you, I am at a losse for the Kings li∣bertie, as much as for some other concurrent due authoritie, in this Act, & reade nothing but your violence in these proceedings. But let us see how you & a namelesse friend of yours agree. He tells us the letter that Dunkenson brought to this Assemblie had other∣guede contents. That the King onelie quickned your dispatch in consultation a. bout some head of the discipline, & preparing your unanimous result for the consent of the Parliament that followes. The Kings jealousie of your medling with these affaires he see∣mes to anticipate by two yeares of your account & if there were any such thing, whereof he doubts, he sayth the King was better informed of the truth. He farther complaines of two whole leaves about this businesse that were rent out of your publike records. that ever since left posteritie in a cloud this was done in the yeare 1584. which he calls the houre of darknesse. You say the authentike Regi∣sters
are extant, & onvince the Bishop to be heire of falshood. Error cau quâ coepit eat All the truth that I can picke out of this confusion is, That the King was disaffected to the Discipline; That the Assem∣blie did not obey his command nor answer his desire with their si∣lence; And that what consent you say, he gave in Parliament soon after, was either forg'd, or procured by constraint. What followes con∣cerning your rigour to the Papists, & many orthodoxe Christians comprehended in that title, is easilie credited. But you should have done well to have set downe the names Dominorum Consilii ex quo∣rnm deliberatione proclamation as made, & then we should have know'n how neare they were of kinn to your faction. Some bodie tells us, That the Ministers did deliberate, & Buchanan did act [according to Gor. Con. De duplic. stat. Relig. apud Scot. lib. 2. … ministri cu omnia ex suo suorum∣que arbitrio pendere, sa∣vente & an∣nitente im∣primis Bu∣chanano, cerncrent, &c. the maximes of loyaltie he publish'd.] That the Kings name was to it, & what else you pleased, is not much to be doubted, when you had got his person in your power. For how short a time you could keep his inclination to the Discipline, which was proclaim'd, ap peares out of your storie of an Assemblie mans penning. How cordiallie peremptorie the king was in his command, & how forward in subscribing whatsoever is in the Act for the short Confession of fayth; And what good effects it wrought among the people, you may take notice out of His Majestie speach in the Conference at Hampton Court, wherein he shewes how ridiculous the thing was, & the person that drew it up. I thinke it unfit to thrust into the booke every position negative…according to the example of Mr. Craige in Scotland, who with his I renounce & abhorre, his detestations & abrenunciations, did so amaze the simple people, that they not able to conceive all those things, utterlie gave over all, falling backe to Poperie, or remaining still in their former ignorance. These are the Kings words about Mr. Craige the Authour, & his Confession, K. 1. his dislike of the short Confession. Many un∣justisiable praciices about it. Vindic. E∣pist Hieron. Philadelph. Archiepis. Fan, S. Andr. Pa. 1 77 which you may compare with the Act, you pretend to at your leisu∣re. The approbation of the Assemblie was but the harmonie of a faction, such being excluded as were not prejudged approvers or, if prae∣sent, overaw'd by a praevalent partie in their vote, as much as other Ministers abroad, by Philadelphi Vindicatours confession, in their consent. Quis credat quenquam, qui rem sacram administrabat…ausum fuisse calculo suo non probare. Or if they were free & did ap∣prove it, they did it in that sense that many Orthodoxe persons did sweare or subscribe it …in eam confessionem jurâsse neminem Pres∣byteriorum regimini alligat. Which King Ch. 1. in his large Declara∣tion tells you to be consistent with Episcopaie, it unqu-estionablie true. Or it may be the register of your approvers was handled as the roll of subscribers, wherein were a great many more names then
had been hands … adde Episcopos nunc sedentes & magnam partem Archiepis. Fan. S. Adr. Ministrorum subscriptiones illas inficiari. The opposition Of the Kings Com∣missioner it may be was ingrossed in the two leaves torne out of your publike records, if not left out as impertinent to the procee∣dings of that Assemblie. If he gave a passive consent by his si∣lence, it was in conformitie to his Masters subscription & command which you mention'd. The direction of His Majestie for the 50. Classical Assemblies was specializ'd by your power which did direct him. The crecting of them was with no intent to pull downe Epis∣copacie, as may be, in effect gather'd from your words. For if they remaine to this day, the same stood while the Bishops were in po∣wer as subordinate chapters or consistories unto them. These some Noble men, you speake of, were most of the Nobilitie, Epist. ad Theod. Bez. The reason upon which the Nobili∣tie main∣taind Bi∣shops. Pseudo-Episcopatu. as your Brother Andr. Melvin doth acknowledge … reluctan∣tibus nobilium plerisque. And these did not now erect, of new, a ti∣tular Episcopacie, but maintained that which had been legallie esta∣blished. And this they did, not onelie to hold fast their Ecclesia∣stical revenue, but upon other more conscientious grounds, as he ingenuouslie confesseth. Viz. To keep the state of the Kingdome entire from being rent in pieces; sublato enim Episcopatu [Il'e leave the lie for his heires to licke up] regni statum convelli. To prae∣serve Majestie due to the King, constitutis Presbyteriis regiam Majesta∣tem imminui And, by asserting his right to some Church revenues, to prevent the utter exhausting of his exchequer … bonis Eccle∣siasticis … restitutis Regis aerarium exhauriri causantur. That the Nobilitie enjoyed so much of the revenue, beside what The Presby∣terie the Cause of the Nobilities kceping the revenue of the Church. was payd in to the King, came upon the perpetual divisions rais'd by the Presbyterie in the Kingdome, which perturbing ever the establishment of the Episcopal order, & voting them to have no more right to the meanes then they had to the office, the lear∣ned at least & prudent Nobilitie having better assurance that nei∣ther power nor meanes belong'd de jure to the brethren of the discipline, it is not unlikelie, till the controversie should be ended, they framed a kind of plausible argument to continue the steward ship in themselves. Yet in the meane time, by your leave, they Episcopacie more then titular by the Cove∣nanters acknowled∣gement. did effectuate more then a title to this & tulhan Bishop: And this kind of Prelates pretended right to every part of the Episcopal office, & exerciz'd much more then you mention'd. Which having been made good against you in several volumes, I shall onelie bring an undeniable argument, by producing confitentes reos, the whole packe of Covenanters of all orders & qualities, aswell Ministers, as
others, Who in their publike bill or Complaint, upon which an Act of the Presbyterie of Edenburgh passed Octob. 24. 1638. have these Words. Whereas the office of a Bishop (as it is now used within this Realme) was condemned by the booke of policie, & by the Act of the Assemblie holden at Dundee, Anno 1580. Whereof these are the words; For asmuch as the office of a Bishop (as it is now used, & commonlie taken within this Realme) hath no sure warrant from Authoritie, &c. Hence I argue thus. The office of a Bishop now used in the yeare 1580. & the office of a Bishop, now used in the yeare 1638. is ex confesso the same. But the office of a Bishop 1638. consisted in the power of ordination & jurisdiction: Ergo so did the office of a Bishop 1580. And as much is implied by the Act of that Synod which condemnes expresselie the power as well as the title of Bishops, & that with reference to the persons of the Bishops then living, that had executed this power, & were to lay it downe or become excommunicate. Therefore you shew us but the halfe face in your discovrse about their voting in Parliament, Into which imployment they crept not, but came upon considence of better authori∣tie then any general Assemblie could give them, as shall be proved hereafter, particularlie in the case of Rob. Montgomerie Arch-Bishop of Glasgow whom you name. That there was some debate ta∣kes of somewhat from the Kings forwardnesse in commanding, subscri∣bing & directing in special. That he shew'd his good satisfaction, I beleeve not, when you publish it with a blancke Reviewer. But the Warner The Bishop too courteous in passing over 27. yeares storie meane, base, & abject persons, who were never any way re∣markable as en of great gifts Decl. of His Majesties Counc. Imperfect policie alte∣rable at the Kings plea∣sure. heere jumps over no lesse then 27. yeares time, &c. Ans. The Bishop un∣dertooke no continued historie of your Disciplinarian rebellions. Therefore in passing over 27. yeares he sav'd himself a trouble, but hath done too great a courtesie for you, unlesse you were more thankefull for his silence. Though indeed this signal rebellious Convention of a few stubborne ignaro's at Aberdener shewes to what an height & maturitie of mischiefe your other sucking Conspira∣cies had come to; if Royal presence had not been at hand to sup∣presse their growth & nip these blacke boutefeus in the bud. That King Iames at that time was by his English Bishops perswasions resolv'd to pu downe the general Assemblies of Scotland, is disavowed in words by pu∣blike proclamation, bearing date the 26. Septemb. & in act by appoin∣ting one to be holden at Dundee the last Tuesday of Julie. Yet if he had, with the grave advice & consent of his three Estates, your Church lanes & constant practice must have strooke saile, as it after∣ward did, unto the supremacie of that power. Himselfe telling you, That no Monarchie either in Civillor Ecclesiastical policie, had then at∣tained to that perfection that it needed no reformation; Nor that infinite occasions
might not arise, whereupon wise Princes might foresee, for the benefit of their Stes, just cause of alteration. For what immediatelie followes, take His majesties answer out of a Declaration penned with his owne hand. As to the nature of their particular priviledge in holding of Assemblies, they The Privi∣ledge of As∣semblies li∣mited. have in this their last praetended Assemblie broken the limitations of that privi∣ledge that is clearlie set downe in the first Acte of the Parliament in the 92 yeare, which is the latest & clearest warrant for their Assemblie. For there it is speciallie provided. That as We give them license for holding of their Assemblies once in the yeare or oftner as occasion shall require (which proves that all their power onelie pro∣ceeds from us) so must it not be convened without our owne prasence, or then of our Commissioner, nor no day, nor place set downe for the next Assemblie, but by Our, or our Commissioners appointment, except we be not pleased neither to goe in our owne person, neither to send any for assisting the sayd Assemblie. And how these limitations have beene observed by them at this time, let the world judge, first in not onelie refusing the praesence of our Commissioner, but most contemptuouslie & in∣juriouslie barring the doore upon him, & next in setting downe the dyes of the next Assemblie without either his privitie, or consent. The letter which His Majesties Commissioner Sr. Alex: Strayton of Low∣renston The Legal proceedings against the Aberdene Assemblers offered you know was a missive from the Lords of the Councel, not addressed to them as to an Assemblie, & therefore no such capa∣citie requir'd to their receiving it. His Majesties letter to the Commis∣sioners of the general Assemblie signifying his pleasure to have the appointment of this meeting deferred, & no new indiction to be made without his consent, having been long before delivered, & the substance of it by them communicated to the several Presbyte∣ries of the Kingdome. In contempt whereof these persons assem∣bled at Aberdene, where, the day before they sate downe, was a publication at the mercate Crosse of a charge to the contrarie from the Lords of the Councel. Beside, they had not, His Majestie tells them. any warrant to hold a new Assemblie, without the praesence either of the Moderatour of the last, or of the ordinarie Clerke of the Assemblie. As for their dutifull demeanour afterward, That they rise immediatelie after the reading of the Missive, Mr. Baylie knowes to be absolute∣lie false, Howsoever, the naming a diet for the next meeting Was against an expresse clause in His Majesties letter, which by the Councel is calld a Rebellious, & traiterous misbehaviour. For the trouble that followed hereupon, if by the counsel of Arch-Bishop Bancroft, that could not be pernicious, because the proceeding against them was legal. They were calld before the Lords of His Majesties Councel; had libertie given them to entertaine lawyers, & make their defense, which prov'd a Declinatour disclaiming all subjection to His Majestie, & His Councel; This Declinatour was re∣pell'd,
& they were found to have unlawfullie conven'd; His Ma∣jestie commanded that the ordinarie course of justice should pro∣ceed. Whereupon Sixe of them were presented upon panel at Lyn∣lithgow before His Highnesse Justice being the ordinarie Judge, who had joyned to him a great number of Noblemen, &c. Their inditement grounded upon the first statute in May 1584. Two of Their obsti∣nacie. their Procuratours, & Counsellers at law, not being able to per∣swade them to a course of humilitie, did upon their obstinacie re∣fuse to plead for them, Indeed Sixe, or seven of them, touched with the open discoverie made by the Kings Declaratour upon hum∣ble submission were dismissed, & sent home to their charge. See more particularlie of all these in the Declarations of K. James, & his Councel 1606. The next instance of the Bishops, Viz. Their abolishing the chiefe festivals of the Church, the Reviewer can not justifie to any purpose The Church festivals a∣bolished in Scotland by no just Au∣thoritie. either from the authoritie, or the time. For first this great Councel of Scotland were but a parsel of the rebell Nobilitie that had of late de∣posed, & persecuted the poore Queen Dowager to the death, And now having the yong King & Queen at as great a distance as France, at the same rate order the affaires of the Church as they had the poli∣cie of the State. The charge they gave the Assemblie brethren dated the 29. day of April 1590. (the summe whereof is so formallie pla∣ced in the front of the Discipline) was upon procurement by them∣selves, It being ordinairie with them, when they had any new de∣vice on foot, to extort some pretended authoritie by their letters. Therefore it is but a mocke obedience by service not onelie offered, but obtruded. Nor was it so pleasing to them, whom they here owne for their masters, but that after many dayes perusal, it was with di∣slike, & scorne rejected by diverse. Those that sign'd it had no power to ratifie it, no more then just before, the Confession of fayth, which they were faine to send over into France. And how their Act, or promisse in secret Councell, dated the 27. of Ianuarie, was illu∣ded from time to time, Knox relates, & very much laments in his sto∣rie. For the time, there was no such Parliament intervall as required the di∣ligence of the Councel of State: for what they call'd a Parliament, though none, was but new lie dissolv'd, when presentlie consulta∣tion was had how the Church might be established in a good, & God∣lie policie. The reason of which haste was lest, the yong Queen should come over, & interpose her Royal authoritie in this great Councel of State, as she did afterward, & rejected the Discipline, for all the Act of State that had passed on it, demanding How many of those that had sub∣scribed would be subject unto it, & her Secretarie telling them. That many
subscribed in fide parentum, as children are baptized. Those dayes which Mr. Baylie calls here fond seasts, out of the The primi∣tive Chri∣stians ob∣serv'd thom booke of Discipline & that farther abominations, were not thought such by the Primitive Christians, who were strict in the solemnitie of such times. And if the writings of the ancient Fathers, & the Godlie, & approved lawes of Iustinian the Emperour might be admitted, as once they were offered, to decide the controversie betvixt us, we know what Would become of this part of the Discipline. The authoritie of the Orat: of the Protest. of Scotl. to the Q. Reg. 1558. Church, warranted by the holie Scriptures is sufficient to justifie them & us in this observance. Nor were the Scots so fallen out with these abominations, but that they let them stand in the Calendar be∣fore their Liturgie, &c. And there were a people in Scotland which, in the Bishops dayes, did celebrate those feasts, Therefore ever since they have not shewed such readie obedience to that direction of the Discipline. See the Bishop of Brechen's defense of the Perth Articles. Your farre-fetecht comparison accidentallie improves the Bi∣shops knowledge by a seasonable experiment, Who findes the Disci∣plinarian barbarismes in Scotland as monstrous as any he ever read of in Iapan, & your nullities in religion as many as Vtopia hath in policie, or nature. If your thoughts had not been rambling so farre for recruits to your malice, you might have been furnish'd with truth nearer home, which His Lordship brings unto your doore. As fine as here you make your selfe for the triumph, out of every wing you plucke, you will by & by be at a losse for your victorie, & must then weare your blew cap without a feather. For (that you may know The Bishop not mistakē in the Scot∣tish Chrono∣logic. my meaning) His Lordship can afford you no such pretie thing as the antichronisme you lay hold on. He sayth not, That statute of trea∣son wa in being in the yeare 1580. And his Printer you might see, had done him so much right as to set a number 4. yeares older directlie, against the place where it is mention'd. His Lordships words are these Which ridiculous ordinance was maintain'd stiffelie by the succeeding Synods, not∣withstanding the statute, That it should be treason to impugne the authoritie of the thrce Estates. The plaine sense whereof is this, The succeeding Synods to the yeare 1584. maintain'd it stisfclie. And not onelie they but likewise the suc∣ceeding Synods afterward, notwithstanding the statute then made, That &c. Yet, not to be too literal, That there should be three Estates, to whom your brethren presented their Assemblie Acts as they did, by the King & them to be confirmed, even before the yeare 1580. & yet, That to impugne the authoritie of the three, estates or to procure the innovation, or diminution of any of them, should have no statute nor law to make it, at least interpretative, treason, is a peice of politikes that Iapan nor
Vtopia, will never owne, nor any man that is civiliz'd in submission to government beleeve. The businesse of appeales we are to meet with in the chapter follo∣wing, & so farre you shall have leave to travaile with the counterfeit credit of that untruth. What you make here such a positive consent of Lundie the Kings Com∣missioner in that Assemblie, even now went no farther then a suspense in silence, where all you found was, That it appear'd not he apposed. And how that might be I there gave you my conjecture. In the next What kinde of Presby∣teries were erected by K. Iames & his Com∣missioners, & to what purpose. Assemblie 1581. the Kings Commissioner Caprington was not so hastie to erect in His Majesties name Presbyteries in all the land. The businesse was this, The King sends him, & Cuningham with letters to the Assemblie at Glas∣gow, to signifie, That the thirds of the Ecclesiastical revenues, upon the conference had between his Commissioners, & those which they had before sent from Dundee, were not found to be the safest main∣tenance for the Ministrie, they having been so impair'd in twentie yeares before, that nothing of certaintie could appeare; That there∣upon had been drawn a diagrame of several Presbyteries, where∣by a division of the greatest parishes was to be made, & a uniting of the lesse to the end that the Ministers might be with more aequalitie maintained, and the people more convenientlie assemble'd, That His Majestie had determined to sent letters to several of his Nobili∣tie in the Countrey to command their meetings, and counsel here a∣bout. This he did not till the next summer, nor was any thing ef∣fected diverse yeares after. The conventions of the Ministrie were Bishops to praeside in them. to be moderated by every Bishop in his Dioecesse, who was, by agreement, to praeside in the Presbyteries with in his limits. So that the modelling Presbyteries was onelie for setling a convenient re∣venue upon the Ministers, & so farre was it from abolishing Episco∣pacie, that the Bishops were to have the managing the affaire. It would not have cost you, nor your printer, much paines to have put in what hapened before the yeare 1584 The opposition against Declar. 152. The abuse of the Kings indulgence by the Pres∣byters. your abuse hereof by the Bishops Montgoinerie & Adamson; His Ma∣jesties discharging by proclamation the Ministers conventions, & Assemblies under paine to be punished as Rebells, publishing them to be unnatural subjects, seditious persons, troublesome & unquiet spirits, members of Satan, enemies to the King & the Commonwealth of their native Countrey, charging them to desist from preaching in such sort as they did viz. against the authoritie in Church causes, against the calling of Bishops, &c. removing, impri∣soning, inditing them, &c. Which put you upon the desperate attempts of surprizing and restraining His Majestie's person, whereof other∣where. So that the King, you see, had very good preparatives to
purge his Kingdome of such turbulent humours, before Captain Stuart put him in minde to make use of that physike. Which Captaine Iames The E: of Arran no wicked Courtier. was no such wicked Courtier, when the saints in behalve of the Disci∣pline, set him up to justle with Esme Stuart Lord Aubignie for the nearest approach unto Royal favour. This Parliament 1584. was summon'd with as loud a voyce as any other, & was as open as the sun at Edenburgh could make it. Nor was Captain Stuarts crime about it such as to denominate his exile the vengeance of God, which was wrought in the eyes of the world by your rebellion. Nor his death by Dowglasse's high way murder, aveng'd His bloud reveng'd. afterward in alike terrible destruction & that in Edenburgh high street, where sanguis sanguinem tetigit: bloud touched bloud, though I dare not, as you doe, judge for reward, nor divine such ambiguous cruelties for money, being no Priest nor Prophet, as you are to the heires of those bloudie soulders in Micah [chapt 3.] I dare not say that it either was the fingar of God, though he imploy not the hand of his power to re∣straine them. Rev. … these acts of his Parliament the very next yeare were disclaimed Bishop Bancroft Dang. Posi b. 1. Gib∣sons bold speaches to the King. by the King, &c. Ans. They were not disclaimed the 21 of December the next yeare, when James Gibson being question'd for dis loyal spea∣ches about them before His Majestie & his Councel, very impudent∣lie told the King, he was a persecutour for maintaining them, and compar'd him to Ieroboam, & threatned he should be rooted out, & conclude that race. His confidence was in the returne of the banish'd Rebel-Nobles, who forced all honest men from the Court, possessed themselves of His Majesties person, & acted all disorder in his name. This was the regular restoring of Presbyterie, Which to say was never more removed to this day, in that sense, you must speake it, is to abuse the igno∣rance of some new convert you have got in the Indies, who it may be, at that distance, know not that Bishops had the visible Church government in Scotland, for about theirtie yeares together, since that time. Rev. The Warners digression to the the perpetuitie of Bishops in Scotland, &c. Ans. The perpetuitie of their order in that Kingdome is no disgression Perpetuitie the Bishops in Scotland. in this place, where His Lordship shewes your practical contradiction in pulling downe Episcopacie with one hand, & yet seting it up, though under the name of Superintendencie, with the other. The sequestring their revenue, & altering their names, & pruning off some part of their power, he takes to be no root & branch ordinance, for the deposition of their office, or utter extirpation of their order. This he asserts to be the greatest injurie your malice could ever hitherto bring about, & therefore goes not one step out of his way to
let you know. That Bishops have been perpetual in your Church, Nor doe you out of yours (but keep the same path of truth you began The Revie∣wers long reach for the antiqui∣tic of Pres∣byters. in) in acquainting us with the antiquitie of Presbyters, who, it should seem are terrae filii that sprung up in Scotland, like so many mushromes, the next night after Christianitie came in: Though he that is read in your opinions & actions, will take it for granted that you must pay the acknowledgement of your Presbyterie to the San∣hedrin, & your sects conversion to the lewes. If you will impudentlie crowd it into the companie of the first … facile est credere Victorem Pontisicem …in Scotia reperisse multos quos salutaribus undis expi∣aret alios quos Judai∣zantium in feerat error. G. Con. De dupl. stat. Rel. apud Scot. lib. 1. Multi ex Britonibus Christiani savitiam Diocletiani tiementes ad eos [Scotos] confugerant è quibus complures doctrina, & vitae inte∣gritate clari in Scotia substiterunt, vitamque solitariam tanta sanctitutis opinione apud omnes vixerunt, ut vita sanctorun cellae in templa commutareniur. Ex eoque consuetuao mansit apud po∣steros, ut prisci Scoti templa cellas vocent. Hoc genue Monahorum Chaldeos appella∣bant mansitque nomen, & institutum donec Monachorum genus rocentius in plures divisum e∣ctas eos expulit Buchan. Hist. lib. 4 Christians that came into Scotland, you can not denie but that for some part of the Centuries you speake of, it was confin'd to the monkes colls, never came to clamour at the Court, & the poore Culdiis, with a great deale more humilitie & pietie, then the Covenanters, ca∣ried it in their cowles. Rev. … & after the reformation there was no Bishop in that land. Ans. The reformation you meane, began the day before, or after the Greeke Calends, & if you will helpe me to an account of the one, I shall know how to order the aera of the other. Many yeares confusion there was of Poperie, Presbyterie & Superintendencie. The re∣form'd Episcopacie could never get ground till King James set it forward, & then it went not far before it met with your violent encounter by Sword, & Covenant, which never suffered the crowne nor Miter to stand long unshaken, till both were held up by the Armes of England, & the Kings person secure at a distance to command you. That ever such a thing as reformed Presbyterie according to the Canon in your Discipline, had the free positive consent of King, & Parlia∣ment (without which it can not legallie passe for the Religion of your Kingdome) I denie to be visible any where in your storie. Rev. … till the yeare 1610. Ans. That yeare did indeed complete the Episcopal power, which King James had by degrees piouslie, & industriouslie promoted many yeares before. Rev. … When Bancrost did consecrate three Scots Ministers, &c. Ans. A brother of yours tells us they were consecrated by Bishop Abbot: As evil as their report was the men were not so bad, as their names need be in charitie conceled. They were Iohn Spotswood, Andrew Lamb, & Gawin Hamilton, Bishops of Glasgow, Brechen, & Galloway. Who enjoy now their reward in heaven for the rviling they had on earth, it
being for Gods sake & his Church] according to our Saviours pro∣mise, St. Matth. 5. 11. The first was a man for zeale to the Church, fidelitie to the King, prudence in Government, & constancie under affliction singular, & inimitable, & indeed for his excellent gifts onelic hatefull to the Disciplinarians, though especiallie because he through long experienec was of all Scotish men best acquainted with & ablest to detect their crosse wayes to the King & all Sove∣raigne Magistracie. He died piouslie, & peaceablie at Westminster in the second yeare of this rebellion, & was buried in the Abbey Church. The second was a great & assiduous preacher, even when he was blinde through extreme age, He also died in peace, & with the good report of all, except these calumniatores, who hold that no Bishop can be an honest man, & whose invention is so rich of nothing as reproaches against better men then themselves. The third was a reverend Praelate of great parts, & singular learning, a most constant preacher who lived in peace, & died in his bed. Rev. … that violent Commissioner the Earle of Dunbar. Ans. His vio∣lence did not carie him beyond his Commission, & because he exe∣cuted that upon the rebellious Aberdene Assemblers, & would not take off some of his kindred or acquaintance who were in the jurie, that deliberatelie cast them in their verdict, nor intercede for their stay in Scotland, being desir'd; you here meet with him at the Synod of Glasgow. Which being at large prov'd legitimate in every circum∣stance required by law, is in vaine condem'd as null by your fa∣ction. Nor was it corrupt in any more then three members of about 140. who being rotten drop of from the close union & harmonious suffrage of the rest. Rev: … got authorized in some part of the Bishops office. Ans. I hope Episcopacie intirelie authorized in the Sy∣nod of Glas∣gow Vind. Epist Hitr. Philadelph. you will not denie that Bishops were authorized to ordaine in this Sy∣nod. And into how many particulars their power of jurisdiction was branched your brother very pittifullie complaines… jurisdictio in omnibus offendiculis, sive in doctrina, sive in moribus … Armantur … po∣testate exauctorandi ministros, suspensionis censuram irrogandi, excommunicationem decernendi, &c. you may reade the rest, & then tell us what part of their office was left out. Rev. Superintendents are no where the same with Bishops, much lesse in Scot∣land. Ans. That they are aequivalent to Bishops is evident by the Superinten∣dents aequi∣valent to Bishops. conformitie in their offices, & power. The particulars whereof His Lordship recites out of the fourth & sixt heads of your 1. Book Dis∣cipl. To which upon my Review I could adde some more, if those were not enough. Their ambulatorie commission, was no other then our Bishops ambulatorie visitation. If your onclic in the time before have any
influence here, & exempt them from all duties in their visitation, but preaching the word, &c. you cut of three parts of their injunction in the Discipline. If they were onelie, as you say, for a time, it concerne you to tell us where they ceas'd, & denie there were any since, or ever shall be more but upon some future new plantation in your Churches Being pressed about obtruding your Discipline, you tell us. For the Ecle∣siastike Presbyters not to have Synods as often as they list, nor doe in them what they please. enjoyning of a general Assemblies decrees a particular ratisication of Par∣liament is unnecessarie. Which holds not where the particular decrees of your Assemblie transgresse the general intent of that Act whereby you are authoriz'd to meet. That relates to the times and matters to be treated of. In the former you are limited to custome, or praescription. In the later to the doctrine, & discipline receiv'd. Which are therefore ratified in such Acts together with your Assemblies, Presbyterie & Ses∣sions, that obedience might be render'd upon the visible conformitie of your decrees, & injunctions to that rule. But to make any Act of Parliament so general as to ratisie at adventure all possible arbitrarie com∣mamds of your Assemblie to the altering of the doctrine or discipline established, were to praecontract affinitie with all sects, & haeresies, & to enter into an implicite league, or Covenant with the Devil about his worship, so it may be de futuro ad placitum Synodi generalis. Let me put this case, suppose a general Assemblie should, by an Ecclesiasti∣cal decree, enjoyne the canons of that Antichristian government against which you praetend your discipline is framed. Whether or no is that injunction authentike upon the general A & of Parliament for their Assembling without a particular ratification thereof? I might adde how ridiculous it is for you to make the power of your Assemblies so absolute, & yet trouble King, & Parliament so often with your importunate petitions to passe what is fullie ratified be∣fore, & that by their owne General Acts including that very particular for which you supplicate. The debates about the second booke of Discipline I beleeve: But that in The King consented not to the second booke of Disci∣pline. the Assemblie 1590. the Kings consent to it was obtaind, I can sooner admit upon undeniable authoritie, then your Logike, you pretend not to the perpetuitie of His Majesties personal praesence which was but some times, & it should seem, not at that time of general consent. Nor is your Act for subscription so cleare in the assurance you give us that His Majesties Commissioner was there, you onelie take it for granted he was among the herd. Nor so explicite in his positive consent, you onelie collect it from a clowdie universal, & to serve your turne, honour him with a primacie in suffrage. Wherein you are a litle re∣dundant in courtesie, there having been a time when if His Maje∣stie, K. Ch. 1. Larg. De∣clar. 1633. pag. 411. or His Commissioner siting in Assemblie should denie his voyce
to any thing which appear'd unjust, & repugnant to his lawes, yet it that were concluded by most voyces, you would tell him he was bound jure divino to inforce obedience to your Act. The case, for ought I know, stood no otherwise here in this Assemblie. Where, to discountenance the testimonie you bring, you have been told long before now, That the superintendents of Angus, Lothian Fife, &c. George Hayes Commissioner from the North. Arbuthnoth of Aberdene, & others were Refutat. libel. De Regim. Eccl. Sot. dissenters from this Act about the discipline, whereby His Majesties, or His Commissioners consent becomes somewhat improbable, to the au∣thoritie whereof such men as they had in prudence submitted, if not in dutie by their silence. That States-men in Parliament oppos'd it is evident. That the King ever endeavourd to get it passe, is your single assertion. Neque usquam sictum, neque pictum, neque scriptum. If your Church did, it was for want of worke, for you told us even now, To this a particular ratisication of Parliament was unnecessarie. What the Bishops opinion is about the patrimonie of the Church, how farre, & by whom, & what part of it may be law fullie alienated, The Bishop no hypocrite in his cha∣lenge about the patri∣monie of the Church. when just occasion is given, I praesume His Lordship freelic, & fayth∣fullie will declare. In the meane time his chalenge against the Scotish Presbyterians is without hypocrise, & injustice, Himselfe & many other good Prelates having ever aesteem'd it a fault, to call the annexing some part of the Church revenues unto the crowne a detestable sacriledge before God. Nor can Mr. Baylie instance in any indefinite disputes, including all that hath been, or shall be given to the Church, that have ha∣pened since the first reformation between the Kings, of England & their Bishops. Who had they found their Princes rapacious seque∣stratours, would not have failed in their dutie modestlie to admo∣nish them of the danger, yet had it, may be, abstained from calling them. theeves & murderers, peculiar termes characteristical of the Discipline-To 1. Book Disc. 6. head which be longs not, by haeredi∣taire right to the Pres∣byters. which I thinke I shall doe no injustice, if I assert that the revenues of Bishops, Dcanes, & Arch-deacous, of Chapellries, Friaries of all orders, to∣gether with the sisters of the seenes, (abstracting from the favour of Prin∣ces) no more belong to the Scotish Presbyters, then they doe to the Mufties of the Turke. The intention of the doners having never been that such strange catell should feed in their pastures. Nor can M. Baylie shew me any law that makes him heir to Antichrist, or a just inheriter of his lands. Beside, methinkes the weake stomack'd brethren should take checke at the meate offered unto idols, & any silken sould Presbyter be too nice to array himselfe in the ragges of Rome, or be cloth'd at that cost that belong'd to the idolatrous Priesthood of Let. of K. Ph. & Q. Mar. Ann. 1559. Baal. But, it may be in the heate of Reformation, they went to
worke with the coyning irons, which they more then once got into their possession, & with them altered the impression of the beast. And the mattokes & shoucls. Which other armes being wanting, they very often tooke in their hands, were, possiblie, onelie to turne up the Church land, & whereever crop had been reap't by Antichrist, that abo∣minable glebe went downe to the center of the earth. What he talkes about the Praelatical jus divinum, & their taking pos∣sessions by commands from Court without a processe, requires his instance, & The Revie∣wer is the hypocrite. then he shall have his answer. In the interim he playes the hy∣poctite in a question: What if then, [the Disciplinarians] had gone to advance that right to all jusdivinum, when the Assemblie at Edenburgh did so April 24. 1576. Mainten. of the sans∣tatie. But he sayth, all the Scots can be challeng'd for, is a mere declaration of their judgement & simple right in a supplication to the Regents Grace. . pag. 10. The Disci∣plinarians declaration of their judgements in their im∣pudent & imperious supplicats. These Scots judgement was not allwayes in righteousnesse, and their simplicitie in supplicates had many times more of the Lion then the Lambe. Witnesse that to the Queen Regent 1559. where they declare their judgements freelie as true & faithfull subjects, they tell her, yet this is the style of that declaration …Except this crueltie be stayed by your wisdome, We shall be compelled to take the sword of just defense, &c.…If ye give eare to their pestilent counsel…neither ye, neither yet your posteri∣tie shall at any time after this finde that obedience & faythfull service within this Realme which at all times ye have found in us. In the assemblies supplica∣tions to the Lords of secret Councel, May 28. 1561. the second ar∣ticle annexed to, which was for the maintenance of the ministerie, this. Before ever these tyrants & dumbe dogs Empire above us…we…are fullie determin'd to hazard life, & whatsoever we have recived of God in tempo∣rall things…And let these enemies of God assure themselves, That if your Honours put not order unto them, That we shall shortlie take such order, That they shall neither be able to doe what they list, neither yet to live upon the sweat of the browe. December 25. 1566. They order requiring instead of Supplicating & Churh censures to the disobedient. Their sixt head of Church rents in the first booke of Discipline runnes very imperiouslie upon the must. The Gentlemen, Barons, &c. must be content to live upon their just rents, & suffer the Kirke to be restored to her libertie. And Jul. 21. 1567. They tell them they shall doe it, & shall passe nothing in Parliament untill it be done. That ever any assemblie in Scotland did make any other addresse to the Parliament for stipend, then by way of such humble supplication, I grant, is a great untruth. Nor were onelie the birds thus petition'd for, but time after time all tithes, rents, & whatsever could be comprized under the patrimonie of the
Church, were demanded as insolentlie as could be, which meetes me every where in their storie, as frequentlie as Mr. Baylies dissembling, & falsifying in his Review. In the last instance the Bishop denies not but there was a time when a kinde of Presbyteries was legallie approv'd & receiv'd, And this I They anti∣cipate the law in the exercise, of the Disci∣pline. presume he will admit to be after the Assemblie 1580. About which allreadie you have indeed alledged more untruth then you had authoritie to shew for it. I have given you as much as that you brought will beare. What His Lordship brings here is another discoverie. That you did erect them in your Assemblie Acts, & put them in execution, as farre as you durst before any Parliament had pass'd them. And Synodicallie established such, as no Parliament had passed. For this he cites your Acts of several Assemblies, which you must either disavow, Hieron. Philadelph. de Regim. Eccles. Scot. Epist. Iren. Philaleth. Narrat. mot. Scotic. or unriddle what the mistake is you impute. Vnlesse you thinke good to save that labour, & confesse aswel as other your Brethren, what is so manifest in your storie. The particulars of your proceedings herein, Arch-Bishop Bancroft long since collected in his booke of Dan∣gerous Positions: Where he shewes how you not onelie acted your sel∣ves at home, but sent your emissaries into England to see the like practice there in the very face of Episcopal Government. What other reasons, beside the recalling the Church patrimonie, caus'd the refusall of your second booke of Discipline, I told you before. Which with the rest may suffice to the vindication of what the Bishop premiseth in proofe of the conclusion he makes That the Dissiplinarians by their pra∣cties Their do∣ctrine as de∣structive as their pra∣ctice. have trampled upon the lawes, & justled the Civile Magistrate out of his Su∣premacie in Ecclesiastical affaires. His Lordship proceedes to his scrutinie of your doctrine, wherein if he yet be more happie, as you courteouslie tell us possiblie he will, I shall take you to have the spirit of Tirestas, & having justlie lost your eye-sight for rash judging, to be now better at prophesying then reviewing. Which immediatelie appeares, by your Ovid. Met. lib. 3. sub. 4 wandring at noonday, & being at a losse for that which every man may finde in the very place cited by the Bishop. None are subject to re∣paire to this [the National] Assemblie to vote, but Ecclesiastical persons, &c. 2. Book of Disc. ch. 7. 2. This His Lordship conceives to crosse the Kings supremacie, which being aswell Ecclesiasticall as civile, gives him a power of voting & presiding in Assemblies. Nor was there ever act of free Parliament in Scotland, old or late, nor any regular justifiable practice of that Church, but reserv'd this power to the King, & his deputed Commissioner, without being chosen member of any Presbyterie, or made a ruling elder in a National Assemblie, which your booke of Discipline calls The Bishops Super-Era∣stianisme the doctrine of the Refor∣med Churches the generall Eldership of the Kirke. Your hypercriticizing upon his thoughts (while the spirit of divination comes upon you) makes his Lordship
no Super-Erastian in his doctrines. Though what transscendent hae∣resie there is in a moderate answer to the malice in your question, any of your aequitable comparers may reade in what Vedelius, and Paraeus (no herctikes I hope) have published to that purpose, as the doctrine of all Ad Dissert. De Epise. Constant. M. reformed Churches; the one quoting Bellarmine the other Stapleton as proper patrons of the Sub-Erastian principles in the Discipline, & Vedelius, in his preface giving the world a caveat of the danger by the mischiefe it had brought upon England & Scotland in the yeare 1638. How opposite they were to the Disciplinarian language, & sense in that particular which the Bishop remonstrates, these single propositions can evidence. Multo magu est Christiani Magistratus non so∣lùm apprehensivè, & discretivè, sed & definitivè de religione judicare, Here a definitive vote is asserted to the Magistrate …ad Magistratum pertinet judicium de religione, seu rebus fidei, & causis Ecclesiasticis…tum for∣maliter, Ph. Par. Vindic. propos. 8. D. Par. N. Vedel. De Epise. Const M. q. 5. tum objectivè. Hereby a formal judgement in religion is attri∣buted. And this Doctor Rivet, who, I am told, is call'd, & reverenc'd in the French, & Dutch Churches as the Calvin of these times hath vouched under his hand to be the Catholike doctrine of the Reformed. If he had not, we are sure it was the primitive practice of the good Chri∣stian Emperours to assume it, to whom our conformitie is requisite. Of Constantine the great, who was personallie present in the Councel of Nice; & is sometimes called koinonos épiscopoumenon for his communite The pra∣ctice of the good primi∣tive Empe∣rours. of suffrage with the Bishops. Of the Emperour Theodosius, who in the Councel of Constantinople sifted the several Confessions of the Arians, Macedonians, Eunomians, & as Brentius relates it, cast himselfe upon his knees, craving the assistance of Gods spirit to direct him in the choyce of what was most consonant to the doctrine of the Apostles. Which epicrisis, or completive judgement, submitted unto by the Ancient Synods, had these authoritative termes to expresse it. Bebaioun, épipscphizesthai épisphragizesthai, cratinein, cratioun, epikyroun, tàpepragmena, To the exercise hereof the Discipline of your Reformed Brethren in these Countreyes not onelie admits, but craves the presence, & suffrage of Delegates from the supreme Magistrate; without which their Synodical Acts are not establish'd. Quin etiam summi Magistratus delegati sunt postulandi, ut in ipsorum praesentia eorumque suffragio Synodi Acta Har. Syn. Belgic. c. 10. concludantur. Nor did K. James any more in the Conference at Ham∣pton Court, then when in freedome. He would have done in any Scotish Presbyterian Assemblie, though he hated the name & thought of the thing, when somewhat was propounded that did not like him, put it of with Le Roy Pavisera. Rev. Yet the most of the prelatical partie will not maintaine him heerin. Ans. Bishop Andrewes will in his Tortura Torti & Bishop Field (whom your
friend Didoclave calls Hierambicorum eruditissimum) in his volume of the Church, beside many others. And possiblie those that seem to be Altar. Damasc. pag. 15. opposite may be reconcil'd, if you have the maners to let them state the question among themselves. The chiefe case wherein they [not you] instance of Leontius Bishop of Tripolis in his answer to Constan∣tius the Emperour may be attended with circumstances which may terminate the dispute, if not, we must not take it on their word, that, for that, as well as his other more regular demeanour he is own'd by Antiquitie to be kánon ecclesias, as Suidas records, The rule of the Church. However, it behoves you to cite your lawes to which the Bishops assertion is contrarie, And I shall cut you short of that pom∣pous traine which your vanitie holds up in the universal of all the Prin∣ces that have lived in Scotland, & confine you to two, (the rest being by their Religion unconcern'd in voting (though not in permitting) any Disciplinarian decrees) King Iames, & the holie martyr King Charles the first, Renounced by none of the Scotish King. who I hope you have not the impudence to say ever made profession so derogatorie to their right. In what followes you practise over the fisher-man in the fable, from whom you know, that unlesse you trouble the water it is in The Revie∣wers malice not any Prelatical principles doth impos∣sibilitate (as he speakes) the peace betwixt the Kiag & his Kingdomes. vaine for you to cast in your net, & if you catch nothing for the Dis∣cipline you must sterve. The whole paragraph is naught but a mali∣cious seditious inference of your owne, whereby you affixe an odious sense to the dutifull attributes of Royal prerogative, & your owne guilt causing a trembling in your joyuts at the thought of a scepter, you buselie creep under the protection of the club. The name of Parliament you make but a pandar to countenance the wanton license of your Assemblies, & the great seale you would have set to, nothing but an indenture of the Crownes perpetuall servitude to your Synods. The Prelates Cabin divinitie (which sea language you're in love with since your voyage into Holland) came often above decke with very innocent loyal intentions long before these times of confusion, which your Consistorian divinitie hath wrought, And though you take your selfe to appeare as ominous as Caster without his brother in the shrowds, it feares no shipwrake by any storme you can raise, nor lookes through your cleare prediction upon its ruine. You have not hitherto found such a fate in your words as to produce a consequential necessitie of the banishment of Marquisses & Bishops from Court, though divine justice may hereafter inspire our Soveraigne to returne this judgement upon your heads, who are ever breathing murder, & exile into his eares. For while such popular Sicophants, as you, are suffered to live in any Monarchs dominions, neither can the People be secure of their peace, nor Princes of their lives. K. Iames spake it plainlie,
when he sayd, A Scotsh Presbyterie as well agreeth with Monarchie, as God & the Devil. Such Reviewers who looke but halfe way home into the original of crownes, are cleare everters of the first foundation of Kingdomes, Conf. at Hampt. Court. which made Kings some what more then siduciaries of the people, whose solid peace consisted in an hurble active submission to their just commands, & a Christian quiet passive obedience if tyrannicallie imperious. This to be sure would keep the best part, if not the best partie, from ruine, till the high hand of heaven over ballance their temporall sufferings with an aeternitie of reward, where no malecon∣tentment can be to come. To the second challenged principle your answer is very slight, & impertinent. And would I undertake a farre more unpleasing im∣ployment then Phocion had in chiping Demosthenes, for which he was call'd kópis ton lógon, I should make a slender instrument of your review, there being beside the extravagancie of your railing language, your malicious enlargements in false commentaries, diverting your Reader from the genuine orthodoxe meaning of the text, drawing him into an intricable labyrinth of jealousies & feares, the chi∣maerical brats of your owne braine; which you would faine lay at other mens doores, scare sixe pages in your booke that are a direct answer to the Bishop, which I can not impute to your ignorance, but your cunning, who feeling your selfe held closse by the necke in the letter of your lawes & Assemblie Acts, would very fame winde your selfe out of the controversie, or run away with it into any Church, or Countrey but your owne. In this paragraph the Bishops citations prove what he intends (nor dare you, I see, denie what you are too conscious The Disci∣plinarian doctrine & practice a∣gainst the Kings power to convocate Synods. you maintaine) It having never been your practice, but when you could not doe otherwise, to wait the Kings, or Queens call for your Sy∣nods. In the yeare 1561. Knox writes expresselie, That gladlie would the Queen & her secret Counsel have had all the Assemblies of the Godlie, (that is the Rebellious Disciplinarian) discharged. They notwithstanding make a convention, the businesse comes to dispute, Mr. Secretarie Leshington makes a doubt whether the Queen allowed it or no, to whom was this answer returned. If the libertie of the Church should stand upon the Queens allowance, they were assured not onelie to lacke Assemblies, but also to lacke the publike preaching of the Euangel. In the beginning of your late commotions the Historian that so officioussie styles himselfe the Parliaments Secretarie mentions a writing publish'd by you, wherein Pag. 41. you affirme. That the power of calling a Synod, in case the Prince be an ene∣mie to the truth, or negligent in promoting the Churchs good, is in the Church it selfe. And that the state of the Church of Scotland at that time was necessitated to such a course. Nor doth your Disciplinarian doctrine make the Chri∣stian
Magistrate any more then your Baylisse to take up your rents, or the Captaine of your guard to defend you (Vedelius renders it in more harsh language… faciunt ex iis [Magistratibus] mancipia, imò lictores DeEpiscop. Constanstin M. & curnisices Episcoporum seu Ministrorum Ecclesiae) To advance the Kingdome of Iesus Christ. …To defend it against all that would procure its hurt… To ssist & fortisie the Godlie proceedings of the Kirke in all behalfes… To see 2. B. of Disc. ch. 10 that the Kirke be not invaded… To hold hand as well to the saving of the Mi∣nisters persons from injurie & openviolence, as to their rents & possessions. Fi∣nallie, not a word is there in all that chapter or booke that asscribes to him a syllable of this power, So that the King may call a Synod when, & whersoever he thinke sit, & if the toy take you in the head to anticipate, or procrastinate his time, you will assemble when, & wheresoever you please for you tell him he ought to heare, & obey your voyce. And your friend Didoclave averres this to be a businesse that hath no absolute dependance upon him, Non absolute, & simplici∣ter pendere a Christiano Magistrat. If when you have a minde to meet Cap. De primat. Reg. he prohibites, that must make no demurre, non cunctandum est, non cessandum ab officio … For this you pretend an intrinsecal power touching which I demand what it is, when, where, & how farre to be exerciz'd. What old or late dutifull Christians did use it when any Christian King did forbid it. Who of the Praelatical partie they be that maintaine it in their writings or practice, for I know none that in either extend it to a like latitude with you. And how many soever you have of the Papists, all the Popes are not of your side. Leo confessing that Epist. 43. he had not power to call a Counsel but the Emperour, nor durst Li∣berius call one against Constantius pleasure. The necessitie you frame of meeting for the execution of the Discipline even in times of persecu∣tion may have reference to an heathen Magistrate or Christian. If to the former, you doe it either in confidence of your power to resist him, in that rebellion, wherein how are you justified? Or else you runne desperatelie upon your ruine, which is selfe murder no martyrdome, for Quis requisivit? by what praecept, or counsel is it required at your hands? If to the later, there may be at least a sallibilitie in your judge∣ments, if not an obstinate perversenesse in your will. Et quis vos judices constituit? who made you, that are parties, Arbitratours? If at any time the ancient Christians assembled, it was where no Imperial edict restrain'd them. And then the learned Grotius tells you, Non opus fuisse venia, ubinulla obsturent Imperatorum edicta. What private conferences De Imper, sum Pot. cap. 8. they had in the times of heathenish persecution, you know by their apologies were voy'd of suspicion, which yours never were, but anomia ergapiria the very shops or Laboratories of rebellion. The Church is not dissolv'd where dissipline's not executed: if it were, it should Constantin. De Ario.
be, where it is, at the pleasure of the Magistrate, suspended. To imagine a final ineapacitie of meeting, by perpetual succession of Tyrants hath litle either of reason or conscience, it assaults the certitude of fayth in Gods promises, & advanceth infidelitie in his providence. But to give you at length your passe from this paragraph. Such as you, in a schismatical Assemblie, may, & have frequentlie in Scotland pinn'd the character of erroneous upon an upright Magistrate, & a Dis∣ciplinarian rebell to save his credit call'd a Royal moderate proclama∣tion a tyrdnous edist. The Bishops third allegation you finde too heavie, & therefore let fall halfe of it by the way. You have too good a conceit of your The ultima∣te determi∣nation of Ecclesiastike causes by the lawes of Scotland is not in the general As∣semblie. Parliaments bountie, though had they been as prodigal as you make them, it litle becomes you to proclaime them bankrupts by their fa∣vour: Their Acts were allwayes ratified by your Princes any which, & whom tell me one wherein this right Royal was renounc'd of suspen∣ding seditious Ministers from their office, or if cause were, depriving them of their places. It were a senselesse thing to suppose that the Bishop would denie to the Church a proprietie to consult & determine a∣bout religion, doctrine, haeresie, &c. Yet its likelie His Lordship allowes it not in that mode which makes her power so absolute as to define, consummate, authorize the whole businesse by her selfe. He hath heard the King to be somewhere accounted a mixt person, & thinkes it may be that the holie oyle of his unction is not onelie to swime on the top, & be sleeted off at the pleasure of a peevish Disciplinarian Assem∣blie, but to incorporate with their power. The lawes of England have not been hitherto so indulgent of libertie to our Convocation, but that the No more then in the Convocati∣ons of En∣gland. King in the cases alledged did ever praedominate by his supremacie. And the Parliament hath stood so much upon priviledge, that if Religion fetch'd not her billet from West-minster, the could have but a cold lodging at St. Pauls The booke of Statutes is no portable manual for us whom your good brethren have sent to wander in the world, yet I can helpe you to one An. 1. Eliz. that restor'd the title of supreme to the Queen, & withall provided, that none should have authoritie newlie to judge any thing to be haeresie, not formerlie so judged, but the High Court of Parliament, with the assent of the Clergie in their Convocation. Where the Convocations assent, by the sound, should not be so determinative as the Parliaments judgement, which (right or wrong) here it assumes. As touching appeales (because you will have somewhat here sayd, Appeales to the King in Scotland. though it must be otherwhere handled) No law of Scotland denies an appeale in things Civile or Ecclesiastike to the King. One yet in force enjoines subjection unto them, the Act of Parliament in May 1584. which was, That any persons, either spiritual or Temporal, praesuming
to decline the judgement of His Majestie, & His Councel, shall incurre the paine of treason. What you, call a complaint is in our case an appeale, what taking order, is executing a definitive judgement, without traversing backe the businesse to Ecclesiastike Courts, or holding over the rod of a coercive power to awe them into due regular proceedings. I confesse this the Presbyters in Scotland never made good by their practice. Their appeales were still retrograde from the supreme Magistrate, & his Councel to a faction of Nobles, or a seditious par∣tie of the people. Such is that of Knox, printed at large. Or which in effect is the same. The Scotish Assemblies, when they had no power, appeald to providence, when they had whereupon they might relie, unto the sword. In case of Religion, or doctrine, if the General Assemblie, which Court of Delegates against nei∣ther word of God, nor aequitie. is not infallible, erre in judgement, & determîne any thing contra∣rie to the word of God, & the sense of Catholike Antiquitie, the King may by a court, of Orthodoxe Delegates, consisting of no more then two or three (Prelates if he please) receive better information of truth, & establish that in his Church. Or, which often hapens in Scotland, If the Presbyters frame Assemblie Acts derogatorie to the rights of his Crowne, & prejudicial to the peace of his people, the King may personallie justifie his owne praerogative and keep the mi∣schiefe they invented from becoming a praecedent in law. This doth not the word of God, nor any aequitie prohibite. The judgement of causes concerning deprivations of Ministers in the yeare 1584 you would have had come, by way of appellation, to the General Assemblie, & there take final end; but this you could not make good within yourselves, nor doe I finde, upon your proponing & craving, it was then, or at any time, granted you by the King. Two yeares before, you adventurd not onelie for your priviledge in that … but against the Magistrates puting preachers to silence…hindering, staying, or disannulling the censures of the Church in examining any offender. Rev. In the Scotes Assemblies no causes are agitated but such as the Parliament All causes agitated in Scotish As∣semblies. hath agreed to be Ecclesiastike, &c. Ans: If any Parliament have agreed all causes of what nature soever, to be Ecclesiastike by reduction, & so of the Church cognizance, you have that colour for your pragmatical As∣semblies: but if you admit of any exception, you have for certaine transgressed yourlimits, there being no crime, nor praetended irre∣gularitie whatsoever, that stood in view, or came to the knowledge of the world, that hath escaped your discussion, & censure, & not been serv'd up in your supplicates to be punished. Rev. … No processe about any Church rent was ever cognosced upon in Scot∣land Processe a∣bout Church rent. but in a Civile Court, Ans. Your imperious, though supplicatorie,
prohibition 1576. I allreadie mention'd. In the Assemblie at Eden∣burgh, April 24. 1576. You concluded…That you might proceed a∣gainst unjust possessours of the patrimonie of the Church…by doctrine, & ad∣monition, & last of all, if no remedie be, with the censures of the Church. In that at Montrosse June 24. 1595. About setting Benefices with diminution of the rental, &c. you appointed Commissioners with power to take oaths, call an-inquest of men of best knowledge in the Countrey about, to proceed against the Ministrie with sentence of deposition. Master Tho. Craig & the Solicitour for the Church, to pursue the Pensiionars in Caitnes for redu∣ction of their pensions. If in no particular you actuallie proceeded to Church censures, It was because you foresaw they would not restraine the corruption no more of the laitie, then the Clergie, & then your me∣nasing petitions sometime obtein'd strength from some partial, or pusillanimous Parliament; or when you praevail'd not, you wrapt this up with the rest of your discipline, & put all to the processe of a warre. And this was, you know, the mysterious sense of Knox's Letter to the Gen. As∣sembli at Sterling Aug. 3. 1571. method, upon good experience, praescrib'd on his death bed: First protest, then denounce vengeance, & then to the execution thereof seeke re∣dresse of God & man. Of God by fasting as you did order for this very cause (wasting of the Church rents without remedie) in the Assemblie at St. Andrewes 1582. Of man, by rebelling, which you practis'd not long afterward. With which godlie advice that saint shut his teeth, & de∣parted if not (after a minutes repentance as I hope) in litle better peace, then he had liv'd. To what followes in the Bishops charge, the legislative power they Reviewer declines answering about the legislative power. praetend to, To make rules, & constitutions for keeping good order in the Kirkc. To abrogate, & abolish all statutes & ordinances concearning Ecclesiastical matters that are found noysome, & unprofitable, & agree not with the time, or are abused by the people. And all this without any reclamation, or appellation to any judge Civile, or Ecclestastical, we have not one word in answer from Mr. Bay∣lie. Andindeed being taken up so much with his seemings, & fallacious apparences, he may sometimes overlooke the realities of what alle∣gations he dislikes; for this indeed he had very good reason, know∣ing the natural, & inseparable connexion to be such between it & the power of jurisdiction, that to whomsoever belongs the supremacie of the one, upon him necessarilie descends the praerogative of the other. For the fourth objection. If the Reviewer had minded the ill con∣sequences Danger in asserting the divine right of Ec∣clesiastike jurisdiction upon the antecedent of Ecclesiastike jurisdiction by divine right, he would not have held that conclusion at large without professing an infallible assurance that it is haereditarie to the Presbyterie. Some danger there may be of drawing after it an adaequate right in that
ominous Episcopal order, which with no great difficultie may be prov'd from time, to time to have executed this jurisdiction he mea∣nes. How soever this inconvenience he gaines by it, That, if it be such, it is indispensable, & turnes all the confessed indulgence of the Scotish Assemblies into sinne for Nulli homini licet cuiquam juris aivini gratiam facere. What divines there have been in the world of another Hug. Groti. De Imper. Sum. Pot. minde (which are all except Donatus the haeretikes disciples among the rigid Papists, Anabaptists Scotish & Scotizing Presbyterians, who de∣mand as boldly as their Master) (Quidest Imperatori cum Ecclesia?) he may reade (though I looke not that he, nor all his brethren should Scotish Do∣natist. muster up abilities to answer) in the nineth chapter of the fore-cited famous Grotius's booke. Vnder the safe conduct of whom the Bishop may travaile with the truth of these contradictions about him through all the Assemblies highway men of the Scots. That all Ecclesiastike power flowes from the Magistrate…penes Ecclesiasticos judices per Archiepiscopos & Episcopos derivata a Regia potestate Jurisdictio Ecclesiastica consistit. That Polit. An∣glic. Ad Reg. Iac. the Magistrate may praescribe a rule how Ecclesiastike censures should be regulated, & in case of resistance, see them executed by his power. Constitutum fuit eis ergon d krinomena para ton episcopon agein tous archontas kai tous diaconoumenous au∣tois stratiotas. That all the ofsicers praetended to be appointed by Christ for Sozomen. the Government of his Church, if they governe it not according to his, & Aposto∣like example, may be lay'd aside, & such a kind of Governers be put in their place as the Magistrate shall be pleased to appoint, as more just, & upright stewards in that trust. Non frustra gladium gerit potestas, sed vindex est in omnes male agen∣tes, ergo etiam in eos qui circa sacra delinquunt…Iurisdictionis enim est relegare Eliens.  loco sive in locum…That it is not yet universallie, & unquaestionablie defin'd that the spiritual sword, & Keyes are in any other then the hand of Christ. Nor that ever his Apostles, & Priests layd claime to an absolutelie intrinseal right to execute the power of either Vtinam exscindantur qui vos perturbant. Videtur non imperantis sed optantis Apostoli, That for the sword. Sacerdos quidem officium exhibet sed nullius potcstatis jura exercet. That he cites out of St. Ambrose for the Keyes, him I cite, but doe not, being not oblig'd, assert any thing. Your difference herein (I meane the power of the Magistrate) from the Warner is Donatisme an haecesie so great as deserv'd, it seemes, to be anathematized by the Catholike Church your pra∣ctice schisme, whereby you rend your selves from the Congregations of all the Reformed, as Vedelius hath shew'd you, And whether it be not rebellion by your lawes, I leave to the verdict of your 15. Godfa∣thers, De Episco∣pat. Con∣stant. M. who gave it in to be such against your differing brethren at A∣berdene. Had Mr. Baylie in his answer, to what he calls the last challenged principle, tooke upon him to alter that axiom in Ethikes, & make it, Disciplina∣riam call re∣sistance a∣gainst the person obe∣dience to the office of the Magistrate
Nolenti non fit injuria, the dispute had been onelie whether his autho∣ritie, or Aristotles; should have caried it, But when he deletes the commentarie upon it, he conjures the sense into a circle of his owne by such language as none but himselfe, & his spirits understand, In∣deed for a madman to have his hands bound, who, were they at libertie, would doe himselfe mischief, For a sicke man to have physike forc'd into his stomake, which may worke his recoverie, otherwise desperate, if his aversion be countenanc'd, may be cour∣teous violence improv'd to their good; But to contervene a Ma∣gistrates commands praetending punctual obedience thereby, if not an advancement of his power: To wrest the sword out of his hands, & disarme him for the securitie of his person; is a piece of invisible justice, & a favour left by all law and reason to be whollie at the dis∣posal of the Discipline. But in Scotland, you say, there is no such case, &c. Which must relate to mater of fact, or right: If to the former, I must crave libertie to averre, That scarce any one of your Synods pro∣ceedings was ever freelie justified by the consent of the Magistrate for the time. That most were not, I have, & shall sufficientlie prove here, & otherwhere. If to the latter, your selfe confesse that your booke of Discipline (which includes the jurisdiction you have) could not passe the Parliament 1590. Nor can you make appeare where ever after it did with an exception onelie against the chapter D Diaconatu. In what followes, you pretend too much acquaintance with the The Revie∣wer too bold with his Majestie. King, to know what His Majestie controverts in his thoughts, with whom, I have hear, your late treatie was not so particular & closse as to make what discoverie you wished, & aim'd at, And what you did is not so authoriz'd as to strengthen your proofe, His Royal, & too gracious concessions having met with such unworthie, impru∣dent, refusal by persons, through habitual rebellion, not yet dispo∣sed to their good. As touching the case which the Bishop intimates, I can not wonder the account of it so odious as not to be met with by your answer, since it sets in your sight the horrour of your many yeares sinne, with the guilt of which you would gladlie runne into dens, & caves, or move the hills, & mountaines to cover you. In the meane time in vaine you hope to have any the annt Christians companie, The Disci∣plinarians no compartie for the Pri∣mitive Chri∣stian. Who in times of their persecution never held publike Assemblies in their Edenburghs Imperial Cities, never arm'd themselves to main∣taine the divine ordinance of the Discipline, Though, had they done it, litle would their praecedent availe you, the just imposition of a Christian King being very unlike the heathen Emperous persecution. Nor was the Presbyterie, that divine ordinance of Discipline, practiz'd by the perse∣cuted in the wildernesse.
Mr. Baylie in this time, by his affected diversions, & devious mazes, having run himselfe halfe out of breath, begins to thinke on The Revie∣wers cun∣ning in pas∣sing over what he dares not, can not ans∣wer. the shortest way home, to finde which he takes a large leape over the hedge (& by vertue of some Disciplinarian priviledge passeth, two whole pages of consequence unanswer'd. Perit libertas nistlla con∣temnis, quae jugem imponunt) yet not so cleare, but that one bramble hath catch'd him by the sleeve, &, if the truth were known, I beleeve, many more have prick'd him to the heart, for one of most danger I ad∣vise him to seeke out a timelie remedie, & stand to the charitie of his aequitable comparers for the rest. 'tis that sharpe quaestion which the Bi∣shope propounds. Who shall judge when the Church is corrupted? the Ma∣gistrates or Church-men? If the Magistrates, why not over you aswell as others? If the Church-men. why not others aswell as you? Mr. Gilespies Theorem. because pressing such downright rebellion he, without any brotherlie love, leaves on the shoulders of a single Pres∣byter, His un∣kindnesse to his brother Gilespie whose theo∣remes are the doctrine of the whole Presbyterie & will not afford one fingar of the Presbyterie to ease him, though the tantamout be not so unconsequential as to need a stake to helpe it downe in a swallow, It being very well know'n that if Mr. Baylie should not tantamont in this businesse, the Assemblie brethren would give him a drench in the Scotish horne, & send him to grasse with the long-eard creatures, as being no fit companie for the late more rational rebells in a Synod. The consequence, if it must need be such, from one particular, denied by none, to a universal affirmative, as strange as it lookes, may be made good by the new Disciplinarian logike, Mr. Baylie himselve having more then once profess'd an identitie in the Scotish with the Reformed disciplines abroad, in the harmonie of which I finde such a canon as this. Si Minister donum habet aliquid ad aedificationem conscribendi, illud typis non Harm. Syn. Belg. cap. 1 mandabit, quin prius a classe examinetur, & probetur. From the Classe he knowes it takes a remove to the provincial Synod, & thence to the national Assemblie. Now if the Reviewer will not tell us in what As∣semblie, Mr. Gilespie was censur'd, or this theoreme of his disavow'd, because it will be such a singular case as never was heard of, Re∣bellion disclaim'd in a Scotish Presbyterian Assemblie, otherwise then in a Catholike mist which never drops in any particulars, he shall have the reputation of catching this unconsequence for once. But as the Bishops sayth, Take nothing, & hold it fast if he can. Beside he kno∣wes there are many other such theoremes of Mr. Gilespies upon which the Bishop hath built many high accusations, which the Discipline must acknowlege, & must be meant to be of that number which had the approbatorie suffrages of the Vniversities in Holland viz. Leyden, & V∣trecht, or else he spake litle truth, and as litle to the purpose in his
Epistle. Yet to helpe him to somewhat of better authoritie. He is desir'd to take notice, That the substance of this theoreme was not declin'd in a protestation made (he knowes by whom) in Edenburgh Parliament 1558. In the dutifull letter to the Queen Regent from the faythfull Congregation of Christ Iesus in Scotland 22. May 1549. In another from the Lords of the Congregation, 2. Jul. 1559: In an answer to the Queenes proclamation by the Lords, Barons, & other brethren of the Congregation 1559. In a declaration of the Lords against another pro∣clamation of the Queenes 1559. To all thesé 'tis undeniable that the Assemblies adhaer'd, or indeed rather the Lords &c, to them. In the Church Assemblie's supplication 28. May 1561. In the vote of the whole Assemblie 1563. In the Superintendents, Ministers & Com∣missioners letter to the Bishops, and Pastours in England they write, If authoritie urge you farther ye ought to oppose your selves boldlie, not onclie to all power that dare extol it selfe against God. but also against all such as dare burthen the consciences of the faythfull (they mean'd the same opposi∣tion themselves made in Scotland) In the seventh article fram'd by the Assemblie 1567. Beside what was very particularlie pres∣sed by Knox in Sermons, Conferences, letters, &c all acknowledge the sense of several Assemblies. But all these authorities are absolet, the several ends of such speaches, & actions being long since accom∣plish'd in Scotland. However, M. Baylie denies that the maxime in hand was the fountaine of any our late miseries, or the cause at all of the losse of our Soveraigne. Fati ista culpa est, nemo fit fato nocens. If he had but in kindnesse delivered his meaning at large, & quitted aswell his independent brethren of their bloudie performance Gilespie's theoreme the rule of the late Disci∣plinarian practice. in the fift act, as he doth the Presbyterian properties that caried on the rebellion in the foure first of the Tragoedie they might have masked merrilie together in their antike disguises of innocencie, & pointed out to some sillie credulous spectators the guilt of this horrid murder in the starres. But I shall reach him a ladder, where by he may ascend to the top of this truth, (not aninch higher then Edenburgh Crosse) & what else he wants when he comes there, to doe justice accordinglie as he shall be enlightned upon his owne selfe for his share in this maxime, & unpardonable mi∣schiefe, The first step hereof begins neare the ground with the meane, & baser sort of the people, who on the 23. Jul. 1637. when by his Blessed Majesties command, the service booke was to be read in Edenburgh Great Church, fell into the extraordinarie wayes of clapping hands, cursing, & outcries, throwing stones at the
windowes, & aiming at the Bishop with a stool, Continuing this hubbub in the streets, besetting the counsel house, whether the reverend learned, & worthie Bishop of Galloway was forced to flie for his refuge. Their outcries being commonlie such as this. God defend all those who will defend Gods cause, & God confound the service booke, & all the maintainers of it, of whom the King must needs be mean'd to be one, who had expressclie authoriz'd it. Vpon this follow two extraordinarie petitions, one in the names of the Noblemen, Gentrie, Ministers, Burgesses against the service booke, & booke of Canons, which being not answerd to their mind at Sterlin, & otherwhere, themselves in protesting did the same thing which they had call'd the uproare of raskals at Edenburgh. From protesting they mount up to co∣venanting, & by that engage multitudes of people to attend them at pleasure in affronting His Majesties Commissioner. With whom when they came to capitulate they gave this extraordinarie answer, That they would rather renounce their baptisme then Covenant (good Christians) or abate one word or syllable of the literal rigour of it. If Mr. Baylie hath any minde to goe farther, I shall desire him to step up beyond the preachers per∣swading the people to arme themselves & to meet in the streets (duti∣fullie) to enteraine His Majesties proclamation. Their protesta∣tions against that & the rest, with such loyal expressions as this. That if the King will not call a general Assemblic, which shall allow of their proceedings, they themselves will. Their branding the subscription of their owne confession of fayth with the most hideous, & horrible name of the very depth, & policie of Satan. Their pulpit imprecations, God scatter them in Israel, & divide them in Iacob, who where the authours of this scat∣tering, & divisive counsel, of whom (as range as it seeme) the King againe must be principal. Their grand imposture in Michelson a mayd, a∣bout whom their Ministers cosin'd the people into an implicite fayth that she was inspired by God, & while the vented their devillish re∣bellion in her fits Rollokes blasphemous praetense for his silence, That he durst not speake while his Master was speaking in her. Another having these words in his Sermon. Let us never give over till we have the King in our power. Another, That the sharpest warre was rather to be endur'd then the least errour in doctrine or discispline. Their maintaining this position among the rest. That Nec enim dissimula∣bant foede∣rati, nimis diu apud Scotos reg∣natum esse Monarchis, nec recte cum illis a∣gi posse Stu∣arto vel uno super∣stite Hist. M. Mon∣tisros. it is lawfull for subjects to make a Covenant & combination without the King, & to enter into a band of mutual defense against the King & all persons whatsoever. Their laying open the true meaning of their pro∣testing, Covenanting, Arming, &c. That Scotland had been too long a Monarchie & that they could never doe well so long as one of the Stuarts was alive. Their raising an armie for their extirpation, & meeting K. Ch. 1. to that purpose in the field. Their renewing & continuing, the warre when
their first designe had been obstructed by His Majesties unexpected, unwelcome grant of their demands. Their reasonable dealing with the King when he unhappilie made their Armie his refuge, by chea∣ting his pious facilitie of his strength, & delivering up his naked per∣son to their fellow Rebells, upon conditions litle coulorable in words, not at all justifiable in substance, & sense, Their laying chaines upon His Majestie, when a prisoner, & linking his crowne with iron propositions. Beside what was acted at Derbie house & otherwhere in the darke, & not improbablie agreed on at Cnthia's midnight Re∣vells, when Cromwell was in Scotland. And all this under the fallacie of exstraordinarie resisting, reforming. And now let Mr. Baylie looke not up to the starres, but downe into the depth of hell, where that maxime was hammer'd before ever Gi∣lespie fild it over, & see whether it were not the fountaine of all our mise∣ries, & the cause of the losse of our late Soveraigne. The quaestion that followes about defensive armes (though there No defen∣sive armes for subjects. hath been no such thing as a free Parliament, & without freedome 'tis none) I returne on himselve, & demand Did ever his Majestie, or any of his advised Counsellers, I adde, Did ever loyal Parliament in England, or Scotland, declare, or intimate in what cases, how extraordinarie so ever, they thought it lawfull? I retort this. The unhappinesse of the Disci∣plinarian Presbyters did put the seditious part of the Parliament on these courses, which did begin, & promote all our miserie And were so wic∣ked as to the very last to endeavour to breake the bands asunder of reason, justice, honour & a well informed conscience, wherein His Majestie professed to the world the hand of God, & the lawes of the land had bound him. The peaceable possession of His Majesties Kingdomes Episcopacie no obstru∣ction to His Majestics peace. depends not upon his Clergies conditionate consent to have Epis∣copacie layd aside. A handfull of Scots, with an hypocritical Assem∣blies beediction in their knapsackes, could they hold their wind when they got over Tweed, & swell up to the picture of Boreas in the face, would not be mistaken for probable Vmpires or over-ruling Elders, in the quarell. Nor can Mr. Baylie possesse any prudent men of the loyallay partie, that, that order obstructs the King from his happinesse. Why it may not be layd aside the unanswerable reasons in the 9. & 17. chapters of Eik. Basil. His Royal fathers booke will a∣bundantlie satisfie any man, that will rest in what he can not denie. Where he will finde enough of such devout Rhetorike, & Religious logike as this I must now in charitie be thought desirous to praeserve that Govern∣ment in its right constitution, as a mater of Religion, wherein both my judge∣ment is sullie satisfied, that it hath of all other the fullest Scriptures grounds, & also the constant practice of all Christan Churches, till of late yeares the tumultu∣arinesse
of people, or the factiosiresse, & pride of Presbyters [Reviewe that Mr. Baylie] or the covetousnesse of some States, & Princes gave occasion to some men wits to invent new modells, & propose them under specious titles of Christs Go∣vernment, Scepter, & Kingdome (which are the Scotish titles as I take it) the better to serve their turnes, to whom the change was beneficial. The reasons that convinc'd the Royal Father have so confirm'd the Royal Sonne His Majestie now being, that Mr. Baylie dares not say (what he so prae∣sumptuouslie intimates) that he ever asked the consent of his Canterbu∣rian Praelates to the alteration of that government. If, without asking they spontaneouslie spake their conscience in due, season, there was litle boldnesse in it, & as litle in printing, which hath been often as much, & more at large, in volumes about the unlawfullnesse of See the le∣rned & judicious Digges u∣pon this subjects. subjects taking up of armes, where Parliaments have unanswerablie been proved to be such, though the name of tyrannie is very unhand∣somelie, unjustie, maliciouslie used in this case, & let him speake out if he meanes to attribute it to the King. CHAPTER III. The last appeale to the supreme Magistrate justifiable in Scotland. THe Bishop consider'd that the Kings supremacie is the same in Appeale in Scotland from a Ge∣neral As∣semblie nei∣ther irratio∣nal, nor ille∣gal. Scotland, as in England, & upon that grounds the aequitie of ultimate appeale. The altissimò either of the Parliament, or Assemblie puts them not above the capacitie of Courts, & so makes them not coordinate with the King. What allayes you have for government I know not, & therefore can not close with you in the terme, till you give me an undisputable definition of the thing, which you call a moderate Monarchie, & tell me in what part of the world I may finde it, I know of none any where yet that inhibites appeales to the Kings person, If the Empire may be the standerd to the rest, the learned Grotius, that had better skill in the lawes, then you, or I, sayth. That in causes of Delegacie semper appellasio conscssa fuit ad Imperatorem, si ex Im∣periali jussione judicatum esset, aut ad Iudicum quemcunque, si ex judiciali prae∣cepto, which holds good against your general Assemblie, if that jud∣geth earegali jussione, & that it doth so is cleare from your Assemblie Act, April 24. 1578. wherein it petitioneth the King to set, & esta∣blish
your policie, a part whereof is your Assemblie judication. That it is, for the most part, order'd to the King in his Courts, is not any way to con∣fine his power, but to free him from frequent impertinencies, & un∣seasonable importnnities of trouble, or, it may be, a voluntarie, but no obligatorie, Royal condescension, to avoyd your querulous im∣putation of arbitrarie partialitie, & tyrannie in judicature. There∣fore you injure the Bishop by converting his assertion into a nega∣tive confession, As if when he sayth it is to the King in Chancerie, he must needs acknowledge. It can be neither to the King out of Chancerie, nor to him there but with collaterall aequipotential ssistants. Where∣as your friend Didoclave complaines that our appeales are ever pro∣gressus Altar. Da∣mascen. b unico ad unicum, wherein, whether he mean'd an aggregate, or personal unitie, I leave you to interpret. That an appeale is not per∣mitted from your Lords of session, or Parliament in Scotland, is because whatsoever is regularlie determin'd there receives its ratification from the King. But if one, or other in their session without him, should determine a case evidentlie, undeniablie, destructive to the rights of his crowne, or liberties of his people, whether His Maje∣stie may not admit an appeale, & assume his coercive power to restraine their license, I thinke no loyal subject in Scotland will controvert, As touching your Assemblies, King Iames tells you, It is to be general∣lie observed that no priviledge, that any King gives to one particular bodie, or state within the Kingdome of convening, & consulting among themselves (which in∣cludes whatsoever they doe when they are convened, & consulting) is to be understood to be privative given unto them, & so the King thereby depri∣ving himselfe of his owne power, & praerogative, but onelie to be given cumu∣lative unto them (as the lawyers call it) without any way denuding the King of his owne power, & authoritie. This His Majestie alledged against the Ministers at Aberdene, whom he accuseth not onelie of convening, but acting after they were convened, He particularlie mentions their setting downe the dies of the next Assemblie, & His Councel addes their end∣vour to reverse, & overthrow all those good orders, & godlie constitutions former∣lie concluded for keeping of good order in their Church. If you alledge that His Majesties Commissioner was not there, then you grant me their acts are not justifiable without him, And that all are not necessa∣rilie with him, I argue from the language of the Commission, where∣by they meet, which limits them thus secundum legem, & praim, against which if any thing be acted, upon appeale the Kings praerogative may rectifie it at pleasure, if not, any judge may praetend to be absolute, & then the King must be absolutelie nothing, having committed, or delegated all power from himselfe. What civile law of Scotland it is, that prohibites appeales from the General Assemblie, you should doe
well to mention in your next, I know none, nor did King Iames thinke of any when he cited his distinction from the Scottish Law∣yers, aswell as any other. Where an Assemblie proceeds contrarie to the lawes of God, & man, Which is not impossible, while it may consist of a multitude, men neither the best, nor most able of the Kingdome, the Bishop thinkes an appeale to a legal Court of delegates constituted, by a superiour po∣wer, might be neither unseeming, nor unreasonable. The law of old ne∣ver intended they should be the weakest of all Court; Where it hath so happened, by your owne rule, pag. 22. The Delegates, not Dele∣gacie, are to be charged. Such heretofore in England as imployed mercenarie officials, for the most part, were mercenarie Bishops, & if they had been cut to the core, would have been found, I doubt, Disci∣plinarian in heart, though Episcopal in title. The Scots way of mana∣ging Ecclesiastical causes is not more just, because more derogatorie to the right of the King, And the late Martyr'd King found it not more safe, & therefore told Mr. Henderson plainlie the papacie in a multi∣tude 3. Paper An. 1574 might be as dangerous as in one, & how that might be Gualter writ to Count Vnit-glupten in a letter. Emergent hinc novae tyrannidis cornua, paula∣tim cristas attollent ambitiosi Ecclesiarum pastores, quibus facile fuerit suos assessores in suas partes attrahere, cùm ipsii inter hos primatum teneant. He might have found the experiment of it in Scotland. Nor can it be more satisfa∣ctorie to those rational men, with whom the Bishops arguments are prevalent, beside what else may be effectuallie alledged against it. Allthough the two instances, the Bishop brings, for stopping appea∣les were accompanied with so many treasonable circumstances, as might have enlarged his chapter into a volume, & deleted the credit of a Scotish Disciplinarian Assemblie out of the opinion of all the Cristians in the world; Yet His Lordship thought good to furnish his reader with better authoritie from the second Booke of Discip. ch 12. which shall here meet you againe to crave your acquain∣tance. From the Kirke there is no reclamation, or appellation to any Iudge Civile, or Ecclesiasticall within the Realme. The reputation of the two Reverend Arch-Bishops Montgome∣rie, The Rebel∣lious, & in∣solent disci∣plinarian proceedings against the too Rt. Re∣verend Arch-Bi∣shops Mont∣gomerie, & Adamson. & Adamson depends not upon the sentence of a turbulent, & en∣vious Synod, much lesse any single malicious Presbyter in a pam∣phlet, with whom we know 'tis crime hainous enough to be a Bishop, & shall not want his vote to make them excommunicate. Their ma∣nifold high misdemeanours are mention'd in the censure of the Presbyterie of Striveling, for admitting Montgomerie to the tempora∣litie of the Bishoprike of Glasgow, & his owne for aspiring thereto. Assemblie 1587. And of the other for taking the Kings commission
to sit in Parliament 1584. In the last Act of which his commission is printed to register his guilt. The principal of their evil patrons among the wicked States-men (I meane next under the King, to whom you yeild that praerogative at least) is sayd to be the Earle of Arran, Answ. to the Proses∣sion & De∣clar. made by Marq. Hamilt. 1638. who deserves that character for being second, at that time, in His Majesties favour, & he is sayd by your brethren to have taken them into the Parliament. So that, lay their commission, & Earle Arrans courtesie together (which without the other had implied the plea∣sure of the King,) they tooke not, without authoritie, upon themsel∣ves as you sayd) the Episcopal office, nor place in that Parliament. Whether the pride, & contempt of the Prelates, or Presbyters were greater may be judg'd in the case of Arch-Bishop Montgomerie, by the Assem∣blies Vindic. E∣pist. Hier. Philad. slighting not onelie His Majesties letters, but Messengers such as were two Heralds at Armes, His Master of Requests, who in the Kings name inhibiting their proceedings they send him word by Macgil Supplicum libellorum Magister. Se posse sal∣vo Regis imperio de causa tota cognoscere. they can salve their obedience, & yet goe through with the businesse, Setting up Durie, & Belcanqual, two Edenburgh Ministers, to raile against the E: Lenox, & when they are accus'd, quitting them by their Ecclesia∣stike praerogative. Putting their scholars at Glasgow in Armes, & oc∣casioning bloudshed in resistance of the Principal Magistrates of that place, against whom they afterward proceeded His Majestie sum∣mous them to his judicature at St. Andrewes, they send their oratours instead of comming themselves. The King exchangeth a promise of securitie, for theirs of suspending the censure. They admit the con∣dition, but collude with His Majestie, leaving an underhand power with some select brethren, to give sentence, as occasion should serve. When they get loose they contest with his Majestie by a serpent-suppli∣cate, which when it creepes at the foot, wounds to the heart. Tell him boldlie he playes the Pope takes a sword in his hand, more then be∣longs to him. The Earle of Arran demanding who dares subscribe such a paper; Andrew Melvin answers undauntedlie for himselfe, & some others, for hast snatcheth the pen out of a scribes hand that was neare him, writes his name, & exhorts his complices ro doe the like. By letter to His Majestie they shew how farre His Majestie had been uninformed, & upon minformation prjudg'd the praerogative of Iesus Christ, & the liberties of his Church (what becomes of the Kings, when this is pleaded?) They enact, & ordaine, that none should procure any such warrant, or charge, under the paine of excommunication. Where K. Iames did acknowledge the aequitie of the Church proceedings in these cases I desire to be inform'd, I am sure K. Charles 1. many yeares since arg D clar. pag. 308. hath writ, That they did wickedlie, & that which they could not doe. And that it is a very reproveable instance. Which to have been ever his fa∣thers
opinion, I have under the hand of one of the most learned, knowing men, & eminent historians in your Kingdome, As likewise Marg. not upon Potest. of the Gen. Assemb. at Edenb. Crosse De∣cemb. 18. 1638. that they did never confesse their crimes, nor renounce their Bi∣shop-rikes &c, but that they were most cruellie persecuted by that firebrand of schisme in the Kirke, & sedition in the state, Andrew Mel∣vin & his subscribing Associates, & made so odious to the people by their excommunication, that they suffered most grievous penurie, & in the end were sterved to death, which did not quench the malice of their mercilesse enemies, who after their death continued persecu∣ting their names, & memories, making them infamous by false sup∣posititious recantations, whereof they themselves were the au∣thours, & publishers. Others, that acknowledge a word, or two to this purpose, that drops from Arch-Bishop Adamson, say he did it, when set on the racke by his hunger, being faine to beg bread of his ene∣mies, who, glad of the occasion, sold their charitie by weight, for his selfe seeming-conviction, & when they had it, being too greedie to Quioccasio∣ne laeti pa∣linodiam i per vim ex∣pressam, sed in - numeris a se locis in∣ter-polatam typis publi∣carunt. gaine damnation to themselves, did sophisticate every syllable with a lie. The Bishops in their Declinatour against the Assemblie of Glasgow, (if you remember well) appeale to no general Assemblie, otherwise then as it shall pleace His Majestie to constitute it, & personallie be present, or by his Commissioner, without whom, they acknow∣ledge no authoritie it hath. They referre it to His Majestie to call one to repaire their injurie, by way of humble desire, or direction, no way derogating from; nor impairing his separate, absolute praeroga∣tive, The Bishops Appeale not deroga∣torie to the Kings per∣sonal Pr∣rogative. to redresse all personallie, if he please. Their expressions rela∣ting to Royall power in this particular are such as follow … So that they praeventing, & not proceeding by warrant of Royal authoritie … May we not therefore intreat my Lord Commissioner His Grace, in the words of the Fa∣thers of the fourth General Councel at Chaldon, Mitte foras superfluos. For discharge of our dutie to God, to his Church, & to our sacred Soveraigne, lest by our silence we betray the Church is right, His Majestics authoritie, & our owne consciences … And we most humblie intreat His Grace to intercede with the Kings Majestie, that he may appoint a sree, & lawfull Generall Assemblie… to whom [Dr. Rob. Hamilton] by these praesents we give our full power, & ex∣presse mandate to praesent the same in, or at the sayd Assemblie, or where else it shall be necessarie to be used, (where's that Mr. Baylie?) with all submission, & obedience due to our gracious Soveraigne, & His Majesties High Commissioner. All which are clauses assertive of His Majesties supremacie over Ge∣neral The Revie∣wer mista∣kes the scope of the Bi∣shops war∣ning. Assemblies, & implie his power to take cognizance of their demeanour. Though, after all this compliance with your method, & countenancing a seeming pertinencie in your arguments; I must
seasonablie put you in minde that you are very much mistaken in the Bishops meaning, & here, as otherwhere, maintaine a blinde∣conflict which your selfe. For allthough His Lordship often take advantage of your Assemblie proceedings, as contrarie to your la∣wes, & justifiable establishment of the Ecclesiastike power in your Kingdome; yet, where there is a concordance of your practice, with your rule, if accompanied with inconvenience of state, incroach∣ment upon that just praerogative, which Monarchs otherwhere doe, or may, assume, if destructive to that libertie of the people, which is given them by the Gospell, & Christian freedome sealed to them in their baptisme; if disagreeing with the primitive practice for the first five, or sixe hundred yeares after Christ you lie open to the force of his arguments, though you ward the blow from falling upon your Church in its owne peculiar, as constituded in your Countrey. For his Lordships endeavour is not onelie (though in part) to shew how tyrannical your discipline is to your selves, but how praejudicial, & destructive it may prove to us in England, if (through want of cau∣tion, or a facile yeilding to your insolent attempts,) way should be made for you to propagate what you call the Kingdome of Jesus Christ, but is indeed the tyrannie of Satan, & the second practice of Lucifers ambition, (To banish Gods Anoynted from the earth, since he faild in his project of turning God himselfe out of heaven) & we be ensnared in the like Presbyterian slaverie with the Scots. Therefore you see he entituled his booke, A Warning to take heed of the Scotish Discipline, &c. And were it not, that you would clamour in vour next pamphlet, you were unanswer'd, this advertisement might passe, with any rational reader, for a refutation of, at least, halfe your booke. If I should prosecute you with the many appeales that have been made before the Bishops declinatour of the Assemblie at Glasgow I know you would runne to your cover of complaints pag. 20. of your booke. What others have been since will be brought to yourremem∣brance in such a flying roule as the Prophet Zacharie, mentions (unlesse a Ch. 5. v. 1. gracious pardon be given you upon vour knees) when His Maje∣stie shall by Gods assistance have power to chastise your rebelling, cur∣sing, covenanting, excommunicating, imprisoning, murdering, decreeing, the confusion of his Royal familie, & three flourishing Kingdomes in your Assemblies.
CHAPTER IV. Seditious, & Rebellious Ministers in Scotland seldome, or never censur'd by the Assemblie. HEre Mr. Baylie layes faster hold upon the title, then the Bi∣shops evidences in the Chapter, & because sedition, & rebellion Sedition, & rebellion not censur'd by the Dis∣cipline. are charg'd home to the conscience of the Presbyters, & their usual indemnitie imputed to the Discipline, he would faine step over these publike enormities, to personal vices; against which (by his leave) the Ecclesiastike rigour is not such, but it can admit of very frequent indulgences, & many times convert the guilt, or shame of such haynous transgresions, to the glorie of their Gospel, & a more certaine signe of the sinners election by grace, according to John Knox's divinitie after proofe made against Paul Meffane. The treason of Hift. of Re∣form. 4. booke. Iudas, the adulterie of David, & abnegation of Peter, did derogate nothing from the glorie of Christs Evangel, nor yet the doctrine which before they had taught, but declared the one to be a reprobate, & the other to be an instrument, in whom mer∣cie must surmount judgement. Nay, if they find it advantageous to their discipline, these declamers against adulterie, & bloud, will make reli∣gious applications to any, as they did to Murray their Regent-bastard & murderer (to say no more of him) whom they made the greatest saint upon the earth, & the most eminent patron of their Church. That your pulpits have been perduellionis plaustra, the common stages for sedition, & treason. I have made appeare upon an old item some∣where else. And because you had not enough of them for the last old Comaedie you were to act, how you did mount it in halls, schooles, & other Scotish Pres∣byters mounting in halls schooles &c. profane places, is deliver'd unto us upon Royal authoritie in his late Maejsties large Declaration 169. Where is to be found such loyal doctrine as this. One in Edenburgh, upon his Majesties urging sub∣scription to your owne Confession of fayth, sayd It was an Italian, & a devellish device, first to make them renounce God, & perjure themselves, & then afterward there was an intention to destroy their bodies; & so that this subscription imported no lesse, then the destruction both of their bo∣dies, & soules. Rollocke did as much upon a seaffold in publishing a wicked, & rebellious protestation, Another, That though there were never so many Acts of Parliament against the Covenant, yet it ought to be maintain'd against them all. And Andrew Cant since charg'd His Majestie thus to his face, Awake thow lumpe of clay, thow wast not sleeping, when thow gavest cut the blondie commissione to Iames Graham. Of all which I desire Mr. Baylie to
name one that suffer'd any censured from a Synod. what priviledge these, or any other scandalous crimes had in England, or Ireland, the High Commission, & Civile censures can cleare. But the Reviewers conscience can tell how many such tooke shelter under the wings of the Covenant, who were threatned processe, if they subscrib'd not, &, having done it, passed for very zealous, pious brethren in the cause. Their names, & infirmities, if Mr. Baylie hath not, I have charitie to conceale, Or, if I had not (could their ordi∣nation be justified, & they accounted of our brotherhood) I should thinke my selfe oblig'd to it under the penaltie of the 55. Canon of the Councel of Carthage. Episcopus accusatores sra∣trum An. 436. Ancient Canons a∣gainst Mi∣nisters accu∣sers of their brethren. excommunices & si emndaverine vitium, recipiat eos ad communionem, non ad Clerum. If he bear'd the like reverence to Antiquitie when he speakes so broadlie of the Bishop of Derric, he might be∣thinke himselfe of the 57 Canon. Clericus maledicus, maxime in sa∣cerdotibus cogatur ad postandum veuiam, si noluerit, degradetur, nec un∣quam ad officium, absque satisfactione, revocetur. And to give His Lord∣ship his due interest in the prudent provision of the Church, I di∣rect the reader to that in the Councel of Constantinople, De accasatori∣bus Orthodoxorum Episoporum non admittendis, which is to be found in the edition of Chr. Iustell, where he shall see by how many clauses Mr. Baylie is excluded from being admitted to enter any accusation Reviewer no compe∣tent witnsse against Bi∣shops. against him, first, by the Religion he professeth, adjudg'd as bad as heresie by the ancient Canons for decreeing in conventicles against the au∣thoritie of Bishops, antisynagontas tois kanonikois hemin episcopois … And whether upon the several grounds that follow, an Oecumentical may not reject him, hoos kathybrisanta tous kanonas, kaiten ecclesiastiken lyme∣namenon eutaxian, as a reproachfull despiser of Canons, & a bane to the eutaxie of the Church; let any of his aequitable compare consider. Yet, I thinke, I shall breake no canon by retorting his quaestion, his acts being so publike, & himselfe autocatacritos, convinc'd under his hand in his booke, Did the Reviewer never heare of a Presbyterian, sibb to Mr. Baylie, who to this day was never (but may be in good time) called to any account for flagrant scandals of such crimes (even the same the Bishop mentions) sedition, & treason, which (aswell in Scotland, as in any other King∣dome) are punishable by the Gallowes? These crimes, above any, deserve civile cognizance, from which as free as the Scotish Churchmen have been, I dare undertake to prove out of their storie, That there was hardlie ever Synod in Scotland (Presbyterian I meane) but was guiltie of Rebellion, or bloud, having ever made their covenants with death, & their agreement with hell having made liet their refuge, & under sal∣shood bid themselves as they did Isai. 28. 15. So that Mariana, & his dis∣eiples,
whether in Italie, or Spaine, or all the world over, can not in aequitie have layd such devillish doctrines, such publike murders of Princes, & Nobles to their charge. Foedus umbrarum perit. As constant a Covenanter as you are with He will not be at peace & charitie with the dead. the living, I see the holiest league can not chaine up your furious malice against the dead. Your naming Bishop Aderton, For his sinne, & that blessed Martyr the L. of Canterburie for his patron, speakes you a sonne of neither Christian charitie, nor truth, If Presbyterie had been as old as the Councel of Nice, I perceive your sawcie fingars would have snatch'd the libells out of Constantines breast, & your zealous tongues, that are made seven times hotter otherwhere, would have runn the hazard to licke the Bishops faults out of the fire. I wish you had help'd me to a better bargain of your silence, & not forc'd me to give you this, which I am oth to part with, in exchan∣ge for your blabbing That if all be true that is in print (which for your credit I hope is not) Your Discipline had no other then a So∣domite for its patron, some thinke you may take your choyce of French, or Scot. How this abomination hath been propagated with your Discipline, (though by it no Disciple) I leave them to relate, who, to shame you into some speachlesse civilitie, have had reason to be your Domestike observers, if they can frame it by chast language in a riddle. Yet because your Presbyterie shall gaine no credit, if I can helpe it, by any counterfeit innocence, I will returne you a line or two in Latin, which may informe you that such an ill weed hath grow'n even where the sharpe sickle of the Eldership hath praetended to cut downe all wickednesse before it. Hoetamen dissimulare non pos∣sum, Gualth. Epist. Erast. Aug. 3. 1570. in Palatinatu nulla prius seandala tam atrocia incidisse quam ed sint quae seniorum illic constitutorum culpa acciderunt. Et quis, obsecro, eos postea feret correptores, qui sceleratissimum hominem Siculum Sodomitam, & cundem pe∣stilentissimum calumniatorem (you inherite at least the upper halfe of his qualities) impune elabi passi sunt, ne ad Iudices legitimos traheretur. If you name Bishop Aderton in your next, you will force me to breake the bond of modestie with my Readers, & make me lay this horrid scene nearer home. If you will shew your self a better Christian, or Scholar, & strengthen your arguments with the ruines of Bishops doctrines, where you finde them, & not rake up the rubbish out of some few sinnes, or lapses in their lives, you may write your pleasure, & without a blush expect the like ingenuitie on this side. Pseudon syncolletes…leptotaton leron hiereus, Excuse me sir, if Aristopha∣nes Nor speake any truth of the li∣ving. at praesent furnish me with no more honorable titles to salute
you by, for your ingenuous meritorious demeanour in the next pa∣ragraph. Wherein you are pleas'd to pervert all that the Bishop mean'd innocentlie, & writ temperatelie, & sacrifice your soule to the Father of lies to gaine the countenance of your 'brethren in Hol∣land. Historical ruth I hope is no slander. Nor can it be their shame to keep peace in their Churches, & turne seditious incendiaries out of doores. But while you plead for these your owne brethren among them, (the rest holding not that point of your discipline) what respect you beare to their vigilant Magistrates, whom you taxe for putting out of their cities men zealous in their doctrine, pressing the true practice of pietie, &c. I leave to some interpreter to tell them. But my selfe shall tell you, by the way, that they joyne not with you in rejecting our Episcopacie, as Anti-christian Name you what booke of theirs, or per∣son of any note that hath done it. I am sure since you, & your English mates fell to worke with root, & branch Spanheim, their great divinitie professour in Leyden, held up his hands, & wished that all had been such as Arch-Bishop Vssher, & Bishop Morton, & then the order with such Spanheims speach a∣bout En∣glish Bishops men he acknowledg'd would passe here wel enough. So that it should seem in the rest there wanted onelie a conformitie in some such thing, as Calvins opinions to qualifie them for a tolerable commu∣nion with the Dutch. What their zealous Ministers have preached for practice of pietie, suppression of haeresie, & schisme, the Bishop is farre from The Kings booke of re∣creations farre short of what other Refor∣med Chur∣ches tolerate on the Lords day. calling, or accounting any crime. But because you croud into their zealous preachments, the sanctification of the Sabbath-day in your Judaical sense, If, they pressed it in the rigour of your discipline, their au∣ditours use a large practical license to confute them. To passe by their weeklie Sabbath mercates, & many publike faires, one of which you, & I met with at the Hague, I could have shewd you there the dancing on the ropes (if not a dutch stageplay for a need) & many other prettie sights, to which you were invited with sounding of trumpets, & beating of drumes, which is their businesse at this instant in another part of the reformed Provinces: where I am I can tell you of several recreations I have observed (beside playing on the ice Vindic. Chr. Phi∣laed. objected against the Ministers of St. Andrewes that were spectatours) which I litle thought on when the poor praelatical Clergie, not many yeares since, were cursed with Presbyterian bell, booke, & candel, for approving a narrower toleration in our Countrey. Our persecu∣tions have help'd us to this, & some other experience, whereby we shall be hereafter enabled to unmaske your adventurous impudencie to the world. Whether the streame of Presbyterian, o Praelatical ermons have run clearer from contempt of pictie from silence, flaterie, &c. may be seen by him, that will looke into these last 12 yeares current
of the times. If the vigilant Bishops, such as their Lordships of Derrie & Downe, purg'd their chanels from the filthie doctrines, & rebel∣lious Blaire & his compa∣nions justlie banished. obstructions of Blaire, Leving stone, Hamilton, Cuningham & others, they did it for the more even passage of pure Primitive reformation. The zeale of these men was eating out the foundation of Gods hou∣se, & their swelling waters did overflow the bankes of government, where they came. Their impious doctrines made them first be turn'd out of Scotland, where Blaire had been before expelled the Vniversitie of Glasgow by the Professours for teaching his scholars, K. Ch. 1. larg. Dec. 1639. pag. 324. in his lectures upon Aristotle, that Monarchicall government was unlaw∣full, (the lawfullnesse whereof Mr. Baylie accounts part of the Pre∣lates profanitie, & errours.) Vpon the like misdemeanour the same ju∣stice overtoke them in Ireland, but at a time, as it hapened, when Christs Covenanting, Antimonarchical Kingdome began to be reedi∣fied in Scotland which wanting such bold pieces to supportit, & their blasphemous treasonables sermons to cement it, they were very heartlie welcom'd, & praeferred to places of greatest eminencie in that Church. What a singular difference there is in the point of exemption from secular jurisdict on between the Geneva Discipline, & yours the procee∣dings The Disci∣pline. in Scotland different from Ge∣neva. in the next paragraph will shew. And what person convict of, or notorious for those crimes, that you reckon was ever priviledg'd by the spiritual Court, you are to mention. Your generals are aire, the Bishop craves no favour of your extraordinarie charitie to conceale. The Declaration 1584. might be penned by Mr. Patrike Adamson & yet be King Iames's, If his Majestie declin'd the acknowledgement thereof the yeare after, when your Rebells had seiz'd upon his per∣son King Iames Declaration 1584. at Sterlin, that may very well be imputed to his feare. Nor was that the onelie negative subscription, you extorted from your priso∣ner that yeare, who, when at libertie, afterward, with the same hand, blotted out that which, when you had the guidance of his pen, you had forc'd him to write against his owne inclination, & sense. If Mr. Adamson prosessed upon his death his repentance for lies, & slanders (to which we have a contrarie tradition from some that were praesent) he did no more then your great Declaratour Buchanan for his that were opposite to the other, And how both these sort of, lies that ca∣ried contradictions could proceed from the same spirit, or their re∣pentance have the same grace, & truth to reforme it. I leave to your discerning spirit to reconcile, or, if you find them different, to di∣stinguish. What the Bishop asserts, Mr. Camdens faythfull register will justifie. Ministri nonnulli in Scotia è pulpitis, & per circulos Reginam indignissi∣is Part. 3. An. 1684 calumnus insectati ipsi, Regi, & Consiliariis asperrimè obtrectárunt, & coram
comparere jussi fastidioso quodam contemptu abnuerunt, quas pulpisa à Regnm authrritate essent exempta, & Ecclesiastici non Principii mperio, sed Presbyterio subessent. Your Ministers raile against, Queen, King, Councel with contempt, & seorne, denie appearance upon summons, stand upon Ecclesiastike priviledge, are not censur'd by the Assemblie, & what is that but protected? & what both but as much as the Bishop out of the Declaration praetends to? What nullitie in the law of your countrey you pleade, can be taken The Bishops consequence good from Commissa∣ries to Ci∣vite Magi∣strates. for no answer to the Bishops second proofe, who tells you, the same rea∣son may exclude aswell Magistrates, as Commissaries, because they have no function in the Kirke, & they are so excluded out of the 11. chapter of your 2. booke of Discipline, which providing that all abuses may be removed, & dependances of the Papistical jurisdiction abblished, regulates all by the Elder∣ship of the Church, & in silence robs the Civile Magistrate of his power. The strength of which argument you wave, as you doe the 3. instan∣ces that follow, & scowre up an old rustie peice of Logike of your owne to fight with your shadow; The Bishops consequence holding good. That it those, which have no function in the Kirke, are not to be jud∣ges to ministers, no jurisdiction remaineth in the Civile state where∣by Ministers may be punished. In England the Commissari, & official were no ordinarie judges to depose, & excommunicate at their pleasure: what re∣servations there were, & how limited was their power, your friend Fucus ad fallendum simpliciores, vel potius illudendum Ecclesiis pag. 404. Altar. Damase. Didoclave will acquaint you. Which integritie, & prudence he calls a fucus, & fallaei, because he had found no such native beautie of holi∣nesse in his Church, no such down-right dealing in the discipline. The jurisdiction of Commissaries was reestablished in Scotland in Ec∣clesiastike causes, to as great a latitude as formerlie, by act of Par∣liament at Edenburgh June 4. 1609. Presbyterian Assemblies are easilie satisfied about any delinquen∣cie against Kings. And had not K. Iames at this time been absolute, & the brethren in feare what should become of their Euangel, they had not proceeded so farre as they did in Gibsons case. That many passed The Assem∣blie jugling in Gibsons case. at other times with lesse notice, nay with their authoritie to main∣taine them, I have shewed frequent enough out of their stories. De∣linquents of the Episcopal partie could get no such opportunies for absence. When Gibson came about, he praetended not onelie his feare for an excuse, but his tender care of the rights of the Church. This, because more pertinent to the quaestion, Mr. Baylie overlookes, as he doth their purging him of his contumacie without acquainting his Majestie, which the Bishop urgeth. He were better betake himselfe to some other trade then that of reviewing. Two, or three such surveys will loose the Dis∣cipline more ground, then Didoclave, & any other his unanswered
Champions ever gaind them. That no trial of Gibsom fault was perfected though a fugitive was a testimonie of their forward dutie to the King. Others (beside the Bishops by the Synod of Glasgow) have been excommunicated at as great a distance for their loyal expres∣sions, & actions. The Bishops fourth proofe I perceive hath much troubled the Reviewers eyes, osper tà suk epi tous ophalmous. Mr. Blackes case may very The Bishops relation of Mr. Blackes case vindi∣cated & enlarged. well seem odious, Odit, quod metuit, It turnes his stomake so much that he findes not confidence enough to wipe of that filth, which was spit upon the reputation of the Discipline by his speaches. He is better imployd with his sieve, & his scissours about divining how his Lord∣ship came by so many particulars of the storie; but the guilt of his conscience makes his hand shake, & so all his witchcraft falls to ground. For the Bishop, to my knowledge, may have his warrant for that relation somewhere else, &, for ought he knowes, recourse to some vocal oracles of that time, beside some such registers as have not been raced by the sword of the Disciplinarian spirit, nor can∣cell'd by the Clerke of the Assemblie in the darke. Though that large, most excellent volume compiled by the Rt. Reverend Arch Bishop having, not long since, happilie escaped the Scotish' Inquisition, may here∣after be a printed monument of the Disciplines shame, an aeternal dis∣grace to the Rebellious Presbyterie, & his credit, for all the Revie∣wers calumnies, a lasting pillar to support the fayth of all posteri∣tie, that shall reade it. Yet to take Mr. Blackes storie from his hand, out of the register of truth, the Doomsday booke of the Discipline as it lies. —Veniat invisum scelus, Errorque, & in se semper armatus suror. If the Kings countenance were changed, his conscience was not, which, by his own confession, so soon as ever his judgement was in the bloome, tooke checke at the Religion, as well as at the Rebellion in Hamp. Court. Conf. the Assemblie, professing with our faviour that though he liv'd among you, he was not of you. That you make no medium between Presbyterian, & Popish, is a piece of old Synodical malignancie, which the trial of the orthodoxe partie in these times hath made out of date, since being rejected, & banish'd by the one, they neither finde, nor sue for reception with the other, (saving into a toleration of their asyle) but by the hand of the All∣mightie are held up in their constancie between you both: Yet your feares were not groundlesse, when the Religious King went about to establish such publike worship, as would have informed ignorance in
a discoverie of your errour, & draw'n of all your conscientious, & rational disciples. His Majesties civile favours to some Papists, were not so strong evidences of his change as to wind up your Ministers to such a free warning, nor gave them license to make such rebellious appli∣cations. If that be the use 'tis time for Kings to search better into your doctrine, & see whether the toleration of that have not been the great sinne of our age, which hath pull'd downe such judgements upon their heads. This grace inyour pastour is that, which abounds by continuance in sinne. Rom. 6. 1. Ephes. 6. 16. And this fayth is nothing like St. Pauls shield, being beaten by the As∣semblie into a sword, whereby they endeavour to subdue Kingdomes, but have no such commission as had Samuel, & the Prophets. Mr. Blackes denial was too faint to absolve him, & his honest hearers, if conforme Hebr. 11. 33. to their English brethren, might perchance be so wrapt in their night caps, as their negative testimonie could not be very currant. When he shew'd himselfe so willing to be tried by all the world, he litle thought who might passe upon the verdict. All the heathen had con∣demn'd him for the murder of moralitie, & he had met with a scurvie packe of hardhearted Godfather among the Papists. A brother of yours confesseth that somewhat Blacke had sayd, though he hath no great Nescio quid nec quando, sed multo ante Vind. ep. Philad. minde to take notice, what, nor when. He complaines of Rutherfort his accuser because oblig'd for private courtesies, who deserves to be commended for praeferring publike dutie, & in that appeares to have been one of the most honest hearers there. The Courtiers can not be blamed for intending to stop the mouthes of such Ministers, as layd the Devil with his bairnes at their doores, & put them in afright that they should afterward be charg'd with keeping all the blacke brats of the Assemblie. The advice of the Brethren was adjudg'd treason by the law of Scotland produc'd against the Aberdene Ministers, & your Edenburgh Bibles have not one text to justifie that appeale. The words layd to Mr. Blac∣kes charge I hope will be confessed to be trulie seditious. All the quae∣stion you make is whether he spake them or no, which though doubtfull (as it is not, being proved before the Assemblie who gave this reason for his exemption from punishment, They knew not with what spirit he was overruled) must be acknowledg'd a mater of L. 1. c. The od. de Re∣lig. civile cognizance (because no point of religious) aswell as the pu∣nishment, if prov'd. Constat Episcopos & Presoyteros forum legibus non ha∣bere, nec de aliis causis … preter religionem posse cognoscere; The Breth∣rens reason, or rather mis-apprehension must not be made the mea∣sure of the lawes. If the King yeided so much toward an amicable con∣clusion, what can justifie the Presbyters in continuing the breach? who, say what you will, were bound to subscribe a band for that silence
which was required, Pessimus est mos suggestum in scenam vertere, & dul∣cisimam Euangelii vocem in Comaediam veterem. What the learned Grotius De Imper∣sum. Potest∣circ. sacr. cap. 9 enlargeth upon this subject, I will not transcribe, but call upon you to answer, being that which I assume to make good upon the same texts & proofes he produceth. The truth was you durst neither have advised Blacke to appeale, nor your selves have shew'd such con∣tumacie to the King, but that you had felt the pulse of the people, & made it beate high in your behalfe. This your brother confes∣seth Nam co re∣pore summā fuit Ecclae concordia & authoditas ut aulici ab ea, tametsi Regia gratia niterentur, timerent, Vindic. Ep. Chr. Philad. though in Gypsie language, calling it the great concord, & authoritie in the Church, such as made the Courtiers to tremble, though never so much in fa∣vour with the King. Which concord, when so magnified in your storie, we know, was ever a covenant to rebell, & awe the King aswell as the Court by your usurp'd authoritie of the sword. Yet whatsoever is your practice, & profession, by sits; sometimes you are more serious (though seldome more loyal) & the result of your councel apparels it selfe in such a sentence as this Our obedience bindeth us not onelie reve∣rentlie to speake, & write of our Soveraigne, but also to judge, & thinke. Which if the Edenburgh Ministers had practis'd, they had not come under that severe sentence pronounced against them for raising a dangerous mutinie among the people. If I would, like you, turne diviner, I might easilie guesse out of what Let to the Q. of Engl. Iul. 16. 1561. un printed register you have that prettie legend, that followes, which yet is not so decentlie dress'd as to make good the chast credit of the dis∣cipline. Who was this villaine? By whom was he Suborn'd? Avillaine. They suborne, without particular instance of either, will not passe upon publike fayth. If the Commotion was innocent, why not approv'd? If not approv'd, how appeares it to be innocent. The best way to have quit the Ministrie from being authours, or approvers, had been to be censu∣rers, but here they could keep silence without a band. I can not yet let goe this singular storie, my dutie forbids my cha∣ritie any where to favour you with my silence. And because you are so praejudic'd against unprinted traditions, I will give it you for the most part out of some printed registers I have met with. King Iames, desirous to set off his Court with what luster he could to foraigne Ambassadeurs, had, in a provident magnificence, re∣trench'd The Mini∣sters guiltie of the tu∣mult. De∣cemb. 17. 1596. some allowance formerlie issued for his Courtiers atten∣dants, & contracted their tables to enlarge his owne entertainments. For the managing of this, & somewhat else concerning his revenue he had appointed eight officers of State, where of some were Papists, but of know'n intergritie. The Resormado Courtiers, by way of scorne call'd these Octavians, & made an easie impression into their Ministrie by suggesting, that they had a designe to introduce Po∣perie,
& subvert the whole discipline of the Church. After private conference, a fast, for the smiting with the fist of wickednesse, soon after was kept at Edenburgh. Balcanqual preacheth, & spares neither, King nor Councel in his virulence, infuseth all the unpleasing particulars, he could thinke of, to imbitter his Satyr, humblie beseecheth the Eden∣burgh Citizens at a certaine houre to meet in the New Church, tells them how much it concern'd their reformed, Euaugel. His reser∣vednesse sharpend their expectation, & caus'd their punctual assem∣bling almost to a man, where they found their Ministers in a formal Synod, having chosen a violent Presbyter, Mr. Robert Bruce, their Moderator. Here Mr. Blackes sufferings were aggravated: & the Kings violating the praerogative of the Church. One Watson comes in, & addes oyle to the flame, remonstrates his late repulse at Court, & denial of accesse to the King, being sent with some Rebell-supplicate from the Brethren. The Moderator, with as much malice as my be, comments at large upon every instance in a speach; Makes it Gods cause, & engageth the people to assert the libertie of his Gospel, if not by petition: by power. Some Commissioners are sent to the King, then in the Tolbuith, who, receiving some checke for their unjustifiable pro∣ceedings, come backe with their angrie account to the Assemblie. One Alexander Vasius Vaux being (as the Presbyters had praedesign'd) moun∣ted up above the congregation by a pillar, with stretched out arme cries, The sword of God &, of Gideon, bid them to follow him in the vin∣aication of God, & his Church. They take it out of his mouth, & in confusion clamour, Arme Arme, for God, & the Church. They doe accordinglie, & rush violentlie into the streets beguirting the place where His Majestie was. Mr. Thomas Hamilton afterwards Earke of Haddington takes an hal∣berd in his hand, & with some of his friends keepes the multitude from entring. Alexander Hume of Northborvick, for the time Provest of Eden∣burgh, & Roger Mackmath (whom the King ordinarilie called his Baylisse) raise what power they can upon a sodaine, the honest Ham∣mermen come in to their assistance, They demand first whether the Kings person be in safetie, & then by a mixture of faire words, & me∣naces make the rowt quit the place, but not their riot, for they by, & by rallie in the Mercate place. The Captaine of the Castle turnes some canon upon the Towne, & by that militarie argument praevailes with rhem to disband. The King is safelie guarded to his palace at Halyrud Howse. For all this Brucc sends abroad his writs, to callin the Nobilitie to their succour, some of whom had in zeale abetted the late tumult. The Lord Forbes payd his sine for going into the street, The Lord Hamilton hath an invitation to be General, & should have had his commission (from the Synod no quaestion) if he had signi∣fied
his acceptance. He very noblie, & loyallie delivers up his letter to the King, & detects the Rebellious project of the Discipline. Some of the Ministers are sent for, & convicted, obtaine pardon of the King, but no actual oblivion from any his good subjects, who ever after detested that disloyal sect, & branded the 17. day of December with the indeleble infamie of that prodigious attempt. How like this lookes to an halfe houres tumult or petie fray, How Ignorant were the People, how innocent the commotion, How free the Mi∣nistrie from being authours, or approvers; Let the Reviewers aequitabl tomparers determine. CHAPTER V. The Discipline exempts not the supreme Magistrate from being excommunicate. TVatim agis. The Bishop argues about excommunicating Kings, & you answer about censuring officials, that pronounce sentence for The Rev. impertinen∣cie or cun∣ning in al∣tering of the state of the quaestion. non-payment of money, wherein yet you are not more imperti∣nent, then malicious: For you know well enough that sentence was not executed for that, but for obstinacie against the power, & com∣mands of the Church, Wherein if any officials inconsideratelie proceeded, it must not bring in quaestion the more deliberate pru∣dence of them, that made the constitution to that purpose. The rash praecipitancie of the Scotish Presbyterian rule, & practice, though many times very reprovable in the later, I sinde not heere in the Bi∣shops allegation, nor of what magnitude the sinnes are, for which they excommunicate, though we have know'n a desertion of the Brethren in conspiracie against their Prince, or a glance through Let: of the Congreg. to the Nobles of Scotland 1559. their fingars, an interpretative neutralitie, hath been made the great sinne, & threatned with this censure. Neither the Praelatical partie, nor any orthodoxe Christians in the world come into your communion in the point of excommunicating their Kings, nor com∣prehend them within the object of their Discipline, by which, though they have kept the sonnes of the Church in a filial awe, yet ever re∣serv'd a paternal priviledge for their Kings, the Nursing Fathers of the same Imperatoria unctione tostur poenitentia. And the learned De Imper sum. Po, cap. 9. Grotius assures us that the Kings of France for many ages have expres∣selie challenged this exemption for themselves, No posint excommunicati.
Rev … did never so much as intend the beginning of a processe against their King, &c. Ans. Christian prudence admits no such charitable glos∣ses Disciplina∣rian inten∣tions never better then their words upon the Scotish intentions, where is no colour of ambiguitie in their words. In which if the King be a man, or a Magistrate, he must be necessarilie included, & made subject aswell to Church animadver∣sion, as admonition. If Mr. Baylie hath a perspective for the thoughts of all his praedecessours, he may enjoy the pleasure of such spiritual reviewes, or revelations to himselfe, but can have no demonstrative evidence to propagate the like confidence among others. True causes of citation of Princes to an Assemblie is the peculiar lan∣guage of the Discipline, no such truth is implied in this truer text of Scripture, Where the word of a King is, there is power, & who may say unto Eccles. 8. 4. him what dost thou? The beginning of the next verse is not the Scotish Assemblie, in answer to that quaestion. What these true causes have been, I have partlie manifested out of their storie, their owne Registers ju∣stifying No thankes due to them for not ex∣communica∣ting their Kings. their successive meeknesse, & indulgence; wherein though no King may be found excommunicate, (because their spiritual sword wanted luster, and brightnesse to strike such amazement into Princes, as to make them let fall the temporal one out of their hands) yet not any one of them hath there been since the Assemblies were possess'd of their infernal commission, but have been personallie threatned, imprison'd, depos'd, or murdered, & they should have tasted the meeknesse of the Discipline in them all, if the season had served, & they could have catch'd, or kept them in their power; Against which universal experience whether Mr. Baylie's single word may be taken for the future securitie of His Majestie, & his successours, I submit with silent reverence to be debated in their Councel. Rev. We love not the abused ground, &c. Ans. We are as litle in love with the Reviewers affronting of Kings, as they with, what he calls the Warners The An∣cient Fa∣thers quit peccant Kings of all humane censure, flatering of Princes. To the quaestion he so magisteriallie propounds. St. Ambrose, notwithstanding his Act to Theodosius, makes answer upon that speach of David cited by the Bishop, & addes the reason in such language as Mr. Baylie will not heare from any Canterburion-Praelate, Quod nullis ipsi [Reges] legibus tenebantur, quia liberi sunt Reges a vinclis delictorum. The same is to be found in Isiodore Pelus: And Tertulian to this purpose many hundred yeares before Presbyterie was hatch'd. Sciunt [Imperatores] quis illis dederit imperium … sentiunt Deum esse solum, Apos. Gent. adv. in cujus solius potestate sunt, a quo sunt secundi, post quem primi, ante omnes, & super omnes Deos, homines. And because the Reviewer calls this doctrine Episcopal, let him take St. Hieroms note too by the way. Rex ipse [David] & alium non timebat. This Catholike doctrine praeserves the
Majestie of Princes, de jure, inviolable from the insolencle of Assem∣blies. Where the abuse of it spurres them on to any dangerous prae∣cipies, they are to stand, or fall unto themselves. The poor oppres∣sed people would many times worke out their deliverance by prayers, & patience, if the outragious Presbyters did not thrust them downe, & with the hazard, if not destruction of their persons, dash all civile government in pieces. CHAPTER VI. Kings may sometime pardon capital offenders, which the Disciplinarians denie. As they doe their Royal right to any part of the Ecclesiastike revenue. WEre your reasoning as methodical as the Bishops, I should not be so in every Chapter at a losse to find out more to what, then The Bishops reasonning not unconse∣quential. what to answer, having hitherto met with none, but Socrates's three darke principles in your booke, tò chaos touti, kai tas nephelas, kai ten glottan, confusion, clouds, & tongue: which among them have made such a mist in your own eyes, & such a clatering in your eares, as you Aristoph Nubes. can neither see, nor heare a good logical argument brought before you. We, that are above this disturbance, & at a distance, observe his Lordship laying out the doctrine of your Discipline (for so I'll speake for once) received by you all, & then illustrates it by your practice, wherein if he had roome enough, he would muster up so many particulars as with an, &c. might conclude an inductive uni∣versal. Though the other way of acconsequential arguing hath been thought tolerable in Mr. Baylie (no Doctour as I take it) as not long since in his uncharitable mention made of Bishop Aderton, & his slander against the two reverend Bishops of Downe, & London Derric. The Ministers rigour, & vindictive pleading hath ever multiplied Bloud the seed of the Discipline. in Scotland the widowes, & fatherlesse, the deadlie feuds having been ever continued, & received by them, when they saw it tend to their advantage, so that the bloud shed by murderers of their making may be trulie aesteem'd, the seed of their Church. Which duelie consi∣dered, demonstrable in their storie, should deterre any cautelouc Christian from their communion, who, by that partaking in their guilt, can exspect from heaven no benefit of his prayers, Gods curse
in the Prophet concerning them nearer, then any ministrie in the world, When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, yea Esai. 1. 15. when ye make many prayers, I will not heare: Your hands are full of bloud. The historie of that time, though very partiallie, & falselie re∣lated Mercie Gods attri∣bute, & so the Kings. by the Reviener, were it not, can not justifie the insolence in their discipline, wherein they do not occurre to the inconvenience praetended, the impunitie of murder procur'd then by some importunate & powerfull solicitours, but despightfullie scratch out the image of God in his Anoynted, & pull downe his praerogative attribute of mercie, which hath a season of priviledge above justice, if that passe with Mr. Baylie, for any of his workes. What I meane I collect from this clause. In the feare of God we signifie unto your Honours, that whosoever . Book Discipl. 9. head. perswades you that ye may pardon, where God commandeth death, deceives your souls. & provokes you to offend Gods Majestie. where not onelie the act of impunitie is condemn'd, but all power to pardon in any case denied. Which God never practis'd himselfe, nor exacted in the rigour from his Kings. Beside, the case hath been know'n, when the Presbyters Presbyters sollicite pardon for murder. themselves became the powerfull sollicitours to the King, & drew a pardon for murder from his hand against his heart, as they did from K. Ch. 1. for Mr. Thomas Lambe, a preaching brother, who stab'd a young man of Leith with a ponyard betwixt Leith, & the Abbey of Haliryd House upon the Lords day in the afternoon, in the time of the Assemblie, & Par∣liaments sitting. To whom the King, used this speach Ministers must be pardoned though slaughterors.  other men must suffer for a words speaking, reflecting upon one Mr. Iohn Stuart, who suffer'd for saying that Ar∣gile had spoken about deposing the King. How they professed their Church to be reformed by the murder of David Rizio, & the King called a weake man because he would not vouch it, I have shewed more par∣ticularlie in their storie. Yet I hope Mr. Baylie (who is too rigid) when he comes next in the Rebell-Commission, will be no sollici∣tour for any act of oblivion. That if the King gives not what satis∣faction they finde necessarie, & due, he, & the other bloud-hounds will articulate their crie into justice, justice, or lie downe in their armes to exe∣cute it themselves even upon His Majestie himselfe (for he hath all∣readie encircled him, within the object of the Discipline) may be fair∣lie collected from hence, as from what he told us in his Epistle. That you may preach unto Rigour to be preached &c. under non but implous or nligent Magistrates; so exommu∣nication for impunitie. Magistrates, that according to Scriptures mur∣derers ught to die even Erastus will grant you, Yea that in some cases you may rebuke, exhort, admonish, threaten, denounce judge∣ments, aswell as preach promises according to the examples of the Prophets. But he puts you in minde that this they did onelie under impious Kings, no Davids, no Salomons, no more must you assume this
libertie, under Iame's, & Charle's, pious, prudent, & just Kings. If you should have an unhappie occasion to exercise it under other, you must goe no father, no excommunication which is order'd in your Discipline. He calls for your texts, he answers your arguments, he helpes you to instances of Ioab, whose murder could not safelie be punished, of Absalom, whose, for some reason, was neglected. He demands whether these men, went not into the Temple nor communicated in the Sacraments with this impunitie about them. I have no way to be rid of you, but as Mr. Selden, they say was of the whole packe of your clamouring brethren at London, who layd Erastus booke open before them, & bid them answer him. Which dismounted their tailes, & put a gag in their mouthes, so that I heare he was never troubled with them afterward. E. Huntley's case hath been caried to the mint, & comes now out with a new stampe of the Assemblie at a losse till their Father behind E. Hunt∣leys case wholie min∣ted in the Assembii them scatters his kindnesse among his prodigal sonnes, & bids them lavish out his inexhaustible stocke of calumnies, as they please. What the Bishop hath granted you about the guilt of the three Lords, I have no commission to retract. What you aggravate about E. Hunt∣ley's apostacie, &, after seeming repentance, frequent relapses, doth at the worst, but argue his adhaerence in heart to the Romish religion. This added to his banding with the King of Spain (which you pricke into some blanke papers subseribed with his hand, & the rest taken out of Dr. Kerre's pocket, as he was shiping over, upon your excommuni∣cating, & banning; & picke out of some other, such as litle could be made of at that time, when it should have been most advanta∣geous) is not enough to justifie that rigour alleadged by the Bishop. The truth of what followes shall be left to the ingenuitie of your judicious & aequitable comparers, by laying your relation to that of more authentike historians, whose record is this Bothwell, after many murders, & misdemeanours, having broke prison, endeavours to get the King, & Chancellar Maitland into his power, to which end he sets fire to both their chambers, & by vio∣lence makes his entrance into the Queenes. For this, some of his com∣plices were hang'd, the Kings proclamation, publish'd against him, prohibites any man to harbour him. The Earle Huntley, upon the Chancellars intreatie, raiseth some power to surprice him, with which he besets Earle Murray's house, where Bothwell was entertaind, & Murray in defense of him slaine. For this soon after was E. Huntley Bothwells notorious crimes. imprison'd till having put in caution to appeare at a publike trial, he had his libertie given him to goe home. Murray's friends had not patience to wait the leisure of the law, but worke revenge upon
all advantages they could get. Bothwell having been this while con∣ceal'd in England, enters Scotland in armes, & assaults the King in his palace at Fawlkland, but, being beaten off, makes another escape. The Assemblie, failing of the successe they hop'd for in Bothwells at∣tempt, praevaile for the banishing of Papists, & confiscation of their goods, Bothwell, finding no good welcome in England, gets away, & gaines a private opportunitie by his friends to be secretlie con∣veigh'd into the Kings chamber, where he begs his pardon upon his knees, & obtaines it, yet the next day makes a tumult in the Court, & caries away diverse of the Kings servants; The King (which may seem strange) for the safetie of his person, was faine to put away his friends of greatest trust, the Chancellor, Treasurer, Baron Humes, &c. but within a moneth repents him, appeales to his No∣bles, & by their advice, recalls them, yet permits Bothwell to depart. The Ministers are angrie that the Papists are not persecuted by fire, & sword. They assemble without the Kings order, & call together the Barons & Burgers. Bothwell enters againe with 400. Horse as farre as Leith; makes proclamation, summons all in to defen'd re∣ligion, & put away evil Counsellers; sends it to the Synod at Dun∣bar, which favour'd it; The same day he marcheth against 3000. of the Kings forces neare Edenburgh, fainteth in his businesse, and gets away to the borders; Queen Elizabeth sets out a proclamation against him, yet presseth the King for proscription of Papists; The Lords are but few that meet, & expresse some reluctance at it. The Ministers, & Burgers are many, which vote it, take their armes downe out of the windowes, &c. Argile is sent against them, & beaten; The King drawes toword them, & permits three of Hunt∣ley's houses to be pull'd downe, Huntley escapes to his Aunt in Suther∣land, thence into France. These were Huntley's notorious crimes, & multiplied outrages which cryed up to the God of heaven; Out of which let the world judge what reason the Ministers, those mercifull men of God, had to give such warning & crie to the Iudges of the earth, to shed his bloud. That appearance with display'd banner against the King in person, should be made an article against him by Mr. Baylie, a loyal peaceable assertour of ten yeares armed re∣bellion in three Kingdomes: I dare not adventure my spleen to dis∣course on but in Mr. Baylies language, hope by his good advise, the Prelates will no more Lull' Princes asleep in such a sinfull neglect of their char∣ge, but breake off their slumber by wholesome, & seasonable admonitions from the word of God, such as that Prov. 10. A wise King seatercth the wicked, & bringeth the wheel over them. Or what other texts, their Lordships bet∣ter know applicable to the most just, necessarie chastisment of schis∣matikes, & Rebells.
About E. Angus, & Errol, you thinke your selfe not concern'd to make answer because your brother Presbyter Mr. Rob. Bruce, gave R Bruce's speach a∣gainst E. Huntley King Iames leave to recall them, but with this considerable sentence, against E. Huntley. Well Sir, you may doe as you list, But chuse you, you shall not have me, & the E. Huntley both for you. Pretie humble soules, who can weigh downe the chiefest Earles in the ballancing of a state. In the next paragraph, you dawbe with untemper'd morter, such First fruites &c. witheld from the King as much by the Presbyters as Pope. as can never keep the Kings right to any Ecclesiastike revenue, & the claime of the Discipline together. For having comprehended in the patrimonie of the Kirke all things [without exception] given or to be given to that, & the service of God; All such things as by law, or custome or use of Countreys have been applied to the use, & utilitie, of the Kirke. 2. book Disc. ch. 9 And call'd them theeves, & murderers [without exception of persons] that alienate any part of this patrimonie. 1. books Disc 6. head you are the innocent dove that, here bring us newes, That the Church never spoyld the King of any tithes, while those birds of spoyle, your forefathers, have left him, neither eare nor straw to possesse. But to deale with you at your owne weapon in your words. If the King never had any first fruits, then, as the Bishop sayth, you are the Popes, that with-held it, & by you, that were the Reformers, was that point of papacie maintained; If he neither had, nor demanded, to what pur∣pose toke you, such paines to obtaine in favour of the Church to have it declar'd in Parliament, That all benesices of cure under Praelacies shall in all time coming be fee of the first yeares fruits, & fift penie, & the Mi∣nisters An. 1587. have their significations of presentation past, at the Privie seale upon His Majesties owne subscription, & his secretaries onelie, without any payment or cau∣tion to his Treasurer for the sayd first fruits, & fift penie? About tithes, you say, His Majestie, & the Church had never any contro∣versie Contradi∣ction about tithes. pag. 57. in Scotland. How agrees this with your Declaratour in his ap∣pendix to the maintenance of your sanctuarie? When the minor-age of a good King had been abused to the making of a law, whereby the most of these rents, first fruits, Tithes, & the lands belonging to Bishoprikes were annexed to the crowne, the Church very earnestlie do labour for restitution, & never gave over till these lawes were repealed. If you review your records, you will finde in the yeare 1588. Patronages. that you had a plea with, which you call an earnest suit to, His Majestie about patronages, & such considerable opposition, as put you upon inhibiting all commissioners, & Presbyteries to give collation, or ad∣mission to any person praesented by authoritie from the King. And [to omit many] a greater you had before with the Queen. Anno 1565 The Nobilitie, & Gentrie were more beholding to your impo∣tencie,
then patience for peace. What gracious men yon have shewd Presbyte∣rian rebel∣lion, & ty∣rannie. your selves, since your Rebell-Parliament got that incumbent power into your hands, your congregations would speake if they durst, whom you feed with the bread of violence, & with that you cover them as a garment. So that whether the Presbyterie be not as good patrons of the people, as they are vassals to the King, need never more be quaestion'd in Scotland. Whether by the wickednesse of Praelates, or Presbyters the King, & Rejoycing at the se∣questring the Church patrimonie. Church were cousin'd of the tither, will appeare by them, that bragg'd most when they were most endanger'd by the sequestring the other patri∣monie from the Church, which I finde to be the Presbyters that could not keep councel but boasted they had given a seasonable blow unto the Bishops. Qui jactare non dubitâ∣runt se E∣pisc. plygin kairian in∣flixisse. That legitimate power in the Magistrate the Bishop pleades for King James never declared to be a sinne against Father, Son, or Holy Ghost, nor did ever the patrons of Episcopace oppose it. That chan∣geling you here substitute in the roome calls you Father by the ri∣diculous posture in which it stands, your friend Didoclave Aitar. Damasc. p. 3. had more ingenuitie then to inferre a claime to the power of preaching, & cele∣brating K. Iames anti-presby∣terie. the Sacraments upon the power of iurisdiction over Ecclesiasti∣cal persons derived upon the King from his praedecessours in En∣gland, & given them by a statute. Verba statuti de jurisdictione, non de simplici functionum sacrarum administratione intelligenda esse quis dubitat. The well grounded consequences, which you call Castles in the aire, will hereafter batter your Presbyterie to the ground, when Prin∣ces shal retract their too liberal indulgence, take a courageous re∣solution to claime their own, & relie upon Gods providence to maintaine it. King Iames had given you the practical meaning of his wise sentence, seven yeares before he spake it at St. Andrews. For, as you may very well remember, when His Majestie had put downe your Presbyterie by the head, your Ministerial office was with the exercise of your halls, having, to the time of your late rebellion, no other, then an ambulatorie Euangel, no Disciplinarian legallie to∣lerated to officiate, but such as would conforme to the canons of the Church. If the King had sayd, Egonon possum erigere Ministri caput, the heads of the Aberdene, & Edenburgh Ministers might have con∣futed him upon the gates, but that his mercie [without the Syno∣dical censure of impunitie] interpos'd in that dispute. As great an enemie as His Majestie was to such Erastians, as the Bishop, I am sure he was no friend to such Donatsts as you, unlesse infestis∣simus No Dona∣ist. host be significant to that purpose. He sayd, you were the persidious, bedlam knaves among the preachers, my dictio∣narie Ep. lector. Aitar. Damascen.
will helpe me to no fiter English for his Latin, persidi, & sanatici nebulones inter concionatores; And you, or your profession he Georg. Con. De Dupl. Stat. Relig. apud Scot. lib. 2. often styl'd Calvinistarum Satanismum, a sect of lapsed spirits among the Calvinists, whose malice had metamorphoz'd them into Devils. CHAPTER VII. The Presbyterie cheates the Magistrate of his Civil power in ordine ad spiritualia. THe Bishop begs no beliefe of his Readers, beyond what he Their lati∣tude of scandal. 8. 9. brings proofe out of your Discipline to prevaile for. When you have made all offenses, more, or lesse scandalous, like the Pro∣phet in Hosee, you become the snare of a fowler, & with this coun∣terfeit call catch all the uncleane birds in your net. If the Bishops Official takes notice of more civile causes then your Presbyterie, the qualitie, & number had been Worth your noting for your Readers satisfaction. To strengthen your evidence, I consulted with Didoclave your brother Scout, whom I finde to have made no such numerous discoverie, & I take him to be alltogether as strict, & able an inquisitour, as your selfe. That capital offenders, whom the Magistrate hath spared, should be excommunicated, is discipli∣narian Malefa∣ctours par∣doned not to be excom∣municated. censure, which no societie of regular Christians ever infli∣cted; Nor can any ingenuous Divine denie such, accesse to the holie table, if otherwise qualified then by their impunitie. He must di∣strust either the prudence or pietie of the Magistrate, conceiving him either too liberal of his pardon to a person shewing no remorse for his fault; or impious in countenancing instead of cutting off, an obstinate malefactour with his sword. Erastus himselfe (whom you raile at so often) puts in this caution (which Beza approves of) for whatsoever he hath asserted in his booke. Quod meminisse te velim etiamsi non semper adjeccro. That the person you admit be suppos'd to understand, approve, embrace the doctrine of the the Church, with which he desires to communicate; That he professe an acknow∣ledgement, & hatred of his sinnes (he addes not from your stool of repentance (That a murderer, adulterer, blasphemer, thus par∣doned, thus poenitent, thus supplicant for the seale of the Sacra∣ment, should be, to fill up the amphitheater of any prou'd hypocri∣tical,
popular presbyter, made the sundays sport, or spectacle to the people, No Scripture commands it, no orthodoxe Church ever practis'd it, no law of Scotland imports it. If you suspect his re∣pentance to be but counterfeit, & his humble addresse, a religious imposture; you may discourse with him in private, lay open before him the hainousnesse of his fact, deterre him by the extremitie of the danger, tell him if he disccrnes not the Lords bodie (which he can not through the blacke unrepented guilt of that sinne) he eates judge∣ment, he drinkes damnation; But all this pertaines ad Consilium, a terme us'd among the ancients in cases somewhat conterminate with ours, to ghostlie councel, no spiritual execution, ad legis annuncia∣tionem, non jurisdictionem, to the terrible declaration of the law, to no jurisdiction or legal exercise of your power. Beside, here I must put you in minde of what I otherwhere prove, and is undeniable. That your excommunicating facultie is not originallie in your As∣semblie, but derived to you from the supreme Magistrate, with an implicite reservation of his own priviledge, to remit it at pleasure, it being no ure divino discipline, I hope (for if such, what becomes of those Churches that use it not?) The malefactours exemption from this, without quaestion, accompanies his largesse of civile mercie, & he stands acquitted from all spiritual, aswell as temporal, punish∣ment: For to suppose the Magistrate takes him from the gaoler, to deliver him to Satan. exchangeth his shakles for chaines of darke∣nesse, his prison for hell, is inconsistent with reason, or charitie, & gets no more faith, then such a cruel sentence hath the face to aske my opinion of its justice. The learned Grotius tells you, how John a Bishop of Rome became intercessour to Justinian the Emperour in the behalfe of poenitent delinquents, that were separated from the union of the Church, asscribing to him the authoritie, & honour of their restitution to the communion thereof. Which argues him, & his Presbyters, (if you admit him not to be single in his jurisdiction) at that time to have had no independent Discipine, to crosse the Em∣perours power, to have been no countermanders of his pardons. That the Magistrates in Holland have very often commanded the Pastours to their dutie in these cases. And that, by an old law in En∣gland, the Kings pleasure was craved before any of his servants could be excommunicated. Fraud in bargaining, false measures, &c. the Bishop takes to be ma∣ters False mea∣sures, &c. maters of civile co∣gnizance. of civile cognizance; He findes them call'd abomination to the Lord, not any where such scandals to the Church, as to require publike satisfaction. What Ecclesiastike rebukes are due, he thinkes may be gi∣ven by particular Ministers in their several charges; without a sum∣mons
before a Consistorian judicatorie. Die Ecclesiae was no praecept of speed; There were two or three errands to be done by the way; The offended brother hath, after conference, a private arbitra∣tion praescrib'd him: Nor doth it appeare that, in cases of this na∣ture, our Saviour sing'd him a warrant to fetch his adversarie to the Church, not a word is there that doth authorize the Church to command him out of the Court, to anticipate, or aggravate the civile censure by the Reviewers Ecclesiastike Rebukes. The Bishop speakes of Presbyterie in the institution, makes no The Revie∣wers 30. yeares expe∣rience no argument of Presby∣terian hene∣stie. instance of it in the practice; I'll take no mans word for discipli∣narian honestie throughout 30. yeares trading. The saints, after that rate; will not be readieat Doomesday to give up their account of compassing the earth, & getting in their inheritance annex'd to their dominion, which they will have founded in grace; If the Presbyteries, wherein all that time you were conversant, were no merchant adventurers, tooke no share of the purchase, they have kept some Jubilee to lease out their indulgence; Or it was, not unlikelie, a piece of your Kirke-policie to connive a long time at all petie larcenie, knowing who at length would be catch'd in the great cheate, the 200000. pound sale of damnation to their breth∣ren, & yet keeping backe whole viols of vengeance, and wrath unto themselves. For the many causes of Ministers deprivation, cognosced upon in your Presbyteries, you have the good liking of neither Papists, nor Prae Their Ca∣nons not the same with those of the ancient Church. lates, who finde no canon, that gives commission to such a mungrel socitie of lay-Clerical Presbyters to take away, what they have no power to conferre. If I give, but not grant, your usurped tyran∣nie a priviledge, by many yeares rebellious precedent, to cognosce of such cases, I must except against clipping of canons; the coyne that beares the Majestike image of the Primitive Church, such as is the 67. in the fourth Councel of Charthage, Seditionarios nunquam ordinan∣dos Clricos, sicut nec usurarios, nec injuriarum ultores. The first of the three Victorem Romanum Epum cir∣ca annum Dui 200. legimus Coenae usu interdixisse injurias condonare nolentibus Th. Erast. thes. 7. had met with your vertous Fore-Father Knox in the Castle of St. Andrewes, & sav'd all the mischiefe we have reap'd by his call from abetting the murder of Cardinals, to rebelling against Princes, ren∣ting the Church, & the Commonwealth into Congregational, & Cove∣nanting parties. The last, which was your injust praetense, if not in your banners, at least in the Remonstrances, which you brought in your hands when you invaded England (Canons holding aswell for depriving, as ordaining) had rid us of all the rable of Rebellious revengefull Presbyters without a stroke. For the businesse of usurie, I shal not draw up my charge till I discover the Scottish Presbyterian
Cantores; Yet you were best have care (whatsoever becomes of the ancient Canons) that you be not too severe in depriving for that, lest you get a rebuke from your brethren abroad, who, it may be, desire not to shake hands with you in that point of the Discipline. The Bishop neither tooke out, nor put in any causes of Church∣mens deprivation, but merelie transcrib'd, what he thought more No canon against re∣bellion, nor deprivation of rebellious Ministers. concern'd a Civile Court, then a Synod. If he had been at the charge of reprinting all whereof your booke of Discipline makes mention, he must have left an &c. to bring up a reserve (though yov will not owne it) of preaching, penning, practizing, schisme, sedition, Rebellion against moderate, just, & pious Kings, aswell as what your Assemblies were solicitous to prohibite, under the terme of Schisme, or Rebellion against the Kirke. For the first, & last of the three sinnes you draw out (because you will have the pleasure, at least, of licking your lips at the naming) His Lordship knowes no Bishop, nor Do∣ctour Presbyters as peccant as Bishops. but may finde a namelesse Scottish Presbyter to give place to. If he should be mistaken (which he hath not so much reason to hope, as charitie to wish) he sees in St. Iames the guilt of murder aequiva∣lent Ch. 2. 11. to adulterie, & made as great a transgression of the law; He heares of Isaiah's triel in Scotland, which deserves the same wonder, 29. 9. & crie of the Prophets. Ye are drunken, though not with wine, ye stagger, though not with strong drinke, &c. And, since your last returne out of England beholds sitting at Edenburgh, aswell as London, the great whore [instead of her blew] arrayed in purple, & scarlet colour, & decked Revel 17. with gold, & pretious stones, & pearles, having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations, & filthnesse of her sornication; And upon the forhead of the woman drunken with the bloud of the Saints, & with the bloud of the Martyrs of Iesus, a name written with a beame of the sunne, Mysterie, Babylon the Great, The Mother of harlots, & abominations of the earth. For the third sinne of glut∣tonie [which you will have produc'd, because in your canon, though not much for your credit that your excessive gossiping comes to be cognosced by your Church] all Bishops, & Doctours may freelie bid desiance to your sect, of whom so manie are so often known to be as fed horses in the morning, & though you flatter your sel∣ves into a conceit that the noyse is not heard, are neighing as much as those in Isai. So that you may in due time have, what you better 5. 9. deserve, the same curse with the Priests in the Prophet Malach which will spoyle your reviewing & singling out other mens 2. 3. crrours, or secret sinnes to the shame of Christianitie among the Na∣tions, when your selves are spiloi, kai momoi, the principal spots, & 2 S. Pet. 2. 13. blemishes that are in it. God may corrupt your seed, & spread dung upon your saces, soleunitatum stercus, even the dung of your solemne feastes, &
you, more likelie then they, may be taken away with it. The Bishops third chalenge mounts somewhat higher then your answer, which pleades onelie for preaching upon texts, concerning Their exer∣cing civile jurisdiction the Magistrates dutie, & resolving, from Scripture, their doubts, both which reach up onelie to a judgement of direction: but his Lordhip cites the clause in your theorem, which makes difficult ca∣ses between King, & people subjects of cognizance, & judgement before the Assemblies of the Kirke, And this, he sayth, riseth to a judgement of jurisdiction. Your second booke of Discipline is more modest in language, though as mischievous in meaning. The Mini∣sters exerce not the Civile jurisdiction, but teach the Magistrate how it should be exerciz'd according to the word; whereas if you take cognizance of, & pronounce judgement in, these difficult cases, Or call before you such as may be more easie, but should be heard otherwhere; this is no other but exercing civile jurisdiction, as spiritual as you make it. If you, with the terrour of your excommunicating Maozin, overaw the Magistrate into a servile submission to what you praescribe, this I take to be no teaching, but commanding, & instead of resolving by de∣liberate advice, & Christian moderation, cutting in sunder with this sword of your spirit (no word of Gods) the knots, & perplexities of his conscience. What doubt-resolvers you are commonlie between Master, & ser∣vant, Their eoco∣nomical su∣perinten∣dencie. husband, & wife, your licentious demeanour in many fami∣lies may informe us, where (it is too well know'n) you have made your selves judges of the trivial oeconomical causes in the hall, & dispensers of, or with, more private duties in the chamber; So that, they say, the good man hath many times met with a consistorian censure at his table, &, if not with a Presbyter a Presbyterian pro∣hibition in his bed: I beleeve you mistake preaching Praelates, & Do∣ctours for some babling Puritanical Pastours, & Lecturers in England, who have made these things, their care, & gone about them, as the uncontrover∣ted parts of their Ministerial function. The Bishops negligence herein was the silent reverence he payd, which you owe, to Majestie at a di∣stance; And His Lordships modest declining domestike curiosities, a civile diversion from that, wherein the word is so cleare, as to need no interpreter, & the Husband or Masters authoritie so absolute, as admits no superintendencie to praedominate. Your license to preach personallie against Princes, I finde given to your Fore-fathers in an answer to the Queenes proclamation 1559 Preaching personallie against Princes. Knox: Hist. Lib. 2. Your tradition still continues the same, touching which (for brevi∣ties sake) I must againe send you (as I can not too often) to the fa∣mous Grotius. De Imper. Sum. Pot, cap. 9.
What the Parliament propon'd to you about the late engagement, Their pro∣ceedings in the late en∣gagement. included no such great scruple of conscience as to long for the com∣fort of your resolution, nor was that, when they had it, the starre by which they steer'd their course, in the businesse. They knew your violence [call'd zeale] to be such, as would force an entrance into the hearts of many poore people, which, when it sindes emptic, swept, & garnished for better ghests, would call in 7 wicked rebellious spi∣rits St. Matth. 12. 43. to possesse them. This epidemical mischiefe they endeavour'd to praevent by acquainting you with the plausibilitie of their enter∣prize, & if they could have praevailed for either your consent, or silence, they should have the lesse need, they thought, to looke backe in the prosecution of their designe. What conjunction soever you found to be at that time driven on, I can assure, you there was a clearlie malignant partie on this side, that found themselves separated, & who trembled at the hazard of their religion, & the persons of them, that were to be most eminent instruments of its praeservation, when they saw such a solemne outward compliance with oathes, & Covenants, & with a Committee of Estates, that declar'd so at large for the for∣mer joint-interest with England, against the Liturgie, & established Declar. Iul. 21. 1649. religion in our Church. Yet their warning against it made no other noyse then sounding of their bowels in compassion to the King, whom they desired to have by any meanes, delivered out of the hands Isai. 63. 15. of the mercilesse Independent, and a tendernesse toward their sweet, & ingenuous Prince, who with his loyal & generous Nobilitie, they feard might be deluded, & fall into the hands of the darke merce∣narie Presbyter, the orthodoxe, untainted partie being not inter∣mix'd in such a visible number, as seem'd likelie to secure them from that danger. The Congregational supplications were naught, but your Consi∣storian jugglings: Your selves sow'd the winde in some whispering Assemblie instructions, & then reap'd the whirlewind. in tumultuous petitions from the people. So that your own spirit first rais'd the storme, & then wrapt it selfe in a mistie multitude for concealment. That the States of the Kingdome sent several expresse messages for that end, viz. to receive an Assemblies replic in a Magisterial De∣claration against their proceedings; in pulpit banning, & cursing; in Clamourous seditions, &, as you could make, militairie opposition, I can not get within the compasse of my faith, & take it to be such a salving of conscience as none but a Scottish Classical Casuist will professe, beyond what any Jesuite in ordine ad spiritualia will challenge with all the rebellious circumstances, that accompanie it. For that filthie conclusion you cast upon the Bishop, we know aswell as if
we had seen it drop, that it came from the corrupt praemises in your head. In the case you produce His Lordship ties not up the tongues of Gods servants, but concludes the counsel of the wicked to be deceit, Gods law not to be taken from your preaching, nor his Covenant Prov. 12. 5. Ps. 50. 16. any more from, then in your mouth. To applie your general to the particular in hand, The warre you thought unlawfull, because it pro∣claim'd libertie to the captive, & the opening of the prison to His Isai. 61. Majestie that was bound; And the law in St Iames, you had no rea∣son to submit to, who may, not uncharitablie, be thought to have 2. 11. resolved upon a connivance at, or collusive neutralitie in the mur∣der, that was otherwise visiblie to follow. The greatest impietie, & injustice, I know, was in it (as exquisite as you are in casting the fashion of uncertain evils) was the advancement of your Covenant in the Van. And, if for that, the Engagers were to expect nothing but the curse of God, I am sure they deserv'd no anathema from your Kirke. If your doubting Nation be put in the scales with your resolving Nation that engaged, I beleeve we must give you at least a graine or two to make it aequiponderate. They, that stated their soules by the councel of your Assemblie, stay'd behinde to praevent all recruit, & oppose the retreat of their more loyal Countrey men upon a possi∣ble misfortune. For the lawfulnesse whereof they had somewhat, worse then silence, from the (miscalled) servants of God, though, I am sure, no authoritie from his word. When Religion, & Royaltie lay panting under the talents of most cruel Rebells, the Civile bu∣sinesse of warre was by the other birds of prey unseasonablie dis∣puted. What concern'd the soul in it, had the cleare sunshine from Isai. 8. 20. the law, & the testimonie to warme, & quicken it, That the Assem∣blie spake not according to this word, was because there was then no light in them, the lampe of the wicked was put out. What the Church declared in their publike papers to the Parlia∣ment Prov. 13. had very litlie of modestie, or truth. It bound up your enga∣gement in so many knottie conditions, as had made it sure enough for vindicating the wrongs the sectarians had done, when the onelie injur'd persons were excluded out of their share in the promised successe. To expect reason by Christian, & friendlie teaties from them that you acknowledge had bid adieu to Religion, & Covenant, when your zealous selves, praetenders to both, never offered any heretofore, was like the fine-spun thread, or Covent garden paper Ianuar. 6. & 29. 1649. you put in afterward between the axe & the Royal head it cut off: If the good people in Scotland were so willing to hazard their li∣ves, & estates; what good Pastours were you that held their hands, & forc'd then to sit still. By whose cunning, & misperswasion the en∣gagement
was spovled, or impeded in the stating, we require no farther evidence then from your pamphlets, By whose rash prae∣cipitancie, or somewhat else in the managing (if it may not be ascribed to the fortune of the warre) is a mysterie yet not perfectlie revealed. The number was large enough, though the most religious, as you call them, were absent, & the armies courage. I thinke had not been much greater by their companie. The lies spoken in hypo∣crisie 1. Tim. 4. 2. did but cauterize the conference of the wretched people that stayd at home. The lethargie, call'd peace, which they slumber in for the time, may hereafter breake out into an active warre, to the ruine of the Assemblie spirits that seduc'd them. The three reasons the Bishop toucheth upon, as the principal, may be the test for the many more that went with them. So that we shall not need to rake in your dunghills for the jewel that you promise, which, when we have found, will not yeild one graine of faythfullnesse in your Church. They, that foretold the destruction that followed, were not unlikelie the instruments to effect it. If the Kings friends should not march till the Assemblie Zedekiahs put on their hornes, though his person be more righteous, we looke his successe should be litle 1. Kings. 22. better then Ahabs, & the Independent Syrians push'd no otherwise then in mockerie and sport, while his loyal subjects should be too se∣riouslie scatered on the hills as sheep that have no shepheard to enfold them. If the misbeliefe, & contempt of whom you call the Lords servants, & the great danger, unto which you make religion be brought, were the onelie losses sustain'd in the last armies misfortune; let those wor∣kers of iniquitie perish, that to the ruine of soules, endeavour to repaire them. What griese of heart, or repentance, hath shew'd it selfe in those persons, you say, contributed to the spoiling but must mea∣ne, unlesse you condemne your selves, such as were forward in promoting that designe, whether in a politike hypocrisie, or (which can hardlie be rationallie afforded then) a misguided sinceritie, will find it to be poenitenda poenitentia, & a hard retreat from the guilt, & shame of that botomlesse penance you praescrib'd them; unlesse their judgement be, as their sinne, the same with his who sold his birth-right, as they theirs to their libertie, for a morsell of bread, a poor inconsiderable temporal subsistence, & may finde no place of repentance, Heb. 12. 16. though they secke it carefullie with teares. Should all the Disciplinarian hands be cut off, that were not held up to the agreement of bringing, by a warlike engagement, the Sectarian partie in England to pu∣nishment, David Lesley would have but a left-handed armie, & His Majestie might relie upon halfe his securitie aswell for his crowne, as his religion. They who, to gaine their arreares, so easilie, I must
say traitourouslie, parted with that Royal person, are not to be credi∣ted as men so unanimouslie resolv'd, with hazard of lives, & estates upon his rescue. Nor can any man, whose faith as not resolv'd into aire, & so, readie to engender with the faint breath of every dissem∣bler, beleeve that they would with such hazard make a long march to the Isle of Wight, who would not, with lesse, conduct His Majestie, a day, or two from Holmebie. But had you been at that trouble, & had Victorie strewed roses in your way, when you should have with pleasure regain'd the rich purchase you went for, I preceive you had been at a losse for a chapman, & a great uncertaintie where to dispo∣se it untill you had got one. For first you talke of bringing the King to one of his houses to perfect the treatit, Then of bringing His Majestie to London with honour, freedome, & safetie, Next of bringing him to sit in his Parliament with what honour, & freedome himselfe should desire; And all these with in the extent of a few lines, which make three degrees of doubt in the Saints, even after their debate of that matter, & universal agree∣ment, not to be quaestion'd. But let us suppose the last, & best of the three in your purpose, & your avant Curriers on horsebacke to ha∣sten it: I see you are pleas'd to call them backe with a quaestion, to which I pray tell me where the Lords servants, or loyal subjects of Christs Kingdome e'r made a like. Yet you shall have your answer by & by, though you shew not the like civilitie to the Bishop, who seemes to state his quaestion thus. Whether when the Parliament, & Ar∣mie of Scotland had declar'd their resolutions to bring His Majestie to London, &c. without conditioning for a promise of securitie, for establishing (at best a con∣troverted) religion, any legitimate full Church Assemblie ought, an illegiti∣mate imperfect Clerical combination or Conventicle, could in ordine ad spi∣ritualia, declare against the engagement; call for the Kings hand, seale, oath, to establisp a cut throat covenant to the ruine of his person, & posteritie, Religion, Lawes, Libertie, Monarchie, & whatsoever His Majestie was, by a solemne oath, & indispensable peswasion of conscience obliged, with the hazard of life & King∣domes, to maintaine. In answer to yours take this. The Parliament, & armie of Scotland in declaring their resolutions, &c. did what they ought, & that ac∣cording to your own principles, for you had the securitie of His Majesties Royal word [more then once] for establishing your Re∣ligion in Scotland, according to the treaties that had been perfe∣cted between the two Kingdomes; If you intended the like cour∣tesie to England, your Parliament, & Armie, had it consisted of none but the Saints, were in no capacitie to take it, being no part of the principals concer'd in the benefit, nor deputed by England to capitulate for it, Therefore their rescuing His Majesties person
out of the Sectaries hands, had been the untying of his, & puting him in a posture to give; The bringing him to his Parliament in London, where likewise your own Commissioners resided, had been the seting him in sight of such as were to aske, & receive. Which is the same kind of Logike you us'd in your answer to both Houses of Parliament upon the new propositions of peace, & the 4. bills to be sent 1647. Where I finde your opinion, & judgement to be this, That the most aequal, fairest, & just way to obtaine a well-grounded peace is by a personal treatie with the King: & that his Majestie for that end be invi∣ted to come to London with honour, freedome, & safetie. For which you offer 6. reasons. 1. The sending of your propositions without a treatie hath been often essayed without successe… Of those propositions this ever was one, To promise securitie for establishing religion, And what better suc∣cesse could now be exspected? 2… His Majesties proesence with his Parliament must be the best, if not the onelie remedie to remove our troubles. This remedie the Parliament, & Armie intended to helpe you to. 3… Without a treatie or giving reasons for asserting the lawfullnesse, & ex∣pedience of the propositions to be praesented, they may be aesteemed impositions. This proposition was to be sent without a treatie, being neither lawfull nor expedient for the many reasons His Majestie had formerlie render'd. I remit the Reader to your paper for the rest, & a great deale more of selfe contradiction (with somewhat worse,) which one of the new English Lights hath discover'd in his answer. But Scot. Mist. dispell'd. you shake of that like an old serving-man which had done your drudgerie in his youth, & bestow your liverie on the Parliaments praecedent, which providence, beleeve me, will save you but litle. Your argument's this: The Parliaments of both Kingdomes in all their for∣mer treaties ever pressed upon the King a number of propositions, Ergo, The Church may desire the granting of one. I should be too courteous in ca∣sting up the numerous account of their rebellions aequal to their propositions, & keep out but a single unitie for you. I shall chuse rather to tell you (cautioning first for the falshood in the fundamental hypothesis) That in cases of treatie the Church of Scotland is subordinate to one, & therefore hath no adaequate conditioning priviledge with the Parliaments of both, Kingdomes, especiallie in her peevith state of opposition to both Secondlie, This proposition desired, is the Trojan horse into which all the rest of your treason's contrived, there being no fraudulent possibilitie, Eccle∣sastike, nor Politike, which your Sinon Assemblie hath not cun∣ninglie lodg'd in the bellie, the winding entrailes, the maeanders, of the Covenant. Your clause in the parenthesis, when the bolts are off, & set at libertie, tells us your meaning is this.
Let the Kings person, & children continue imprison'd, His Queen, Prince, &c. banished, His revenue sequester'd, his life be irrecove∣rablie endanger'd, rather then those of the Scottish Presbyterian partie (for the rest you can not excommunicate out of your nation, though not in your covenant) should run the hazard of their lives, & estates; Which was the true result of your debate, & agreement. That you heard no complaint, when many of the thirtie proposi∣tions were pressed, was, because your eares were stopt against the lamentations of everie English Jeremic that wept for the slaine of the I crem. 91. daughter of his people, being such an Assemblie as the nextverse de∣scribes you. That an out crie, as you call it is made when onelie one proposition is stucke upon, is because that one streightneth the bands of your wickednesse, layes heavier burdens upon the shoulders Isai. 58. of innocencie, & will not let the oppressed goe free; And then Gods Prophets are call'd upon to crie aloud, not to spare, to lift up their voyce like a trumpet, &c. This one was that, the yeilding to which would most of all have violated His Majesties conscience, & in reference to which he tells you 'tis strange there can be no method of peace, but by making warre upon his soul. Yet let the case be disputable, & your tender ex∣cusable, at least in respect of the time, which you say was not to be before His Majesties rescue, but onelie before his bringing to London, &c. If so, why was not His Majestie first rescued, & delive∣red out of the hands of the Sectaries, & then your proposition in∣sisted on? The Bishop tells you the reason out of Humble advice, Edenb. Jun. 10. 1648. viz. lest his libertie might bring your by gone pro∣ceedings about the league, & Covenant into quaestion. All honest Christians, & loyal subjects [though heathen] are of the same beliefe with his Lordship, & whatsoever is their opinion in generall, expect that you prove the innocence, or justice of conditioning in this parti∣cular with your confess'd captive King. Concerning the absolute so∣veraignitie of Kings you are other where answer'd, & if not satisfied, may finde more worke made you by the famous Grotius, whose booke was manifestlie penned against you, & your usurping brother-Re∣bells of England, & bids defiance to all your Didoclaves, Bucha∣nans, & Brutus's of both nations, till replied to. But away with your counterfeit inclination to treaties, which you ever abhorred like death, fearing in that peace, there could be no peace for your wicked selves, & therefore gave publike thankes to God for de∣laying your torments in the disappointment of that at the Isle of Edenb. 12. May. 1649 postser. Wight, aswell by your plots, & devices, as by the Sectaries armed∣force. The holinesse of this religious proposition was but the blinde under favour of which you stalked, & made safer approaches to
His Majesties murder, by another, never hitherto repeald, immuta∣blie design'd; Nor are there many of your publike papers but forespake the destruction of his Royal Person, and Familie unlesse he submitted to the tyrannie of your tearmes, and whether that had quitted him as much from your judgement, as it assuredlie had from his supremacie, and crownes, may be guessed by the experiment he made in his first too full, fatal concessions, which your own Parliament Acts have registred completelie satisfactorie to the demands or desires of all sorts of people in Scotland, which too indulgent paternal, goodnesse having turn'd into poison, you regorg'd in his face by a foreigne invasion, and a base mercenarie rebellion till, like evening wolves, you rent in peices, and prey'd upon his person in the darke. The proposition I meane is that, for which one of your sectarian Scottih mist Dispell'd brethren calls God, Angels, and Men to judge of your dissembling in pressing a personal treatie, when His Majestie formerlie desiring one, you told him, There having been so much innocent bloud of his good subjects shed in this warre by His Majesties commands and commissions, … you con∣ceive that untill satisfaction, and securitie be first given to both his Kingdomes. His Majesties coming to London could not be convenient, nor by you assented to. What satisfaction you meane, we know by your Discipline, which makes murder unpardonable, and then I pray, what securitie could be taken, but his life? If the granting this one proposition you stand upon, concerning Religion, and the Covenant, had draw'n after it (as it seemes by your silence) the satisfaction for bloud, and securitie for your peace. We may clearlie conclude your Religion was Hendersons Prophesie Pap. to K. Ch. 1. Iun. 3. 1646. Esih. 4. 12. murder, and no resting Canaan for your Covenant but in His Maje∣sties death. Which in effect was thus foretold him by that bold Hen∣derson. My soul trembleth to thinke, and to foresee what may be the event, if this opportunitie be neglested. He would not use, he said, the words of Mordecai to Esther, because he hoped beter things. Whereas if his hopes faild him, we may well argue he had us'd them, as you doe, that survive him, in your endeavour that he, and his fathers house should be destroy'd. But that you take confession to be the Doctrine of Antichrist, you Preyters Dearing against Parliament debates. mght, without an ironie, put an ce to your own being criminous, to the purpose, in declaring against the Parliaments debates, which if therfore needlesse, and impertinent, because you thinke, or will have them thought to be so, the Great Councel you make but a subordinate Eldership, or Classe to the supreme Assemblie of your Kike. You are not allwayes so modest as to keep your distance from your English Parliaments affaires; We have for many yeares found you like loving beagles, upon eithers concernment, so closelie coupled in the slip of your Covenant, as if, when the
game should be lost upon eithers default, you meant to be truss'd up together for companie. If it be proper to have any King in Scot∣land, the proper place of debate about his negative voice is as well a free The Kings negative voice proper to be de∣bated in a Scottish Par∣liament. Parliament there as in England. If your lawes admit not of that, they admit of no King, whose Regalitie consisteth in that, nor hath he any legislative authoritie without it. It is the argument of your own Commissioners, who use to fetch their Syllogismes from the Assemblie, therfore you that made it are best able to solve it. Their, or your, words are these. The quaestion is where in his [the Kings] Royal authoritie, and just power doth consist. And we affirme, and hope it can Ans: to both Houses upon the new propo∣sitions and the 4. bills 1647. not be denied, That Regal power, and authoritie is chieslie in making, and enaciing lawes, and in protecting, and desending their subjects, which are of the very es∣sence, and being of all Kings. And the exercise of that power are the chiefe parts, and duties of their Royal office and function. And the scepter, and sword are the badges of that power. Yet the new praeface compared with other parts of these new propositions takes away the Kings negative voice, and cuts off all Royall power, and right in the making of lawes, contrarie to the constant practice of this, and all other Kingdomes. For the legislative power in some Monarchies is penes Principem so∣lum … in other … by compact between the Prince, and the People … In the last the power of the King is least, but best regulated, where neither the King alone without his Parliament, nor the Parliament without the King can make lawes … which likewise is cleare by the expressions of the Kings answers, Le Royle vent, and Le Roys' avisera; So as it is cleare from the words of assent when Statutes are made; and from the words of dissent, that the Kings power in the making of lawes is one of the chiefest jewels of the cronne, and an essential part of Soveraignitie … somet mes the Kings denial had been beter then his assent to the desires of the Houses of Parliament … If I had transscribed all, the Reader had found the argument more full. Out of this, compared with what you write, he may rest assured, that in declaring at that time against the Parliaments debate (which in truth was vindicating the Kings negative voice) you were resolved against Regal Govern∣ment. And whatsoever since you have publish'd in a mocke pro∣clamation, had your Covenanting brethren kept their station in England, the Crowne and Scepter, if not condemn'd to the coyning house, had been kept perpetual prisoners in Edenburgh Castle, whither with funeral solemnitie you have caried them; nor had there been any Royal head, or hand kept above ground for their investment, while your Rebells could catch them, and procure sword, or axe to cut them off. But to follow you in your tracke. If your lawes admitted not absolute reprobation, by a negative voice, they did praeterition by a privative silence, which was all together as damnable to your Parliament bills, they being made Acts by His
Majesties touch with the top of his Scepter, and those irrefragablie null'd which he pass'd by. In what followes, you shew more ingenuitie, then prudence, by acknowledging the ground whereupon you built your censure of Why op∣posed by the Presbyters. this debate in Parliament as needlesse and impertinent, because of the power it might put in the hand of the King, to denie your co∣venanted propositions. But alasse you graspe the wind in your fist, and embrace an anie cloud within your armes, and, like some fond Platonike, are jealous over that jewel you never had. The King of blessed memorie told you, when he spake it to your brethren, He would never foregoe his reason as man, his Royaltie as King. Though with Samson Eic. Bas. Ch. 11. he consented to binde his hands, and cut off his haire, he would not put out his eyet himselfe to make you sport, much lesse cut out his tongue, to give you the legislative priviledge of this voice. That you, at best, sit in Parliament as his subjects, not superiours, were call'd to be his Counsellers, not Dictatours; summond to recommend your advice, not to command his dutie. And what pretie puppets, thinke you, have you made your selves for so many yeares together to the scorne of all nations, when you so formallie pro∣pounded to His Majestie to grant, what you professe he had never any power to denie. What comes next is one of the many springes you set to catch cockes, but your lucke is bad, or you mistaken in your sport. I see The Kings affirmative voice. if you were to make an harmonie of confessions, you would be as liberal of other mens faith, as of your own. What the beliefe is of the warner, and his faction about the absolute affirmative voice of any King, you had heard more at large if you had fetchd your authoritie from any line in His Ld. booke for that demand. Yet to keep up your credit (that you may not mount to no purpose). I will bring one who, in spiritualibus at least, shall take off this sublimate from your hands, and pay you with more mysterie of reason then you have, it may be, found in any other of the faction. Nulla in re magis ciucescit vis summi Imperii, quàm quod in ejus sit arbitrio quaenam religio publicè exercea∣tur, Hug. Grot. De Imper. Pot. cap. 8. idque praecipuum inter Majestatis jura ponunt omnes qui politica scripserunt. Docet idem experientia, Si enim quaeras cur in Anglia, Maria regnante, Romanae Religio, Elizabetha verò Imrante Evangelica viguerit, causa proxima reddi non poterit nisi ex arbitrio Reginarum. Going on in the Religion of the Spaniard, Dane, Swede, he tells you ad voluntatem dominantium recur∣retur. Though I shall onelie give you this quaestion in exchange for your language of concluding, and impeding. If Parliaments have power ad placitum to conclude, or impede any thing by their votes, what part of making, or refusing lawes is to the King?
If the Bishop had challeng'd you for nominating officers of the armie, you are not without some such parrot-praters abroad as No such vicitie need be us'd a∣bout momi∣nating of∣sicers. Ch. 4. can tattle more truth then that out of your Assemblies. Nor need you be so nice in a mater so often exemplified in Knox, & his spi∣ritual brethren, who, as appeares manifestlie by their leters, &c. Were the chiese modellers of all the militia in their time, and His Ldp. having shewed you when your pulpit Ardelios incourag'd the seditious to send for (though in vaine) L. Hamilton by name (and Robert Bruce dispatched an Expresse for him) to be their head. You are here charged onelie with not allowing such as the Parliament had named, because not so qualified as you praetended. That the State ever sent the officers they had chosen, to doe over all the postures of their soules, to discipline either their men or af∣fections before you, and to have your Consistorian judgement of their several qualifications and abilities, is more I confesse then hitherto I have heard of, That you put it to the last part of your answer (relating to no part of the quaeltion) was but to shew what you beare in your armes; That, as plaine as you looke, the crosse on the top of the crowne is the proper embleme of your Assemblie, whom no civile mater can escape, having a birthright from Christ (or depu∣tation at least) to overrule both his Kingdomes upon the earth. Your Ifs & Ands about the necessitie of a warre, in that moment of time, when the British Monarchie Lay gasping for life, demonstrates The Pres∣byters de∣structive demurres. what good meaning you had to praeserve the Person, or Government of Kings. The constant proofe of that integritie you required in the officers, must have been the covenant-proofe of their rebellion, and wickednesse, which, if blemished from the beginning of the warres with no religious, nor loyal impression, no sincere pietie toward God, nor real dutie to the King, had marck'd them out for your Mammon Champions and Goliahs, men most likelie to make good the interest, you aim'd at. This you were before practising in Eng∣land, where your Sectarian Masters, that had set you on horsebacke, mean'd not to take your bridle in their mouthes, and be rid by your ambition to their ruine. Though you advis'd them faire for't in your Papers March 3. 1644. requiring to have the officers in their armie qualified to your purpose… men know'n to be zealous of the reformation of religion, and of that uniformitie. Which both Kingdomes are obiiged to promote, and maintaine, &c. As in September, the yeare before, you told them you could not conside in such persons to have, or execute place, and authoritie in the armie raised by them, who did not approve, and consent to the Covenant. Which I sinde by one, well acquanted with your meaning, Scot. Mist. disp. interpreted thus. You desired to have zeaious hardic men out of the
North, whose judgement about the Covenant, and treatie had concurred so as to introduce your Nation to be one of the Estates of England, to have a negative voice in all things, who would have pleaded your cointerest with the Parliament of England, in the Militia of the Kingdome, disposal of places and officies of trust, &c. Having faild there of your cointerest with the Parliament, you straine here for your cointerest with the King, and would have the com∣manding power of his militant Kingdome in their hands, that should have held His Majestie like a bird in a string, which if he once stretch'd for recovering his own just liberties, or his peoples, they could have pluck'd him in to clip his troublesome wings, or cage him at their pleasure. The firmnesse of your Covenanting Commanders to the interest of God, the Dispeller reveales in his experience of their striking hands with hell, in cursing, and swearing, plundering, and slealing, which might have sill'd the hearts of the people (had your poison not been administred under the guilt of wholesome advice) with more rational jelausies, and feares then any by past miscariages, of them whose designe at that time was very hopefull, and honourable, otherwise then as it caried the fatal praetext of your Covenant be∣fore it. To let the world know how long your mysterie of iniquitie hath been working in the bowells of the State, the Bishop alledgeth an∣cient The Re∣viewers im∣pertinencie in the suc∣cesse of the Spanish Merchants. praecedents of So. yeares standing, from more impartial, more credible relations then those in yourRomance, falselie intitled, An Historical Vindication. What you shovell in here about treacherous correspondence with Spaine, is but an handfull of sand without lime, adhaeres not at all to the Inquisitours troubling the Merchants in their religion, nor that to your admonishing the people to be warie in their trade; nor all at all to the truth which the Bishop tells you was a Synodical Act prohibiting their traffique under the rigid poenaltie As. Dund. 1493. of excommunication, which, all the art you have, can not melt into a friendlie advertisement. Those of the Merchants, whom (you say) the Inquisitours seduced, required no relaxation; Nor were the rest so persecuted as to be discourag'd in their trade, when they petition'd the King to maintaine that libertie, where of your spiri∣tual chaines had depriv'd them. Therfore all your courteous mediation was but a disguis'd Imperious prohibition, whereby you checkt the King, and in ordine ad spiritualia tooke it for granted, you mated him, by the Merchants weake submission, to your Censure.
Could we but once take it your Church in agrieving fit for her The Presby∣terian zeale for the 4. Command∣ment bypo∣critical co∣ver for their breach of the rest. Prov. 11. 9. owne so publike profanesse in the daylie breach of the 5, 6, & other commandaments that follow, we would tolerate her zeale though not commend her discretion, in her will worship, & supersti∣tious nicitie touching the violation of the fourth. But when we finde her enlarging her conscience to laugh at rebellion, murder &c. We guesse her crocodiles teares to be more out of designe then com∣pastion, & her mouth open for the destruction of them, that are not, through knowledge [of her hypocritie] delivered. The profana∣tion of the Sabbath is not so in conjunction with à Monday mercate, but that à Saterdays, journey, with some sixpeenie losse, or à Sunday nights watch, and labour might separate them. Your holie supplica∣tions were leven'd with Iudaisme, which had not the Bishops in Christian libertie eluded, as your advantage might lie, the Parlia∣ment might have next been importund to Dositheus's follie, to erect à rediculous statuarie Sabbath in your Countrey. Though I heare all were not so hard hearted as you make them, but that Pa∣trike Forbes Bishop of Aberdene did translate the mercates (which are none of the least) in his diocese to wednesday, as the provin∣cial records of that place will testifie, From the obstruction made Recreations resections to fit us for spiritual duties. by the rest to your petitions, you cannot inferre, what you have formd in a calumnie about their doctrine, & example on that day. What sorts of playes (which were not all if you reckon right) the most emminent Bishops either us'd, or tolerated, were such as consisted with, and spirited, the Dominical dutie of publike and private de∣votion, wherein they had the authoritie and praecedent of other∣guesse Christians, then any scotish Assemblie praecisians, and se∣conded with reason, such as hitherto, you never seriouslie, and so∣lidelie answered. If they endeavoured to make the Sunday no Sabbath; they did it in a farre better sense, and on better grounds then Rob. Rob. Bruc'es motion to al∣ter the Sab∣bath. Bruce could have changd it, as you know he endeavoured, to We∣dnesday or Friday, and Lent from spring, to Autumne, on purpose to priviledge the pure brethren' in the singularitie of their worship, and free them from a profane communion (though not in the time) with Papists, and Praelates. If the Bishops had a designe to advance their Kingdome by such old licentiousnesse, and ignorance as this innocent li∣bertie might be feard to reduce; We know to whom the Presbyters somewhere are beholding, at least for their Sabbath policie, though The Bruc'es Sunday tole∣ration not so large as the Reformed Church's abroad. they thinke good to enlarge it, beyond Episcopal sports, and playes, to publike mercates, to brewing, fulling, grinding, carying beer, corne, dung, and indeed what not? except opening whole shops, and wearing old clothes; For redressing which I doe not finde your
compassionate prayers to god, or advice to them, (which I remem∣ber you us'd) so effectual as to make any amendment, or gaine any proselytes to your circumcised severitie. Therefore, till you prae∣vaile I pray let the Bishops be troubled no more with what all your flintie fac'd malice can not appropriate to the times, or places of their government. What hath been granted since you cast them out of the Parliament, was by them; that had no more power in one sense to giue then in another to denie. Yet had all your demands meant no worse, then you spake in that about the due sanctification of the day, you might have let them sit still, have had the Souters your friends reconcil'd, and made a better mercate of those Royal concessions, which met too farre (unlesse your gratitude had been greater) your unlimited reguests. For the chalenge that followes, The Bishop knowes so well the historie The mon∣sirous im∣pietie of the Presbyte∣rians in pro∣secusion of their ends. of that time, that he is faine to leave a masse of horrour unstampt in his thoughts, conceiving it uncapable of any due impression by his words. And whosoever shall looke upon Scotland at that time, shall finde it to be nefandi conscium monstri locum, a place that had bred such an hideous monster, as neither Hircania, Seythia; nor any of her Northerne sisterhood would foster. Not long before, when the Queen was great with child of that Prince, to whom you professe so much tendernesse soon after, not valuing the hazard, of that Ro∣yal Embryo, you hale her Secretarie, her principal servant of trust from her side and murder him at her doore; Because the King would not take upon him the praerogative guilt of that cruel mur∣der, according to the instructions you had given him, you finde him uselesse must have him too dispatchd out of the way, which was done, though not by the hands, by the know'n contrivance of Murray in his bed, his corps throw'n out of doores, and the house blow'n up with gunpowder where he lay. To get a praetense for sei∣zing upon the yong Prince, you make the Queen and E. Bothwell (because her favourite) principals in the murder of his father, pos∣sesse the people with jealousie; of the like unnatural crueltie inten∣ded to him. Hauing got the Royal infant in your hands, you not onelie null the Regencie of his mother, vou worke all the villanie you could thinke on against her person in his name, and make him, before he knew that he was borne, act, in your blacke or bloudie habits, the praevious parts of a matricide in his cradle. In order here∣unto the Queen (as you say,) was declared for Poperie, which re∣quires some Presbyterian Rebell glossarie to explaine it, there being no such expression to be found in the language of any orthodoxe, loyal Christians in the world. In this conjuncture of wickednesse,
that no other way of safetie was conceivable for your Protesting, and Ban∣ding religion, but a continued rebellion, no other to make sure of the infant King for your prisoner, the Kingdome your vassal, but by such a grand combination in treason, may be granted at sight of your several praeceding desperate exploits. For this end your Ge∣neral Assemblie might crave conference with such of the secret Councel who were as publike Kebells as your selves. That your advice was mutual whose end and interest was the same, is not to be doubted, saving that we may observe such godlie motions to spring first from the vertuous Assemblie, as you confesse touching this. Your call was in much more hast then good speed, and your considerable persons con∣ven'd a great deale more frequentlie then they covenanted. Argile, that did, slept not wel the next night, nor was he well at ease the day after, till he had reveald your treason to the Queen Knox tells you, That the people did not joine to the lords, and diverse of the Lib. 5. Nobles were adversaries to the businesse. Others stood Neuters, The slender partie that subscribed your bond began to distrust, were thinking to dissolve, and leave off the enterprise a confessed ca∣sualtie gave up the Victorie, with the Queenes person, unhapilie into your hands. This mixed, & extraordinarie Assemblie had litle sincere, 1560. or ordinarie maners to call that a Parliament, which was none, having no commission nor proxie from their Soveraigne and to make it one chiefe article in their bond, to defend, or endeavour to ratifie those Acts, which their Soveraigne would not, when the lord St. Iohn caried them into France. But they persisted in the same rebellious principle, professing in terminis that tender to have been but a shew of their dutifull obedience And that they beg'd of them (their King and Queen) not any strength to their Religion, which from God had full power, and needed not the suffrage of man &c. They are Knox's words, which, were there no Lib. 3. other evidence, are enough to convince any your aequitable comparers. That the just authoritie of Kings, and Parliaments in making Acts, or lawes is in consistent with the Presbyterian government. Which is the summe of the controversie in hand. No secret Councel, especiallie, if in open rebellion, can impower an Assemblie to issue letters of summons when their Prince's publike Assemblies have no po∣wer to sum∣mn contra∣rie to the Kings pro∣clamation. proclamation disclaimes it. The greatest necessitie can be no colour to that purpose, Though, what srivoulous ideas of great necessities the Presbyterie can frame, we may judge by their late procedings in our time. Your religion, and liberties seem then to have been in no such evident hazard, as you talke of; if they were, you may thanke your selves, who had the Royal offer of securitie to both, the Queen onelie conditioning, & craving, with teares the like libertie of conscience
to her selfe The life of the yong King was daylie, indeed, in visible danger from the hands of them, who had murderd his father, and ravished the crowne, or Regencie from his mother, but who they were I have told you. In such an ambiguous time men of any wisdome, other then that which is carnal, and worldlie, and so follie before God, would have beta∣ken them selves to their prayers, & teares; men of courage, and pietie would have waited the effects of providence, and not so distrust fullie, deceitfullie peic'd it with their owne strength. From such lovers of Religion, as contest, covenant, depose, murder; as rage, ruin, proscribe, excommunicate, Libra Reges, & Regiones Domme Cantic. 8. 6. 7. Good Lord deliver Kings, & countreyes from them all; Fortis est, ut , dilectio; jura sicut infernus amulatio, Their love is strong as death, in the letter: their jealousie is cruel as the grave; The coales thereof, are coales of fire, which have a most vehement flame; No waters of widowes or orphans tea∣res canquench it; No flouds of innocent bloud can drowne it. It's not unlikelie the Praelates resolution may be, That when a most wic∣ked companie of villaines had deposed two Queenes and killed one King; endeavourd to smother the spotlesse Majestie of a Royal Son with the fowle guilt of their injurie done to his Gracious Mo∣ther, which they cast enviouslie upon his name: And after these to draw a Nation, and Church, under the airie notion of a true Religion, never establishd by Law of God norman, into a Covenanting Rebel∣lion: And a free kingdome under a legal Monarchie into an illegal op∣pressive tyrannie. That in this case there ough to be a general meeting of Church and state, to vindicate Majestie, lawes, libertie, and provide remedies against such extraordinarie mischiefes. That the Presby∣terian Scots never were, nor will be of this opinion, I take your word, and beleeve it. Take this supplement with you That E. Bo∣thewell Contradi∣iion. should kill the King to make way for Poperie, and Murray be∣fore endeavour to hinder his mariage with the Queen, under a prae∣tense of a designe by that then to bring it in (which historie relates) will cost some paines to reconcile Errours and abuses in Religion, the The Assem∣blies can re∣forme onelie according to canon, not the canon. ordinarie reformation whereof is referred to your Ecclesiastical Assem∣blies, are such onelie as appeare to be peccant against the ordinarie rule or canon by just authoritie established; But that the Canon it selfe should be alterable at the pleasure of subjects in a combined Assem∣blies declining their subordination to a superiour power in King, and Parliament; and making them selves not onelie absolute to act, but supreme to praescribe, is contradictorie to all law, and aequitie nor can any necessitie countenance it. What you finde wrong in the Church, according to your method, must be no other, then that, which had been formerlie decreed in some of your Assemblies, which must im∣plie
a fallibilitie in their application of the rule; This errour when you goe about to rectifie from the word of God, you may chance to have no clearer evidence then your praedecessours, nor the people assu∣rance, that your eyesight is better. So that, for ought they know, one blinde Assemblle may leade another by the hand and both with their followers fall into the ditch. Beside It may so hapen, that re∣ligious Acts, answerable to the word, may be offensive to some wicked Assemblie, that have not the feare of God before their eyes, These if they have the power, to be sure they want not perverse∣nesse to abolish, for which I finde no cautionarie restraint in your discipline. For, after you have praetended to rectifie if upon your dis∣sembling petition a following Parliament refuseth to ratifie that you have power to abolish, and establish what you please, I finde every where confessd by your faction. And this indeed, as you say, is your ordinarie method of proceeding in Scotland, but in no other Reformed Countrey, who every where attribute to the Magistrate an Archi∣tectonike power in the Church, and but a ministerical, or instrumental to any Synod or Assemblie, Videlius, and other your brethren of note on this subject making you Bellarmines papists, though when your Kings, stand publikelie in opposition against you for the maintenance of their right, 'tis quaestionable whether his most plausible reasons will as well priviledge you in his doctrine. The legal method of En∣gland you know well enough is otherwise, and therfore can not ad mit of your Discipline without altering the fundamental lawes, the most essential part of gouverment in our kingdome. The three foolish, & unlearned quaestions that follow tell us you 2. Tim. 2. 23. 24. are in the mind to gender strises, rather then according to Saint Pauls counsel, follow righteousnesse, fayth, charitie, or peace. To the first I an∣swer. Christians of old, before the Emperial lawes for paganisme were revoked, Ancient Assemblies reversed no Civile la∣wes. Euseb. were more or lesse hindred from embracing the Gospell, according to the zeale, rigour, remissenesse or clemencie of the Emperours that reigned. Those that obeyd not their commands, suffer'd their pu∣nishments, resisted no powers, reversed no lawes. Nay, its as high a trial as can well be instanc'd, when Maximilian, & Diocletian publishd an edict to demolish their Churches, and burne their Bibles, because one was found that in great in dignation tore the paper in peices, being con∣demned to die, all Christians that heard it approved the sentence, and commended the justice of the pagan Magistrate in his execution. To the second thus. The oecumenical and National Snods of the ancients Reformed no haresies ith out the Emperour. had ever the praesence or authoritie of the Emperour, without which they reformed no haeresies nor corruptions in religion. Who by ratifying their canons did cancel all the lawes of state, which did
protect those errours When this could not behad but with praeju∣dice to religion, the Emperours them selves being draw'n in by the hae∣retikes to their partie, they onelie declared their different opinion, submitted to censure, were disspersed in exile, nor did they coun∣termand by the terrour of excommunication, and cursing, but when summond by the Emperour to rectifie any abuses in the Church. This may be seen in the time of Constantius addicted to the Arians. To your third I answer thus. The civile lawes in Britanie, I meane for our part in it, whereby Poperie was established, were annull'd by the King, whom we make absolute in that power. If the reforma∣tion begun by Hen: 8. be thought clogg'd with any seeming vio∣lence, sacriledge, or schisme (which some ties on his conscience Henrie the eight's re∣formation the occasion not the origi∣nal of ours. that requir'd a more deliberate solution, and some indirect passio∣nate procedings give the Papists a kinde of coloural argument to object) I see not how you are justified that imitate it, nor we bound to susteine the inconveniences that attend it, who may fairlie make the reigne of K. Edward our epoch, and from him, in his first Par∣liament, fetch our authoritie for the change. On your side of Bri∣tain, I finde naught but a continued rebellion in the reforming par∣tie Scotish Pres∣byterians from the begining shisme. (as you meane it) till K. Iames grew up to a judgement of discer∣ning and some resolution of restraining: Nor till that time (though I hope well of many thousand persons under a Presbyterian perse∣cution) can I in reason quit the praevalent part of your Church from a succession in schisme. For Germanie and France I have no more to do at this time to be their judge then their advocate, seeing no where His Lp. joyning with his brother Issachar in impleading then for rebellion. All you can logicallie collect is such a major as this. They who reforme according to the Presbyterian Scotish metod by abolishing Acts of Parliament in a surreptious or violent Synod, by framing Assemblie Acts for religion, and giving them the authoritie of Ecclesiastical lawes, without or against the consent of the Magistrate cheate the Magistrate of his civile power in order to religion. If you will needs be assuming in behalfe of your brethren in Germanie and France, they must put you to prove it, or quit them selves of your conclusion as they can. In the meane time I see your pasture is bad that you turne your catell so often grazing abroad. For the foole in the next line you send to the Bishop, I guesse it may be his minde to have him return'd by the creature that caries None but they have declared Bi∣shops & ce∣remonies unlawfull. his brother Issacha burden, expecting a wiser answer by the next paper Mercurie you imploy; which can not be without bringing to light that law that praeauthoriz'd the Ministers protestation against the Acts of Parliament 1584. And that Act of Parliament since the null Assemblie of Glasgow yet standing in force that made Bishops
and ceremonies vnlaw full; The former, beside the contradiction it caries with it, devolving the legislative power upon the Kirke, which according to you can keep the Parliament in awe not by pe∣titioning but protesting, and so ratifie or null all lawes declared at her pleasure; The latter, beside the long perseverance in sinne it impu∣tes to the Latin and Greek Churches, as well before as after the cor∣ruption in either, the late warmnesse to all Reformed Churches abroad, which never hitherto in any National Assemblie declared regular Episcopacie and ceremonies unlawfull, outdoing the very Act of abolishing which his Majestie in Parliament ratified with re∣ference to no unlawfullnesse, but inconvenience, & retracted that too in his too late, yet seasonable, repentance afterward. Though for what His Lp. objects, were there too after Acts of Parliament to ratifie the substance of what the Kirke repraesents, no one of them thereby justifies the circumstance of Ministers mutinous protesting against lawes made in houres of darkenesse, upon what misinformation soever, which is treason against man and excusable by no formal obedience toward God. This for the Bishop to publish, being one of the Governers of that Church which strangers plot what they can to seduce into the same rebellion, with their owne, is no contemning of law, but discharging his conscience and dutie in his place. By the next storie the Bishop will gaine a more perfect discoverie of your resembling those grievous revoiters in Jeremie, who walke with slanders, being brasse & iron; Who bend your tongue like a bowe for lies, and Ch. 6. 28. Ch. 9. 3. yet, when the true case is know'n be accounted by Solomon but a fool for your labour. In King James's minoritie who stole his name (though they ner had his heart) to act by it the most unnatural op∣presion of that most gallant Queen his vertuous and gracious mo∣ther, Capt: I. Siuart vin∣dicated. to murder and banish many noble assertours of the reformed orthodoxe religion, & lawes, appeares upon publike record in your storie. This one Capt. Iames Stuart very noblie with standing your divellish temptations to have him maintaine a distructive dissention at Court with Esme Stuart. E Lenox, a faythfull subject & most de∣serving favourite of the Kings, & improving that litle interest you helpt him to, to a more Christian conjunction in love and loyaltie, and a double vigilancie over the Kings person exposed too often to your treacherous designes, is unlikelie to have any better character at your hands then what you commonlie give to persons of such si∣delitie and honour. His advancement to the titles & estate of E. Ar∣ran & Chancellar of Scotland, was partlie in reward of his guardian care over him whom somwhat else beside sicknesse had made unfit for the management of either. Yet were not these taken by force
But on free session, then desperate; to whom if the King were nea∣rest in bloud (not to mention a third which your zealous professours commonlie finde him) his Majestie had a double title to his lands, & a power undisputable to dispose of the Chancellars office at his plea∣sure. What beside Capt. Iames's unheard of oppressto is (which dirt his zea∣le for religion contracts when it passeth through the uncleane cha∣nell of any Presbyters mouth) troubled the Nobilities Patience the reader may finde somewhat more trulie and impartiallie related not onelie in the Apocriphal histories of the two Rt. Reverend Arch-Bishops of Canterburie and Saint Andrewes; but even in the Cano∣nical tradition of Philadelphs Vindicatour, who praemiseth some repulse your Church Delegates had about their querulous petitions; A difference that fell out between E. Lenox & Gowrie about some point of honour, to revenge which he calls Murre, Glame and di∣verse other disquiet discontented spirits into a confaederacie, whom you call a number of the prime best affected nobiiitie, which improper title he more ingenouslie declines in a peice of Rethorical ignorance, putting his hand more modestlie before his eyes, as loth to looke The treason at Ruthuer. on their sinfull rebellious demeanour. Qualcscunque fuerint plerique eo∣rum non multum laberabo … qualis quisque corum suerit nescio: applies the blinde mans speach' in the 9. of Saint Iohn. to the authours of the miracle in this change; And beside the mere boast & no violence you re∣joyce Saint Iam: 4. 16. in, confesseth diverse of the Kings servants were wounded among the rest William Stuart, the newes whereof brought Capt. Iames thither. Who was not chaced away by their strong breath, but clapt up into a castle by their power, the Kings guard being be∣fore remov'd from him, and His Majestie taken by Gowrie and his conspiratours into custodie; The E. Lenox banished into France, where with in a short time he died, whether by griefe principallie, or his sicknesse, he defines not, He addes, That the Heads of this faction sent the Abbot of Paslet to your Assemblie at Edaenburgh for their approbation, who what soever they did afterward, at that time onelie thanked God for deliverance (viz from the imminent instice of the law to which most of their Members were lyable) durst not approve the businesse, or appeare to doe it at least; put up a non'sense petition to God, praying him it were well done after it was done, and whether well or ill then unalterable by their prayers, or indeed by devine power, whose omnipotencie is not limited when denied to make good moral contradictions, to pleasure an hy∣poeritical Assemblie; He speakes nothing of the Kings sending to his Councel or judicatories to declare the act of the Lords convenient and lawdable, for which he expected no reasonable mans credulitie
nor patience, unlesse so farre as to spit it backe into his face: Nor yet of His Majestics entreating the Assemblie, but of their sending Delegates to him. The answer he gave them, if any, or such as the Vindicator hath helpt us to, is much different from yours, and though not extorted by the terrour of death, which may well be suspected by the successive treasonable attempts of the same Go∣wrie and his sonne afterward, gives litle approbation of the fact, being onelie his acknowledgement of a blessing from God for de∣livering his person and the Commonwealth from mischiefe, by which doubtlesse he meant the happie praeservation of his life. So that I againe appeale to your aquitable comparers, what historical truth we are likelie to have of your penning; when seting one Discipli∣narian brother against another, without consulting unprinted re∣cords, we can confute you line by line among your selves. The let∣ter His Majestie sent to Q. Elizabeth was forced. Regem invitum compu∣lerunt, sayth Camden, where by he allowed no more that act for good service, then he would have done a thiefe for taking but his purse, when he might likewise have had his life, But to proceed. Capt: I'ames shortlie after crept not in, but was calld, Revocatur Aranius sayth your brother. Therevenge (whether obtaind by him or no) was but the justice of the law, executed with litle severitie upon any, but moderated by the mercie of a gracious King, and tenderd to all upon submission. But traitourous Assemblies giving universal allo∣wance for possible misfortunes, had ever an aftergaime of treacherie in reserve. Therefore the Ministers running at this time into a vo∣luntarie exile was upon the apprehension of their guilt, & diffiden∣ce, even in the word of a King for their impunitie if not rather a designe to make His Majestie secure, and so to praepare for the trea∣son at Striveling that followed few moneths after, where not onelie Capt: I ames was chac'd away, but the Kings life endangerd, for which Gowrie very justlie payd his owne. These their actions were ratified by no Parliament but a partie, nor stand they justified by any butsuch as were the actours. The action at Ruthuen being with the advice of the three Estates Assembled in Councel judge and pu∣blished to be treason in December 1583. And not onelie M. Baylie declar'd a Traytour, but all they that disclaime not his booke which justifies that treasonable attempt, by Act of Parliament 1584. cap. 7. If the Bishop had traced your Assemblie rebellions by their an∣nual succession, and not jumpt from the yeare 84. to 48, he might have made it 58. before he got up to your Articles of Striveling. You have not hitherto kept such even pace with His Lp. as that you can with credit say your selfe wearie. If you speake in good earnest (as I ob∣serve
you in some journeys short winded) I despaire of your com∣panie in the 64. yeares travell still behind, for which I thought to call upon you hereafter. In the meane time, since I meet with you at Striveling, I will take you by the hand, till I bring you in sight (suppos'd you are not peevishlie bent to walke blind fold) of the praecipice you tend to in your entrance upon the justification of that article which referres the worke of Reformation abroad in En∣gland and Ireland to the determination of the Generall Assemblie of your Kirke. If you wet your foot by the way you may thanke your selfe, the Bishop opens no sluce, onelie turnes that streame of choler upon you, which you on the least occasion let goe like a torrent upon the Pope and his Conclave of Cardinals at Rome. The sraud used to allure you, if any, was pia sraus, a devout slight to bring you into the concent of the primitive Christians, and the violence offered by the English praelates was onelie with the sufferance of heaven, which they S. Macth: 11. 12. thought peradventure to take by the force and fervencie of their prayers, which they often put up for your conversion from schisme, and for your communion in religion with themselves. If a god'lie The King can not be sayd to in∣vade the Presbyter: Consistorie. Kings conscientious command, with the mature advice and fre sub∣ordination of the Reverend Fathers of your Church, be no lesse then invading your Consistorie, the Bishops floud of choler ran some∣what too gentlie in as king you whether old Edenburgh were turned new Rome, whereas he might have, in reason, demanded whether your Presbyterships be not so absolute as to barracadoe your brasen gates, and not suffer him that hath the keyes of hell and death to come in. What∣soever Rev: 1. 18. was the yoke and by whomsoever imposed, between that and your contented compliance (without any violence or invasion no quaestion) with the earnest desires of the well affected in England, you should in honestie have left some vacant roome for a more in∣genuous impartial hand to insert the time of taking of this yoke from your hard neckes, with the several Acts of Pacification that follo∣wed it; And that clause in the publike Act of Parliament wherein the well affected in Scotland profess'd His Majestie parted a contended King from a contended people; And then have put it to your ae suitable com∣parers what travaile and paines it concern'd you to take in purging one the leaven of Episcopacie & in the English & Irish Churches, when you should have been purging the leaven of malice out of the Scuts. The managing of which great & good worke became such a Parliament to instruct, & such an Assemblie to undertake, who studie that destruction which, Prov: 24. 2. c. 27. 20 Tert: De Praeser: ad∣vraeser hae∣ret. c: 42. like hell is never full; and so the eyes of such men are never satisfied…haue magis gloriam Captant si stantibus ruinam, non st jacentibus elevationem operen∣jur, quoniam & ipsum opus corum non de suo proprio adificio venit, sed de ve∣ritatis
destructione. The Arminianisme and Poperie whereof Doctour Laud Arch-Bp. Lauds Ar∣menianisme & Pperie the doctrin. of scripture and the Fa∣thers. stands convicted, hath had several appeales to Scripture and Fathers, which is as much as you can shew us for your Creed; his Tyrannie, to the lawes and highest authoritie in our Church, aequivalent with the most your discipline can praetend to A conviction of these I dare promise you will not stand long with out an answer. In the inte∣rim, while your Northwinde is set to drive away the first and the latter raine dropt downe fron those clouds of heaven, the Apostles, and Prophets, & successours to them both, to make good Solomons si∣militude, the Bishops angrie countenance is seasonablie, though ineffectu allie bent against your backbiting tongue. Your discoveries are your unskil∣full Prov. 25. 23. mistakes of rockes for firme land; your disappointment delayes of Gods worke, who will in his owne time accomplish it, And though too great a number in the Christian flocke follow such as you for their bellwether or leading ramme, they will flie as fast from you when they espie you in your proper shape to be a wolfe. Photinus was serv'd so who had a great deale more wit, learning, & eloquence to seduce them. Nam erat & ingenij viribus valens, & doctrinae opibus excel∣lens, & eloquio praepotens, sayth Vincentius; yet this doome befell Advers: hares: cap: 16. him soon after; quem antea quast arietem gregis sequebantur, cundem dein∣ceps veluti lupum fugere coeperunt. What is answered by you before, is replied to and aggrovated. The two stories that follow have those authours whose truth is more currant with you then Spotswoods, though his hereafter will shew it selfe more valide then yours or any others whatsoever. The for∣mer is penn'd at large by Iohn Knox, enough in conscience to ren∣der him the authour of that sedition here mentioned. Hesayth not Ariote un∣der praeten∣se of taking Priest at Masse. his zealous hearers understood of a Priest at Masse and immediatelie brake in, but consulted how to redresse that enormitie, and by agreement appointed those to waite on the Abbey who, you say, with violence brake in and sez'd upon his person and Masse clothes. That Madam Baylie, your Namesake, Mistris to the Qucenes Dountibures as he scoffinlie calls her posted out with deligence to the Comptroller the Lard of Pittarrow…cried for his assistance to save her life and the Queenes Palace; That he tooke with him the Provost & Baylies; That Armstrong and Cranston were summond to sinde suretie to underlie the law the. 24 Octob. for a fore thought felonie, praetended murder, and for invading the Queenes Majesties Palace of Halyrud house, and spoliation of the same. That he writ to the brethren in all quarters, requiring their assistance Abetted by Kno & im∣proid to a rebellion. on the day of their trial. That his letter was intercepted and sent to the Queen, whereupon he was summond before the Queen and Councel; That when he made his appearance. His clients the Brethren of the Towne followed in such number,  the inner Close was full and all the staires even to the chamber doore wher
they sate; That he confessed his vcation of the Queenes leiges &c. That if in that he had been gniltie, he had oft offended since he came last in Scotland, demanding (Sawcilie) what vocation of Brethren had ever been to that day unto which his pen had not served, That he told the Queen, If her Majestie complained that this was done without her Majesties commandement, so had all that God had blessed within the Realme from the beginning of this action, meaning the Presbyte∣rian Reformation; That he was a watchman both over the Realme and over the Church of God gathered within the same; by reason whereof he was bound in conscience to blow trumpet publikelie so oft as ever he saw any appearance of dan∣ger either of the one or of the other. This Act, thus related, the Bishop will have (what you can not disprove) to be a huge rebellion, not onelie in the Actours, but also in Iohn Knox, who was praesent, if not in person, by full consent and approbation. To breake open the Royal Palace to bring any delinquent to trial is according to no law but what your Rebellious Assemblie hath framed. That this Priest saying Masse within the Li∣berties of the Court did contrarie to law (the Queen having ever reser∣ved that priviledge to her familie) remaines yet to be proved. You Vit: Eliz. . 563 did the like to the Arch-Bishop of Saint Andrewes, which Camden tells you was permitted by law, and, though you had Murrays autho∣ritie for it, accounts you no better then Rebells for your paines… Servidi Ecclesiae Ministri, Moravij authoritate suffulti, vim facerent impune sacerdoti, qui missam in aula (quod lege permissim erat) (doe you marke it) celebrârat. Iohn Knox's confession (which I gave you under his hand) may be the harbinger to lodge credit enough to the next storie that fol∣lowes in any man that knowes what superstitious observers your Assemblies have been of all the principles and praecedents he gave them; Nor need you be so coy in taking upon you here the defense of their Convocating the people in armes, which you are forc'd to do other where (as well as you mince it into god'lie directions and conscientious advertisement) and upon lesse colourable occasions approve it every where when done. Though Mr. Spotswood's testimonie can not be refused in the particular evidence he gives in, yet I'll be confined for once to your owne brother in Evill that confutes him. When Assemblie's summoning the people in Armes upon the trial of Popish Lords. his Grace relates the Ministers commanding the people to armes. Your brother playes the Critike upon the word, but grants the mat∣ter in controversie between them, and justifies it from the danger that was at hand from the Popish Lords whom he makes Conspira∣tours with Spaine. Hortate sunt (nam jubere aut imperare non poterant) quod um in tanto periculo constitutae essent & respublica, & Ecclesia, illus, vitio vertendum non est. When his Grace sayth planilie, The King praefixed a day for their trial, the menacing libells put up in the name of a natio∣nal
Synod, the tumultuarie meeting of the faythfull deferr'd it, and made the onelie remedie a necessitie of his remitting their exile. Your brother denies not one clause of all this, but onelie moderates the termes, and enlargeth in some particular circumstances that ag∣gravate the fact, viz. That they appointed a fast this I hope was done by the Assemblie) That they moved the King to appoint a day for their trial, & the Barons those of Perth not to admit them, which advice or injunction they followed till they had received letters from the King, which because they obey'd the brethren tooke pet & armes for the defence of reli∣gion (by whose advice let any man judge) That the King commanded the Conspiratours to submit themselves in a small number to a judical proceeding. That upon the 12. of November they met at Edenburgh; The Conspiratours pleade by their lawyers &c. Propound their conditions; The King declares in a speach the inconveniences very likelie to followe if the Lords were not restored, That an Ast of oblivion was voted, which offended the brethren. What Sedi∣tious Sermons and actions ensued appeares undeniablie in your sto∣rie. Let this be compared with the Bp of Derries relation. That the King was forced to take armes, come upon a fatal necessitie by your rebelling when your importunitie praevaild not. How farre he pursued them. What acts of grace he afterward vouchsafd them you there fore conceale because it confutes what your imperfect histo∣rie imports. CHAPTER VIII. The divine right of Episcopacie better grounded then that prae∣tended in behalfe of Presbyterie. HAd I any hopes to keep you in your wits when you were revi∣ved, I would here sprinkle a litle cold water & pitie upon your faynting spirits, who any man may see are giving up the ghost by your grasping and catching at what you finde within reach, and not liking the lookes of that spirit which appeares readie at hand to conduct you, would have, you care not whether, Anti-Christian Bishop or Papist to secure you. His Lp. having remonstrated at lar∣ge your exorbitand power, here summarilie shewes how by the di∣vine right you praetend to, this sore is incurable, your selves incorrigi∣ble, and how Princes must necessarilie despaire of recovering or
keeping thairs, while Christs Kingdome is yours, and you have Christs Scepter in your hand. The streame of divine Rhethorike and rea∣son he brings for it, you and your Companie, whom the prophet Isai. Describes to be a troubled sea that can not rest, whose waters cast up mire Isai. 57. 20 and dirt, hope invisiblie to swallow. To which if Mercurius Aulicus must be initled Let Britannicus be more properlie to yours, whom I have often heard to be a Common lawyer, but must now take him for some classical divine, since you have grac'd him so much as to serive most of his mater & language into your booke. How unhappie soever you make the Bishop in this chalenge, as in the rest, he caries fortune enough in his argument to confute you. —Misero cui plura supersunt. Quam tibi faelici: post tot quoque funera vinet. Those of his brethren who stand for the divine right of the Discipline of the Church, doe it chieflic in reference to that power of order and the distinction they finde of Bishop from inferiour Presbyters in the Power of or∣der and ju∣risdiction. text. They that draw in the other power of jurisdiction, relate onelie to what they finde practic'd by the Apostles, or by God in them, going under the name of excommunication and the keyes How many circum∣stancials must passe for substancials, when determind by the judicato∣ries of your Church, and be made adaequate in divine right to the general rules to which you reduce them need not here to be num∣berd, being scatered every where in this discourse, and very ob∣vious to the Reader in your storie. But in answer to what the Bi∣shop objects of geting both swords spiritual and temporal into your hands, the one ordinarilie by common right, the other extraordinarilie; the one belonging direct∣lie to the Church, the other indirectlic; the one of the Kingdome of Christ, the other for his Kingdome in order to the propagation of religion and (to let the Pa∣pist a lone whom, out of what mysterie I know not, you very of∣ten, me thinkes call to your assistance) I pray name one of his Lp's learned brethren that ever writ for't what concessions have pass'd from the elder Edward and Elizabeth Praelates of England, or what from the later Erastians, as you style them, in diminution of the jus divinun of Episcopacie desends not to the jus humanum in your sense, there The midd, le Apostolical right of E∣piscopacie. being midle Apostolical right participant of both, enough to consti∣tute an immutabilitie in their order, whatsoever change their juris∣diction may admit of at least such as they finde aequivalent to the communicating of women, baeptizing of infants, observation of Sunday; which when you bring arguments to unfixe, you may with greater confi∣dence treate against Bishops wherein those friends His Lo. hath about the King are so perfectlie instructed that they laugh at your sillie stra∣agems to pervert them being such as, if at any time they repraesent
to His Majestie as you earnestlie desire, will thereby, no quaestion confirme his pious resolution in the continuance of that holie order especiallie since the maxime you build upon, That conscience is bottom'd onelie upon a divine right, they finde ruind by Saint Paul in his doctri∣ne Conscience not bottom'd onelie upon a divine Right. Rom. 1. v. 2. ch. and practice, who convinceth the heathen upon the right or prin∣ciples of nature, and argues from the testimonie of conscience they had sufficientlie bottom'd upon the worke of the law written in their hearts; Nor had he ever converted any of the nations without divine re∣velation antecedent, I meane in them aswell as in himselfe (which had made lesse effectual and pertinent the ministrie of the Gospell) if no moral arguments had obliged their consent. How farre this is applicable to Episcopacie (though were it not, it is to your argu∣ment against it) I am not here to discusse onelie intimate I may that in proportion it is possible as much to a sacred, as civile, Monar∣chie (I meane not coordinate) & the later, had it not the law of God hath the language of nature importunate to commend it I will trifle with you no farther in this matter, but lay downe this conclusion which you may take up to what advantage you can. That in a thing Alterations unsate and sinfull while conscience is doubtfull. ambiguous, such as you here seem to give, if not grant, Episcopa∣cie to be, since no command of God nor warrant from scripture en∣joynes or tolerates the change: since no Apostolical nor Christian Church for so many hundred yeares before that single citie of Ge∣neva began it, since neither that nor any other besides ever acted or at least publikelie avowed what change you demand in the many particulars that have been, and shall be, inserted in this dispute, to the inevitable subversion of Regal government; to the confusion of Christian subjection in the enjoyment of just libertie; to the plaine praejudice of Parliament priviledge in three dominions; to the seting up of much spiritual and carnal wickednesse; some grave reverend Divine might modestlie speake a word in season and say, His Majesties conscience can not at the best but doubt, and doub∣ting ought not by the law of God and rule of reason to resolve on it. Which indeed is the substance of his Royal Fathers printed pro∣fession. That he found it impossible for a Prince to praeserve the state inquiet, unlesse he had such influence upon Church men and they such a dependance on him The reasons of K. Ch 1. against a change. Peace. as might best restraine the seditious exorbitances of Ministers tongues &c. And this is onelie to be had in that government, which was one bottome for his conscience… That since the first age sor 1500, reares not one example can be produc'd of any sotled Church, wherein were many Ministers & Congregations Antiquiti. Vniversa∣litie. which had not some Bishop above them, under whose jurisdiction and government they were. This was another bottome for his conscience. To which such a divine, as I spake of might adde (with a due reserve of all
humblie revence to, and most unshaken confidence in that Holie Martyr, and his most pious hopefull successour our gracious sove∣raigne now living.) That he who for any politike end suggested, or necessitie most fond'le praetended of the subtilest presbyterian of you all, shall adventure to take himselfe off from this bottome, when Iudaisme or Turcisme (some part of your mixture) shall be alike plau∣sible praetended as more advantageous to his purpose, may be fear'd to befound not well setled upon Christianitie it selfe, but fall from it & throw away one or both Testaments of Scripture, which upon the uni∣versal The conside∣rable ap∣proch of Church dis∣cipline to doctrine. Paternal go∣vernment. tradition of the Church (as the other upon the Cathoike practice of the same) he first rationallie received as the word of God, though afterward he found other motives prompting a beliefe of it to be such, which at last be had superinduc'd by (what too many va∣inlie praetend to) the instinct or plerophorie of the spirit, His Ma∣jestie likewise found most agreeable both to reason and religion that frame of go∣vernment, because paternal not magisterial &c. Which was a third bottome for his conscience. Nor did he thinke it any point of wisdome or charitie, where Christians differ;…there to widen the differences, and at once to give all the Communion with Chri∣stians. Christian world (except a handfull of some Protestants) so great a seandal in point of Church government &c. of which wisdome and charitie, the gifts of the spirit of God, he made another very good botome for his conscien∣ce; Let Mr. Baylie reade the rest of that most excellent divine chap∣ter, . ch. 17. and answer it if he can. The maine ground of the Bishops discourse being wilfullie mista∣ken by the Reviewer, his structure is weake about the Warners conscien∣ce. And the Kings advantage. His cordial belie of the divine right of Synod Ius divi∣num of Pres∣byterie sru∣strates all treaties, ex∣communica∣tes all Chri∣stians threa∣tens all Princes. and Presbyteries, together with that of the Reformed Churches, which the Bishop shewes to be different, may come from a private spirit that misinformes them, & then is no good interpreter of Scripture, nor any sure praecedent for Christianitie throughout. Their strict and inseparable adhaerence to his errour (beside that it antidates all treaties null, without an effectual complinance against conscience and honour) excommunicates all the world but themselves, & ex∣cludes them from all hope of fellow ship with this new select socie∣tie of Saints, who, could they multiplie into a number large enough to fill the circle of their ambition, and had they every one a drop Isai. 40. 23. 24. The Revie∣wers per∣verting the Bisops do∣ctrine. of Scotish rebellious bloud in their veines, would no longer labour the conversion of Kings, but take Gods angrie worke out of his hands to bring their Princes to nothing… and be the whirlewind them∣selves to take them away as stubble. He that lookes not through Mr. Baylies glasse of vanitie and lies, can never be able to view the Bishop clasped so close with the elder
Praelates impairing the divine right, nor then, with the consequence he makes, about the legal, or expedient mobilitie of Bishops. Therefore as the ambition, greed, revenge; so the dissimulation in conscience is his, who can not but know what texts himselfe useth to cte for the divine right of Presbyterie, and what the Bishop expresselie sayth, that the same may with much more reason be alleged for Episcopacie, and more consonable to the analogie of fayth. The agreement of sundrie Praelatical divines with Eraus is here impertinent mention'd. What correspon∣dence the Bishop holds, with them hath been too often all-readie ac∣knowledg'd, and maintaind. Mr. Baylies urgent, illogical inference obligeth the Bishop neither in ingenuitie, nor reason to untie the bonds of the Kings conscience, which his own assures him God hath bound, if not by the hands of his sonne, by those of his Apostles and their successours through all Christian, ages and Churches. Nor can his Lp, from the principle you presse, demonstrate any securitie to His Majestie from offending God in the change. Nor yeild satisfaction to his doubts. If Erastus's Royal right (which you so often have inveighd Erastus's Royal right abused in a Sophisme. against) may be us'd as a sophisme to delude the King into your presbyterie, . I pray, by your favour, let it stand as it is, a better argument to confirme him, if he needs it, in Episcopacie. Yet that either here, or otherwhere this Royal right is induc'd by His Lordship to ratifie the order, I say not to actuate the Ju∣risdiction of Bishops, I can not finde upon my reviewing, and must therefore desire a point by your oculat fingar to direct me. Were not the Presbyterians more obstinate in resuming their er∣rours, then the Bishop forward to recapitulate his proofes, his Lp. had spar'd a good part of this chapter, though the receiud rules of method requir'd it. Weake, and naughtie are hackney answers, which, if spurrd too often, and reason holds not up by the head, are likelie to lay Presbyterie in the dirt. Your Iudgement of his revenge is ac∣cording to your practice, who, poore, impotent creatures, like wor∣mes, or flies, by corruption, & filth support an uselesse corps to de∣file that hand, that crusheth you to the death. The praelatical inte∣gritie makes good the praesent disadvantage of their fortune, & their evidence in proofe, before any aequitable comparers, will praeserve still the principate in, dispute. Major est [sinon fortunae] ratio, quàm Sen: De Clem: l. 1. c. 20. ut tali solatio egeat, minifestiorque vis quàm ut alieno malo opinionem sibi virium querat. Your Canterburian challenges were but Scottish Iigges made onelie for mirth to a rude multitude in confusion, the one very in∣considerable in musike, the other flat, if any thing, in the harmo∣mie of truth. If the principles of Praelacie unavoydablie bring backe the
Pope, the practice of Presbyterie unquaestionablie goes before him, & ma∣kes The conse∣quences from Episcopal principles not such as praetended his Papacie hold it by the traine. The Patriarchate of the est, and primacie of Rome flowes never out of the fountaine of Episcopacie, but when some ignorant Presbyter is turning the cocke, or tampering with the spring. Those English Praelates, that so freelie gave away the Patrimonie of Saint Peter &c. were some singular Executours of Constantinus Do∣nation; yet in that nothing so liberal to the Pope, as the Presbyters are covetous, and griping the common inheritance to themselves who, since his refusal that had the profer in possession, take the mocke spirit at his word, fall downe and worship, and then under the S. Matth. 4. 9; counterfeit of dominion in grace, intitle them selves not to Italie alne, but to all the Kingdomes of the earth. What difference there is in number, or nature between the cere∣monies Difference between us and Rome bout ceremo∣nies. they us d, & those in Rome will appeare best by comparing their ritual with our rubrike, & Canons. The ornament of sacred historical pictures, the name of altars, and the adoration of God in uniformitie be∣fore them, have the ancient Christians innocent praecedent to com∣mend them, when commanded, or Countenanc'd by our superiours in the Church, and to vindicate them inus from the superstition, and idolatrie you impute so liberallie to Rome. When the Praelates, & Pa∣pists cope in the controversie there are several other ceremonies they sticke at. That these are the worst, as religiouslie put in practice by the Bishops friends, requires more then your old see saw to confirme it. Adoration of, or to the altaris that, which I never heard professd by their mouth, nor read yet dropt from their pen. For me, let them that owne it recant it, and if none such befound. Let the mouth of him Prov. 10, 31. Real Prae∣sence & cor∣poral disse∣rent. Hist. Mot. that speaketh lies be stopped, and the sroward tongue be cut out. The real praecence of Christ in the Eucharist on the altar, as I take it, was never denied by our Church, a corporal never asserted by her, nor any of the Bishops friends, that I have heard of (though the 21. ob∣jection against our Liturgie in your historie of the Synod os Glas∣gow implies it.) The justification they held was fetchd farre beyond Tren, and if they that went for it were not able to distinguish be∣tween Iustifica∣tion. S. Matth. 1345 Free will. Saint Pauls workes and Saint Iames's, they were very unfit to trade forthat pearle, bad merchants for the Kingdome of heaven. Their free will was held no paragon of nature, but a priviledge by grace, which deliver'd them from the fatalitie of the curse, resto∣ring them in some measure to a libertie of choyce; And, unlesse you will fetch backe Tatians errour, make one God for the law, another for the Gospel, so long as the ten Commandements oblige us, we have Deut. 30 19. aswell as the Israelites of old, heaven, and earth for our record, that life and
death are to this day set before us, and, by the merits of Christ, the grace of having them in the free election of our will. Their final apostacie was seldome, or never intitled to Saints, or, if Final Apo∣stasice. so, with caution enough ro praevent calumnie. They asscribed ever an infallible praescence to God, an immutabilitie in his knowled∣ge; But to make him so peremtorilie, antecedentlie, spontaneou∣slie, irrespectivelie praedestinate a certaine number of men, call'd Saints before their resurrection from sinne; so irresistiblie operate by his power, as to praevent all possibilitie of backsliding, offen∣ding, or, being fallen, forceablie raise them, reenstate them in native innocencie, and his favour; they found consonant to none, disso∣nant from diverse positive texts, in, or inferences from Scripture. such as these. Let him that standeth take heed lest he fall, which excepts 1. Cor. 10. 12. Phil. 2. 12. no more the last houre or moment of life, then the first in the exer∣cise of reason… Worke out your Salvation with feare, and trembling.  importing an earnest endeavour unto the last aga∣inst final apostacio, not impossible; And the reason in the next verse A quaestion about Da∣vids case. implying an hazard of the energie of grace, which onelie supports a Saint from his fall. I demand yea, or no, a direct answer to this. Whe∣ther if a Phineas had come and taken David  in the act with Bathsheba, the point of his speare had been assuredlie blunted, or his hand held by an Angel from heaven. Whether, if so, this extraordmarie miracle had not been wrought in order to the accom∣plishment of somewhat praefix't to the oeconomie of Gods Royaltie upon earth in his person? Whether the like case or capacitie can in such be reasonablie suppos'd incident to all that you call Saints, and what securitie they have from all casualties, all attempts in the very moment of sinne to destroy them? The general promises can be no protection in such cases, & some it may be, are not so gene∣ral as to be made applicable to all, which, well scann'd, incline to the peculiar concernment of them, to whom they were made, and of whom onelie they seeme to be ean'd. But in points of this nature whatsoever the Warners friends have avowed, your exception against them is the same with that against the expresse words of the Church, in the Assemblie at Glasgow 1638 draw'n from what she professd. That insants baptiz'd have all things necessarie to salvation. This you may Rubrike in the consir∣mation. take as the summe of that which the Bishop knew to have been with much moderation, & reason often answerd to your sore challenge. Your slight replies thereunto being indeed but squibs, and crackers for children to sport with, had not the armes of sinfull men, & the Kings artillerie been rebelliouslie us'd, as a more unanswerable argument to force them.
The following position His Lp. nowhere will dispute, nor doth laugh a. That Christ, as King of his Church, hath appointed lawes for, & governers of the same. Who, and what these are, in the general Saint Paul hath left Christ as King of his Church ap∣points lawes &c. in his letters to the first Christians, which they, and their successours have kept for us that come after. He takes you for usurpers, & ty∣rants, who crosse to these lawes, for pride, & filthie lucre, make your selves not onelie Lords over Gods heritage, but commanders of subjection from Kings 2. b. Disc, ch 1. Pro Rege Regum, & Domino Domi∣nantium H. Grot. presbyteria nobis, & Synodos supponentes. The consequence here∣upon, That Acts of Synods must be Christs lawes, where Synods make themselves Dictatours of his pleasure, and repraesentatives of his person, is no other follie, then what the Logical rules of Relatives praescribe us, which, if your Sophistrie decline, I must referre the Reader to the like expressions so frequentlie us'd in your publike papers, in the several contests that Knox had with your Queenes & their Councels in defense of your discipline; And; to come some∣what nearer in your very praeface before the booke it selfe, where your Reformed Kirke is call'd the spouse of Icsus Christ, the rules of her discipline in the language of Scripture The Lords lawes and commande∣ments…the heavenlie proportion of divine discipline; And at last compared to the booke of Gods covenant, that lay hid in the Temple. Under the name of which Discipline, we are admonished, is to be under∣stood. Beside the two bookes, the Acts, Constitutions, and practices a∣greed upon, and recorded in the Registers of the General, and provincial Assem∣blics &c. And a brother plainlie asserts, That your Discipline in the general (which we denie to have any other authoritie then your votes) is as immutable, as the Scripture. I finde you now here such a Master of Rhethorike, and language as Hane none magis licet Ecclae mu∣tare quàm mutare licet ipsam scrip∣turam V in∣dic: Eplae Philad. to take your judgement in comparing of styles. If the Bishop hath borrowed the Iesuites invectives, or any from the Pagan philosophers, he could not beter bestow them then on you, that are neither good Protestants, nor Christians. His declamations against your noveltie will be regarded by such as take universalitie, and perpetuitie for two discre∣tive markes of Christs Kingdome, & government, which must not be limited to a rebellious schismatical Centurie in one Countrey. The antiquitie, you boast of, is founded upon as great a mistake of the Go∣spell, as was the sadduces of the law, you both erre not knowing the Scrip∣tures. Yet, that being your plea, I will urge the Bishops argument no By whom his Seepters is to be swa∣yed. farther concerning the change, and difformitie of your discipline (which may be prov'd in particulars not twice romov'd from your essentials themselves) but appeale with you to Caesar, who calling to his Councel the Primitive Fathers the most publike spirits, most
unbyassed Interpreters, may, by the tributarie assistance, if his Ma∣jestie please, of as many Bhops, or Doctous, as sectarian Presbyters, after a faire schelastike discussion, discerne the truth, decide the controversie, and, according as he findes Christs scepter was swayed among Catholike Christians, by deputation of one part, or other, Vincent. Lyrin: ad∣vers: haeres cap. 14. abolish the Rebell Vsurper at his pleasure. But Annuneiare [or impe∣rare] aliqued Christianis, Chatholicis praeter id quod acceperunt, nunquam licuit, nusquam licet, nunquam licebit. To declare, or command a beliefe of di∣vine right, in that which hath not been received in Gods Church, never was, no where is nor, will it at any time be law full. Your dearth of matter renders you taedious in the rest of the pa∣ragraph, English Episcopacie out done by the more for ward Pres∣byterie. and the course faire wherewith you entertaine your rea∣der, flesh, bloud, and limbes of an English Bishop, makes you suspected here to have been at a stand, to have layd your spiritual scribling aside, till you went to market, and fetcht these carnal expressions from the ambles. My Lord of Derrie, and his friends, in citing au∣thoritie, and pressing reason for their order have dealt so farilie, & wrought so effectuallie, as for all the stripping your sleeves and the other ho∣cas pocas trickes that he tells you of, you will finde no cleanlie con∣veyance of your Presbyterie into the heads of any your judicious comparers, nor will their eares be chain'd by your brazen hypocri∣sie to maintaine it. Your too curious anatomie of English Episco∣pacie, touching which you interrogate, will onelie countenance them in a demand, not otherwise intended of a Scripture warrant for Scot∣tish Presbyterie, as such, disciplining, excommunicating, deposing, I shall doe no wrong if I adde what I prove, justifying & praysing God for the death, if not the murder of Kings, renouncing the na∣me, but acting every one a double part of a lord in Parliament; not onelie voycing in, but imperiouslie overruling all Acts of State, all elections of principal officers, in order to conscience, for prae∣vention of scandal, & keeping a lower Commission Court in eve∣ry Towne, & parish; forcing every Bayliffe, and provest to be your creature; A Presbyterie bold'lie ordaining without a Bishop, and gulling the people into a foolish conceit of Gods call in them, when 'tis their lying spirit that hath praeposless'd them, For let the peo∣ple call, or praesent whom they will, if the learned (the priviledge of B. Discips. 4. head. which title every covie of Dunces challenge to themselves) judge the person unable of the regiment, he is set aside, and they forced to take (without violent intrusion they tell them) whom the superin∣tended Councel offereth to instruct them: A Presbyterie exercing all jurisdiction without any appeale from themselves; A Presbyte∣rie feeding their flockes like swine with graine, and hukes, such
divinitie, as every brewer, or hogheard can helpe them to, never lea∣ding them through the geen pastures of the ancient, learned, and devout Fathers, nor to any other waters of comfort, but such as the very fountaine whereof the foot of schisme, or rebellion hath trou∣bled. This is Scottish Presbyterie in practice and such they would have it in law too, if they could with all their Scripture collusions but once corrupt. His Majesties judgement, or by their sharpe-poin∣ted swords, & two edged tongues affright him from a well grounded resolution, into what his Royal Father esteem'd it, a faint servile, ungodlie, and unkinglie consent. The treasure you call, for hath hitherto had God for its defense, who hath made know'n, and distributed those talents in Scripture, The treasure thereof to be found as well before as after the years 800. which maintain'd the litle familie of the Church, and discharg'd the itinerant Gospell of that time. The greater mine hath been often dis∣covered by them whose divina virgula hath stouped, and put them upon the search of the veine that caried the Episcopal government through the 800. yeares of your account. Your soon-shot bolts in ma∣ny frivolous quaestions have been better feather'd with many wise mens answers, and for all the horned impudence you hold out, re∣turned very often upon your heads, one of whom I shall send you Dr. Ierm. Taylor. to, who (not to derogate from the happie endeavours of many others aswell of the learned Laitie, as Reverend Clergie) hath alone anti∣cipated, and fullie with much acutenesse, and judgement answered allmost every particular you object. Shewing that Christ himselfe hath made the office of Apostle or Bishop distinct from Presbyters; Given them power to do some offices perpetuallie necessarie, which to others he gave not: Asof Ordination, and confirmation; And supe∣rioritie of jurisdiction; Bishops, by vertue of their office, more then called, observed as Lords, in a more sublime sense, then you mention; And commended to the service of Kings; Saint Chrysostom, & others imployed in Embassies; Saint Ambrose a Praefect, and Dorotheus a Chamberlaine to the Emperour; Many of them Councellers to Princes, and Iudges aswell in ordinarie secular affaires, as Chanellors in extra∣ordinarie by appeale; Treasurers at least of the Church revenue, and undergoing what ever civile charge the conscientious favour of Princes put upon them, which was not in gradu impedimenti lericalis; Bishops with sole power of ordination, and jurisdiction, otherwise then as they thought good to call into their subordinate assistance, or deputed Presbyters in their Dioceses. Of officials, and Commissaries I thinke he makes litle mention, because he bends his discourse against all inte∣rest of Lay elders; yet I doe not thinke he would denie that Civilians, such as are our Officials, and Commissaries, might be instrumental to the
Bishops, especiallie having some learned Presbyter authorized in cases, to which the others lay propertie extends not; Bishops, when necessitie may require, using solitarie ordination, which is good in natu∣re Can. 2. rci, as may be taken for granted by that Canon of the Apostles, which as it enjoines no more then one Bishop, so makes no mention of any Presbyter, which it had quaestionlesse done, if of absolute neces∣sitie to the businesse; Bishops ordaining not with the fashional, but ca∣nonical assistance of any two Presbyters that they please, by choyce of their, owne chaplaines or others, where are many, or taking any two that chance otherwise to be neare; Bishops principal pastours of their whole Dioceses, & when commanded, or countenanc'd by the King to waite at Court, not obliged to feed their flockes in their persons, which they doe by many learned, and religious proxies, themselves in the meane time feeding by word, or sacrament, or ghostlie coun∣sel, the great shepheard, whose Royal soul is worth 10000. of the peoples. All this in effect, & a great deale more then your Parkers, or Didoclaves could have answered, hath this one learned Doctour defended, as know'n long before the Pope gave over to say his creed, which he did surelie, when he became the Anti-Christ you call him. I could goe up yet once againe, & helpe you to a third turne from the top of your demands, Shew you that the Warner, and his friends give The Praela∣tes still of the same minde they were. the King the same assurance, that erthey did, that what they stand upon as unalterable in their order hath Scripture, and Antiquitie for its warrant▪ That upon the conversion of England to Christianitie, the Ecclesiastike government there constituted, was not Anti-Christian; That a Bishop there is not a Lord in Parliament by vertue of his of∣fice (as it may be to resolve spiritual doubts he ought to be) but by Declar. B. 2. Dang. Posit. the Baronie & call which the favour of Kings hath annex'd unto it; That in Scotland, when it was decreed that Bishops should have no voyces in Parliament, these your selfe-denying men desired of the King that such Commissioners as they should send to the Parliament and councel, might from thence forth be authorized in the Bishops places for the Estate; That not many protestant English Bishops have been High Treasurers, not many Chancellars, some that have you have litle reason to finde faultwith; That they are not bound in law to devolve all jurisdiction &c; That all which in practice did it, are not to be condemned, where they found able & honest men to exer∣cise it in their names; That those, which erre must not praejudice the care and deligence in government of the rest; That solitarie ordina∣tions were very rare, & therefore not to be objected as so common; Nor did halfe the Bishops live at Court, nor most that did halfe their time. All these particulars could I enlarge on, but that I beleeve
the Reader satisfied with the execution done before, and hath some what else to doe, then to stay to see you stript. In what followes you take a great deaie more, then is given you, naming that a donation from the Court divines conscience, for which Not the Court but Citie Divi∣nes devest Bishops. the Citie Divines, chieflie of Edenburgh, & London, forced the tem∣ple of God by such sacriledge to furnish the two tabernacles of rob∣bers, that then prospered too well in England, and Scotland. That Royal Saint that, upon, this most impious violence, yeilded, up so great a portion of his Ecclesiastike inheritance, the Bishops avile im∣ployment, Arch-Bishops, Arch-deacons, with the &c (which might have been better spar'd) did it in angusto comprchensus, not upon any com∣punction of conscience. Sed difficulter, sed subductis supercilijs…& vix exeuntibus verbis, And had not his paternal affection prompted him, to what your unnatural disobedience litle deserved, he had given you not onelie panem lapidosum, as Fabius was wont to call a gift very hardlie bestowed upon an hungrie beggar, but pro pane lapidem, with∣out Sen: De Benef. lib. 2 cap. 7. S. Matth. 7. 9. 46. 17. our saviours censure, a stone instead of that bread, which was never ordained to stuffe the insataite stomach of every gaping Rebell that call'd for't. Yet, whatsoever you had, was, you know, but for a trien∣nal experiment, which being exspired, in the yeare of libertie, that was to succeed, according to Gods paterne in Ezekiel, if you could then praetend no better title then you had done, it was to returne to your Prince, and the inheritance of such an inseparable right to be his sonnes, who of your adversaries gave this unseasonable advice I know not, nor who have acknowledg'd, and recanted for errours those di∣vine truths ordained for peace, but encountred with troubles, and their abettours expos'd to susteime the envie, and obloquie of the world. Therefore alasse its in vaine for you to invite them to come nearer, to hang out like a dead cat in her skin, unlesse you me∣ane to have every one of them moral the rest of the fable with an . But to leave off spea∣king The Revie∣wers dete∣stable ingra∣titude. in parables, I desire the reader in plaine English to marke the base ingratitude of an unworthie Presbyter. In that, when a most in∣genuous peace-desiring Prince (for him he meanes when he speakes of his Praelatical adversaries) invaded by audacious importunitie, encompassed with all external visible necessitie, placing himselfe upon the very pinacle of Christi-an charitie, shall yeild all that the softest, gentlest Casuist can indulge (and that upon such conditions as, how easie soever, the perfidious contractours litle thinke to make good) he must be argued with upon the ominous advanta∣ge of hi owne gratuitie, & praetended from his adventurous kind∣nesse
to be demonstrativelie convinc'd to give up the rest of that which rebellious license, schismatical singularitie, and degenerate malice have now so devested into a new creature, as neither law, custome, nor honour can call that English Bishop which religion in∣stituded and reformation confirmed. But a crou'd of guiltie conju∣red malefactours presseth shame and the proverbe to nothing, so that ingratum si dixeris nihil dixeris. Seneca knew it who had studied the point and experienc'd the practice. Pudorum tollit multitudo peccantium, De Ben. lib: 3. cap. 16. & desinet esse probri loco commune maledictum. But to send you backe some of your owne logike and language; If this naked bird which you so pleasantlie play with, be a new creature because the feathers are pluckt, then you must confesse that old creature revested with those Euauge∣lical beauties and Royal graces which once it possessed, to be that know'n true English Bishop that in honour, law, custome, if not in conscience (which I need not suppose) is to be inviolablie maintai∣n'd, when it shall be made to appeare, as it may very easilie, and hath been very frequentlie, that such an order not much different∣lie fashion'd and habited, ever was and ever is to be in the Christian Church, To make good the mutual toleration indented for between your sectarian brethren and your alltogetheras sectarian selves, you clo∣selie decline the warners confidence which avowes those texts of Scripture you wrest against Bishops, with as much colour of reason and more truth the Independents may urge against Presbyters, be∣ing resolv'd, since you finde they can make you their province at pleasure (if not command a transmigration of your Euangel) to ar∣gue no more against them then to fight. The triumph you make in two painted Syllogismes is very improperlie plac'd before the victo∣rie, where though you ride like a George on horsebacke in a page∣ant, you will passe for no beter then a dumbe shew, and with your wooden launce be mistaken by none, but children and fooles, for that primitive armed Saint that kill'd the dragon. If you cast not your texts in a couple of better molds, your workemanship will beare as The texts of scripture a∣gainst Epis∣copacie dis∣cussed. litle the image of Gods word, as your selves doe of the reasonable men that he created. Were His Lp. at better leisure his great promi∣ses would reengage him in more necessarie imployments then an∣swering every silie Presbyter in his follie; but his Acolythus & ser∣vant (if not because he hath taken up so much of the similitude all∣readie) will for once, and it may be oftner, follow Solomons advice Prov. 26. 4. & 5. in the next verse, seeing you so very wise in your owne conceit. The first text you are medling with is Ephes: 4. 11. whence your imaginarie argument, not to be denied adoration, is this.
Maj: All the officers that Christ has appointed in his Church, for the ministrie of the word, are either Apostles, Euangelists, Pro∣phets, Pastours or Doctours; Mi: But Bishops are none of these five, Ergo. You pleade custome for the free unquaestionable passage of your major, which you must give me leave to obstruct, first excepting against the improprietie of your termes (being such as may evacuate your argument) the Ministrie of the word, when the Bishops discourse is about the regiment of the persons to whom the word allreadie is mini∣stred, Secondlie, demanding to have it under Saint Pauls hand, whe∣ther the offices he mentions of Apostolate, prophecie &c were by Christs institution for the personal perfecting of Saints in a Church established, and not as the word seemes rather to signi∣fie. Pros ton Catartismon toon hagioon for jointing or knitting new Saints to the Church, new membres to the bodie of Christ in the propagation of his gospel, so aedisying the bodie of Christ by the worke of the Ministrie, which in the next verse seemes to end in the unitie of fayth, that is the general conversion of nations to Christianitie. Thirdlie, whether this enumeration of the Apostle's be universal, to which  finde more particulars added 1. Co. 12. 28. & among them dynameis & Kyberneseis. Powers & governments, the former of which (that you may not cavill about superinfused gifts) he makes as much personal, or persons, as that of Apostle, prophet, Tea∣cher, vers: 29. Besides that he expresselie calleth the Elders of the Act. 20. Church of Ephesus Bishops, & tells them they were instituted by the holie spirit, which we know came downe to fulfill the promise by the mission of the sonne, & so they must passe upon account as offi∣cers appointed by Christ. Three fifths of your Minor thus you prove. Bishops are not Apostles, Euangelists, nor prophets, because they are confessed extraordinarie & tempora∣rie, Bishops ordinarie & perpetual. To which I answer. First, That Bi∣shops Beshosp are. Apostles. Lib. advers. haeres. cap. 32. are Apostles in their ordinarie power of ordination & jurisdic∣tion, though not in their extraordinarie of working miracles, spea∣king with diverse tongues &c. And this Tertullian hath sayd above 1300. yeares since, who, arguing with the haeretikes about succes∣sion, bids them turne over their records, & shew that their first Bishop was an Apostle, or Apostolical, because personallie ordai∣ned by one of them. This the Apostolical Churches could doe, as that of Smyrna shewes Polycarp, because placed there by Saint Iohn. That of Rome Clement, because ordained by St. Peter. And such Bishops as these he calls Apostolici seminis traduces. If they be Apostolical
grafts, good Mr. Baylie, from what tree thinke you were they ta∣ken, and of what may they, without arrogancie, beare the name? Other of the Ancients call'd Timothie Bishop of Ephesus an Apostle, among whom what enterfeering there was of these two termes you may reade in Theodoret upon 1. Tim. Jn the like sense may they be sayd to be Euangclists, (aswell as in May be call'd Euan∣gelists. the Revelation they are called Angele) who praeside over the prea∣ching of the Gospell, and publication of it to them that have not heard, Euangelion & Kerygma being the same. H. Grot. Proleg. ad Matth. And they either are, or should be, Prophets, in one kinde accor∣ding to Saint Ambrose, Scripturas, revelantes, the ablest interpreters of Scripture, or speakers of mysteries in the spirit to aedification, Should be prophets. exhortation and comfort, though not foretellers of things to come. Nam quicquid latet, sive id futurum est, sive praesens mysterium diitur. In 1. Cor. 12. The reason why your adversaries pitch upon the fourth is, to decline your trivial objections against the other three. H. Grot. Why Pa∣stours. Your syllogisme that labours to prove Bishops no Pastours hath no doubt but a certaintie of falshood in the major which your argumentum a pa∣ribus comes some what improperlie to make good, you having spoke of a confess'd imparitie but just before. But for once a bargaine no bargaine pactum non pactum sit, non pactum pactum quod vobis lubet. It would be a rare invention, surpassing Aristoles Logike, if, without a reserve, you could get a conclusion to creep out of a single propo∣sition, for take it on my word your lucke is bad in majours, which whether you play at even or odde are all pariter falsae sicke of a disease, and this here left desperate without any remedie to recover it. No Apostle, you say, is superiour to an Apostle. This is contrarie to what one Walo Messalinus (whom under another name you mistake to Apostles superiour to Apostles. be your friend) hath frequentlie asserted. That they were primi & secundi, majores & minores, The second and lesse subordinate in spi∣ritual power to the first and greater. This he gathers out of Theo∣doret and others. The greater he explaines to be the twelve, the lesse, those deputed by them for teaching and governing. Nay, he dis∣covers a third order inferiour to them both, of which was Epaphro∣ditus, subordinate to Saint Paul, who himselfe was but minor Apo∣stolus, being none of the twelve. So that here being three degrees, I tell you from him what I might from others, or with them rather collect from the text, That an Apostle is superiour to an Apostle. As much might besayd for Euangelists, whereof foure were prin∣cipal, or, if not, it is because they were by their office of the lo∣wer Euangelists Coadju∣tours. classe, or Coadiutours to the Apostles. Such were Titus, Ti∣mothie, Apollos &c. Saint Hierom sayth all Apostles were Euange∣lists,
but not all Euangelists Apostles. And so likewise that all pa∣stours were Doctours, but not vice verse. The learned Grotius, That Doctours, were Bishops or Arch-Bishops rather, the same with Doctours Bishops. haeres. 75. those call'd Metropolitans afterward. Pateres Kai didascaloi are Epi∣phanius titles for them. To prove majour & minor prophets un∣der the new Testament is needlesse till you answer what I have brought about Apostles, or strengthned the majour in your argument which I absolutelie denie. And besides remit you to a learned Doc∣tour Dr. Tayler Episcop: as∣sert. who proves the word Pastor to be the Bishops peculiar among the Ancients, and frustrates that imparitie from which you argue. Your second reason out of Saint Matthew and Saint Paul hath a litle Philosophical Soul and forme in the majour, but no divine one in in the minour, and so, according to your similitude in the moment No power of Ordination in the Pres∣byterie, of removal or separation must perish. The first text 1. Tim. 4. 14. puts no power more then approbant or assistent of ordination in the Eldership, & a Bishop is as much a Presbyterie and no more a Pres∣byter (I meane in your sense of diminution) then Saint Paul, who seemes to make that act of ordination solitarie and personallie his owne 2. Tim. 1. 6. And the Greeke Scholiasts say the Elders here were Bishops, excluding interminis all presbyters from that power o gar hoi Presbyteroi echeirotonoun ton Episcopon say both Theophylact and Oecomenius. For the word which you will needes have to be clas∣sical not personal, perchance somewill say it may denote the order, or office, the Episcopate they meane, and be put figurativelie here for the single person, of the Apostle, comparing these words, toge∣ther meta Epitheseoos toon cheiroon tou Presbyterion, & dia tes epithescoos toon 2 Tim. 1. 6. chciroon mou. But let it be what it will, the power of ordination must continue in the Bishop, so long as Christians keep to the New Testa∣ment and Fathers, and fetch us not a fift Gospel, or some newer Apostle from Geneva. No power of Iurisdiction in the Church. That the second Saint Matth. 18. puts the power of jurisdiction in the Church is gratis dictum, & your authoritie not so great as that your autos ephen. will be able to carie it. First therefore you are required to prove, that excommunication, the act of jurisdiction you meane, is here at all intended; and not rather no more then the three degrees of fraternal correption, the highest whereof is that elegsis enoopion pantoon, a rebuke before all. 1. Tim. 5. 20. Vt qui non potuit pudore Salvari, Salvetur oppro∣brijs sayth Saint Hierom, he sayth not damnetur or eijciatur censuris. That he which could not be saved by private shame might by more publike reproach. Secondlie, That the Church here was a judi∣cial Assemblie call'd to that purpose, or if met to other, that a for∣mal
processe was brought before it; And that they were not rather some greater number then the two or three witnesses, upon what occasion soever met together, which may very well be call'd Ecclesiae with out the signal meaning of the word. Coram multis Lib. Musar. keta Koinon Justin: & tunc multis dicendum est in Saint Hierom. Nor is it like∣lie a deliberate judgement in Court (into which a Christian Con∣gregation, converted) should be after processe in hazard to be sligh∣ted or neglected by one Member delinquent ean paracouse. Nor that to be such which relates rather to the person of the plaintiffe then Iudges estoo soi. Let him be unto thee… Thirdlie, If it be such a Con∣gregation or Church as you would have it, whether the complaint were to be repraesented to them in general, and not rather in their hearing to their superintendents or praesident above them. Epi toon tes Ecclesias proedroon demosiseoson to ptaisma sayth Theophylact. Fourth∣lie, That sit sicut Ethnicus & publicanus, Let him be unto thee as an heathenman and a publicane is undoubtedlie a sentence commanded to be pronoun∣ced by those superintendents or that Church; or an injunction, ra∣ther then permission, to the partie injur'd to have no farther fami∣liaritie or friendship, to have no more to doe with him then with heathen and publicanes, a voluntarie declination of whose companie was no scandal to the charitie Christians professed, & any civile of∣fice out of common humanitie left arbitrarie, and not censur'd if tend'red. Fiftlie, whether binding and loosing vers. 18. Be asserted Confirma. Thes. lib. 4. c. 5. with reference to this Church, and not rather to the Apostles, as your friend Erastus will have it, or more probablie to any par∣tie against whom the trespasse was committed. Potestatem tribuit Apo∣stolis sayth Saint Hierom. Vu garmonon hosa lyousin boi hiereis eisi Ce∣lymena, De Verb. Dom. hom. 15. all' hosa kai hemets hoi adiketentes and Theophylact. And si Fratrem habes pro Ethnico & publicano ligasti illum in terra: si correxeris fratrem, solvisti eum in terra Sainr Austin, which seemes to be the Iohn Morell excommuni∣cated for this doctrine. proper meaning of the place. After all which I expect you should make some apologie for your brethren abroad that in the yeare 1563. Sept. 6. excommunicated Iohn Morell the Frenchman for writing this doctrine, burn'd his booke, and interdicted under a great poenaltie the reading any copie of it that might escape them. The third 1. Cor 5. appeares not evidentlie to put the power No power of jurisdic∣tion in a Companie met together of jurisdiction in a companie of men met together, Theophylact taking it for a modest condescension in Saint Paul to joine the Corin∣thians with himselfe, whose solitarie power was absolute. Hiname doxe autades, Kai autous proslambanei Koinoonous And the context im∣porting the sentence, such as it was, to be but declarative in them
them by the vertual praesence of the Apostles spirit; and judicial in Saint Paul, who had passed it before ede Kekrika sayth he vers. 3. Though it will trouble you to prove that here was any jurisdiction Delivering to Satan what. exerciz'd, delivering to Satan being probablie but a desertion of the partie peccant, using no intercession in his behalfe, but leaving him naked for Satan to assault him with corporal torments, which pro∣digious punishment was usual in those times. Excommunication it can not be, because it limits his censure to the destruction of the flesh, de∣prives him not of the Sacraments, the want whereof is destructive to the spirit. The twelfth verse addes no strength to your argument, the sense seeming to be onelie this. I have nothing to doc to judge them that are without, but leave them to God: I have to doc to judge them that are within worthie of deliverance up to Satan. And ye judge them that is deliver them up when ye are gathered together, & my spirit. As he, had sayd vers. 4. So it is Saint Pauls spirit that is principal in this ju∣risdiction, and the companie of men met together but his delegates or assistants, convocated at his pleasure. To Your assumption I likewise answer. That the Bishop is as much the Church as Saint Paul in this case, and hath as much of the ordi∣narie power transmitted to him. So that you see it requires not the Doctours learning, but the search of his Acolythus and servant to satisfie you, if you will be, with an∣tiquitie & reason. Which being done you may send more scirptural arguments against Episcopacie by your brethren of the next Com∣mission. Touching those you have brought allreadie, you need not be so confident in calling for their answer unlesse they were somewhat better. The visible leisure is, in none but such as you & your Why Blon∣del &c. are not answe∣red. courteous Disciples in England have procured to be imprison'd in se∣verall goales of both Kingdomes; others having businesse enough by shifting from one place to another to secure their persons and save their lives, from your crueltie. The poor prisoners have few visi∣ble helpes to that purpose. If you will finde courage or conscience enough to undertake their free accesse to the Fathers and other authours that are visiblie necessarie to that purpose. I have enough left still to assure you in the name of them that have more learning then they boast of, that whatsoever becomes of your punie Clerkes Master Parker and Didoclave, (who may be easilie turn'd of with some care∣full quotations and references to a multitude of bookes allreadie printed) Master Blondels magazine of antiquitie shall be seiz'd on, and what in it is upsie Scotch (which is not all) for the presbyterie Somais fare well to the Presbyterie. you bragge of, shall in spight of your power be rescued for the true owners, that is, the Bishops. For your meracle of learning, the most no∣ble
Somais, we wish he may worke more such wonders as he hath of late, and send his petie advocate a new blew bonnet at parting trim∣med with a distick, begining if he pleaseth Ille ego qui quondam—for his fee. Were publike masters of fact as mysterious as the intrigues in your The Scottish presb. may be contracted out of their owne storie. Revel. 20. 12. spiritual Iunto; and Consistorian Caballs, some Endor oracle must perchance have been consulted and one of your blacke guardant Angels been superstitiouslie worship'd, or ceremoniouslie waited upon for revelation. But when the bookes of the dead are before their day opened by your hands, and their workes of darknesse re∣gistred by your pennes, the warner may every where, without an ironie, proclaime his knowledge in your storie as great as his strictest search, and as certaine as your rash consession could create. King Iames's 55. K. I.'s 55. quaestions non plus'd them. quaestions so troubled the Scotish divines, that they finding their plea of divine right and immutabilitie of their discipline to be dis∣puted, the Perth Assemblie indicted principallie for that purpose: to divert the King, if not otherwise to praevent his multiplying such problemes (to which David Blackes processe & the businesse about the banish'd Lords may be annexed) they rais'd a desperate sedition on the 17. of December, which allreadie is discours'd on. Their (if you meane the Synods) answer was not so round but that they first protested & parlied about their priviledge at the conference with His Majestie and the Estates; required time to returne, reason, vote & resolve in all points. If thereafter the propounders were speachlesse in the bu∣sinesse, it might be because the Synod caried it for the King, and de∣termined the problemes in his sense, which (for ought I know) is that the Bishop meanes by yeilding the bucklers without any opposition. The maner and time might very well perplexe them being in a free Synod, and meeting with their bold contestation for David Blacke. Nor were they troubled onelie at the Erastian & Praelatical Counsellers about the King, but at Patrike Galloway and Iames Nicolson, of late Saints but now it should seem become Apostate presbyters in the Synod. The quaestions put by the King were not captious and carping at the parts of Church discipline, but a just controversie raised about the whole, fair∣lie propounded, freelie discussed, deliberatelie resolved, to the sa∣tisfying his conscience, and silencing schismatical scruples for the future. I have often told you no statutes of Parliament nor Acts of any but factious Assemblies authorisd your Discipline, though were it ratified (as you would have had it) by any other, set your jusdi∣ninum Episcopa∣cie recove∣red ground in Scotland. aside, and fetch not your praecedent from the Medes and Per∣ans, a power aequivalent to that which did it might reverse it. The visible Church in your countrey at that time was not so farre from yeildino
to Episcopacie, but that your brother confesseth the cranie was then made by which it afterward crept in, though I am at a losse for so much day light in your storie, as to see the yeare when legallie it was thrust out. Perhanerimam (sayth he) ad essentialia ipsa externi regiminis im∣petendum, Vindic. E∣pist: Phila∣delph. & extruendum Episcopatum aditum sibi patefecerunt. You can not denie but that it brought them thus farre on their way, to the title of Praelates and voting in Parliaments. Wicked states men at that time beares the same signifiancie with Court Divsnes and evil Counsellers at this, and so doth the most able and faythfull Ministers with the Men of God that are Covenanters in this age, of whom every mans experience can frame a character enough to scare away his credit to the reputa∣tion you would give them. There need no question be preposed when the Bishops were by full authoritier einstated in part of their un∣quaestionable right; To a great deale more in the yeare 1606. When by Act of Parliament their government was styled the ancient and fun∣damental policie… Declared that they being the Third Estate had been indi∣rectlie Whence they had not been legallie eje∣cted. abolished… That it never had been mean'd by His Majestie and His E∣states that they should any wayes be suppressed: That they had been onelie brought into contempt and povertie… That His Majestie with expresse advice and con∣sent of the sayd whole Estates in Parliament doe repone, restore and redintegrate the sayd Estate of Bishops (it sayth not to their order) to their ancient and accusto∣med honour, dignitees, praerogatives, priviledges &c. This was completed in the yeare 1610. when a kinde of Episcopacie was set up as neare the primitive paterne as the growing reformation would beare in the As∣semblie of Glasgow excepting the two Members I told you of, no other∣wise corrupt then as it may be flie-blow'n by your breath, and tain∣ted by your naming; under which not the Church but the Kirke of Scot∣land did heavilic groane, as it allwayes doth when it hath not libertie to vent sedition in the pulpit, and act rebeilion in the field which the best and most learned of your preachers, the Aberdene Assemblers, practiced in part, and wish'd well to the rest Anno 1606 till the yeare 1637. when if they had met with an English Pharach for ri∣gour as they did with a Moses the meeker man of the two, he would have appointed e masters that should have toke away the straw, and spoyl'd their designe of fiering the house: set them making of brickes and building him treasure ties, while they were pulling downe temples & runing Palaces; he had kept them from soaking of the yoke of Ecclesi∣astike and Civilegovernment, & brought divine justice to their doores while they brought him to beare the burden of a most inhumane, most unjust judgement at his owne; praesaerv'd his Children & sub∣jects from sighing and hanging their harpes upon willowes in a stra∣nge Psalm 137. land, while they sate, under our vines, and keept us out of the
shadow of our owne figge trees; cut up the root, while he lopped the branches, strake off the head while he clipped the eare; cast out of Bri∣taine, what with regreet of conscience he tolerated in Scotland, him∣selfe then & his Church had continued like a treeplanted by the water side Psalm. 1. and had brought forth more fruit in due season His leafe had not wither'd, & what∣soever he had done had in all likelihood prosperd. But he hath overcome them if not in doing, in suffering being more then conquerour, & when those briars & thornes are bundled up for the fire he shall have given Revel. 2. 7. him to eate of the tree of life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. CHAPTER IX. The Commonwealth is a monster when Gods Soveraignitie in the Presbyterie contradicts the Kings. THe Reviewer all this while having made a poor shift to save the credit of the Kirke, and spent his time in sewing a few figlea∣ves The Revie∣wers slender shiss. together to cover the shame of a sinfull disobedience against Gods command in the Civile Magistrate, which every puffe of wind rends in pieces and scaters before the face of innocencie and truth; he here tries his skill to patch contradictions together … pergit pug∣nantia secum Frontibus adversis componere… and makes a parti colou∣red coate for his two headed monster which may aswell, in time, out doe the seven-headed dragon, if more crownes & scepters can befound wherewith to invest it, as it hath allreadie the hundred-han∣ded Gyant, in pulling downe as many powers and dominions as it could reach; metamorphozing the Paradise of Kingdomes into the forest of Commonwealths; and changing men that should be good subjects into scorpions, or in serpentes Regulos, such serpents & coc∣ketrices Icr. 8. 17. as will not be charmed into any obedience. The Presbyterians ministrie under Christ, being a tyrannie over Chri∣stians, The Pres∣hyterians, not Praelates coordinate two Sove∣raignaties in one state. quits them not of coordinating two Soveraignies in a state, Nor doth the Praelates maintaining an hierarchie in the Church make them at all guiltie of that fault since the former acknowledge no superieur in Ecclesiasticis but God; & the later attribute aswell a spiritual as Tem∣poral supremacie to their King. The spiritual Lordspip, Domination &c the Bishops exercise over his subjects in his name but the Presbyterians theirs in the name of the Prince of all Kings, whose Minister he is aswell
as they, and call all opposition against them a warre against Iesus Two Kings in Scotland. Christ. Nay, rather then faile, when they can catch His Majestie in a closet, Andrew Melvin shall tell him he must know he lies at their mercie, Publice Rex, nos parcimus tibi, That there are two Kings in Scotland, fac. memineris duosesse in Scotia Reges, one of the Church (which must have the praecedence too) and another of the Common∣wealth. That by his leave (which is, to say, without it) they must meet at their pleasure, & have a care of the Church, whereof he is no head but a Member, no nursing Father, as the Scripture vainlie calls him, but the elder sonne or at most brother of the Kirke: And that this is spoken with good authoritie too, summa cum authoritate, shall the Vindicatour publikelie print that all may know it. The contrarietie of commands, when issuing from Masters aequallie to be observed, can not but breed distraction in the servant, and where Ianus hath not a twoo-fac'd generation, must needes much unfixe him in his ad∣vertence. Christs particular and extraordinarie commands, if all, Not God o∣nelie but his Anoynted likewise to be obeyed. to all, and at all times to be publish'd with out special commission, oblige not his Ministers publikelie, imperiouslie to prohibite others of his anoynted, which may be mistaken to contradict them If they unhapilie fall out contrarie one to other, the holie Scriptures no where command so to obey God, as activelie to disobey, that is, to rebell against the man that is their King. The Reverend Warners opposition here to the Presbyterians maintaines no such subordina∣tion of the Church unto the state as makes her servile in performance of unjust commands. And where Christ is found ruling in this case. He St. Matth. 26. 25. St. Luke 9. 23. bids Saint Peter put up his sword, & all his Disciples to denie themselves, take up their crosse daylie and follow him, When the Presbyterians have as clere a Commission to prohibite festivals, to assront Ambassadous, proclaime fasts at such times when their Kings solemnize feasts, as the Apostles had for the publication of the Gospell, and teaching in the name of their Master that sent them: Let them applie the text in the 5. of the Acts, and (I hope the Reader makes, the incongrui∣tie none of mine) disregard the High Priests commands of a disterent Religion, and obey God rather then man. The contrarie wayes taken in Scot∣land by Church and state (so King or Queen may he accounted head Contrarie∣tie of Com∣mands very frequent in Scotland. or Member of the later) have not been so rare, if the Historie of your foure last Princes be reviewed. Against three of whom Pope Knox personallie and in his Synod made very frequent opposition, which he bragges of in print. I shall not need to number your rebellious Acts and papers against the fourth. In the possibilitie of such cases, which you tenderlie admit, your modestie being great to acknowledge the fallibilitie of Assemblies,
the common rule of humane direction's very good, had it been not onelie know'n by you, but followed. The difference upon disobedience to either is not fairlie repraesented temporal inconveniences in se∣ditious tumults, to the hazard of life, often befalling men by the displeasure of the Church, And by terrour or force a rescue from punishment legallie to be inflicted, contrarie to the good pleasure of the state. Your interdiction of festivals viz. Our Saviours Nativitie to be ob∣served, and Bishops to sit in Parliament, when summon'd by the King, seemes in your sense to implie no contrarietie of command, and are therefore slighted as impertinent objections The other two you The Revic∣wers fallacie speake to, but not answer. Not the former but in a fallacie some∣what like that which Logicians call of composition and division. The Magistrates that were to attend the French Ambassadours being not excepted in your indiction of the fast, but included with the people, and yet (as excusable) divided by you in the observance. The truth of Church cesure intended can be no calumnie, the Major and Aldermen being cited and convented for their feasting, nor had the processe fallen to ground but through the prudent delayes interposed by the King, I must here put you in minde that your Bre∣thren in Holland indict no fasts but by the Magistrates consent, and your discipline being praetended to be the same, you could not doe it at this time, when the King commanded feasting without coor∣dinating Soveraignities, or which is worse, abolishing his, to or∣daine your owne. In your answer to the later instance, you must cut the tails of Humble petitions &c full of threats. your humble petitions and remonstrances, which were tipt and turn'd up with defiances and threats, under the notion of portents to the Kings person & his familie; And throw your covenant into the fire which engaged the takers in pursuance of your contrarie commands by op∣posing Acts, and Persons of state too, beyond a declaration of their disli∣ke. The watchman in Ezekiel (whose example you counterfeit, and whose authoritie you abuse) was to warne when God brought the sword upon a land: not to arme nor remonstrate when he sent it out. The fal∣shood The Church∣chasing and exeommuni∣ting for the late engage∣ment. of your Church-chasing and excommunicating persons in the late enga∣gement, were it any, could at most be fayd but to be antidated by the Bishop, we since daylie conversing with such persons who live not very comfortablie in these parts, yet dare not returne home; And your publike papers ranking them in 4. classes or divisions, excluding them out of places of trust or power, censuring them to sackcloth, banishing, excommunicating all that repent not for their active loyaltie as a sinne. The Bishop chargeth no man with detrac∣ting
from the freedome of the Parliament that engaged them, He onelie anticipates by his answer such a probable praetense. In the place whereof since you frankelie give us the advantage of your confes∣sion, in your next you must shew upon what sure grounds you pro∣test, preach, warne, declare against the power of the Kingdome in a sree Parliament, in publike Iudicatories, and armies, which you con∣fesse you did in your paper May 11. (as I take it) 1649. As likewise how your declaring of, became censuring in judgement, and your dissa∣tisfaction transformed into a sentence. The heapesof untruths, when your spectatours wipe their eyes will The un∣truths are the Revie∣wers. be easilie discerned cast on your side of the way. So that they will not wonder at your falsifying Histories of old times, when the relation of your latest know'n practices, is by your fierie tongue branded with the ignominie of a lie. The generation you speake of, who keep up their credit according to the rate of too many mens idlenesse or in advertence, can draw no clearer pedegree then from your Synod, whose words can no more weigh with truth in the ballance, then their teeth whence they are lightlie flow'n can with the Silesian boyes en∣dure the touch. CHAPTER. X. No concord between Parliament and Presbyterie. THe harmonie betwixt your Presbyterie and Parliament, when any, is discors concordia, and but still musike at best, such as once was made between Parma and Placentia by the concurrent identitie of the capital leters in thier names. So that when their Duke writ himselfe Dux P. P. and no more their ambition was silenced about prioritie in his title. And if we looke any farther into yours, we are encounterd caninâ literâ, wish that mastiue leter, which it may be, mysticallie snarles as much against the name, as your power assaults the authoritié of the other. And when you take upon you the writing both at large, your humilitie and Courtship is such as here, ever to give praecedence unto your selves. Your constitution must be look'd upon as no other then a caelestial quintessence. Your end know'n to be compassing a temporall aswell as a spiritual tyrannie, & your daylie practice, subduing, swaying both scepters of Jesus Christs. The Praelatical learning, you see, takes no higher flight then the next
instance to prove the conclusion in hand. And he whose fayth must be forced to credit such unanswerable arguments hath indeed litle or no common sense or reason in him, but mistakes snow to be blacke because he lives in a dungeon, goes upon hot coales, and feeles not his benummed seet to Prov. 6. 28. be burnt: the light in him is darknesse because of his evil eye, & quantae tencbrae: how great is that darkenesse. S. Matth. 6. 23. What perpetual iarrings hath been between you I have otherwhere shewed, which never failed but when you tamper'd with the strings & tuned both instru∣ments to your eare. I see the late engagement often serv'd up is enough a lone to take off The Rev. eares not for hearing of the late en∣gagement. Ps. 69: 23. The 8. desi∣res of the Church nei∣ther just nor necessarie. your stomake; yet that insipide colewort must be set upon your table, while your table contimues a snare to eatch your selves withall, and that bill of fare, though but one dish repeted till it choke the rebellious guerts of the Assemblies your paper of eight desires contained 8. very in∣solent demands, in place of that submission which the Parliament sent for, I can not say expected. What justice and necessitie may be in them was not at any time by you, nor by any at that time to be ex∣postulated to the retarding that more just and necessarie designe. If the Parliament counted upon any, it reckoned withall the satisfac∣tion it had render'd, Wherin it had been rather too lavish then close handed, and promis'd more upon the necessitie then thought on, then some conceived in justice or conscience could he performed. Securitie upon oath under hand and seale the Bishop tells you were harder ter∣mes then an Vsurers to a Bankrupt, and it may be you tooke His Majestie for no other, having goten (though by no morgage) his kingdome in your possession. And knowing what he had contracted with God before, you would not part with them but upon the surest interest of his soul. If the quaestion were not for the thing, that it should seeme you tooke for granted. And then what methodical, and scrupulous traytours doe you blazon your selves to be, to leave him langui∣shing in a gaole, while the order and some particle of the securitie must be thought an. The qualification of the persons to have the managing of the warre being approved by the Parliament, the highest Court in the Kingdome, no law intimates an Assemblie or Indicatorie com∣petent to reverseit. So that the Bishop hath sufficientlie inform'd him∣selfe that the knot of the differtnce lies onelie in some bulrush, which you The Ch. of Scotland hath no li∣bertie to de∣clare against King and Parliament. looke for to litle purpose; And having attentivelie read your publike de∣clarations, drawes out of them no groundlesse conjecture, but an infalli∣ble assurance that no Historie mentions such Pharisaical Rebells upon the earth. The Warner knowes very well that what you call the libertie of the Church is in truer language the license of the many schismatical hy∣pocrites
that disturbe it; who by long custome of blaspheming God in guilded rhetorike, and a spiritual figure, translating his holie word, but perverting the sense to sinfull ends in publike declarations, have withdraw'n poor people from their dutie to their King into such feares & confoederacies as the prophet Esai had in the place that you cite warning from the Lord with a strong hand, & instructions not to walke in. The three Graces you bragge of had too many sna∣kes dangling about their eares to be mistaken for other then the thre infernalfuries which they were Your humilitie was pride and arro∣gancie to the height, attributing more to your private fancies, then to the publike counsels of a free parliament, the undenied reprae∣sentative of the Kingdome. Your pietie was but the will worship of your owne imaginations that you chaileng'd: And your wisdome craf∣tinesse; wherin you will be taken in the end, & by your froward counsel Job. 5. 13. caried headlong to your destruction. The visibilitie of this might encou∣rage the Engagers to run any adventure, rather then to follow you in your wayes. Such of them as since the disaster have crouched to an acknowledgement of their loyaltie for an errour, are poore Spiri∣ted fooles that have their eyes onelie in the ends of the earth; are never likelie to be in the number of them who obteind a good report through fayth in Prov. 17. 24. their sufferings, nor receive the promise, of some beter thing that God had pro vi∣ded for them. Did an Angel from heaven blow his trumpet, and proclai∣me Heb. 11. 39. God speaking in your declarations, the Warner and his partie were bound to stop their eares. Or if the Prince of the power of the aire should Ephes. 2. 2. clothe such wicked language in lightning, or pervert some Boa∣nerges to speake it in thunder, by terrour to worke in children of disobedience, we have Saint Pauls praescript to pronounce a dou∣ble anathema against him, Accursed, Accursed let him be and in sub∣mission Gal. 1. 8. 9. to God in his messenger the Apostle such men of gallant spi∣rits should we be, as in a Christian constancie or Romane if you will have it, rather to perish with this last breath in our mouthes, then by hearkening to counsels or walking in wayes so palpablie pernicious to Church and state, with the ruine of both let the breath of our nostrils, the Lament. 4. 20. Anoynted of the Lord, be taken in their pits. If the margin and text of your following paragraph were not so neare neighbours, in my hast I Contradic∣tion between the Revic. margin and text. might chance to have made no comparison, and so escaped the con∣tradiction between them. No offer to stopthe leavic in the one, and oppo∣sition so coldrife and small in the other, will I thinke be reconciled by no logike but that which makes degrees varie species, or argues from The levie was offered to be stop∣ped. the third to the second adjectand according to the vulgar proverbe, makes that not to be at all which is litle or nothing to the purpose. To the substance of your answer. By enquirie I finde your oppsition
as hot as your fervent zeale and abilities could make it, and if your actions drew in the same yoke with your words, you that sweated it out in earnest beseechments, exhortations, and threats, sate not still to see the effects of your papers, but armed your selves to the worke of retardment, if not to the retracting the designe. Some few lines in a Declaration and warning from the Commission of your General Assemblie, are enough to keep the Bishop from ignorance, & a transscript of them as they lie to discharge him from the malice you impute…We doe earnestlie beseech and exhort all who live in this land, that as they tender their solemne obligation and oath both by the National Covenant, May 11. 1649. and by the solemne league & Covenant, & as they love the honour of Iesus Christ and the Gospell…Nay, as they wish to eschew the heavie wrath and indigna∣tion of the Lord, That they doe not give any countenance, nor connivence to these wicked men in their wicked way, much lesse to joyne with them in counsel or in ar∣mes. And because it lies upon us to be faythfull in our station, therefore as we have allreadie given warning unto these men that unlesse they doe speedilie destst from their evil way and repent, that we will proceed aganist them with the dreadfull sentence of excommunication…if any shall hereafter joine with them, we will be necessitated impartiallie to proceed against them with the highest censures of the Kirke… If this be coldrife and small opposition, what tall fellowes are you when you are warme? I Know nothing you could well doe be∣yond it, unlesse with C. Caesar you would be so mad as in Homers language challenge Iupiter to an encounter em' anaeir', e ego se, which you are likelie enough to doe, if it succeeded with him as Seneca Sup∣posed. Non puto parum momenti haue ejus vocem ad incitandum conjuratorum anl∣mos Lib. De Ir. cap. ulr. addidisse. The Armie gotten up so numerous and strong, (which the Commanders thought sooner expedient, and had sooner levied but for you,) was probablie able to have done what service they pro∣fessed; but the aversion of the hearts of the Church declaring it selfe in dia∣bolical curses and supercilious discouragement, divided the hearts and enfeebled the hands of a faint people. It was a strange sympathie in the hearts of your yeomen that in the midst of their fright made them flee to the same corner of the land. Their consciences are not commonlie of such a tender touch, but when scarified by their Clergie. So that it will be no calumnie to conjec∣ture what spirit gave them wings, and directed their flight to the re∣bellious meeting at Mauchlin moor. Their growing number, and abiding there in a bodie for the securitie of their persons, made no partie for, nothing toward the deliverance of the Kings; and their danger being onelie to be forced by the Parliament to goe souldiers into England for that pur∣pose, the quaestion is what violence was therein offered to their con∣science, and, if any, by what law or praecept, divine or humane,
the Assembliecan countenance them in armes, though but in a de∣fensive posture to withstand it? In which had that part of the Armie that sodainly came upon them cut them off, it might have stood for an act of civile justice, more then militarie furie, kept the rest in peace, and much conduc'd toward an after securitie to themselves The com∣munion at Mauchlin layd to the publike. Fast appointed in termiuis for the apostacie of the Parliament, might occasion some of your Ministers coming thither to as good a purpose as his to the Kirke of St. Andro, who pray'd to Allmightie God, that he would carie through the good cause against all his enemies, especiallie against Kings, Devills and Parliaments. Co∣loured clothes and pistols were no proper accoutrement for your Ministers in armes. Kirke-men wherein to celebrate the Sacrament of Christian charitie and peace. Nor were they the good instruments with the people to goe away to run away they might be afterward) that had lead them in bands and troupes into the battail. For Presbyterian Scotish Ministers to pro∣test against any rebellion wherein they act, needes no eagle ey'd Par∣liament man to discover it at the bottome as a peice of effronterie very Not cens. by the Com∣missioners of the Kirke. common among them and proper to their profession, which is very ridiculouslie diss mbled in this case, when diverse of them were taken prisoners, fighting desperatelie for the cause, complain'd of to the Commissioners of the Kirke, who were so farre from inflicting any censure; or giving them admonition, that they approved what they had done, and justified them in the fact. Which I see here you dare not ex professo, but fawlter in your iudgement about the mee∣ting, pleading the securitie of their persons as a faire apologie for the yeo∣mens a biding in a bodie, and yet mentioning the Ministers protestation, which is litle beter then a condemnation of their convening & figh∣ting in the field. The Bishops parallel betwixt the Generall Assemblie and Parliament casts S. Pet. 2. 16. v. 13. Presbyterie makes Par∣liaments subject to the Assem∣blies. the cloake of maliciousnesse upon your owne shoulders in the abuse of your libertie, whereby you refuse to submit your selfe to the ordinance of man sor the Lordssake, otherwise then as it is ratified in your Synods for when the Presbyterians lay the authoritie of both Courts upon a divine foundation, they make themselves the chiefe corner stone, usurping the proper place of Jesus Christ in the one, and of his anoynted in the other, telling him and all Magistrates (among whom Parliaments are to be num∣bred) he ought to be subject to the Kirke spirituallie and in Ecclesiasticall govern∣ment… that be ought to submit himselfe to the discipline of the Kirke if he trans∣gresse 2. Book. discipl. 1. ch. in maters of conscience and Religion. So that when they talke of obedience sor conscience sake to their lawfull commands, they take cognizance what is conscience and law, and at their owne arbitrement many times oblige subjects on the same principles to rebell, calling this the justifiable
revenge of the Magistrates contempt against the authorite of God resident in them. The Bishop mockes not at Ministers that carie themselves at the Ambassadours of Christ, that deliver not more then is in the Com∣mission or instructions they receiv'd; but thinkes they have no priviledge above the Angels, who are not dominantes but ministrantes spiritus. That they are a flame rather to warme indiscreet zeale and Heb. 1. 14. Ps. 104. 4. devotion, then consume in the fervour of violence and passion. That God rarelie tempers brimstone with the breath of his messen∣gers, That he sets the time, & names the extraordinarie case, when Ier. 14. his words shall be fire in the mouthes of his prophets, & his people wo d that it should devoure them. He likes you should judge according to the rule of Scripture, so you follow that rule, and keepe in subjection to good lawes. He commends your caring for life aeternal, not your leaguing and cove∣nanting in order to that for the death temporal of your brethren. He judgeth you according to the rule of Scripture to be shamelcsselie impious that counterfeit a care of life aeternal, whither bloodthirstie Presbyters are never likelie to enter, but have a portion with their fellow hypocrites otherwhere. That make holie Sripture not onelie of private but perverse interpretation, and God the authour of all the wickednesse you act by the authoritie of his word who boast of an Ambassie from Christ, when who so blinde as these servants, who so Isai. 42. 19. dease as these messengers (you say) he sent? who are lead by a Spirit that doth the workes of the flesh from top to botome mention'd by St. Paul Galat. 4. Who would gull the world out of all but a forme or proper∣tie of religion; who make your selves not Ministers but Masters of Christ, commanding imperiouslie the spirit he sends downe; who make a trade of Scripture, and for wordlie gaine parsel out eternal life to whom you please. The second part of the Bishops parallel, I see, puts you to a stand, and Ministers power with the people dangerous if seditiouslie bent. the quaestion What shall be made? … argues you some what suspended in your thoughts whether as much should be made of it as you meane, and the people commended for obeying their Ministers (how sedi∣tious soever) more then their Magistrates that command them. If all the power such Ministers have with the people be built on their love to God, what pitie is it that rebellious structure should have such a religious foundation? When it riseth high he is no good states man that doth not demolish it, knowing that what God and conscience constraine not, but perswade, to imploy to his good, the Divel without any or with one that's erroneous may tempt them to aedifie to his ruine. It is not a∣misse Th. Cap∣nel. eap. 18. sayd & applied by him that writ of the spanish Monarchie Pri∣um instrumentum bone imperandi, lingua est; secundum vero gladius. The sword is but the left hand instrument in the governing Kingdomes:
The tongue, of the preacher is dextra terribilis, that of the right hand that teacheth terrible things, that by the menace of death, which the sword Ps. 45. 5. can not reach to, keepes subjects in obedience to their Soveraignes. Therefore when once it hath a power with the people such as that of St. psis Cardi∣nalibus and P. P. max∣formidabilis fuit, dire∣mita aut u∣nyt princi∣pes & sub∣ditos suos ar∣bytratu. Bernard it had need be endued with the spirit of Saint Bernard, sor there is a tongue. Quae conterit spiritum, the perversenesse wherein is a breach in the spirit Prov. 1. 5. 4. And the proud men in the Psalmist, pro∣mise themselves a victorie over Princes by the tongue, We will prae∣vaile Who because they are the men that ought to speake, just like you, denie all supremacie. Their first language is this. Quis dominus, Who is Lord over use. The Politician I spake of hath a discourse worth your reading, wherein he shewes you how Maliomet stirred up the peo∣ple against Heraclius the Emperour. He sayth as much for Calvin your protoplast, which whatsoever may be apologiz'd for him, I Ps. 12. 4. am sure is inexcusable in Knox and you that are the workemanship of his hands. This made Charles the good so prudent and resolute, who being become too unhapie in nothing more then in suffering your Babel building to be finished in Scotland, when he beheld the like worke of your fellow Rebell Architects in England, would not exclude him∣selfe Eik: Bas: cap. 17. out of doores, nor part with that power whereby he might best restraine the seditious exorbitances of Ministers tongues, who with the keyes of heaven have so farre the keyes of the peoples hearts as they praevaile much by their oratorie to shut in and let out both peace and loyaltie. While the Warner scosfes at your threats his meaning is to have deluded people to scorne them and know in your words that the thundrings of (the Scotish aswell as) that Roman An∣ti-Christ are but vanitie and inde. To tell them in a figure that hell and St. Liturg. p. 87. death are no more in your keeping then the gaole in the prisoners that walkes abroad in the streetes with his shakels about him, but must render himselfe at the end of his covenant: The Praelates proclamation of such Atheisme as this is a printed copie out of the original writ by the V. 18. fingar of God in the 10. S. Matth. Whereby is to be banished out of the hearts of the people all feare of them which kill the bodie but are not able to kill the soul, for all their kirke-bulls and censures that threaten it. To the quaestion you close with I answer, That Satan hath driven all∣readie the first instruments of his Republike in Britaine into a very narow roome in the North, where Cromwell and other his more usefull in∣struments at praesent, are likelie to keep them, till, if God neither convert nor by a miracle otherwise confound them his worke being done he may lash them with whips of their owne making, topt' with Serpents heads, and Scorpions tailes, and at last deliver them to the worme that shall not die, cast them into the fire that shall not be quenched, Isai. 66. 24
and make their stinking memorie an abhorring unto all slesh. The third part of the parallel hath been in every particular justified, and were more instances requisite to evidence the truth, they might be a numberlesse number of such imputations as you are never able to refute. The charge which the Bishop subjoines is not so poore but that it enri∣cheth No in hae∣rent right in Courts to nominate Commissio∣ners for in∣tervalls. his proofe with the best argument of your spiritual suprema∣cie. The daylie practice of the Parliaments of Scotland, such as have been of late and heretofore when your Reformation tooke place, constitu∣tes no right, confirmes no power os nominating commitees for intervalls. Nor is there any inhaerent right in Courts to nominate interreigning Commissioners but by Royal favour in such as (except their intertearming vaca∣tions) are perpetual and standing, not call'd by fits ad placitum Domi∣ni Regis, no not in the Parliament it selfe. Which (to omit other proofes) was the ground of this clause in their Act of oblivion 1641. That the peace to be now established may be inviolablie observed in all time to come, It is agreed that some shall be appointed by His Majestie and the Parliaments of both Kingdomes, who in the interim betwixt the sitting of the Parments may be carefull that the peace now hapilie concluded may be tontinued &c.… And it is declared that the power of the Commission shall be restrained to the articles of peace in this treatie; As likewise of that fatal Act for perpetuating the last blacke Parliament in England, which had probablie ner been re∣quired if it might have nominated a Committe of state (that idol to which it now sacrificeth, in bloud) to sit till the next summons upon any inhaerent right in that Court. For the Iudicatories of your Church. I am tired with telling you that no law of the Kingdome doth priva∣tivé authorize them to meet, their Assemblie being illegal without the King or his Commissioner, neither of which are to come upon course or at call. And their power of appointing Committees hath as often been quaestion'd (and how often is that?) as it ever was executed with∣out or against the positive consent or command of the King or Queen for the time. And trulie the committees in the times, os your late troubles were the Ambuscado wherein you lay closelie in wait to disturbe both Church and state, while your armed bodie in Parliament retired. Whose frequent meetings were forced no otherwse then by the incessant zeale in their Members to persecute Religion and loyaltie. Whose diversion from their particular charges (for attendance on the publike rebellion) was join'd with so great fascherie and expense to fullfill their lusts at other mens cost, Which with all their heart they will in Sempiternum con∣tinue, if feare of their neckes make them not at length slip out of the collar: or their grey haires and withered carkasses (after many a surfeit) call them not to some other account, or their Chiefe in
whose service they made these necessarie meetings pay them not their necessarie wages in pertusum sactulum, into a bag full of holes, which Haggai 1. 6. shall never be filled, no more then was the measure of the iniquitie they acted. CHAPTER XI. The Presbyterie cruel to particular persons. IF King and Parliament be (as they may very well) incenced against the The Presby∣terie a ty∣rannie over the conscien∣cies of the∣people. Presbyterie at sight of the Bishops reason, more then out of sympa∣thie with him in his anger, his warning hath taken in part the effect that he wished and aim'd at. Yet in vaine shall they vindicate all just authoritie to themselves, if the people be kept in a servile obser∣vance of a tyrannous discipline, & pay their blinde obedience to the Kirke. Therefore the Warner excedes no bounds in his rage, but en largeth his bowels of pitie to them, who for the most part having disarmed their soules of that judgement which should dictate their freedome from Church censures upon acts indifferent, or sinfull in an in∣feriour degree, their due submission to an arraignment of thoughts onelie in the Court of a poenitent conscience, or hereafter before the tribunal of heaven, where sits the onelie Iudge of hearts, the discerner of perverse inclinations; expose themselves naked to the boundlesse furie of mercilesse Reviewers; to the sharpe scrutinie of malicious Inquisitours; to the arbitrarie sentence of most sinful Iud∣ges, and therefore most suspicious surmisers. The Bishop mentions Censures upon slight grounds. no faults but such as toward which your Discipline mentions no fa∣vour limited to the privacie of the care. Nor yet doe all those give occasion for that which you take to shew the infinite extent, the interminate divisibilitie of your power. In the booke that he cites is the greatest Scot. Lit. censure of the Church praescribed, and more methodicallie then mercifullie shewed how a small offence or sclaunder may justlie deserve ex∣communication by reason of the contempt and disobedience of the offender. Pag. 60. And lest any should thinke that the osfenses named are not so hainous as that of the Corinthians incest (whence you take your paterne and Saint Pauls authoritie for your processe) you give such to understand that mercie and favour may rather be granted to any other sinne then to the contempt of wholesome admonitions, and of the just and law full ordinances of the Church. Pag. 80. Which if (as you say) it never procured the smallest censure, you have been
a great deale too profuse of your pardons, Where you professe your obligations so great to the performance of the commandement of God. Or, if you thinke it not such may be justlie required by any Erastian to render a reason, why that ignis fatuus, that foolish spirit Rom. 8. 15. of bondage walkes in your Discipline from generation to generation, while they laugh at the calamitic you threaten, and moke when your feare co∣meth Prov 1. 26. upon the people. But he that knowes you will never mistake you for such meeke lambes in this mimike disguise of lions, when he findes you aswell preying as roaring. And how any, the most cha∣ritable man will have just cause to complaine of your rigour, let your aequitable comparers judge observing with me but one passage of multitudes in your forme, that one which speakes you the most savage petitioners that ever invocated the name of Spiritual crueltie in the prayers of Presby∣ters. Christ, whom you humblie beseech (for feare his mercie that is written to be above all his owne workes, should be above that of yours, the in∣humanitie you are about) that whatsoever in his name you pronounce in earth (meaning the sentence of excommunication, though but for susspicions and jealousies, if not confessed to be as real faults as any Sc. Lit. p. 196. peevish brother shall construe them) he Would ratifie the same in heaven. Which can not be paralleld in the Turkish Aicaron, nor among all the superstitions rites and cruel offices of the heathen per formed to the most bloudie, most insatiate of divels, who doth nothing else but goe about seeking whom he may devoure. Where as if this be your slack∣nesse 1. Pet. 5. 8, wherewith sectaries charge you, which you are soric you are not able to refute. it should seem you are sorie there are no more hells then one, no pluralitie of soules in your single Impaenitents, no imaginable pro∣traction of punishment beyond aeternitie for the execution of your censures. The Sabbath recreations, which the Bishop sayth are voyd of Our Sabbath recreations shorst of those in other Re∣formed Curches. scandal, are likelie to be, at most but those mention'd in the booke of toleration so much decried by the brethren of your faction; a∣mong which were no stage playes, nor, in my memorie, any allowed to be acted on Sundays, and so not frequented by his friends. The greater license on the Sabbath Kirmasses you slide over without any of that zeale, which His Lordship prophesieth, though your selfe have been a spectatour of it in these Countreys, So that in your owne words (which I am a frayd will too often be mistaken for mine, and bring upon me the imputation of a sloven) If the Aposteme in your lo∣west gut had not chang'd places with your braines your words had been wiser and your unsavourie breath (which you too often eructate) somewhat sweeter. The debate among some of your sect. Whether in Scotland or no, which is not expressed, about starch and cuffes, may very well passe upon the credit of the Warner that asserts it, & your putting him upon the poofe makes me guesse you are not in a readinesse to
denie it. Howsoever we know the curses of the Laundrie have been through two or three descents a traditional legacie to the brethren Trivial de∣bates, and; articling a∣gainst ha∣biss. of your order in England for the counterscuffles they made about the former. And the debate on the later hath produc'd an injunction to your Societie somewhere else to cast away those litle idolatroue ragges, which could scarce be taken for any reliques of Rome, & their gloves too, it may be upon better reason, lest the cleanlinesse of their hands might beget a jealousie of some superstition in wa∣shing them before their publike officiating, on their unhandsome dis∣tributing of the word. What litle latitude of discretion you allow & how your superiours must be your slaves or pupils in the attire aswell of their bodies as sules is evident by your preaching and articling against the appa∣rell even of the Ladies of Honour & that waited upon your Queenes Knox Hist. Majestie three sundrie dayes when she rode in great state and solem∣nitie to the Tolbuith in Parliament time Ao. 1563. Of the second oppression, which the Bishop objects you give up a very imperfect account, leaving the greatest weight to he as heavie as it The same fault under a different formalitie not to be∣twice puni∣shed. can upon the head of your Synods in calling the Magistrate fool for his mercie, and knave for his briberie, which you onelie suspect because he is not as rigid as your selves; In enjoyning publike satisfa∣ction after the Defendant hath given it at an assize &c. What you bring is litle to the purpose, and, if it were, hath been packt away with its answer long a goe Wherewith yet if gou will not be satis∣fied, you must be set to reviewe Erastus and answer him. When he tells you, of old no notice was taken of your double formalitie viz of crime and scandal, so as to subject the delinquent, for the same fact, to the censure of two distinct Courts, Civile and spiritual. He calls Lib. De Fid. & Op. cap. 2. ad raucedinem usque for one text or example in Scripture to justifie it; He proves out of St. Austin &c. That the Church used the spiritual sword onelie when the temporal was not in Christian hands. He puts you to make good your maine consequence. That if the Magistrate doth not his dutie, an Assemblie, Court is required to constraine him, or as youe Liturgie speakes, to admonish him, and that too, as the Bi∣shop urgeth when he hath discharg'd it according to his Iudgement Offenders quitted to be admitted to the H. Sa∣crament without publike sa∣tisfaction in the Church. and conscience. From your proceedings of this kinde His Lordship drawes 3. observations, which you cannot denie, and yet dare not acknowledge, and therefore say nothing; but worke in a whimzie of his excursions upon his owne friends, not any of whom approve the injustice, the irrationalitie, much lesse imitate the cueltie of your practice. The Popish Praelates are not so neare allied unto the Doctour, nor doe they need to be taken into his protection: The English are, and can vindicate themselves against you for admitting to
the holie table with signes of repentance, without Ecclesiastike pub∣like satisfaction, murtherers that are either quit by their jurie, or have their pardon sealed by the King, whores that either are spared out of hopes of amendment, or have had the whip at Bridewell, and theeves burn'd in the hand at Newgate or sau'd by the benefit of their Clergie; And this upon beter grounds then the Presbyters denie them communion with those, who as much as they make up their mouthes, dare not take up a stone to cast at them. The Doctour knowes his owne meaning, and plainelie speakes it. And they must be very igno∣rant or worse that are not of his minde, or rather of St. Pauls which I take to be this. That when a man shall without visible hypocrisie say, be hath examin'd himselfe, he is not to be againe examin'd by the 1. Cor. 11. Classe, but may eate of that bread, and drinke of that cup, That when he hath judged himselfe, he should not be judged; That when he is judg'd, he is chastened of the Lord, not condemn'd and executed by the Kirke. Your in∣terrogatorie or argument a minore ad majus in case of Scandal is defec∣tive untill you render a just definition of scandal applicable to all where in your discipline doth instance; After which having made your scale of degrees, your antecedent requires your proofe viz. That small, scandals are to be purg'd away by that repentance that here is in quaestion between us. Had I ever read of any Presbyter in The Scotish practice tou∣ching Ex∣communica∣tion litle le∣se rigid then their Canon. Scotland what I have of Fabian once Bishop of Rome. That he was chosen by the extraordinarie descent of a dove upon his head. I might charitablie hope sor some spirit of meekenesse among the bre∣thren of the Discipline, and have some litle credulitie that the want of gall in any one of the number might qualifie the exuberance and overflowing biternesse in the rest; But when I meet with such tra∣gike Histories of their implacable furie, and see every where their unjust judgement running downe like a torrent, and their unrighteous rigour like a mightie streame; I can put litle trust in the slender banke of Master Baylies professions in behalfe of his Presbyterie, from whom ex∣pect as litle mercie as truth, and as litle Christian righteousnesse as peace. The Warner can not be ignorant of your Scotish wayes, while his eyes are open to reade them in your bookes, or his eares to heare them in very credible reports. He that lives in Scotland, and never seeth the exe∣cution of that censure, must betake himselfe to the mountaines, & con∣verse in some corner with those creatures, who know as litle of ex∣communicating by, as they ever did of communicating with a Church. For the 47. yeares halcion dayes that you have seen (of which from your birth which you so superstitiouslie mention you must give us leave to abate at least one or two, as praegnant in knowledge and as quicke an Intelligencer as you could be in your cradle, and about
30. of 40. more, wherein the curst blacke cowes had short hornes, the Presbyterian severitie being regulated by the Bishops, who ca∣ried the badge of clemencie aswell as innocencie on their armes the great citie you liv'd in must be taken for the onelie bright Mercie seate in your Countrey, while the sun of righteousnesse did never arise otherwhere, but turn'd his face away from it as a land of darkenesse, full Ps. 74. 21. of cruel habitations. As touching the two censures you acknowledge, had the profanesse in the papist, and the horrible scandal in the Praelates been priviledg'd as much in the punishment with a proxie, as, they say, the more true and more horrible scandal in a brother of the Com∣mission, the rod of that furie had passed upon the backes of the fooles in your Citie; as for the luftie Presbyters delinquencie (I have heard your excommunication was executed upon the Nodie-Innocents in his parish. If you goe no farther then Saint Pauls command 2. Thes. 3. 14. You should denounce no publike excommunication in the Church, but diates epistoles scmeiousthai, by private leters signifie his fault. You should have no companie nor familiaritie with him that he may be ashamed, not forbid every man to sell him bread, that he may be sterved. You should admonish him as a brother, not count him as Sc. Lit. p. 00. an enemie, commanding him to be reputed as accursed & delivered to the devil. Much lesse should you arrogate the praerogative of God, Master Iohn Guthrie Bishopp of Muray. if not a greater, in visiting the sinne of the father upon the children, such it may be as hate you not, denying them baptisme till they come to be of age &c. And, to shew what good Angels you are, after sentence pronounced, you dismisse not the Congregation before they have The follo∣wing in con∣venients to be charged rather upon the Church then state. sung with you the 100. Psalme, a Psalme of exultation whereby as much as may be, you rejoyce at the confusion of a sinner. Nor is your reserve of litle kindnesse very constant in permitting the ex∣communicate the companie of them that are tied by natural bonds unto him, when the sharpenesse of your censure cut' these bonds, with-held this indulgence from Master Iohn Guthrie Bishop of Murray, to whom, when he lived in Angus you denied the comfort and conversation of his brother though a preacher of a parish thereabout. For the inconveniences that follow, how powerfull hath been the in∣fluence of the Church upon the State in such Acts of Parliament as are made consequential to their Acts of Assemblies may be guessed by the frequent servile submission to the tyrannie of their papers. In the Parliaments where your Princes were ever praedominant it can not be thought they would ratifie an Act so destructive to their owne strength in the diminution of their subjects, as to set the Quia a empore quo us lagatus est capnt gerit lupi∣num, ita quod abom∣nibus inter fici possit & impuné Bracton. heads of wolves upon the shoulders of men, and for such trivial faults as the Bishop mentions antecedent to your censure, with le∣ters
of horning expose them to be worried by dogges. For this crueltie may your Church be deservedly challenged, and that by Proelates, who gave no such customarie allowance to thier officials to excommunicate as ap∣peares by the caution in the Canon 1571. Nullus horum, nec Cancella∣rius, nec Commissarius, nec Officialis in cognitione causarum procedt usque ad serendam sententiam excommunicationis, nisi tantum in causis instantiarum. And in the Canon 1604. If the delinquent made his appearance, and after processe was to be censured the official was nor to pronounce the sentence but the Bishop nullam ejusmodi sententiam pronunciari volumus praeterquam per Episcopum &c. Nor were the civile inconvenients like those after leters of horning. And how easilie all for great crimes was commuted for, your brother Didoclave complaineth at large. Where as you run againe from the severitie in your lawes to the clemen∣cie in your practice (though that be no answer to the Bishop who presseth upon your Canon) your diverse late yeares crueltie, which still is continued confutes you in the face of the world. In which if your sentence tooke place in heaven as it doth to their confusion on earth, so many have payd the price of their soules for observance of the first & fift Commandements, their dutie to God & obedience to their King. Your parenthesis that hookes in the greatnesse of sinnes is convict by the slight pecoadilloe forementioned. And the length of your processe shall be cut short by one instance in the forenamd Bishop Guthrie, who was never so much as admonish'd by a brother, nor summond by a messenger unlesse to yeild up his house to Rob. Mon∣roe, being caried to Edenburgh not to have trial, but to heare that sentence had passed upon him before he came. In the case of fugitives your Discipline makes no distinction not arbitrarie between the contumacious and timerous. And he that stands to Crueltie to∣ward fugi∣tives. your account shall come short of his reckoning on mercie, if your flying rowle can reach his soul at a distance aswell as to be sure it shall consume the timber and stones of his house thats at hand.
CHAPTER XII. The Presbyterie a burthen to the Nobilitie, Ministrie, and all Orders whatsoever. You know what Constantine sayd concerning the Arians… The Pres∣byterians as outra∣gious as the Arians. Christe, Christe, Kyrie, Kyrie, ti depote hemas to lesterion hosemeran titroskes He complaind that when their hainous crimes whereof they were accused had wounded their heads, and the deformitie of Shame spread over their faces, their violent boldnesse stood fiercelie in op∣position to the truth, They wept not in Sorrow, but roar'd in mad∣nesse Brychatai epipriusa ten odonta Rescript ad Arium & Arian. with a grinding of their teeth. The Presbyterians I see by many passages in this chapter want neither impudence nor rage to outface and raile as much as any haeretikes whatsoever, when once their discipline is touched to the quicke. The Praelatical malice seemes no way exorbitant by this supplement of the Bishops, wherein his just in∣dignation chaceth all the remaining eccentrike motions of these pla∣nets, these ftaires that wander from the fixed beauties in the firma∣ment of the Church. If you can but finde patience, or your stomake will serve you to returne to your owne vomit and licke up your lan∣guage the aire will be cleansed which was become unsavourie onelie by the uncomelinesse of your speach. The Noblitie and Gentrie in all Presbyserie more oppres∣sive to the Nobilitie and Gentrie the Praelaccc. parts of Britaine have had too long and unhapie experience of the difference between the fatherlie counsels or friendlie correc∣tion of Bishops (whom Religious Princes in honour of their function have dignified with the title of Barons, and priviledge of Peeres) and the unsufferable insolencies of Presbyters, whose peacockes tai∣les that traine it daylie in the vulgar dust, and sweep together the ras∣kalitie of the people, are poudlie spread and fanned in their faces. Those in England, (which were none of the best) that refused no hazard to shake off that easie yoke which was layd upon them by the hands and institution of Christ, have broke their neckes in their hast, & you see their honour buried in the grave. The Scotish Nobilitie that lead them the way, having serv'd allmost a double apprentiship at the trade, alas groane for their freedome yet dare not aske it from him, whose mercie they feare must not be so injurious to justice, as after so many rebellions and murders especiallie that unpardonable
parricide) to redeem them from bondage and to quit the for feit of their lives and estates. Therefore they chuse rather (unhapie choyce between necessitie and nothing) to renew their slaverie, Were the British Bishops set downe againe and (which they may be in beter earnest then you meane it) well warmed in their repaired sees, as they would looke to receive a filial respect so they would doubtlesse re∣pay a paternal Christian care of the Nobilitie and Gentrie in their charge; Those that heretofore did not (if any did not) had no na∣tures nor principles befitting their dignities, and till they have changed what they had for such 'tis pitie, if they survive, they shovld be reen∣stated. You should doe well to name those that set their feet on the neckes of the greatest Peeres, but withall to set downe how long they could keep their footing there when a just appeale had been made to the capital power that was above them. If the publike oo scandalous li∣cense of any peere, how great soever, receiv'd at their mouthes a friendlie rebuke; If after that his untractable confidence in sinne some legal restraint or fatherlie chastisement at their hands; when Gods impartial and irrespective commandements are alter'd; when Christian lawes that are consonant repeal'd, they may be then, & not till then discharg'd of this dutie, and visited by Master Baylie (when he shewes his commission) for their arrogance in the exercise of any oppression or tyrannie in their Courts. In the pretie peice that followes Master Baylie hath play'd the The Revie∣wers coun∣terseit of Presbyterie inverted. part of Pauson the painter in Plutarch, and artificiallie draw'n the Presbyterian horse in his ful career, giving as he thinkes every limme its due proportion to grace him in that posture; But when, with Pausons customer, we turne the table and lay the beast on his backe, his designe is spoyl'd, and that uglie spectacle of a founder'd jade drawes contempt and laughter from all judicious passengers that behold it. That every small Congregation in Scotland can furnish your El∣derships Wisdome pietie, and learning not so common in Elder∣ships. with wise, pious, and learned men by the dozen, will never be credited till we get some Historical assurance that when all good parts, pietie, and prudence were divorced from Canaan Athens & Lacedaemon they made a voyage to Scotland to court the wilde af∣fections of the Presbyters in the North. For the double portion of discretion and learning in your Clas∣sical The Nobi∣litie & Gen∣trie abused when chosen Elders. Presbyterie, which drawes in by fifteens the Nobilitie & Gentrie you runne the adventure of losing a beter inheritance, if you take St. Pauls to meane that in the leter (as you sometimes tell us when you are angrie with Court and our Academical Clergie) Not many wisemen… not many noble 1. Cor. 1. 26. But it is in truth your owne
carnal wisdome not so much to adde worth, as to arrogate power to, and make absolute the authoritie of your Consistorie, that in other mens names you may Lord it over not onelie the Common people but the Senate as he told some of your kindred that had searched every secret corner in your spiritual house. Consistorium ut dominari Schulting Steinwich Hierarch Anacris: Lib. 2. possit Senatui asciscit pro senioribus Consutes, Senatores & Optimates… Where if persons of qualitie be wanting to complete your number, you go to plow with an oxe and an asse, yoke a Count and a Cobler together, while your prickeard Pastour keepes the goad in his hand to quicken their dull pace and drive them into Rebellious Covenants and so to their Dut. 22. 10. shame and destruction. The Iudge in our Officials Court is to be no petie mercinarie lawyer, but a Doctour that hath approved his skill in our Doctours at law more sit judges then unstudied Nobles or Gentlemen. Civile lawes before one of our learned universities, & thereby sup∣posed to have beter abilities to judge then any Nobleman, Gentle∣man, Burgesse, one or more, except some select persons who by stu∣die may have attained to some excellence in that facultie, wherewith neither by birth nor education they are know'n to be ordinarilie qualified, unlesse Dame nature in Scotland hath some faeminine molds in every parish for your Elders, or some Seraphical fathers to breed their children by the rod or institution of the Spirit. But to returne to our Doctour. From his single sentence appeale may be made to a Court of Delegates consisting of a number the most learned, and in humane opinion the most upright lawyers in the land. Which can be taken for no miserable reliefe, being the highest Court constituted by the authoritie of the King where if not His Majestie in person, his immediate Commissioners are Iudges. Your twice a yeare Synods seem somewhat unnecessarie if intended Synods not to besummo∣ned to recei∣ve lay ap∣peales. principallie for receiving appeales, your Classical Presbyteries con∣sisting of persons (as you praetend) of such sinceritie & honour, & somewhere (as I remember) Didoclave tells us they have litle worke which, if well examin'd, hapeneth not so much by reason of the aequitable proceedings in inferiour judicatures, as from the assu∣rance which persons oppressed have to meet with the same measure from the same men that are the Members of your Synods, who know well enough how to gratisie one another in the mutual ratification of the particular sentences pass'd before. The Primitive Synods found other worke, praeserving in their Provinces the puritie of doctrine & uniformitie in practice, trusting Bishops in their Dioce∣ses except in singular cases with the censures of persons & redresse of grievances. Yet whatsoever convenience may be in it our Episcopal twice a yeare visitation may parallel. If the chiefe Noblemen &c have decisive voyces in your Synods, they gaine that priviledge by their birth
or estates to neither of which is inseparably annexed wisdome, pietis & learning, the three gifts or spirits you require in your Iudges. How farre private instructions and interests praevaile with your Presbyte∣ries in their elections to exauctorate all the good qualifications in the competition of Candidates, the records of your Edenburgh Ta∣bles at the begining of this Rebellion can justifie: Though were their Honourable heads gaged and concluded capacious to hold no lesse then a tunn of wisdome & learning, and their armes clasped upon the embrace of the whole sisterhood of zeale, vertue, and grace, with all other abilities requisite to your Elders, your Presbyteries full approbation and choyce could not authorize them to suffrage in a Synod, whereto of old they had no admission, but as in the Se∣cond Councel of Orange, when sent thither by the King. I shall not insist upon the comparison or disparitie between them & inferiour Civile Court Judges, in whom no parts are wanting to the execution of their place in whose choyce the Canon of their institution is ob∣served All hopes of redresse by appeale from your Synods to a Ge∣neral Collusion & violence in the choyce of Members for the As∣semblie. Assemblie are crush'd in the shell by your underhand violence in election of Members, and praelimitation of them that are chosen in their votes. You remember the seven private directions sent to your Presbyteries before the Assemblie at Glasgow 1638. the fourth of which was. That such as are erroneous in doctrine or scandalous in life, be praesentlie processed that they be not chosen Commissioners, and if they shall hapen to be chosen by the greater part, that all the best affected both Minicters and Elders protest, and come to the Assemblie to trstisic the same. By this tricke you not onelie praeudg'd or praecondemn'd the legal freedome in choyce, but caus'd to be process'd all suspected to be of a different sense from that which you praedesign'd or praescrib'd to the Assemblie. Thus the Presbyterie of Edenburgh put very many of their Ministers un∣der processe, begining with Master David Michel, their procee∣ding Master Da∣vid Michel. Laird of Dun. against whom His Majesties Commissioner could not get defer∣red untill the meeting of the Assemblie. Thus the Laird of Dun cho∣sen Lay Elder for the Presbyterie of Brechen by the voyce but of one Minister and a few Lay Elders, was accepted, & the Lord Car∣naegie L. Car∣naegie. a Covenanter too, but somewhat more moderate, more law∣fullie chosen by the voyces of all the rest was rejected. There was another paper of instructions dated August 27. 1638. which is mors in olla, the Collaquintada that spoyles all the pottage you bring us in this parapraph, the Second of which is this, Order must be taken that none be chosen ruling Elders but Covenanters and those well affected to the businesse, so that parts for judgement, wisdome, pietie &c are no considerable quali∣ties in your Members of Assemblies, when the Covenant and good
inclinations to the busnesse (of rebellion) can be found though but in Ideots & Atheists. The multitude of Burgesses & Gentlemen is so great Why so ma∣ny Burges∣ses & Gen∣tlemen. to some such good intent as this, that you may praeponderate the Parliament in your laike votes, and anticipate any just exception they can make against your Acts. The ground of their admission in your first reformation was a defect of Clergie, which, when once supplied, had for 40. yeares possessed all the places till exchange was made at your Glasgow null Assemblie to doe the worke in hand. The prime Nobilitie are not allwayes the men, but such among them as are first in popular opinion, and for that in your favour. Your choyce The laitie to have no decisive voyce. of them is many times illegal, when to serve your turnes you call them from one Presbyterie to another. Yet when all is done, you can pleade no praecendent from antiquitie for any more then a decla∣rative consent, no definitive sentence no decisive voyce, the subscrip∣tions in the Ancient Councels, distinguishing the Clergie and Laitie in this maner. Ego N. definiens subscripst. Ego N. consentiens subscripst. Those that at any time had greater priviledge, (if the words cited by your Bishop of Brechen must needs give it them) Gloriosissimi edicunt & Glo∣riesissimi Iudicos dixreunt, were special Commissioners sent from the em∣perours Perth Pro∣ceed. not from any Presbyteries, as he tells you, and more to this purpose which you may answer, as likewise what the Reverend Bi∣shops objected in their Declinatour, about Theodosius the yonger, Pulcheria the Emperesse, & Martinius in the fourth General Coun∣cel of Chalcedon. Master Andrew! Ramsey undertoke an hard taske upon the top of his stool offering to prove the lawfulnesse of Lay El∣ders Master An∣drew. Ram∣sey. by Scripture, Antiquitie, Fathers, Councels, & the judgement of all the Reformed Churches. And therefore, when His Majesties Commissioners offered to bring one into the pit that should encoun∣ter him, the cocke crowed no more, and, with the Brethrens good liking the controversie ceased. Till afterward, on good occasion, a Member offering to prove there was no such thing in the Christian world before Calvins dayes, the Moderatour learnedlie confuted him, saying, His father while he liv'd was of another minde. The E. Ar∣gile, E. Argile. The King or his Commis∣sioner hath litle power in Assem∣blies Pro∣test of Gen. Ass. Nov. 28. & 29. 1638. who was surprized, as he sayd, at the sodain rupture of this Assemblie, held the Members a litle while by the eares with his argument of con∣venience, telling them. He held it sit the Assemblie should consist of Lay∣men aswell as Churchmen; Take this with you. Your Assemblie Mini∣sters are chosen by the lay Elders your Moderatours some times are laymen, a course not justifiable by law, praecedent, or reason. The Kings Majesties person, or in his absence his high Commissioner is there onelie (you tell him) to countenance, not vote in, your meetings, and proesides in them for exernal order, not for any intrinsecal power. So that when you
goe on calmelie in your businesse he findes litle to doe without Do∣mitians flie-flap, of more use by farre in a summer Synod then a Scepter among you which you often times wrest out of his hand, and continue your meetings after he hath dissolv'd them. You can denie him or his commissioner the sight of publike papers brought into the Court (which libertie the meanest subject may challenge.) And twhen he hath any thing to object against suppositions, or, at Nov. 28. sess. 7. best suspicious Registers, the E. Rothes can tell him boldlie in your names he must speake it praesentlie if at al, and because he doth not you E Rothes. wait no longer; but, proimperio, vote them to be authentike. Besi∣de, to deminish as well the Kings state as authoritie, you send As∣sessours, or Assistants to your Elders, and invest them with power aequivalent to his Councel This meeting thus disordered sits too long by a month when no more, and Assembles, too often when but once in a yeare. The number of such Members no more hindereth an ap∣peale, Necessitie of appeale. then a multitude of Malefactours can sentence a necessitie of becoming their followers in doing evil. Their wisdome is such as his Exod. 23. 2. to whom, a wiser man tells us, it is a sport to doe mischief. Their eminencie like Sauls, head and shoulders higher then the com∣mon Prov. 10. people in Rebellion, And their honour somewhat like Abso∣loms mule, beares them up to the priviledge of the great oake in the wood 2. Sam. 18. 9. for their hanging in beter aequipage then their fellowes. So that be∣side the justice theres an absolute necessitie of appeal to the Parliament, or in that to the King from himselfe to himselfe, who sits there as supreme, here in no other capacitie but of your servant. Which is Pap. of 10. prop. before M. Hamilt arri. farre more justifiable and necessarie then vour appeale from both Parliament and Assemblie to the bodie of the people, which I tell you againe is the final appeale you make when Assemblies are not modell'd to vour minde. 1638. Why Knigts and Burges∣ses so nume∣rous. The number and qualification of Knights and Burgesses is therefore large and as great in your Assemblie as Parliament, that your power may be as large and great in the State as the Church, and the Nobilitie sit in one by elec∣tion, because they sit in the other by birth, and so in a condition to unite the counsels of both according to the instructions of some few Presbyters that by Sycophantike infinuations have got possession of their soules and by their Spiritual Scepter dominion of their suf∣frages. Headie zeale, craft, and hypocrisie got in commission or Covenant together, we finde by experience can fit them to judge in Ecclesiastike affaires, when age, wisdome and pietie are sentenc'd. If he hundred choyce unparliamentarie pastours make up the oddes of some absent Noblemen, it should seem you and the Nobilitie are even pa∣res cum paribus, Peeres alike in your honourable Assemblie. Which
they must not disdaine, since Christ himselfe, I meane not his A∣noynted, (that you take to be out of quaestion) goes but for a single Elder or Moderatour at most. So Cartwright and his Demonstra∣tour cajoles them together, when he sayth, If they (the Princes and Lib. 3. de∣monst. c. 14. Nobles) should disdaine to joine in consultation with poore men, they should dis∣daine not men but Christ himselfe. So that Christ being in his name made your Assembly Praesident or Prolocutour, the King in his Commis∣sioner your protectour, the Nobilitie your aw full subvoters or suffraganes, I see nothing wanting can conciliate a tyrannie to your Pres∣byterie, nor keep your foot of pride from trampling as basely as may be upon the people. But not to forget at last what you set in the front as first to be answered. The Presbyterian course, as you, or I more trulie, have describ'd it, is not much more readie then the Praelatical, because the benefit of appeale is to be had ordinarilie but once or twice in a yeare; not much more solide, because most of your Iudges can reasonablie be thought neither good Civilians nor Casuists, not much more aequitable, because, as you order them, many more of the laitie then Clergie. In the second hurt your Nobilitie sustaine, the Bishop lookes, not upon the judgement of foreigne Reformed Devines (you doe not say of Chur∣ches) nor yet on their practice, which I have know'n some time a great deale too sawcie with Princelie Patrons, but upon the aequity of the thing, upon the priviledge our Nobles in England enjoy, & the right yours have to the same by many yeares praescription and the lawes of your land. The first will be found if the original be searched. The right of patronage being by the due gratitude or favor of Kings & Bishops The original of patrona∣ge. reserved to such as either built Churches or, endowed them with some considerable revenue, as likewise for the encouragement of others to propagate meanes and multiplie decent distinct places for Christian conventions. Hoc singulari favore sustinetur, ut allectentur, Laci, invitentur, & indantur ad constructionem Ecclesiarum. The exercise hereof Coras. Glas. in Iustinian is expressed by the termes, Epilegein or onomazein, which signifies an addiction or simple nomination, to stand good or be null'd at the just pleasure of the Bishop, and therefore accounted no spiritual act in the Patron, but a temporal annexed to that which is Temporale spiritualli annexum. Altar. Da∣asc: spiritual in the Bishop, and therefore not simonaical as your brother Didoclave would have it. Nor is there that absurdie he mentions of arrogating to one what belong to all the Members of the Church, as is praeten∣ded, but can never be proved, Nor that danger in transmitting this right from one to another, if the care of the first patron desend not with it, which defect the care of the praesent Bishop must supplie. Nor is it requisi∣te
he should be a Member of the same parish to which he praesents, since the Bishop is head of the same diocese to whom, That this is contrarie to the libertie of the Primitive and Apostolike Kirke, to the order which Gods 2. B. Disc. ch. 12. word craves, and good order, is onelie sayd but not argued in your Dis∣cipline, no more then by you when and to whom it became a grie∣vance. Your patience in enduring it goes for no heroical vertue, being pee∣vish enough soon after the Act of annexation had passed, as appeares by your cariage in the Assemblie at Edenburgh 1588. and turned into a Rebellious Conspiracie, allthough painted with the name of a Parliamnt that now at last (because it could not at first) hath ta∣ken it away. The Nobilities losse of their Impropriations and Abbey lands is very consi∣derable, when they bethinke themselves upon what false pleas, and to what unconcern'd persons they must part with them. Touching which as Sycophantike as is the Bishops accusation, he'll not abate a sig of his right for the Presbyters answer, nor I a leter (take which he will) in exchange for his name. Pl. in Carcu A. 5. sc. Aedepol nugatorem lepidum lepidé hunc pactu'st… Calo∣phanta est qui honeste qui∣dem loqui∣tur, sed u∣jus facto ab oratione dis∣crepant. Calophantam an sycophantam hunc magis esse dicam nescio. That the whole generation of the praelatike faction (as your style it) did hy∣perbolize in zeale against that which they call sacriledge, is an argument they were all true bred, no bastard children of the Church, not so meane condition'd as to sell their spiritual birthright for potage. Were your title as good, (which can appeare to be nothing but your rough hands, and red soules with the bloud of the Martyrs of your owne making,) Gen. 25. 25. we should commend so farre as we act our selves your strugling aswell for the inheritance as primogeniture. But when we compare our professions or evidences, & finde our bre∣thren to say that the benefactours and founders of these Ecclesiasti∣ke possessions were true Christians, though mistaken, we thinke, in Par. Al∣ciat &c. many maters of doctrine and worship; yours that that they were Members of Anti-Christ undoubted Idolaters and haeretikes; Ours The Praela∣tes title to Impropria∣tions and Abbey lands beter then the Prebyters. that the Churches which they endowed were Episcopal, such as we continue them or to our utmost endeavour it. From which you de∣generate, schismaticallie separating, and arming your selves with all resolution & rage to demolish, (beside what other advantage we may use of a nearer union & uniformitie in religion, more conso∣nant to the minde of the doners, at least if such as your malice doth render it, litle thinking it may be to have it so unhapilie retorted in that which is the chiefe drift of all your rebelling and covenan∣ting) when we thinke of no other restitution but by the possessours consent, when it may be transferred to us by the same supreme hand
that conserr'd it on them, out of which you no sooner get opportu∣nitie and power but you violentlie ravish it; calling Princes & no∣bles sacrilegious robbers while they over-power you and deteine it; I beleeve all our Religious and prudent Nobilitie will unanimouslie grant our plea more just, our proceedings more moderate, & when God shall if ever, touch their consciences (not we the skirt of their estates and livelihoods) with an humble feare that such an inheri∣tance with-held from such a Church, may be sacrilegious indeed; with assurance that if it be so 'tis sinfull; they will not value their lands at so deare a rate, as to pay their soules for the purchase, but with courage & confidence in a blessing from God to be multiplied on their undevoted temporal possessions returne them to him (the King I meane) from whom they receiv'd them, and be beter content that Episcopal Christians then Presbyterian counterfeits should re∣possesse them. But if such of them as are not perswaded in conscience they are oblig'd to restore them upon the arguments we bring (which would ne'r be convictive if our plea were no beter then yours) shall adventure to leave the suit depending till the Court of heaven give final sentence upon it; at their peril be it, the Praelates & their fol∣lowers use no violence nor course of law here below to put them out of these their possessions, no threats but those against sacriledge in Scripture, fea∣ring this may be such, no activitic but that of a swift charitie to catch. hold of their soules and snatch them out of the snare when they finde them devouring the bate, and to put them ante vota, before vowes upon making enquirie, or if post vota to retract them. Therefore such of the Pro. 20. 25. Nobilitie and Gentrie as were wakened hereby to take heed of their rights, were best have a care they slumber not in the wrong, and take Solo∣mons counsel intended Prov. 16. 8. Beter is a litle with righteousnesse, then great revenues without right. But (which requires the Readers adver∣tence) for you here to call those the rights of the Nobilitce and Gentrie, The Revie∣wers praeva∣rication. 6, head. Ch. 9. which so many Assemblies have declar'd to belong jure divino to the Church, which in your first booke of Discipline you tell them they had from theeves and murderers, and hold as unjust possessions, or indeed no possession before God; which in your second you hold a detesiable sacriledge before God; For you to twit the Praelates with violence & threats, who are bound in Iohn Knox's bond not onelie to withstand the mercilesse devou∣rers of the Church patrimonie… but to seeke redresse at the hands of God & man; April 24. 1576. That declare the same obligation upon you to root out of the Kingdome S. Decl. 1642. Ap∣pend. aswell the monster of sacriledge as that of Episcopacie, and so aswell the persons of most your Nobles as the Bishops; For you to object a ourse of law and activitie, who by incessant demands and praeter legal devices never gave over till the lawes that annexed lands to the
crowne were repealed. For you to bragge of your last Parliament's con∣irmation of titles, because your last Assemblie power could not reach beyond the destruction of patronages; What is this but apertlie Sucophantein & calophantein, to fawne & accuse, dissemble & destroy, Prov. 26. 28. 129. 5 flater your with mouth, while you spread a net for their feet and worke the ruine of their persons and estates? If Noblemen once abase themselves to be Elders of every ordina∣rie Noble El∣des lighted by the Cler∣gic. Presbyterie, it's not to be doubted but evey ordinarie Presbyter takes himselfe for their fellow if not their superiour, which they finde to their griefe, Therefore all or most respect that they give to their gra∣cious Ministers, is alas a litle Court holy water cast on the flame of their zeale, a sacrifice made for their owne securitie from your tonues and pennes, and from the armes of the people that serve you war∣rants oft times in tumults upon their persons, For the honur, on pay them they are faine, like wretches to morgage their conscience, See  of the Congreg. to the Nobil. of Sc. 1559. those that doe not, gaine the honourable titles of Traytours of Gd, are cashier'd your companie, and then passe for no  ho∣nourable heathen, publicans and sinners. If they becom  h∣men between a single Presbyter and a Prince, when he  with his I require you in my name &c. Before every charge, (no very humble forme as I take it) they all be called abusers of the world, neutral livers a their pleasure, if not shedders of Scotch bloud. And some that draw on themselves their Prince's displeasure for a Rethorical libertie used in their behalfe, shall be pay'd for their paines with the honourable essay of men sold unto sin, enemies to God and all godlinesse, the L. Sempils L. Sempil. Lib: 2. reward which he had from Iohn Knox as this gratefull Presbyter hath registred in his storie. They that bridle the rage of their Princes, (the phrase usd) as occasion serves, will not sticke to halter the heads of their Nobles, if they will neither leade nor drive, but mo∣lest the progresse of their Presbyterian designes. Your Historical Vindication I hope is no new nam'd Logike, to prove negatives of fact; your detraction from the credit of many irrefragable authours Calder∣woods redi∣culous reve∣rence of Bruce's gost Cujs ani∣ma, si ullius mortalium, sedet in coe∣lestibus. Ep. Ded. ad Aitar. Dam. that Historize that insolent speach uttered by Bruce, lookes more like a calumnie then their relation to a fable. And yet such a supersti∣tious reverence is payd by your fond brother Didoclave to the me∣morie of his name, that he could be content to pin his fayth on his sleeve, and hang his soul at his girdle. Anima me cumanima tua Bruci, si ex aliena ide esset pendendum, and were there to be but one pri∣viledge of aeternal residence in heaven he thinkes neither Patriach nor Prophet Apostle nor Martyr, no, nor the Virgin Mary her selfe were likelie to carie it from Bruce. Which compar'd with King Ia∣mes's opinion of him as a perfidious madman that had a whirligigge
in his head, delivered after to many experiments of his rebellious zeale, and frantike restivenesse, is enough to condemne both saint and votarie to some bedlam purgatorie, before imposture can fixe, or facilitie of fancie finde these new imaginarie lights among the starres. Your following invective is writ with Arrius's quill, and by such Manias Ca∣lamo Con∣stant: in Rescript scribling you gaine the title that Constantine gave him, patroctonos epiiceias, discovering your selfe to be a parricide of aequitie, mur∣dering truth in your relation, and justice in your parallel. His Lord∣ship takes himselfe not concern'd in this case to recollect 800. yeares Historie of Europe, to picke out of the pietie & humilitie of many Reverend Bishops the pride and passionate errours of some few; No hath he malice enough, with you; to make that the nature of Our Bishops contest not with King & Nobles. their office which hath been some litle monstrositie of minde, by ill habits accidental to their persons. Beside, what among the Papists the nobiliti by birth of many Bishops concurring with the received dominion and large revenve of their Spiritual paeferment; may elevate their thoughts, and enhaunce their owne opinion of them∣selves, if impadonable, addes litle to the condemnation of ours, which partake in litle with them but their titles. The universal supre∣macie, which the Pope arrogates aswell over Kings as Bishops, may puffe up a litle Cardinal, that is neare him, in his purple, & possesse him with a conceit that he may Write himselfe companion to a King, whom he thinkes (but is mistaken) oblig'd, in Spiritual humilitie, to lie prostrate at his holinesse foot, and kisse his slippe. But the same Kings soveraigntie in Ecclesiastici at home secur'd him from all such conestation with his Bishops, Though, had it not, the argu∣ment from a Cardinal in Rome to a Praelate in England will hardli finde a topike. Those in Scotland take themselves as capable of ho∣nour Their prae∣dence, & place neare the Throne. conferr'd upon their order as their Popish praedecessours; Nor are such legal establishments (if not of right) of Princelie favour to becast away in complement, Nor were they to make an unne∣cessarie distance out of forme, when the material meaning of their vicinitie to the throne, was the neare concernment of their counsel to the King. Orthodoxe Monarchs, as well as Papists, having doub∣ting consciences, and orthodoxe Bishops as good abilities to resolve them. I have not heard they crowded much; or quickened their pace to get the doore of the Earles &c. Their Provincial that with much humilitie and respect unto their H. H. tooke it, was lead to it by the hand that had exalted them or their progernitours. But for the rea∣son of praecedence, which I guesse to be your meaning, you were best review the Heralds office and reforme it. Poor podants are not to
be reproached for making a litle diocese of their Schooles (Priests being charged to make such of their houses) and from the experi∣mental regiment of boyes raising their abilities, by honest endea∣vours, 1. Tim. 3. 4. & 5. to the meriting an higher Episcopate of men; Nor their con∣scientious demeanour in that office to be aesteemed the arroganci of their order, if it move Kings to commit the white staves to the cro∣siar, and great seales to be under the keyes of the Church. The most Offices of state. capricious of them all, and most contentious for the honour, (which I thinke were none but such as did you too much service when they had it) were many straines below your Presbyterie of Knoxes, Bru∣ces&c. Who have contested with Kings for their Scepters, which with white staves and seales they brought under the pedantike jurisdiction of their rod. Never have Bishops so ruled it as many base borno Pres∣byters with the secret Counsel. To whose Consistories all Courts of Iustice were faine to doe homage & the greatest Lords of the land, become subordinate Elders to the parson of their parish. It's not so long that yet it can be forgoten, since a most violent and malicious man How the difference hapened be∣tween the E. Argile and Bishop Gal∣loway. call'd the Goodman of Earlstounne, a client of the E. Argile for in∣terrupting of divine service, forceable overturning the Communion Table in his Parish Kirke, theatning and abusing the Minister with many other such enormous crimes, was fined (but the fine never exacted) by the High Commission and confined for a season. The E. Argile complain'd of his hard usge to the Lords of Counsell, and enformed against the Bishop of Galloway that he promised to him somewhat, which he had not perfrmed; The Bishop denied the promise, & gainsayd what the Earle alledged, whereupon sayd the Earle, If you say so 'tis as much as if I li. The Bishop modestlie re∣plied, I doe not say so, but I beseech your Lp. to call your selfe be∣ter to minde, & you will finde it as I say. This is giving the lie because he would not take it on himselfe, and ruling with a great Lord, because he would not be ruled out of a just vindication of the truth, & yeild his consent that a Counsel Table should approve turning the commu∣nion table out of the Church. The Reviewers should doe well to bring in his accounts fuller, when he reckons with Bishops for braving of Noblemen. All Presbyterians are heterodoxe to all good Catholike Christians, with whom Episcopacie is so necessarie a truth, as next to the divine in∣stitution, Presbyte∣rians hete∣rodoxe. Vniversalitie, Vbiquitie and perpetuitie can render it. Confingant tale aliquid haeretici … nihil promovebunt, Could your inven∣tion seigne such authoritie to Presbyterie, yet your doctrine would Tert. De Praeser, cap. 32. diversifie you into a sect. What the Bishops following words cleare, shall not one whit be clouded by any obscuritie in my replie, though the strongest eradiations that come from them would sinke them∣selves
silentlie in the deep, playd you not the malignant Archimede (though no such exact Mathematical Divine) to reflect them into a flame that may set the ship of the Church on fire about our ears some coales of this fire I shall heape on your head & cast backe into your bosome, which if you meane not to quench, you may blow up to what father mischief you thinke good. The Apostles were Bishops, who did, undoubtedlie delegate the 1. No Ordi∣nation but by Bishops. power of ordination to none but such as were constituted Bishops by them to that purpose. This power appeares not undoubtedlie to have been exerciz'd by 2. any but Bishops in the Historie of the Scripture. This power was exerciz'd canonicallie by none but Bishops in the 3. Historie of the Primitive Church According to the second canon of the Apostles. Presbyter ab uno Episcopo ordinetur, & Diaconus, & reliqui Clerii. The laying on of hands of the Presbyterie, both in Scripture and 4. Ecclesiastike storie was onelie for external forme, no intrsecal po∣wer, the efficacie of the act being in the Bishops benediction, which I never finde attributed to the Priest. As in the third Canon of the fourth Councel of Carthage, Episcopo eum benedicente, nowhere bene∣dicente Presbytero. Therefore your friend Didoclave is faine to ac∣knowledge Aitar: Dam. cap. 4 a great difference, Magnum discrimen, between St. Pauls imposition of hands and that, at the same time, of his Presbyterie; whatsoever is mean'd by it. Nam per impostionem mannum Apostolorum Deus conferebat charismata, non autem per imposionem mannum Presbyterorum, distinguishing in the ordination of Timothie between dia & meta, the former relating to Saint Paul, the later to the assistent Priests. Which is another interpretation of the tex then you were pleas'd to make of it chapt. 8. So that I see the bethren agree not upon the point. Succession through the lineal descent of Bispops from the Aposiles, ad ordina∣tion 5. No comfor∣table assu∣rance but from Apo∣stolical suc∣cession and Episopal ordination. De Praeser. cap. 32. by the hands of Apostolical Bishops have been ever used as strong argu∣ments to uphold Catholike Christians in a comfortable assurance of their Ministrie as lawfull. And haeretikes have been pessed by the ancient Reliquos verò qui ab∣sistunt a principali successione, & quocun∣que loco col∣ligunter sc∣spectos ha∣ere &c. Fathers with the want of nothing more then these to justifie their profession. Hc enim modo Ecclsiae Apostolicae census suos deferunt, sayth Tertullian And Irenaeus before him joines the gifts of God required in the Ministrie, if he meanesnot the sacraments with the Apostolical cession of the Church. Vbi igitur charismata Domini posita sunt, ibi discere oportes veritatem, pud qus esi ea quae est ab Apostolis Ecclesiae successis &c. The Presbyterians praetending divine institution, must likewise prove such an uninterrupted succession, or evidence their new ex∣traordinarie
mission, otherwise they can minister litle comfort lesse assurance of their calling to be lawfull. The former they can not doe for Saint Hierom's time at least, who makes ordination a proprietie of the Bishops. Quid facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus quod Presbyter not facit? where a friend of theirs failes them when he sayth, ad morem jusque siae aetatis respexit. That he had respect to the custome & Walo Mes∣sal. canon of his time. Nor can they doe it for above 200. yeares uncer∣taine storie after Christ, in which they have as litle light to shew their Presbyterie was in, as that Episcopacie was out, which they would faine perswade us to take upon their word dispensing with them∣selves for the use of unwritten tradition to so good a purpose. If they will pleade an extraordinarie mission, they should doe well to na∣me the first messenger that brought the newes of their Euangel, and what miracle he wrought which might serve him for a leter of cre∣dence to us, who it may be otherwise, shall be no such superstitious admirers of his gifts or person. 6. That therefore the orthodoxe Ministers must want the comfortable assurance of their undoubted ordination in the Ministrie, which words yet beare a much more moderate sense then that you give them viz. That they may very Kakos her∣meneus an∣tochrema ei∣kon te kai andrias esti tou diabolou. Reser: ad Ar. well know and be assured that their calling and ministrie is null, the distance being (as I take it) not so indivisible between the negation of one assurance to the position of the other. Such a malicious interpreter beares the image & may stand in Constantines opinion for the statue of him who is the father of calumnies, & cares not what pyson he casts to spot other mens names, & cracke their credits ta tesoiceias ita motetos deleteria apheidos proballon, as true of an Aërian as Arian. Your divination about the deleted words will succeed in some The Praela∣tes doe no annull the being of all Reformed Churches. strange disoverie by and by. In the interim you set too sharpe an edge upon the doctrine of the Bishops friends, and doe act violence where it may be they intended not so much injurie as the ut most extremitie of justice, allthough they held the axe in their hand in Christian charitie disputing the sentence, not so hastie to execute it, (or beyond it) in the rigour, and cut off at one stroke the Clergie from their calling, and so many, ay societies of Christians from the Church. Vntill  meet with some particular more forward instances then I know of, I shall answer for them to the Churches of France, Holland, Zwitzerland and Germanie, as Pope Innocent writ to the first Councel at Toledo, about the ill custome of the Bishops ordi∣nation in Spaine That it's very requisite somewhat should be peremp∣torilie determin'd according to the true primitive tradition might it be without the disturbance of so many Churches. For what is done, ita reprehendimus, ut propter numerum corrigendorum ea quae quoquo modo sacta
sunt non in dubium vocemus, sed Dei potius dimittamus judicio. We so dislike it as not to startle so great a number of delinquents with our doubt, but referre the judgement to God who standeth in the congregation Ps. 82. 1. as well of Presbyters as Princes, and is a Iudge aswell among Mini∣sters as Gods. The Sophisme of the Iesuits, because so popular, should They use not the So∣phisme of the Iesuits. have been refuted, or else not recited. allthough the imilitude it brings runnes not upon all foure even with the doctrine of the Bishops prime friends. Some of whom I beleeve will acknowledge there may be resident many Members of the true Church, where are no true Sacra∣ments, being well praepared to receive them when they may have a true Ministrie to dispense them. That one of the two Sacraments is true, though not This word dulie was left out by Henderson in his recitl of K. Ch. 1. words to this purpose Answ: to 1. pap. Ep. 7. Ad. Symrn. 1. Pap. o Henders. dulie administred, when, in case of necesstie, by lay hands, where is no true Ministe to doe it, which may consist with that of B. Ignatius if applied, to this purpose, Ouk exon esti choris tou episcopou oute baptizein, oute prospherein. Exon at most but illegitima∣ting the outward visible act; not nulling the inward invisible grace, That the other's effectual, when had but in voto, if it can not in signo, through want of any or (which is as bad) a lawfull true Ministrie to make it. In the third clause I hope you will shake hands with the Iesuits and them. Where is no true ordination, there is no true ordi∣narie Ministrie, or lawfull Priesthood as His late Majestie call'd it. As for the fourth the Bishops friends, whatsoever they may, doe allay it thus. Where are no Bishops can be no comfortable assurance of a true ordination, And so in whatsoever reformed Countrey are no Bishops, being no true A∣postolike ordination, no comfortable assurance is had of a true visible Church in the publike administration of the Sacraments, though Heb. 7. 25. 26. they hope well the invisible Members have an invisible true Priest∣hood among them, or such an high Priest as being himselfe hole, harmelessc &c is able to supplie what their Presbyters want, able to save them eis Rom. 14. 23. to panteles very completelie, and make intercession for them who sin in submission (out of more good meaning then fayth) to their disci∣pline, who can give no comfortable assurance that Saint Pauls rod or St. Peters keyes everwere committed to their charge. Those of the Re∣formed, which I hope are not all, i any, that concurre, if you meane covenant, like your selves, under praetense of selfe praeservation (being endangerd by nothing beyond the frequent ineffectual po∣wer of good advice, and plea of Apostolike example) with eigned words to make merchandize aswell of Bishops as Kings, and like the insolent Abaddons at Edenburgh and London, to assault their per∣sons and then abolish their order, declare themselves such as Saint Peters false teachers or worse because more publike in bringing in dam∣nable haeresies, denying the Lord (at least in his Ministrie, which they
call Anti-Christian) and (what they have allreadie in part) bringing swift destruction upon themselves. Your officious informer that drew the curtaine & made the disco∣verie The Revie∣wers malic in publi∣thing what the Bishop had deleted & perver∣ting it, of what the Bishop deleted, had litle good maners, though, it may be, not so much malice as you in your uncharitable (not so for∣tunate) conjecture. A dangerous question being mistaken when called a true judgement, and doubting whether it be within the pale, not actuallie ex∣cluding all Reformed Ministres &c. out of the line of the Church. Remorse of con∣science hath commonlie antecedent evidence of science, puting all out of question & doubt, without which the vanitie or pusillanimitie of re∣penting had been litle commendable, how condemnable soever had been the iniquitie of erring. What His Lordship left behind unscraped out, doth not shew his mind onelie, but the minde of all good Catholike, orthodox Christians. And why his feare to provoke should incline him more to delete the following expressions, then his care for their com∣fortable satisfaction had mov'd him to pen them, I know not. Nor need I be curious to enquire the reason of a line blotted in his booke more then if I had seen it expunged in his papers being not con∣cerned to give account for more then was his pleasure to have publi∣sh'd. Though, were all the Protestant Churches (what they are not) They may be doubted to be un-Christian that call us Anti-chri∣stian. as unconscionablie cruel to us as the Presbyterian Conventicle of the Scots, I see not why, in reference to the Religion we professe, it should be more unsafe why more unseasonable (since they give, I hope, the same libertie they take] out of a pious sollicitude to have a union of both, some what ambiguouslie to unchristen them, then they out of malice, to make an aeternal separation, very affirmativelie anti-Christen us in all the peevish pamphlets they put out. So that whether stands upon the more extreme pinacle of impudence & arrogance, the Praelate that doubts your being in a Church visible true for succession & A∣postolike ordination, or the Presbyter that denie our being in any but what is visible false by a Satanical Priesthood & Antiapostolical investiture, let your aequitable comparers impartiallie decide. The The Church of Rome not most true. Praelatical tenet is not to averre the Church of Rome, as she stands this day &c to be a Church most true, who praeferre that of their owne for a truer, and condemne many Canons in the Counsel of Trent. That they h ld she is true in respect of undoubted succession and Apostolike ordination (our businesse now in dispute) so much concernes them, as the truth of their owne derived from that Nor can you denie, what you so shamefullie dissemble, that in the retrograde line your last Priest (for a last there must be, unlesse you have been Autóchthones or Autoráni i rather, coaeternal with tho Priest that's in heaven) had his ordination, and you thereby succession from them; and so both prove as Anti-Christian
as ours. An easie way of salvation in the Romish Church, is no second tenet of the Praelates, who meet with her stumbling upon Nor hath she the most easie way of salvation. many errours in doctrine and worship, going somewhat about by Lymbus Patrum & Purgatorie, whereas we thinke if she walked with us, she might have a more easie & shorter journey to heaven. Yet withall knowing that the wayes of God are anexichniastoi not to be tracked Rom. 11. 33. and his judgements anexcreuneta not to be searched; we dare not damne at adventure all that goe with her, (no more then you can assure a ship to be sunke so soon as ever you lose sight of her saile,) but leave the issue to him who is great in Counsel, and mightie in worke, Ier. 32. 19. whose eyes are open upon all the wayes of the sonnes of men, to give every one ac∣cording to his wayes, and according to the fruit of his doings. The seperation from Separation from her in many things need∣lesse. her, Which they hold to be needlesse is such as that which you fondlie make about copes and surplices, Church Musike and festivals & that came not in with the Counsel of Trent. That which is made upon higher points, (though not yet, God be prays'd, in the highest of having one Lord, saying one Creed, using one baptisme in substance however different in ceremonic) they impute to them who kept not their sta∣tion in conformite to the Primitive Christians of the 5. or 6. first Centuries, with whom a reunion not onelie may, but ought to be much desired on just conditions, and that which is, continued, rather then the division made greater by our fruitlesse compliance with morose and humourous Reformers, whose preaching being not with entising words of mans wisdome, they tell us of aspirit, which can not be the same En apodei∣xei pneu∣matos ai dynamos. 1. Cor. 2. 4. with Saint Pauls, because thereof they never gave us any demonstra∣tion, nor of any power but the sword. Could your bold praecedent priviledge or excuse me in compa∣ring, judging, censuring or approving, the publike transactions of our Royal Soveraigne, I should with much modest & innocent free∣dome professe more justifiable, according to Christian Religion & prudence, His Majesties late graces and securities granted unto the returningconfederated Irish; then any like future concession unto the persisting, covenanting Scots: They gratefullie accepting a li∣mited toleration of their publike worshp to those of their owne di∣vision in that Countrey; you endeavouring to extort an absolute injunction of yours in all His Majesties dominions, denying liber∣tie of conscience, so litle as to his familie or person. They onelie Atic. 1. craving in much humilitie, a freedome from being bound or obli∣ged by oath to acknowledge the Ecclesiastike supremacie in the King, you arrogantlie binding by solemne league and covenant (wherein so much is implied) Him and us to attribute it to the Kirke. They re∣newing in the oath of allegeance their recognition of Royal right;
and swearing, without restriction, their defence of his person &c to the uttermost of their power, you by proclamation admitting Febr.  16. 9. Artic. 3. him to the exercise of his power, but in order to the Covenant, And covenanting his defense no otherwise then in the desense of (what you call) the true religion & liberties of the Kingdomes. They subjoining in that oath their best endeavour to disclose to His Majestie &c all treasons and traitourous conspiracies &c. You having not a syllable to that effect in your covenant, lest you should be obliged to betray your selves, who are resolved to continue principals in such practices against him and his Royal familie to the last, They charitablie forgeting all revenge against any of His Majesties partie that had fought against their con∣foederacie; you cruellie combining, expresselie to bring to publike triall all such as had been any way instrumental opposers of your Co∣venant. They embracing in the armes of Christian communion, their quondam enemies, now fellow subjects of a different religion, you baselie butchering them with unexemplified crueltie 1. with your material sword, axe, or halter in their bodies, your civile in their estates, your spirituall (what may be by your excommunication) in The Pres∣byterian Scots more bloudie then the I∣rish. their soules. The aggravations you bring against His Majesties agree∣mentare, First, That it was with persons so bloudie which as it can not be wholelie excused in them, so ought it of all men least to be objected by you, whose religion hath passed from the Castle of Saint Andrewes to the House at Westminster in a red sea path, made for you neither by Moses's rod, nor Eliah's mantle: under the conduct of no civile, no prophetical power, fenced on both sides with bloud of different complexions, the bloud of Popish and orthodoxe Prae∣lates, the bloud of Princes addicted to several Religions, So that Chapt. 4. God doubtlesse will have a controversic with you, who as the Prophet Hose speakes, by swearing and lying have broke out into rebellim, and bloud tou∣cheth bloud. The bloud of the Cardinal hath touched the bloud of the Arch-Bishop. The bloud of Queen Mary the bloud of King Charles, and more then that, which you may heare of otherwhere Touching the crueltie of the Irish I remit you to what our Royal Martyr hath writ with much Christian indifference. Ch. 12. of E: Buo. where you may take notice principallie of these clauses. I would to God the I∣ish had nothing to alledge for their imitation against those whose blame must neede be the greater by how much protestant principles are more against all rebellima∣gainst Princes then those of Papists … I beleeve it will at last appeare that they who first began to embroyle my other Kingdomes (and who,  pray you were they) are in great part guiltie, if not of the first leting out. Yet, of the not time∣lie stopping those horr'd, essusions of bloud in Irland. To omit what is Ma∣jestie intimated before, That their oppressive feares rather then their malice
engaged them, and you know how profuse you are of bloud when you treate of the doctrine of selfe praeservation. Secondlie, you are Whose Li∣bertie of re∣ligion was limited. troubled at the full libertie of Religion he granted them, which if you er saw the articles, extended no farther them the remission of poenal statutes. not to the restitution of Churches & Church Livings, but what they had then in possession, not to any jurisdiction but what they exerciz'd at that time, for which an expresse caution was taken in the very first article of the treatie. And in the last but one their Regular Clergie were restrain'd to their pensions, and confind to the praecincts of their Abbys and Monasteries, which are explain'd to be within the Walls Mures, and ancient fences of the same. No charitable bene∣factour having libertie to exercize one maine point of their Reli∣gion, by laying a foot of land unto their Convents. But had it been as full as you fncie i (because you make your owne case many times the same with that of your brethren abroad) I pray directlie answer me, Why a Papist may not have as free libertie as a Iew? And Whe∣ther, according to your conscience be more AntiChristian a Cloy∣ster or a Synagogue? Thirdlie, You object the Armes, Castles, and Places of trust saffer in the hands of Papists then Pres∣byterians. prime places of trust in the state he put in their hands. Whereas if the case were politicallie disputed, Whether the Militia were safer in the hands of Papists or Presbyterians. I beleeve the former would carie it upon the greater securitie (though not generallie the greatest) they give in their principles, and the greater experimentall assurance in many places of trust they have often rendred Princes in their discharge. And had the prime Castle and place of Trust in that Kingdome been theirs, and no armes nor command in the Armie been the others (a tolera∣blee freedome of religion being granted them) it is not improba∣ble that Noble Marquesse last yeare had either not been forc'd to hazard a siege for his reentrance, or at least not betrayd into an in∣evitable unhapie necessitie of retreat, What they demanded, or had the 9. Article of agreement will informe you. That upon the distribu∣tion, conferring, and disposing of the places of command honour profit! and trust … no difference should be made between them and other his Majestie subjects. (Heres no exception against Malignants nor persons disafected to the cause) but that such distribution should be made with aequal indifferencie, according to their respective merits and abiliues. By which qualification all disloyal de∣meriting persons are made obnoxious to a just exception at any time. Those that continued in possession of His Majesties Cities, Gar∣risons Arti. 29. & within their quarters are to be commanded, ruled and governed in chiefe upon occasion of necessitie, as to the Martial and militaire affaires, by such as His Majestie or his chiefe Governer, or Governers of that Kingdome for the time being should appoint. And where any garrison &c. might be endan∣gerd
by restoring to their possessions & estates the Litizens, freemen, Burgesses, & former inhabitans, they were not to be admitted, but allowed a valuable, annual rent for the same, as in the 7. Article was provided touching those of Corke, Youghall, and Dungarvan. Finallie in all that ageement no condition is found, That His Majestie or His Lieutenant should be governed by a Popish Parliament at Du∣blin when it might be in Civile, nor by a Clerical councel or Assem∣blie at Kilkennie in Ecclesiastical affaires. Fourthlie, That the King gave Kings can∣not ratisie too well what they promise, if just… Sed qui ju∣ramentis sudunt sicut pueri astra∣gatus Pet. ad. Alter. Dam. assurance, of his endeavour to get the articles ratisied in the next Parliament of England, was to ratifie at praesent their confidence in him, for which he can not be blamed, unlesse you would have Kings sport like boyes with changeable knots in their treaties or (what you scornefullie charge them all with when you thinke on't) like children play at checkstone with their promises and oathes. That His Majestie did this of himselfe, is false, if mean'd exclusive of his Councel. That he did it without a Parliament, which he could not have, and before it, which his urgent necessities could not stay for, is justifiable by that law which will never pleade for your pardon. Salus populi supre∣ma lex. Nor is that currant law contraire to any standing law in such an exigence as his unlesse there be one (as there is none) that injoines him to follow the misfortune of his father, to let the Presbyterians Parlia∣ments not be stay'd for in extre∣mities if they can not be call'd at present. binde his hands from laying hold upon any advantageous assistance from the Papists, till his head be cut off by your bloudie Executio∣ners the Independents. Therefore whatsoever passed in this agree∣ment, if perswaded by the gracious partie, no faction, of the Praelates, they exonerated their conscience, if opposed by them, they were no antagonists to their dutie; if with moderation and patience heard, their passionate zeale did not so transport them as to reject salvation from God, when he gives it by the hand of Papists unto their-King. Who thinke it neither loyaltie nor prudence rather to deliver him up to the hazard, if not assurance, of the axe, then he should by such meanes be delivered from the perill of the sword. The Kings inclination toward covenanting protestants hath never hitheto made such an uglie ap∣pearance The King never ex∣press'd his inclination to Covenans ers. as to scare them in a dreame or a waken their art & industrie in a furi. Nor have you heard, I beleeve, His Majestie complaine that his sleep was broake by their midnight disswasions. If in sermons by daylight they layd before him the mischiefes that lurke in your Covenant they did but bring him a message from his Fathers Ghost who it, may be heard the low'd cries of those tongues that had toke it, as he pas∣sed from the skaffold to Ahrahans bosome. Or were sent from some other Ancients that were dead to tell him more truth then he ever will heare from the Scotish Interpreters of Moses and the Prophets.
That temporal death with any misfortune ought much rather to be embraced His King∣domes rui∣ne rather to be embra∣ced then his souls. then the losse of his soul in the hell of the Covenant they could not beate too often in His Majesties head, unlesse they infalliblie knew his Mar∣tyr'd Fathers instructions to be engraven with the point of a dia∣mon'd, or unchangeablie set as a seale on his heart. And where as our Saviour assures him the whole world can be no proportionable profit for that damage mention'd in the 16. S. Matth. the ruine of his three Kingdomes need never be grudged in so good an exchange as he Vers. 26. afterward speakes of. Though His Majesties conscience (or such of his Councel as look'd well about them) could not hitherto tell him he hath been by any necessitie tempted to one of those two imme∣diate extremities, between which providence ever maintain'd a visible passe (it may be none of the easiest) nor ought is it but sloth and Athiesme (except some treason may be in the composition) that would scare him with fancies of prodigious monsters, worse then Solomons lion in that way. Your forsooth, with a seigned lispe and a courtesie, will winne your Mistresse (the Covenant) no favour in Prov. 26. 13. wisemens eyes, who can not be catch'd with such red and white painting and patches as where with you so often praesent her. Since their deare bought experience hath tought them that her crowne of pride can as litle brooke a societie with the Goddesse Regalitie, as Prelacie. Nor doth she oblige in sense, how faire soever she speakes, her takers to lesse in their station, then to the abolition of them both. If I conceiv'd my selfe in danger, instead of answering, I would cut out your next paragraph and weare it for an amulet or special More lear∣ning under Episeopacie then Pres∣byterie. guard against magical enchantments, having read that things most rediculous or filthie are the best securitie that can be in such cases. That you should appeale to Reason & Experience for your Iudges of Pres∣byteries praeeminence before Episcopacie in learning, honour & wealth, who stand selfe condemn'd by the frequent invectives you with your partisans make against the vaine philosophie, which is the sciential learning, of Prelatical preachers, against the dignities of Praebenda∣ries, Archdeacons &c. Against pluralitie of their livings, which doubles their revenues, is as if you were practizing with your pencil upon the first verse in Horace; Poetrie, rather then disputing by your pen in divinitie or Logike with the Bishop. The Severest of your Hmano capiti cer∣vicem pic∣tor qui∣num. Trial before ordination is about cutting to the root some Hebrew word, and corrupting it in the sense; graffing some yong vowel upon an hopefull stocke, or in oculating with a pricke to make it bring forth fruit pleasing to your tast, though, in all likelihoo'd, never inten∣ded by the Holy Spirit that planted it in the Bible. Your all sort of learning here, called gifts utterance and knowledge in your first booke of
discipline, were it not reduced, as it is in your liturgie, to tatling The Bi∣shops trial before he ordaineth more serious then the Presbyters 4-head pag 14. they propose him a theme or text to be treated pri∣vatelie, whereby his abilitie may the more mani∣festlie ap∣peare unto them. halfe an houre beside a text, would put his Lay, if not his Clerical, Iudges to a nonplus when they were to give their verdut of his parts: And though here you talke of disputations upon controverted heads, and there of the chief points of controversie betwixt you and the Papists, Anabap∣tists, Arrians &c. We know what discouragements you give your yong students about looking into Schole Divinitie, the most au∣thentike Ecclesiastical Historie, and Fathers, without which they are proper champions for such an encounter. It is not Davids sling, but in Davids hand, and with Davids God to guide the stone which goes out of't that, without other weapons, can make these Goliaths fall upon their saces to the earth. Our trial is personnallie by the Bishop or his Archdeacon, unlesse in his absence some other learned Mini∣ster be appointed. We have nothing to doe with lay Elders nor peo∣ple in the examen, who have no interest by the Catholike canon in the election. Peri tou me tois ocklois epitrepein tas eclogas poiersthai toon mellon∣toon Cathisasthai cis hieratcion is the 117. by Iustells account. Our practi∣ce is seldome so remisse as yours, if our rule be more, it may be im∣puted to the necessitie of that time, when learned men, I meane re∣formed, did not swarme in a number aequal to the cures to be served. Against which what you argue in your owne case 1. Book: Discipl. may be replied to as in ours. 1. That the Bishop His Deane, and Ca∣nons, 4. Head. or Cathedral Clergie, may supplie the imperfections of o∣thers in his Diocese (for if the lacke of ablemen be real, your streight and sharpe examination may disparage by discovering the infirmities, not one whit enable your Proponents or expectants for their duties) 2. The raritc among the Gentiles in the begining of the Gospell was recompen∣sed with the extraordinaire diversitie of gifts. 3. Vnpreaching Mini∣sters are no idols, having eares to heare what the Church praescribes Neither judge we that the Sa∣craments can be rightlie Mi∣stred by him in who∣se mouth God hath put no Scr∣mon of ex∣hortation. 1. B. Disc. 4. head. and mouthes to utter, as her prayers for, so her wholesome doc∣trine unto the people. But what, I can not passe by since it meetes me in the way. That efficacie of the Sacraments, aswell as power of the word, which you call of exhortation, should be limited to the abilities of the Minister. And as the Papists directlie, so we by inference, be disabled in both, I thinke will helpe you to a share in the Iesuits So∣phisme, whereof we latclie discoursed, and set you upon the pinacle of arrogance and impudence, who hereby unchurch the greatest part of Christians, and contract this Soveraigne excellencie to your selves. Your Latin disputations when they come by course among the ignorant or yonger frie of your Ministrie, doe but multiplie haeresies, & make them now and then, in their heate, blaspheme God more lear∣nedlie then in their weeklie exercizes and Sermons. As occasion
shall serve, I may helpe you hereafter to more instances then one The Papis∣ical Priests have nei∣ther power nor autho∣riti to Mi∣nister the Sacraments of christ I∣sus, because that in their mouth is not the sermn of exhortation Ib. 9. head. of the like practice among some of your brethren abroad, where every beardlesse boy (for with such your Presbyterie every where abounds) hath libertie to talke (for I can not call't disputing) upon the highest mysteries the Trinitie, Praedestination &c. As consi∣dentlie, to the shame of your religion, as the gravest Doctour can determine in the chaire. What of this may be tolerable among the learned, super rotam materiam, Is litle beter then a forme, and litle de∣cencie in that, which approves not much, improves lesse the abi∣lities of the longest liver among you all. Our aequivalent to this (let it be what it will) in our Archdeacons Visitation, your friend Di∣doclaves turnes off with a jeer, making as if the abilities of our Mini∣strie were inquir'd into after they were constituted leaders of the flocke. Primum cretur duores gregis, deinde siunt discipuli, where as it is principallie to discerne the advancement by studie of what abilities they had at their ordination, whereby the election of rural Deanes may be regulated, & persons know'n that are enriched by gifts be∣fitting Alter. Damasc. Schot he∣tcrdoxe di∣vines not comparable to the Or∣thodoxe En∣glish. them to be Bishops. Your experience shall not draw me into an unnecessarie comparison between our English Clergie and the French or Dutch Divines, whose ordination, you are not ignorant, hath been impeached by their adversaries (whether deservedlie or no they are to looke to) and their abilities resolv'd just like yours, into an effusive readinesse of words. But I bid defiance to you and your Countreymen of the Discipline, to shew me among you all, a Law'd, an Andrewee, a Montague, a White, to whom the English you name must give the guerdon of learning (which I beleve Reynolds caried Admittunt ad Mini∣strium in∣dignisemos sartores, subulcos. & infimad faece homi∣nes, modo sint togodae∣dali &c. not at Hampton Court Conference) unlesse Perkins had more in his Chaine of paedestination, or Parker in his silie Arraignment of the Crosse. But how solide and singular soever was their learning, their defection from the doctrines and practical praecedents of so many yeares standing among Catholike Christians makes their fayth in many things, and their good parts comparitivelie in all, but as chaffe to be blow'n away with the winde, and the memoire of them to be winowed by our breath that the truer graine may be visible in Gods Church. Avolent quantum volent pallea levis fidei quounque. Assltu tentationum, eopurio mass a frumenti in horrea Domini reponetur. It's well your C. Schul∣ting. Hier. Anaris. Lib. 1. conscience can be enlarged in some litle charitie towards any of our Bishops, though we may be justlie jealous of this kindnesse, & feare (if we hear'd their names) it may be placed upon persons inclined to your interest, rather then commended to your good opinion by Tert. De Praescr. cp. 1. Quod non ideo scandaliza∣rioportat, quod qui prudentis∣simi odifi∣cen in . their mrit. But whoso'er they be you meane, we know you never prike any in the list of the learned but the best read men in Synopis's
and systems in Common place bookes, and Centurists, or general lie in your select Reformed Fathers, whom, in a fallacie, often ti∣mes you perswade your Disciples to be the more proper men be∣cause standing (you tell them) upon the shoulders of the ancients, when, if set on even ground, the longest arme they can make in true learning and eloquence, will not reach halfe way up to their girdles. But to proceed in some answer to your quaestion. The War∣ner therefore speakes to you of ignorance, because your Presbyteri parts with the greatest incentives and encouragements of studie; There∣fore shops ded by the Re∣viewer to be suspec∣ted. of contempt, because it quits those dignities which give praece∣dence to their persons, and draw reverence to their function; The∣refore of beggerie, because it diverts the Ecclestastical revenue, and makes you but stipendiaries of the people. Of this very conciselie, yet fullie hath his late Majestie admonish'd you Chapt. 17. of Ex: Bu.   how the cause of ig∣norance, contempt and begge∣y. He that surveyes impartiallie the multitude of good Livings and other Clerical praeferments in England which might serve as a sup∣plement to the bad, will finde litle reason for any, none at all for the greatest part of our Priests I meane those that had a title, that were eidi cheirotonoumenoi (as it is Can. 6. Concil. Chalced) to be begarlie & contemptible for their want, especiallie since those Pluralists, you con∣fesse were searce one of twentie that lived in splendour at Court or were Nonre∣sident Provision under E∣pi in England against the beggerie &c of the Priests. in the Countrey. Such as were apolelymenoos ordinat, ordained at large, without title to any benefice or cure, the Bishop was charged with them till provided for. And they that complained of their povertie had no cause, there being as you tell us, such plentie in his palace. The ignorance of our Clergie (which it may be was not incomparable if we bring yours into the light) was never greater then when Calvin and Knox had some heires and successours that crept into the praelacie, Puritani∣cal Bisops make an ignorant lergie. degenerating from the austeritie of their Fathers, who because they lov'd not the office, never mean'd to discharge it. Yet could dispense in their conscience with the title & lawne sleeves into the bargain, that under them they might take the revenues of our Bishops But when and where we had Austins and Chriso, Lawds and Andrews's never cloud was dispelld with the rising sun, so as ignorance at their asscent in the Epscopate of our Church. And they that heard not of the great studie in these Prlates to remedie the evils, brought in by the other, are such as Zecharie speakes of that imagine evil against their bro∣ther Cho. 7. v. 10. 11. 12. their heart, refusing to hearen, and pulling away the shoulder, and stopping the eare that they should not heare, and making their hearts as an adam that they may not &c. Those some that were most provident, you meane (I thinke) most penurious in their families, were those I told you of that made
a trade of ieir proeferinents, and would dispense with any thing among the putitans but their purfes. Such as those soms other that I named, as they were apter to teach, so were they know'n to be of Our Bishop no Purha∣ser by his parsimonie. beter behaviour and given to hospa litie, the requifites of a Bishop and accomplishments of ours, whose parsimonie or providence for hu sa∣milie was not that which advanced him a sumine to make a purchase. If the suplusage of his evenue could doe it in a cheape and plenti∣full Countrey, J know not who have beter title to it then his heire. Though as I am informed, where I may trust (meeting with a pro∣fess'd enmitie against his office, whatsoever reserve of kindnesse was for his person.) This great purchase, you meane, was the reco∣verie of lands sacrilegiouslie taken and deteined from the Church, in the purs whereof, as he spared no endeavour, so it should seem he was well rewarded with successe. Allthough prating and praying non sense in the Church may well passe for a paraphrase on that which the preacher calls the sacrifice of fooles, Yet  now∣ledgelabour or conscien∣ swed in Presbyte∣rian prea∣ching. I wish that were the worst which Presbyterie brings when she sets her foot in the House of God, and not another * of bewitching re∣bell mention'd by Samuel, or treacherous. K. K, which the pro∣phet Habakkuk calls Sacrisicium sagenae, the sacrifice to the net or drag, ma∣king men as the fisher of the sea, as the creeping things that have no uler over them 1. Habak. 14. In whose praying or preaching (whereof doubtlesse les 5. 1. 1. Sam. 15. 22. we had the quintessence sent us by the Reviewer and his brethren f the mssion) what knowledge there is beside that conning of texts of the Concordance helpt them to; What labour but of the lips and the lungs, neither mater nor method requiring their stu∣di; What conscience, when no doctrine was proved but by Scripture wrested, I am sure not to the salvation of the hearer, & I feare to somewhat worse of the speaker, I leave to the testimonie of any kno∣wing, attentive, ingenuous person that at any time was there. And for my selfe, that was sometime seting aside all animositie and praejudi∣ce, I will in the word of Piest professe that I found none. But what else in the place of it is best know'n to God and my conscience, and letit be to the world to be that which makes me tremble to thinke of their danger that shall adventure their soules in the botome of such hypocrisie and gnorance. To the calumnies which this railing Rab∣shekal casts on our Church, I answer 1. That a read service was all the Reading Ministers usefull and justifiable in our Church. exerciz of few, and why it may not be of some, aswell as a read chap∣ter & Psalme is of many where the Discipline takes place I know not. Since care is taken that where they reade no necessatie preaching is wan∣ting. Since none that are not in orders may reade it the office of pra∣yer in the Congregation being as much a Clerical poprietie as the ordinance of preaching. Since all that are have thereby no commis∣sion
to goe preach in your sense; and why they may not goe pay & administer the Sacrements, conerring with and catechizing the ignorant according to their talent I see no reason. Ite & praedicate sen∣ding not all the Disciple up into a pulp it to make an houre or two's continued discourse. Nor had Nations ever been converted, nor Chri∣stians improv'd and confirmed, if praedicate had been no otherwise order'd, not one of an hundred having abilities to draw arguments out of sermons convictive of their judgements, nor all Presbyte∣rians so good Logicians as to frame them. And he that yeilds him∣selfe up to be caried with the streame of their words & wind of their fancies, may ave as many changes in fayth as their are points dif∣ferent in Christianities compasse, being like a child Clydoniomenos & peripheromenos, as St. Paul speakes, tossed to and sro, and caried about …, by Eph. 4 14, the slight of men … who are many that lie in wait to deceive him. Second∣lie, Your first Reformers made the same use of Readers as we doe of un preaching Ministers, and continued them as long as necessitie required, nor shall we any longer, if you can furnish us with as many learned preachers as we have pulpits, & them with stipends where are not tithes but impropriate proportionable to their abilities and paines. To the Churches where no Ministers can be had praesentlie must be appoin∣ted the most apt men that distinctlie can reade the Common prayers and the Scriptu∣re sayth your first Book. Disc. It was the late labour of no Praelates of ours 4. Head. for Readers. Preaching without booke ap∣proved by our Praela∣tes.  disgrace prcahing without booke, who ever respected and cherished men whose praesence of minde and memoire served them to deliver gravelie and readilie what they had at leisure deliberated on, and for the true benefit of their hearers digested into the clearest me∣thod, and a dorned with selected significant language before they came into the pulpit. Those who having taken that paines yet wan∣ted the other abilitie not in their power, or some litle confidence That with∣in booke ot to be dispa∣raged. to command it in publike, they were at least to excuse, and condem∣ne such itching eares as would hearken unto no sound doctrine but when taught after their lusts and luxurious desires, more for their pleasure then their use. That they disparaged those of your tribe was no wonder, who like your selfe (that goe for one of the best) con∣sulted litle before hand with their bookes or thoughts, onelie wht their tongues like their knives for a meale, with which so they cut out bread for them selves, they car'd not what contemptible frag∣ments they cast among the people. Of their best kinde of speaking We may say as Seneca of one not much unlike it. Hae popularis [oratio] Epst. 4. Lib. 1.  veri, movere bam, & inconsultas aures impe rapcre, trac∣tandase non praebet auserur … multum haebet manitate & vani plus sonat quam vales. It hath a great deale os vanitie and emptinesse in it, more
sound then substance, you may reade the whole epistle, and learne I'll warrant you to preach better by it if you afslect it. For praying The Litur∣gie why read. without booke (all though without a command it may be indifferent, & you can bring no more for it then for praysing and you sing not all without booke as I remember) they thought best a conformitie with Catholike Christians, whose liturgies were ever read in thei Churches, and that I guesse (besides some decencie it seemes to ca∣rie with it) because they had great varietie of prayers in the exhi∣bition of which a constant order was to be observed, between and in them some varietie of gesture and ceremonious worship, for di∣rection in which they thought humane infirmitie, subject to mi∣stakes, might have cause some times to consult by a glance the ru∣brikes every where inserted. As for you that have naught else to doe but to turne over the tip of your tongue what comes next in your head and up the white of your eyes, as if the balls were run in to looke after the extravagant conceptions of your braines a booke's of no use, though I wish we had one of all the profane and vaine ba∣bling amongst you, that we might make such unskillfull workemen a∣snamed; 2. Tim. 2. 15. 16. and shew our selves approved aswell to the world as to God. The Praelates never cried up our Liurgie as the onelie service of God. Who thinke him serv'd in some other Churches that have it not. Their opinion of it as a most heavenlie and divine piece of writ, doth those holie men that compld it but the same justice which a beter comparison will then yours of it with the Breviarie and Missal of Rome. Your paines had A parallel of it with primitie  beter then with the . not been lost in a parallel of it with the solemne services disspersed in many parts of the Bible; with the Greeke and Latin Liturgies where they are not interlin'd or corrupted with any superstition or idola∣trie of Rome. That you have made doth but magnisie her and ob∣lige you, had you any Christian charitie or justice, to thanke God for praeserving so much of his word & worship in her service what the Bishop intends when effected, will warrant our Church, upon your principles, in most parts of her Lturgie; when shewed con∣sonant to the most publike sormes of Protestant Churches, though 'tis hard for Fathers to aske advice or borrow authoritie of their children, & for Ancients to heare wherein Iob was mistaken. That with the yong men is wisdome and with the shortnesse of dayes understanding. The Praelatial Dociours not yet so much for praching a Presby∣terians. 9. head. King and the many well minded men, I beleeve were never deceived by our Doctours, who I can not thinke ever affirmed they were as much fr preaching in their practice and opinion as the Presbyterians. So much as to set aside praying for sermonizing as your . Booke Discipline doth, tel∣ling us. That what day the publike sermon is they could neither require nor greatlie approve that the Common prayers be publikeli used. I require the na∣me
of any that sayd the life and soul of the Liturgie was preaching, without Verbi prae∣dicatio de bet esse qua∣si anima li∣urgiae. Alter.  Dam. . 10. Ibid. 1 sa. 56. 7. which it could not be intire in its parts: That he must never goe in and out of the, House of God without ringing his bells (a fit alussion) the nord of exhortation Interpratation and praeferring the nams given the Temple by some of the ewes Domus expositionis, before that by God Domus Orationis. Though it may have been the fruitlesse practice of some, to quit themselves, as they hop'd, of the disreputation you brought them as ignorant and lazi, to preach somewhat more often then formerlie, till they found their ringing the bells was to scare the people from Church, and doubling their paines reform'd not their opinions nor reduc'd them to their duties. They that prayed without booke be∣fore Pucrile est ut mii vi∣dur aliter faere Ibid. and after their sermons came not up to the Presbyterians opinion, that it is a childish thing to doe otherwise. Nor to their practice, To bawlke the first and second service of the Church. What they either assirmed or did in this kinde might bemore to shew your grsse ifsimulation at all times; in making if such a difficult businesse to talke then to personate their owne in this of their affliction, which, when you have brought them to the lowest, shall never seduce them so to decline the enie of the people, as by profaning the House of God, sooth them Gal. 5. 10. in their erour, styling those aivine ordinances which in your maner or frequencie of use (being both without praecept) are but humane Canons and Acts, and for most part in the mater consist of strise, s∣ditions, and haeresies, the workes of the lesh, or the Divel that dictates them. So that you may see, if your eyes be not full of somewhat else while you are sprting yourselves with your owne deceivings, their tenet re∣maines the same that it w, and themselves readie enough in this season, as unfi as you thinke it, to ring as low'd a you will in the eares of the world, That for Divine service in publike, people need no more but the roding of the Li∣turgie. Divine Ser∣vice. Which is beter furnish'd with pious petitions, occurring to all visible necessitis (and for others emergent the Church keepes a reserve, and in due time ever affords a recruit) then any set or ex∣temporarie prayer that er came out of Presbyters mouth. 2. Sermons Carefull Chrisians will finde litle lisur e on weeke dayes to heare ser∣mons. on weeke dayes (if not festivals, wheron a commemoration of Saints dparted is necessarie for Historical instruction, and for imitation exemplarie) ma belayd aside by Christians that have no more time to spare from their honest callings then they ought to spend in the ap∣plication and practice of what they heard on the Sunday; in medita∣tion upon God, his attributes and workes &c in the serious exami∣nation of their lives, and very particular srutinie of their actions, secret, publike, good, bad, indifferent or mixt, in sorting or par∣selling their sinnes of mission, commission, weaknesse praesump∣tion and in private repenting, weeping, praying, praysing, In
conferring closelie with holie men, chieflie their Priest and pastour of their soules, laying open before him their doubts, distractions Quantum ad crimina quae su declarata Ministris abillis' qui petunt con∣ aut consolatio∣nem, relin∣quimus con∣scients Ministr∣rum &c. Disc. Eccl. Reformat. Regni Franc. Can. 25. infirmities & perverse inclinations & Invisiting the sicke, strength∣ning the weake; considering the poore and placing charitie with prudence; condoling with and comforting the afflicted; Compo∣sing controversies, reconciling differences, designing and enter∣prising Heroicke exploits for the just advancement and honour of the King, and publike advantage of Countrey, Citie or Parish where∣of they are Members Finallie, acting all (of which these are not halfe) that concernes them in their publike and private capacitie. And when all is done, not before, in what leisure's redundand, let them in Gods name, call for a weeklie or daylie sermon, and (where the Priest hath discharg'd as much more of his dutie, and findes in himselfe abilities to compose such an one as with confidence or ra∣ther conscience he can speake it) let them have it. 3. That Sundayes afternoon Sermon is well exchanged for catechizing children, instruc∣ting them in their principles of Religion and acquainting them with the doctrine and discipline of the Church, to which they ought to adhaere when they come to their choyce at yeares of discretion which is the custome of some Presbyterian Churches abroad and either hath or should have been tong since of the Scots. 1. Book: Disc: Be∣fore Catechi∣zing beter then prea∣ching in the afternoon found. noon must the word be preached and Sacraments ministred, and afternoon must the yong children be publikelie examined in their Catechisme in the audience of the people. 4. That on the Sunday before noon sermon is very convenient (a∣buses being redressed) and must be while and where enjoined. Yet in Nations converted to Christianitie by the preaching of the Apost∣les 9. Head. or Apostolical men, and so fullie confirmed as no reasonable feare may be of their apostacie, since the infallible spirit is not Forenoon sermon con venient but not absolu∣telie neces∣sarie See Hook. Ec∣cles. Pol. 5. Book. cooperative with all, if with any, and where, as among the Presbyterians, the noxious spirit of delusion in the mouthes of very many preachers, it's farre from being necessaire to salvation, that care must be had lest it bring damnation to the hearers. 5. That where some learned Scholars, or honest industrious Ministers, not at pleasure, but publike appointment, on festivals dayes make a sermon, or have an oration (for litle difference need be about the name, and it may be't were beter to have lesse in the thing) it would be short, not Sermons not to ex∣ceed an houre. exceeding an houre, according to the Court paterne, which is likelie to be the best in the Kingdome, and for the most part hath come nea∣rest the most approved example of the primitive Fathers, as may be seen by their sermons and homilies that are exstant. And it should seem Presbyterie, aswell as Episcopacie, hath found some incon∣venience in Sermons that were longer which produced the 34. Ca∣non
in the Provincial Synod at Dot 1574. Ministri  anim lo∣gis conci, quas ultra horam non extendent. 6. That spirit and life for adi∣fication, As litle li∣e and adi∣faction in Scripture ill interpre∣ted a in Rhetorike without it. since extraordinarie super infusions were rare, have been heretofore attributed to such discourses principallie wherein the Canon of Scripture hath been interpreted by no private enthusias∣me, no partial addiction to one mans opinion how eminent soever for his gifts or good life, but by the Catholike tradition of the Church, that is the consent of most holie men in it throughout all ages and places as much danger having been from the Iewes (& may be now from Iudaizing Scots) by bad gloffes, as from haeretical Vin, Lit, adv. hare. cap  . Christians by Rhetorical discourses on Scripture…Hoi de c peri∣times, dia toon theioo graphoon. hapei exegourtai cajous proserehomenous a∣patoosin…Haieticoon de paides dia tes chrestologias cai euglottias…But what spirit or life hath been found in flat lectures consisting of non∣cohaerencies, 5. Ciril. Hicrosol. catech. 2. haesitancies, tautologies &c (notwithstanding all the gapings and groanes or other aretifices used to put them ofs for divi∣ne extasies and raptures) let them speake that were aedified, which I was not, I assure you, by What I heard from you and the brethren that brought the Scotish Euangel to us in this Countrey. 7. Though Reason of bidding prayer be∣fore Sermon. . cap. 16. the Canon bestrict, the practice was not, so much as at Court, for bidding prayer before (for after Sermon that for Christs holie Catholike Church and the Collects appointed, are not such, if you remember) some it may be knowing his Majesties minde, which now i publi∣shed, That he was not against a grave, modest, discrect and humble use of Mi∣nisters gifts even in publike…the beter to fit and excite their owne and the peo∣ples affections to the praesent occasions. Those that toke themselves obliged to keep to the leter of the rule were satisfied aswell in the reason as lawfullnesse of the command. Being therefore well assured that the Lords prayer is, as the Fathers call it, oratis legitima, a complete prayer comprehending the summe of what petitions soever were fit to be praesented to the Father, (which none knew beter then the Son∣ne) That the people might be inform'd what at such a time they are to aske, and what, asking in fayth, they might hope to receive,! the Minister commands them in the name of that particular Church to which they are to submit in all publike duties or so renounce her communion, to pray for her after Christs holic Catholike Church, for the King and his Royal famili His Councel, all inserious Magistrates &c. And because after the Ltanie and so many several prayers relating diffe∣rentlie to those particulars he mentions, it is neither necessarie, nor convenient at all, to doubte the time in repeting or paralleling the formes  he calls upon them to joine with him in that short prayer which very effectuallie comprizeth all can be asked, saying Our Fa∣ther
&c. But as touching the Church; limitation of us to the Pater Vt non in∣veniamur discordes in ingressu ad preces ante concionem faciendas, visum uit utile unior∣mibus ver∣bis uti…Concio et∣iam etur uniformiter verbis Marc. c. 6. No prayer for the dead in our Ca∣nn. noster before, & her approving the Gloria patri &c after the sermon, I see no more in it, then in the 33. Canon of that Councel of Dort which I even now mentioned Praying for the welfare of soules departed (a controversie yet depending between Protestants and Papists) hath ever impudentlie and falselie been attributed to that Canon on pur∣pose to delude poor people so rashlie opinionated of their Presby∣ters that told them so, as they thought it derogatorie to their cre∣dit to search the truth; Or so grosselie ignorant as unable to distin∣guish between praying God for the welfare of, and praising him for the ex∣emplarie lives of and the heavenlie reward conferr'd on the soules of the Saints departed. Wherein nothing need be argued when those of a seeptical conscience will not be convinc'd, and those that are prae∣judic'd will not be reform'd, & to such no more is to be sayd, but si de∣cipi volunt decipiantur. For private prayer, if personal, the Praelates ne∣ver hitherto praescribed any forme, leaving people to themselves who are private to their owne wants, and to the direction, not in∣junction, of their Priest. But if congregational, though but in Par∣lour or Closet, no colour can be brought why an house should con∣fute a Cathedral, or extemporarie non sense take place of the ancient and well advised prayers of Holie Church. You can not be more loth to confesse then I am hard to beleeve The Church of Scotland hath had a liturgie not onelie for helpe but practice. that you ever were guiltie of more conformitie to ancient Christians in your publike worship then opinions; Yet when I consider what establishment our Religion received in Queen Elizabeths reigne, & what advancement your schisme unhapilie had by her misse placed assistance, I can not satisfie my selfe how in policie or conscience a Princesse so fam'd for devotion and wisdome could professe and pro∣secute such seeming contradictions, and without some humane as∣surance of your conjunction with her so liberallie contribute to∣ward your praetended reformation to the utter demolition of her owne. Therefore upon good enquirie, I am faine to lay my dissi∣dence aside, and have where withall to confirme the Warner in his be∣leefe, discovering first your negative Remonstrances and renuncia∣tions Knox Hist. 1. B. of Rome coincident with (though more violent and particular then) ours; Your superintendents aequivalent to our Bishops; And which as all in all, upon Buchanans record, your subscription to a communitie with us aswell in Ecclesiastike as Civile affaires. This your Maintainer of the Sanctuarie tells us was done in the yeare 160. in the infancie, or before it rather, in the first conception of your Dis∣cipline. Yea, two yeares before that not long after your Lords and Barons professing Christ Iesus had subscribed your first Cove∣nant
in Scotland, they convene in Counsel, conclude on several heads whereof this is the first. t is thought expedient, advised and ordai∣ned, That in all parihes of this Realme the Common prayer be read weeklie on Ib. B. 2. Sunday, and other Festival dayes publikelie in the parish Churches &c. In the first oration & petition of the Protestants of Scotland to their Queen Regent this was the first demand…That they might meet publikelie or privatelie to their Common prayers in their vulgar tongue. And that this may not be set to the account of your Temporal Lords, or some imper∣fect Members of your Clergie, because I. Knox your Holie head was 1. B. 9. head. at this time disjointed from that sanctified bodie, the same care is af∣terward taken for Kirkes in your booke of Discipline it selfe with∣out any intimation of your purpose to tolerate it onclie for helpe and direction, being a forme praescribed, as liable to the peoples super∣stition as ours, otherwise then as you approved the omission of it Decl. Ch. Sc: Prae. The hypo∣critical use, of the Com∣mon prayer booke in Scotland. on publike sermon dayes. And your Maintainer sayth, without doubt it was the very booke of England. Your Church having none of her owne a long time. I would not have you mistaken, no more then you would have the Bishop, whom you so carefullie informe (I feare against your conscience) as if I imputed this to you for any more then a politike compliance, to effect your owne ends by Q. Elizabeths armes, which being in a good part accomplished you altered your Liturgie both in substance and use, changed our prayers for worse, and those you neither injoined by law, nor supported by the generalitie of your practice. Thus from petitioning forCommon prayer to your Queen you came about at length to condemning it among your selves. This for the Historie of your hypocritical conformitie with us to worke your owne designe, and inexcusable defection from us when that was done. Touching your feigned approbation of set formes for rules, and for use in beginners, I am to aske you 1. What institutions their can Set formes of no use to beginners that pray by the spi∣rit. befor improvement of supernatural gifts. What formes for progresse in extraordinarie graces 2. If there be such why they serve not as∣well for the benefit of tongues as utterance, and whether the Apost∣les before the day of Pentecost had any praeparative to that descent of the spirit upon them, if they had not (the difference of persons not diversifying the donation where or to whomsoeverGod intends it) why we are to looke about for helpes unto this purpose? 3. Whe∣ther this sword of the spirit can not aswell cut the tongue as pierce the heart? Whether God can not without helpes aswell indite words as mater, and make the tongue become the pen o a readi writer. That The gift of prayer in the Pater Noter. your set formes were published onelie for Ministers that are beginners thereby endeavouring to attaine a readinesse to pray in their familie, not in the Church. I take for an evasion scarce thought upon before now. The gift of pra∣yer
which you take gratis without a proofe, I can afford you to be rdinarilie no other then the forme which Christ bestowed upon his disciples. The use of that hath ever hitherto been continued by their successours in the frequent repetition of the words, and analo∣gie of all their enlargements unto the sense. The greatest comfort that can be had by this is in a cheerfull submission to the judgement of that Church in whose communion I adventure my salvation, & the greatest libertie in the exercise of her words, which in Christian hu∣militie and common reason I am to conceive more apposite then mine owne. Herein I rest the beter satisfied, when I see my com∣mon 5. Iud. v. 13. adversaries in this dutie so to fluctuate in their senses, and like raging waves in a conspiracie to shipwrake others, breaking mutuallie Presbyte∣rians divi∣ded about praer. Hist. 4. B. themselves by the uncertaine violence of their motion, and so in the end forming out nothing but their shame. Master Baylie renouncing aswell formes composed by themselves, as praescribed by others. Master Knox praescribing such a se prayer unto himselfe, and so praemeditating the words he was to speake, that when quaestioned he could repeat what er he say'd. Their brethren abroad sometime strictlie enjoining a forme compiled by others Omnes Ministri unans formam publicam in Ecclesia precandi tenebunt…ideoqu alia forma brevir post Synod Hol∣land. & Zo∣land 1574 Artic. 38. Herm. Sy∣nod. Belgic. cap. 11. concionem recitanda composita est. At other times leaving their Ministers to a libertie of a set prayer composed by themselves, or one depen∣ding on the dictate of the spirit. Minister prces vel dictante spiritu, vel certa sibi proposita formula concipiet The 4. wrongs that are praetended from our Liturgie to redound upon A Giver, A Receiver, A Gift, and A Church, being Relatives in this businesse are inseparable by nature, and must fall to ground with the falsitic of the supposition upon which they hang: But what injuries are multiplied upon all by the extemporarie license of Presbyters in their prayers. Our Blessed So∣veraigne. The inju∣ries by ex∣temporie prayer; Fx. B cap. 16. K. Ch. 1. hath enumerated, the affectation, mptinesse, imper∣tinence, rudenesse, conusions, flatnesse, levitie, obscuritie, vaine and ridiculous repetitions, the senclesse and oft times blasphemous expressions, all these burthened with a most taedious and intolerable length…Wherein men must be strangelie impudem and flaterers of themselves, not to have an iusinite shame of what they so doe and say, in things of so sacred a nature before God and the Church, after so ri∣diculous & indeed profane a maner. Nec potest tibi ('tis Master Baylie I meane, Sn. Ep. 40 . 1. who hath been guiltie of most in my hearing) istares contingere aliter quam si tepudere desieris: perfrices fronem oportet, & ipsete non audias. But I referre him to the rest of what K. Ch. 1. Briestie but solidelie hath 5. , of Ecl. Pol. writ, and what more at large Master Hooker, to whom I may chal∣lenge all the Scotish Presbyterie for an answer. So great a cloud of witnesses encompassing the Scotish Presbyterie, and
giving in evidence against her as the mother of mischief too many yeares in three Kingdomes, your arme is too weake to lay aside the Heb. 12. 1. weight of those wicked actions that must be charged on her backe, and the sinne of sacriledge Royal that so easilie bsets her. The Parliament of Scotland, sure The Par∣liament of Scotl. in no cpacitie to demand af∣ter then ur∣der of K. Ch. . quivocates in denying that they have stripped the King of his justrights (I speake to His Majestie now reigning His ather having unanswe∣rablie argued for himselfe) because they never hitherto acknow∣ledged him invested with any but the name, to which bare inheri∣tance they knew him borne without the charitie of their breath, & which he must have had without their sounding trumpet, proclai∣ming this for their almes as hypocrites in their markets. But to come close to you. This Parliament of Scotland, had it been such, as it was not, upon the murder of the ather ought to have been stripped of all it selfe, then no just rights, (no more but such as a deadman hath to his robes) and being a breathlesse carkasse could require no∣thing at the hands of the Sonne. The courses to which he was stirred up and keeped on, out of natural dutie, by no factious advice, were (how∣soever they succeded) praeservative of his Fathers and himselfe, and de∣structive to no people but the workers of iniquitie that with their owne hands plucked downe miserie upon their heads. The bloudshed brings Ps. 51. bloudguiltinesse upon them that first opened the veine, from which he had no need to be purged with hysope that was cleane, nor washed, whose conscience, in that particular, was whiter then the snow. Yet Haak. 1. 13. being by your scarlet Parliament imputed to him, (whose impure eyes can bhold nothing but iniquitie in others, and whose wicked mouthes are wide open to devoure the man that is more righteous then themselves) the satisfaction they required could be in order to no exercise of his Royal go∣vernment, nor dare they take any by the rules of your Discipline, which must have bloud for bloud, but a slavish subjection of his life and erowne to sentence without mercie, which had been, though fewer in number, yet as full in your meaning, and as effectual aequi∣table, demands. Allthough this be a replie unanswerable to your prae∣tense. Yet I must not leave you without discovering your diminu∣tive Review changeth the words of the Procl. The origi∣nal of the oath for se∣curitie of disscipline. forgerie in Parliament Proclamations, putting parts of his Royal Government where they the whole without exception. His name portract & seale being not his, when new stampt, and set to publike writings by your hands then in actual rebellion against his person. The securitie to your Religion and Liberties required, were first enacted for an aequitable demand onclie by a Convention of Rebells at Edenburgh 1567. who had been partlie solicited, partlie scared into a dubious consent with, andby a Traterous Assemblie, (who had in vaine posted away foure Caitiffe-Cursitours, miscalled Commissioners, to the more loyal Lords
delated for the Hamiltons, as likewise to the Neuters, to depose their Queen, and clog their future Princes's succession with this K. Do Row. Craig. . Hist. B. 5. impious condition. That all Princes and Kings hereater in this Realme, be∣fore their Coronation shall take oath to maintaine the true Religion now prosessed in the Church of Scotland, and suppresse all things (even their soules & con∣sciences) contrarie to it, and that are not agreeing with it. This I take to be the fundamental law your Proclamation reflects upon, foralas the other foundation of your solemne league and covenant lies not fathom deep, a stripling of twelves yeares old can reach to the botom; and evert, both, when he calls for that invisible law of God, which approves much lesse enjoines this praerequiring satisfaction from a King, For it Dial. De Iur: Reg ap. Scot. The choyce of a King o∣riginallic not justifia∣ble in any perpl. is not Maitlands idle concession to Buchanan in his cursed dialogue upon Homers authoritie, That there was a time when men liv'd law lesse in Cottages and caves, and at length by consent tooke a justi∣siable course of creating a King unto themselves that will reduce Ro∣yaltic to popular restrictions. Such stuffe as this may be put off a∣mong Pagans that will hearken to the fable of Cadmus, & be wonne into a beliefe that the serpents teeth were sowed in so good a soile as that they all sprung up proper men of whose race we might have had some at this day, if they had betoke themselves to the election of a King, when for want of one they fell to civile dissensions & de∣struction of themselves. I demand as a Christian, and as much mighta ew. Who was the first King! Whether he was not instituted by God? Whether not with a decree touching primogeniture in th right of succession, by the first borne to propagate his authoritie and office? Whether any people in the world, more or lesse in a bo∣die lawsullie assembled, have been at a losse for a King to command them? & what law beside that of nature which if such as Saint Paul describes it, is somewhat hard to distinguish from an original law of God, (and yet shall be sequester'd from our praesnt dispute) con∣stituted them in a full capacitie to chuse one? Who? When? Where? Cum sit & ordini na∣turae con∣scntaeum, & bus propé om∣nium gen∣tium Histo∣rijs tessi∣catum. Open Buchanans packe, as big as it is, begirt with no lesse then the cingle of the world, and with out Ambiguons peradventures, or assmations involv'd in quaestionable circumstances, lay me out one cleare instance to this purpose and when you have, purchase a paral∣lel among your selves. Transmigration of Nations, Navigations of discoverie, design'd or contingent, New plantations upon necessi∣tie or pleasure, Spontaneous secessions, though by supreme autho∣ritie approved; Relegations and exiles, Extinctions of lines. Fi∣nallie whatsoever to be thought on that can separate a medley of men from a seted societe, or make an Anarchie among People, will when De Iur Reg. all are combin'd, I beleeve, litle disorder me in my hold. So that
to use the words of that valiant General, or take the Kings from his mouth. You declared him to be your King, but with such conditions and provi∣sos M. Mntr. De. 1650 as robbe him of all right and power. For while you prctend to give him a litle, which he must actept of as from you, you spoile  of all that power and authoritie which the law of God, of Nature, and of the Land hath invested him with by so long continued decent from his famous praedeccssours. For the nature of your Abolition of Episco∣pacie will not give the scott sa∣tisfaction demand, the abolition of Episcopacie, which you confesse to be a great one (so great indeed as not to be granted but with a devastation of his conscience, the Praelates were very unworthie of their miters, if they pressed not his Majestie (were it necessarie where is so free an in∣clination) to denie you, though they know well enough, were your great demand yeilded, you have one no lesse behind, securitie of liberties, and when both were had (which God forbid they ever should be) your crueltie and guilt would admit of no lesse after-satisfaction from him for England, then from his Father for Scotland, nor your raging Devill be otherwise satiated then with his bloud. There∣fore the advantage you take of his denial (though you confesse upon other mens importunate instance) makes your Praedestinarian Godships no lesse peremptorie in the immutabilitie of your decree, to forme Commonwealths of Kingdomes, and according to you Di∣vinitie the meanes being as unalterablie destin'd as the end, you re∣solve what you can (and doe well to tell us so) that he and all his fami∣lie shall perish. —Levia sed nimium queror Sen. He, fur. Coclotimendumest, regna ne summa occupet Qui vicit ima… For you that thus capitulate with Kings, have nothing next to doe but to article with God. Presbyterie admitting no Rival Regent, much lesse any superiour, will make way to its solitarie supremacie by ruine. I terruina quaeret, & vacuo volc Regnare mundo.— Your patient surplicate were your Hage papers, which most inqui∣sitive men have heard or seen before this time. Wherein you tell His P. Iun. 1. may 22 Majestie his denial will constraine your people… to oe what is incumbent unto them, we know what you meane, that fatal word being scarce to be met with but having Rebellion and Murder at its heeles. Your Henders. 1. Pap. to K. Ch,  Euangelist of the Covenant did not cant it to his Father, but sayd plainlie Reformation may be (though he wish'd it not) left to the mul∣de whom God rreth up [to kill and slay without quaestion] when Prin∣ces
are negligent, as they are when they yeild not their aequitable demand, grant their patient supplicates, lay their heads on the blocke, and (not doe but) suffer as they would have them. Laesa patientia fit furor, Even in such meeke men as you, patience upon denial can become furie and supplicates after some continuances commands.. And then he may have an offer of his or their Kingdome, as you thinke fiter to style it, but it must be with a resignation of his crowne, their Lives and estates shall be Oretenus for his service, when aurium tenus they are up to the ares in a good bargaine, taking money with one hand, and delivering him up with the other; which is the issue to be expected upon the grant, and nothing worse can be feared (nor that if well thought on) from the denial of your demands. Therefore, to con∣clude, no miserie of King nor people should be so impolitikelie declin'd as to be desperatelie embraced. And till the essentials of Scotish Presby∣terie be changed, which are undisputablie destructive to all Mo∣narchs that come among them, true Praelatical hearts can not be tru∣lie considerate or loyal, if they be not obstinat in this perswasion and beleefe. 1. B. Disc. 9. head. The place cited, to which you send us for a view of your tender care in providing the parents consent to the mariage of their children, gives us a Nature robbed of her Praero∣gative by Prosbyterie full prospect of your tyrannie over Nature, whose throne is usur∣ped, whose praerogative trampled downe, and her Paternal Princes enthralled to the dominion of your spirit. For your publike inhibition of private mariage there mentioned, is not so much to carie the streame of childrens obedience to their Parents and Curatours, as to make sure that the water goe no by your mill, that due homage be payd to the consistorian powers that are above them. Therefore in some cases (and we know not which you except) 'tis sayd. The Minister or Magistrate to whom, (though not you, your Discipline gives the prae∣cedence and praedominance) may enter in the place of parents … may ad∣mit them to mariage. For the worke of God ought not to be hindred &c. This Inclina tions to mar∣rie not all wayes devi∣ne motions. worke of God is there called the touch of the heart with desire of mariage, As if all hearts so touched had Gods hand layd upon them, and the Scotsh climate were so cold as all natural or carnal inclinations were frozen untill fire came downe from heaven to dissolve them. As if then, good soules, they were melted in a minute, and had outrun the bounds of all selfe moderation, all rational perswsion, all love mar∣tyrdom in a passive submission to the just rigour orunjust wilfull∣nesse of cruel parents contradicting their sodaine affections and a∣mourous violence, For if these Flames warme by degrees at a di∣stance Consent of parents. (and some danger drawes on of being scorch'd without scree∣ning) their dutie should prompt them to withdraw in due season,
and repraesent to their parents the first sense they finde of that heate, the increase of content or comfort they take in it, and with their approbation farther cherish these desires, or upon their dislike in gratitude and justice to their sufferance of many infant troubles, & elder petulancies, endue a litle hardship for their pleasures. For to change the allegorie, if children first set saile of themselves, & then call to their parents at hoare for leave to take shiping, this mocke re∣spect would rellish more of scorne then good nature or dutie. And as well may they bid adieu to relations, as when before a strong gale of winde looke for anod or waving hand to incourage that course wherein they themselves are steering, and necessitie carying then not to be resisted. Yet no other is that honour which your Discipline sayth they are bound to give to their parents, the parts whereof you make these. To open their affection. To aske their counsel and assistance how that mo∣tion … may be performed, it speakes not of asking pardon for enterta∣ning it before approved.  in Scriptu∣ris determi∣natum sit & jure Ci∣vili de con∣sensu pa∣rentum; In Ecclesiasti∣c tamen curijs obti∣net jus Pa∣pale Cano∣nicum qu definitur consensus parentum dehouestate non de ne∣cessitate Et quod Matrimo∣nia debent esse libera, & non pn∣dere exali no arbitrio Assert: Pol. Christ. You know the Civile and Canon law are divided, that standing much upon the necessitie, this onelie on the decencie or honestie of having the parents consent. A friend of yours, that îs hugg'd for his paines in opposing our Church, presseth hard the coincidence of the former with the determination in Scripture, and objects her concurrent practice with the later To tell you how Lib. 2. De Regn, Christ. Bucer playes the strict Civilian in this businesse, whose authoritie is very oracular when for you, would it may be render him but a private opiniatour now against you. And as litle might it availe to produce the Acts of your Brethren in Holland, who seem to declare for a necessitie in their provincial Synod. Nemo proclamabitur de con∣trahendo nisi priu attulerit testimonium de consensu parentum, No more then a convenience in their National, and that determinable by their Presbyterie when controverted … Siquis autem irrationabiliter in his causis & refractarie se gesscrit, sic quod nullo modo vellet consentir … presby∣terium constituit quid in talibu casibus sit saciendum. In this division you doe well to quit your selve of all wonted interest, and appeale even from Scripture it selfe to the Tribunal of reasen and a quitie. Where yet you will scarce get your hearing before you prove that the anthoritie of Pa∣rents is to be restrained by the many times unreasonable (though law∣full and honest) desires or motions in their children. As if a Kings daughter should be taken with a beggar borne under an hedge. With which instance your Presbytrie is scarce to be trusted, who it may be, are readie enough to justifie the match by the eminencie of his vertues, to which they may beter dispose daughters then distribute crownes, saying Regna virtuti, non generi deberi. Epictetus that was a very good Master of his reason, gave this general rule unto his disci∣ples.
That all obligatorie offices are measured by the relative habits Dordorac. 1574. ar∣tic. 81. 1578. of the persons. He begins with the Father as most absolute in his po∣wer, all whose injunctions and actions are to have an active or pas∣sive obedience from his children. Pater estin; hypagoreuetai epimeleisthai, parahorein hapantoon, anecheshai loidorountos, paientos If you talke to him, as The inju∣rie done to Parents by Presbyterie not justisia∣ble in rea∣son. Bucan. Bishop, to the of a cruel arent, abusing his autgoritie &c. He will tell you Na∣ture hath not tied you to a good father, but a father, & your dutie must bepayd him in his natural capacitie, not moral ete oun pros aga∣thon patera physei okeiothes, alla pros patera. There is indeed some what in humanitie it selfe, which may be call'd the ice of a father to his son∣ne. To moderate sometimes his autocratical power by affection, & run his iron heart into the same molds with the softer metall of his childrens at least not t make it the hammer and anvil whereby to Ta cathe∣conta hoos epipantais schesesi pa∣rametrei∣tai. fashion youth to the humourous morose sevetitie of age. It was upon some such advantage that Pamphilus argued in the Comoedie. Hocci∣ne est humanum factum aut inoeptum? Hoccine officium Patris? … Pro eum atquchominum, quid est, si non baee contumeli est? Vxorem decreverat dare sese mihi hoaie, nonne oportuit praesisse me ante? nonne prius communicaum oportuit. Yet afterward Simo contrapones his improper choyce of a match Enchir. c. 37 misbeseeming him, against custome, law, and his dutie as a snne. Adeon impotenti sse anime ut praeter ivium Mrem atque legem, & sui volun∣tatem Terent Andr. act. 1. Sc. 5. patris. Tamen hanc habere cupiat cum summo probro? n sine Pamphilus convinc'd in likelihood by his reason, made a filial exemplarie sub∣mission in our Case. Ego me amare han fateor, si id peccare est, fateor id Act. 5. Sc. 3. quoque. Tibi Pater me dedo. quidvis oneris impone, impera. Vis me uxorem du∣cere? han amittere? ut potero feram. Yet among Christians, when such submission's not found from a frenzie of love which will take no advice from Nature or Reason, I confesse the Magistrates and Mini∣sters shall doe an act of charitie in their mediation with his father by complying with to cure him of his madnesse, and restore him to his senses. But when their Discipline makes it an act of power and juris∣diction, 1. B. 9. head, and that as much, if not more, concerning the Minister as Magistrate, I take it to be very empie of oequitie, as full as the Reviewer thinkes it, and see not where, after the Scotish mode, any Church or State doth practize or approve it. In the behalfe of them that doe, he is to repaire the breach of the 5. Commandement by the disobe∣dient child, or shew us where in  is particular it was dispens'd with. No obe∣dience due to parents requiring a injust mar∣, In case of sinne I confesse a just apologie may be made. As if the Fa∣ther would admit of none but an incestuous marriage, or, to save his estate, with one in open rebellion against the King; The child must not obey, nor yet is bound where is feare of incontinencie, to live single. The supreme Magistrate ought here to take the place, &
doe the office of the parent. And the Minister must execute all law∣full commands of this Kind in his function. But if the case be so rare of the childs complaint? and not heard of in an age, the Dawbers of the Discipline might have saved this patch; and need not have fould their fingars with such untemper'd stuffe, as having neither Scrip∣ture nor reason in its mixture, was never intended to cement any building of Gods, nor the corrupt aections of willfull children to be called his worke. Yet that the Rader may neither be unsatisfied nor deluded (as he will be very often if he observes not your fraud in mistating the case) I must admonish him that the Bishop's may be frequent though yours be rare. His Lordship objecting your admission to mariage the parent gainstanding. And you reponing an authoritative Sentence to enforce consent. His addition about compelling the parents to give portions was fastned upon your practice not your canon. Your rai∣ling Ep. S. Id. v. 9. acusation, an impudent lie which Michal would not bring when disputing with the Devil, will as litle grace, as strengthen, your contro∣versie with a better Angel of the Church. In such maters of fact truth can be justified no otherwise then upon enquirie, whereby will best be discovered he faythfull witnesse; and the false one too that will tter lies. Yet in the place alledged your canon ordering out of the text, Prov. 14. 5. 2. Cor. 12. 14. 1. Tim. 4. 8. without quaestion a dowrie to a daughter that is defloured, he that at a distance hath any good opinion of your conscience will praesume your care can be in justice no lesse of her who you say, hath committed no such filthinesse before, but kept the Virgin-ornament that commends her to your super-paternal powers to be made a bride. The passage a∣gainst sparing of the life of Adulterers (which you here substitute in the Poenitent Adulterers not to be put to de∣ath. S. Iohn. 8. 2. Cor. 12 7. roome of a beter answer to the other) is not so consonant to the law of God, as dissonant from the milder Gospell of Christ, who nei∣ther as Kong commanded stones to be cast at the poenitent brought before him nor as Priest retracted by excommunication his signal mercie shewed in her dismission. A Presbyter may have a thorne in the slesh aswell as a Praelate, allthough for want of Saint Pauls spirit he will abate no measure of his pride in revelations And if he take it out to no better purpose then to thrust it in othermens sides, (if he looke not to it) will pricke his owne fingar, in his hast. The falselie prae∣tended authours and lovers of so severe discipline make it as litle consistent with Christian libertie hypotaxein & doulagogein, to discipline their bo∣dies and subdue them by Apostolical correction, as to subject their spirits, according to Apostolical doctrine, to just powers ordained by God, And a peice of tyrannie they count it to chasten and mortifie (which by praecedent they turne into reproose) ever since David did it that was a King. For want of which (whatsoever they fancie of I
know not whose biting and spurning) the Presbyterian Iesuruns have kick'd as much as before, nor since this great severitie was threatned, could they have the face to expunge the clause that by their owne confession occasion'd it, & still stands thus in their booke.. Whore∣dome, sornication, adulterie are sinne most common in this realme. 1. Book. Disopl. 9. I Head. The Bishops warrants for clandestine marriages were not without this par∣ticular caution against spoiling parents of their deare children. Quod parentum, modo sint in vivis, vel alias Tutorum sive gubernatorum suorum ex∣pressum The Bi∣shops caute∣lous in their warrants for clande∣stine mar∣riages. consensum in hac parte obtinuerint. And how abundantlie otherwise was provided let your brother Didoclave beare witnesse. If their mercinarie officers prostituted to their profit this indulgence gran∣ted upon very good reasons to noble personages, whose praecon∣tracts, or impediments if any, were not very likelie, and it may be not so fiting to be discovered, upon publishing their bannes) this In nuperis constitndi∣nibus anni 1603. vi∣dentur prae∣sules An∣glicane a∣bunde cavi∣se Alter. Dam. c. 70 Ao. 1588 Schulting Reprehens. Synod. Middelb. The Revie∣ners same∣lesse denial of aknow'n truth about impeding civile pro∣ceedings. Contr. E. pilam Phi∣ladelph. can fairlie be charged neither upon the Bishops order, nor their per∣sons, unlesse you would have them ubiquitarie in their Courts, & omni-praescient in the actions of their instruments. Their after-di∣spensations with marriages without warrant I hope are not culpable, except you would drive them to a necessitie of divorce. Among them whom you call brethren heretofore those of Middleburgh did invalidate all private marriage. About which their adversaries, though con∣senting in the substance, call upon them for a text of Scripture, which I never heard was hitherto produced. If he that fixeth his eyes upon the sunne, till the strength of the beames and luster put them out, should declare before the witnesses of his misfortune that he never saw the least glimpse or brightnesse of that luminarie, he were more to be credited then Master Baylie in his grosse selfe-confounding denial, that ever any such mater was at∣tempted in Scotland as drawing civile causes upon praetense of Scandal unto a Synod of Presbyters, or that he ever heard alledged by their adver∣saries their impeding or repealing any civile proceedings. Whereas the first hath been proved allreadie by the Bishop out of the very words in their discipline; And the two other objected in numerous instan∣ces by most, if not all the adversaries that have published any thing against them. By Arch-Bishop Spotswood in the different cases of the Bishops Montgomerie and Adamson, A Melvin, Blacke, the spa∣nish Merchants &c. So that in general he is faine, to alledge against them in this language… Ministrorum eo crevit insolentia, ut non contenti sua functione, lites & reoomnes (what and who is here excepted?) a suum tribunal revoare niterentur, concilii publici (which is more then the mea∣nest civile Court) placita reseindere, Ordinum decretis (which riseth high (que ad slomachum non sacerent intercedere, &c. Which is worse then Sy∣nodical
impeding or repealing, populum cmnem contra hostem in armis paratum esse jubere. And which includeth all in all. Nibil denique erat quod islos fam severos censores essugeret. The Answerer by leter… How inconsistent Presb. Government is with Monarchie objectts their interposing in a case of debt between J. T. and P. T, determined by the Lords of Session; Their discharging Munday mercates against leters Patents under the Great Seale, professeth that like infinite instances might be produ∣ced, and one more of them he brings with the several circumstances about a decree and judgement obtined by Master Iohn Grahum. In general your judicial Vsurpations are censur'd by the Authour of Episcopacie and Presbyterie considered. Whereof he brings no particulars because he sayth no bodie can be ignorant that hath look'd into the knowen stories of this last age. Some what to this purpose is in him that writ the Trojan Horse… unbowelled. K. Iames's Declaration against you in the case of the Aberdene Ministers is in print. Beside many other of this nature that I have not seen, or doe not thinke on. Where Master Baylie hath slept out all this noyse, J can not guesse, if above ground. So that a lasse the Curtisan Bishops may pasle away unquaestion'd with a few innocent prohibitions in their pockets, when the Traverse is draw'n and the Palliard Presbyters discovered in multitudes at the businesse, heaping up such loades of repeales and protestations, as crush all iniquitie into scandal, & make Civile Courts, Parliaments Coun∣cel and King responsable for their sentences to the Synods. The next injurie against Masters and Mistresses of families as it stands in Publike ca techizing of Masters & Mistresses indecent. your discipline (not as you subtilie, yet vainlie, advantage it) is criminal, at least so farre as it is a transgression of Saint Pauls rule, which requires all things to be done euschemonoos & cata taxin, decentlie and in order, 1. Cor. 14. 50. Whereas for them to be brought to such a publike account, who at all other times, without personal excep∣tion, are constituted instructours of their children and servants, is not eushemonoot; it caries litle decencie with it, it too much discounte∣nanceth their authoritie, it levels their natural and politike Domi∣nion for the time. nor have those different lines as they are draw'n in your Discipline, such a just symmetrie, as to produce an hand∣some feature of one person: It is not cata taxin, tae it in what sense you will, no man will say there is a due order observed, nor any such praescription in Christs Holy Catholike Church. The same A∣postle that gave particular directions in the case made no canon for this. An antecedent examination he appointed, but the Ancients 1. Cor 11. 28. Lit. Ch. c. p. 215. interpret it more of the will and affection then the understanding & mind. Or f he meant it of both, he made every man judge of him∣selfe (as you doe when he is praesent at the ministration of baptis∣me)
that had before renderd a reason of his sayth to the Church, neither Presbyter and inquisitour of course nor parishoner a wit∣nesse of his unworthinesse and ignorance. Ourh heteros ton hetecon…all' atos beauton sayth Oecumenius which put Cajetan upon the thought that confession was not at this time required, for which he is taken up by Catharinus. And Chrysostom referres us to a text in St. Pauls 13. 5. second epistle which tells us what discoverie may put the examina∣tion to an end. Examine your selves whether ye be in the sayth. Omnem prola∣tionem quaerendi & inveniendi credendo fixisti, hunc tibi modum statuit sructusipse quaerendi, is intended, I beleeve, as a glosse upon it by Tertullian. So that the knowledge how to pray was no praerequisite of St. Pauls. Nor De Praeser. c. 10. can we heare from him that the ignorance of other your disciplina∣rian articles exclude a man more from the Sacrament of the Lords If they know not how to pray neithern be∣rein their rightcous∣nesse sands or consists, they ought not to be ad∣mitted to the Lords table. supper then from the communion of Saints & Christianitie he pro∣fesseth in his Creed. Beside 'tis easie to conceive what discourage∣ment it brings upon such good Christians as hunger and thirst after this spiritual nourishment of their soules, and how much it deroga∣tes from that reverence Antiquitie render'd to this Sacrament and the high degree of necessitie they held often to participate hereof by such clauses as this. All Ministers must be admonished to be more carefull to instruct the ignorant then readie to serve their appetite, and to use more sharpe examination then indulgence in admitting &c. Which hath a different sound from the earnest crie of the Euangelical Prophet Isai 55. 1. and the free invitation made by the High Priest of our profession in the Gospell S. Luk. 14 you accounting profanelie the losse hereof no more then the misse of a meale, and the disappointment no other 1. Book Disc. 9 head. Ibid. Excommu∣nication of the igno∣rant with∣out war∣rant. Ibid. then depriving an hungrie appetite of a diner. Our Fathers of old were otherwise minded, and excommunicated those that were pee∣vishlie averse, not those that (being engag'd in no penance) hum∣blie desir'd the benefit hereof. Aposlrephomenous tea metalephin tes cucha∣ristias cata fina ataxian toutous apobletons ginesthaites ecclestas. was part of a ca∣nen at the Councel of Antioch A. 341. I could adde, That you declare not what may passe among you in the Master and Mistresses answers for the summe of the law, what for the knowledge wherein their rightcousnesse stands, without which you say they ought not to be admitted. So that the sharpnesse of your examen and acceptance of their answer being arbitrarie, much roome is left for private spleen, antipathie and passion no justifiable causes of separation from this communitie of Christians, and therefore made the ground of enquirie and cog∣nizance Exetau∣esho de me micropsyc∣a e philo∣neikia e fi∣ni toiause aedia tou e∣piscopou a∣posynagogo egegenen∣tas. in every halfe yeares Synod by the Nicene Father, that such partialitie might not be tolerated in the Bishops, But whereas you excommunicate the parent and Masters for negligence when their chil∣dren
and servants are suffered to continue in wilfultignorance. Why not as∣well the God Fathers and Pastours whose subsidiarie care should not onelie be restaurative but praeventive? Why not such aged women as are not teachers of goodthings, That the yong women be sober, love their husbands and children &c. Tit. 2, 3? Why not all those in whom the word of Christ should dwell richlie in all wisdome, and they teach and admonish one another Col. 3. 16. Which being a like duties of the Text alike require your in∣spection, nor doth it appeare any more that you are left to a liber∣tie Can. I. Chr. Iustel. Familievi∣sitations commenda∣ble aswell in orthodo∣xe Priests as Presbyters. of discrimination in your censure, then that for any of these de∣faults you may exercise it at all. Your familie visitations, if sincerelie intended for the inspection of maners and conversations is com∣mendable, if done with the spirit of discretion, moderation & mee∣knesse. When this was practiz'd by the most conscientious Priests of the Episcopal partie (your knowledge whereof to denie by oath would looke litle beter then perjurie) it was calumniated by many of your brood for gadding and gossiping, defam'd by some for more sinfull conversing. And when the generalitie of them (the Episcopal Cler∣gie) remitted the frequencie of preaching, the studie for which they found inconsistent with this more necessarie more beneficial catechizing the people, it was nicknam'd suppressing the word. And when at such times as the sacramental solemnities they entred into any pri∣vate spiritual communication (though advised by the Church) they were put to purge themselves from the imputation of Poperie in practizing auricular confession and injunction of penance. Your or∣der and practice is to keep off from the holie Table not such onelie as conjunctive are grosselic and willfulle, but divisive (intoo strict a sense) grosselie or willfullie ignorant. Touching which allthough their negli∣gence is inexcusable, and their dulnesse pitiable, yet that your act of cruel jurisdiction is justified by no divine command nor Catho∣like example. If never any for simple ignorance were excommunicated in Scotland. You must be rebuk'd for transgressing your rule and failing in your dutie as your Kirke pleaseth thus to declare it. In sufferable we judge Ib. Disc, 9. Head. it that men be permitted to live and continue in ignorance as Members of the Kirke. Whether greater tyrannie were exerciz'd in the High Commission Courts Riot in Scotland to get downe the High Commission. or your Consistories, your aequitable comparers by this time, are not to seeke. What excesse on your side hath been evidenc'd is here resumed onelie to aggravate your floud of boundlesse crueltie by the many heads from which it issues, and the cataracts it powres upon the poor people in every parish. The Bishops playd indeed the Rex in that their Court, because they acted in it by authoritie and deputation from the King. But you and your Brethren playd the Rebells to the purpose,
when you first rioted, then rebell'd and covenanted before, er you supplicated to suppresse it. K. Ch. 1. by his grace and too fluent cha∣ritie praevented the violence intended by your Parliament, though he found no thankes nor yet acceptance at your hands His proclama∣tion being rudelie encountred with a rebellious protestation read Iarg. Decl. The Kings palace and Parliament fallen with that in En∣gland. by Iohnston. The King & Anticlerical Parliament in England that alasse joind hands in a maner, yet searce agreed, to throw downe the o∣ther about their eares (without which the Praelates had no power, lesse then no reason (if it might be) to let it fall) have not onelie covered the poor Bishops with the ruine of that Court, but since hands and hearts were divided, the laborious Lords and Commons, without him, have pull'd the Fabrike of both Houses, and of Monarchie upon themselves. The Congregational Eldership, a thing wheresoever More com∣fort because lesse rigiour in the re∣formed El∣derships a∣broad. more to be jeerd at and lesse endured then a Commission, is enjoy'd with so much more comfort among other of the Reformed then in Scotland, as we are eye witnesses of lesse authoritie & rigour in it. And while I am writing this Replie one of the Reformed Presbyters, your Countreyman ingenuouslie confesseth to me that he thinkes in his con∣science the present Kirke tyranniem Scotland (he speakes it indeed rather of the practice then rule) is farre beyond what ever could be alledged against our Bishops, or the Pope. And that if he & others of his minde tooke the constitu∣tion of that government every where to be the same as it is executed in Scotland they would not continue a day longer in that communion. The lawes of se Scotish Elderships taken out of Holie scripture can not be very Partic  many cases. Their Acts of superiour judicatories doe not, can n  pecific interpretative Scandals, nor in all occurring pofsibi propor∣tion corporal punishments, or pecuniarie mulcts, in the arbitre∣ment of which lies the tyrannie of this petie Aristocratie, and most ridiculouslie many times used in cutting haifethe haire, shaving beards &c. as before now hath been objected by others that having I beleeve seen it, better know it. In the abuses by such censures, and difficul∣tie Answer by Letter. of some cases, when appeale is made to a Synod, the Biop tells you (which you observe not) that the shortnesse of its continuance can af∣ford, the condition of the persons will afford litle reliefe. Your dozen of the most a∣ble pious plow men in many parishes, with an unexperienc'd illite∣rate Pastour praesiding in their Councel are no very reverend Iud∣ges in many cases. Aud what pitifull creatures they must be of ne∣cessitie Many of those in Scotland have very unfit, una∣ble Iudges. in some places may be guessed untill this quaestion be answe∣r'd which is sent you from another Countreyman of yours an ho∣nest able Divine. Whether you have not heard of Cuntres Churches in Scot∣land, especiallie amongst the Saints of Argie, where not three, hape not one in the whole parish could reade. Amphictyonum consessus. A very honourable
bench. A Senate that no doubt would strike greater amazement (but upon other reasons) then the Romane if any foraigner should behold them. In that you say the Episcopal way is to have no discipline at all Episcopacio want no ae∣quivalent in Discipli∣ne. in any congregation, you are somewhat more hard hearted then your brethren, Who acknowledge some of the functional rubbish of your Temple building, Elders and Deacons, upon the shoulders of our Church wardens, Sidemen and Collectours, part of whose charge is to observe maners, inquire out ill livers, admonish the scandalous, Oeconomis testibus Sy∣nodalibus & Collecto∣ribus in Ec∣clesiastcke paroeciana rudera quaedam functionum diaconorum & seniorum relicta vel potius im∣posita sunt. Alter. Dam c. 12. and praesent them to the ordinarie. To direct them in this dutie the Bishops articles are disspersed, and an Audit held of their account at every visitation. The officials pleasure regulates not their infor∣mation, which is to be as impartial as an oath can make it. His con∣science commonlie is not to large, though his learning and wisdome be of greater extension then the Elders. What power he exerciseth is by law and custome. In correctionis negotijs alia quidem sacient omnia (excom∣munication is more niselie and conscientiouslie excepted) quae de jure pos∣sunt & solent fieri. Constit. 1571 To the Presbyterian tendernesse of medling with domestike infirmities some what is sayd allreadie which the Answerer by leter thus avoucheth. It is certaine that a foolish man revealing foolishlic his faults to his wise, the zealous wife upon some quarelling betwixt her and her husband, hath gone to a good Minister, revealed what was told her, and the ho∣nest impertial Minister hath convented the man, charged him with his sinne, and made him confesse satisfie, and doe penance publikelie. Here the flagrant scandal was onelie the fire or furie that broke out of a weake womans breast Synodales aestes, quos sidem ea∣vocant, qui in inque∣stionibus morum & visitationi∣bus adjun∣gumur Oe∣conomis Oe∣conomi five Gardiani Ecclesiasti∣kae quorum minus est pro eo anno … inordi∣nateviven∣tes inquire∣re, monere scandalosos, ordinario praesentare &c. Ibid. Ex. Aagl. Pol. Isai 53 7. into a pragmatical Presbyters eares, whose heade is no sanctuarie for spiritual secrecies, but his curiositie the mine that under wor∣kes the foundation of private families, and palaces too (where of that of Mary Queen of Scots may be a formidable, and lamentable example) and when jealousies faile of materiall truth in the disco∣verie, to blow them up with malicious calumnies what they can. For suits and differences incident between Pastour and flocke, Lay Elder and his neighbour, the passion upon which perverts, & blindes the eyes of the wisest men that are your Congregational or Classical Iudges you passe quietlie by it, as having nothing to say for it. These are the great injuries and hurts which make the Scotish Discipline, Scandalous to all the Reformed world being prov'd destructive to the just praerogative of Kings, the power of Parliaments, the liber∣tie of subjects: enslaving all orders of men, where it takes place, to the arbitrarie jurisdiction of a corrupt Synod, and that common∣lie moderated by the usurped Papacie of a Knox a Buchanan, a Mel∣vin, an Henderson, such meeke lambes as no misbeleeving Iew can mis∣doubt,
them to be fore runners of his Messias who hath prae-inspired this good principle into their heads. To bring their Kings rather then goe themselves to the slaughter. And wheresoe'r they get power, to teare out the throat of the thearers, and make them dumbe, never more able to open their mouthes against the know'n Deitie of their Pres∣byterie. CHAPTER XIII. The Bishops exceptions against the Covenant made good, and this proved That no man is obliged to keep it who hath taken it. IF I had not found the Reviewer a pretie round and plumpe Gen∣tleman in blacke, I might have misse-thought the habit of his Reasons why the Re∣viewer is so much indi∣ned to the metaphor op a vomit Tous isch∣nous kai e∣vemeas ano pharmace∣vein… tous de dy∣semeas kai mcsoos eu∣sarcous ca 10. 4. Aph. 6. & 7. G. moching Compend. Insti Med disc. 5. bodie and conformation of his parts, facilitating with some pleasure the operation of his physike, to have enamourd him with the o∣therwise undecent, metaphore of a vomit; But Hippocrates praescri∣bing to his constitution (as J take it) the other method for dejection of his humours, I recollect with my selfe a triple cause that might at this time create his distemper, & in his penning force out this floud of gall upon his paper 1. His late fruitlesse voyage by sea might still sticke in his stomake, having before been for many yeares accusto∣med to none but land waves of his raising, the raging tumults and madnesse of the people. 2. A violentagitation of his bodie, the sixe Scotish Iehu's in zeale to the cause coaching it much too furiouslie a∣bout the Countrey. 3. The abominable sight of his Majesties hand to diverse papers, denying the very subject of this chapter, the ta∣king, injoining, or tolerating of the Covenant. So a Doctour in the facultie nearest hand instructs me… vomituns vulgò concitare tradun∣tur… violenta & vehemens corporis agitatio, insueta per mare navigatio… imaginatio & intuitus rerum abominabilium. Beside the pleasing sent of an Irish designe then in hand might offend him, which is a fourth cause he addes and I end with, Odor rerum saetidarum &c. As to the substance of the chapter, wherein his Lordship hath taken the Palladium of Presbyterie, (without which the successe of his o∣ther attempts had been nothing) the Reviewers stratagems (for
strength of reason he brings none) are unlikelie to rescue it, The Bi∣shop Vn lawfull Covenants not to be keept-Ouc epior∣kein phobo menous ten∣te para on theoontimo∣vian, kai ten paratois anthropots aischynta. is very sensible how deep the conscience of an oath stickes in men whose hearts are not hardened against religious impressions. And how perjurie is abhorred among heathen, who have conscien∣tious feare of punishment from their God, and a politike one too of shame before men. To undeceive therefore such as fondlie fancie because their hands were lift up, that their covenant's with hea∣ven: And because their eyelids are open, that they walke not in darkenesse and the shadow of death. He brings them first the reliefe of se∣veral propositions, which when draw'n out, will appeare to be these. All oathes, vowcs & ovenants are not binding, it being customarie among men to make the same bonds serve for iniquitie as justice & tie up se∣cret conspiracies with the publike liguments of communitie & peace. 2. Those that are not obligatoric may be broken, viz where a greater jud∣gement solveth the fallacie of a lesse or a beter conscience seekes to reduce & rectifie a worse. With what other false knots men are foo∣lishlie Egar one omeitai, e hotan om∣nysin euor∣kesei. entangled he demonstrates by the slight where in the Covenant hath catch'd them. Their deliverance is this, if they will accept it from the hands of unquaestionable truth, That Covenant which is devised by strangers to the dishonour of a Nation, imposed by subjects wanting requisue power, and that as well upon their Soveraigne at aequals extorted by just scare of unjust sufferings, is not binding. But this is that Covenant. Ergo. The ma∣jour thus put in forme the Reviewer will hardlie grant, and yet da∣res Per hoc ju∣ramentum spirationes & conju∣rationes & pleraque in iqua & ae∣qua consir∣mari solent Cardan. Terein au∣tou ten chreian on tois anag∣caiois hama kai timioir. Hiorocl in Carm. Py∣thag. Prov. 30. 19. Cove∣nants ordi∣narilie nin∣ted in Scot∣land not in England. not denie, but sets his foot upon I know not what weaknesse and falsitie of the Minour, the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, as he calls them) being among the number of the first and onelie fra∣mers thereof. He must be wiser then Solomon that can know the way of a Serpent upon a rocke. Yet the Presbyterian Scotish subtilitie is not such, but that we may see whence, if not by what gyres and uncer∣taine sinuations, it came about, and he that meetes it at Westmin∣ster may welcome it from Edenburgh, if he likes it. Leagues and Covenants are no usuall abasement of English allegeance, such cop∣per coyne hath been no where so currant as since Knox was Mint∣master in Scotland, whose original inscription With the image of his rebellion is propagated in this counterfeit, as he that delights in such medalls may see if he compares them. This for the thing. For the persons I denie them to be Commissioners on either side, no King, nor Clergie legallie assembled deputing them to that purpose nor in∣deed any of the Laitie but Rebells. They that gave life to it, Lords, Commons, or what you will, or wheresoe'r assemblad, were in the very act Traitours against the King and so no part of a Parliament in the Kingdome Whither they are called by His Majesties writ to consult about the defense not to covenant the destruction of the Kingdome
and Church. The lawfulnesse of whose constitution and authoritie was no farther cknowledged then it was lawfullie used, and in that act absolu∣telie disclaimed, the King sending for them onelie to discourse and treat with himselfe, not to dispose and ordaine, or enact any thing without him. Therefore these men, thus acting upon the praecedent advice and praescription of strangers, foysted a Covenant devised by stran∣gers, how soever factiouslie denison'd in that Court. But how strange Nor can such after∣cotracts devised & imposed by a fewmeni a declared partie with∣out my con∣sent and without a∣ny like po∣wer or prae∣cedent from Gods or mans lawes &c. Eix. Ba. Ch. 14. proque bus arduis & urgen nego slatum & defensio∣nem Regni stri Angl. & Eccles. the advice was will appeare beter by true storie then probable divi∣nation, which being sent me in a leter from one well acquainted with these affaires of his owne countrey. I will faythfullie commu∣nicate as it came unto my hands. When the Commissioners came downe from the Parliament with their letter subscrived be some Mini∣sters shewing that their blood was shed lyke water upon the ground for defense of the protestant relligione and the letter being red in the Assembly had no uther an∣swer bot this. Gentlemen wee are sorie for your case, bot there is one thing in your letter, Yee say yee sight for defense of the re∣formed relligione, yee must not thinke us blind that wee see not your fighting to be for civill disputes of the law, wherewhith wee are not acquame. Goe home and reconcile with the King, hee is a gracious Prince, bee will receive you in his favour; You can not say it is for the reformed relligione, since yee have not begun to reforme your Church, yee had thryven better, if ye had done as wee did, begun at the Church, and thereafter striven to have gotten the civill sanc∣tion to what yee had done in the Church, wee can not medle bet wixt his Majestie and you.] Few dayes after, Sir W. Ermin, Anglie concernen∣tibus … Cum Praela∣tis Magua∣tib. &c. colloquium habere & tractatum. The extract of a letter∣shewing by whom the Covenant was devi∣sed. Master Hamden with the rest were invited by some of their friends to make a new addresse to the Assembly, their friends in the Assembly (after a second desire of a more gracious answere) propounded this. [Will yee joine in covenant with us to reforme doctrine and discipline conforme to this of Scotland and yee shall have a better answere,] Sir W. Ermin & the rest answered (that they had not that in their in∣structions,
bot thanked the Assembly & sayd they would represent it to the Parliament of England) the friends in the Assembly told them [there would be much time loosed ere they could go to the Parliament for their resolutione and thereafter to returne to Scotland and draw up a solemne league and covenant the danger was great and they were not able with all their forces to stand two moneths before the Kings armie bot we shall draw it up here and send up with you some noblemen gentlemen & Ministers that shall see it subscribed,] which was done. To proceed your Rebell-Parliaments desires, beside what may be The Rebells desires were impositions. gatherd from your papers, were not, as I have heard, very hum∣blie praesented by the persons many times that brought them, And when your smoothest language is glossed upon (as best it may be by your rude militarie Interpreters at more distance your negative will not hinder them of being impositions rather then supplications. Re∣ligion and liberties in all the three Kingdomes were very sufficientlie secur'd by the lawes. Scotish Presbyterie is no religion but rebellion in the princi∣ples, and the libertic taken by it is license befitting no subjects, and therefore not to be desired of a King. For which if such a covenant or oath is but one malne peice of securitie (as you confesse) I leave to be jud∣ged if any judgement can comprehend the other maine peices of vassala∣ge, for your safetie, you yet farther expected from the crowne. An authoritie to crave many leaves a libertie to refuse, and be of no suffi∣cience Nullum privile∣gium Par∣lamenti concedi po∣test propr∣ditione fe∣lonia aut ruptura pa∣cis. 17. Ed. 4. Rot. Parum. 39. to impose upon the subject so long as during the contenuance of the Parliament. Nor can you shew that uncontroverted law which gives vali∣ditie to an ordinance controverted by the King, who assumes no power of politike imposible concessions, such as treason, felonie & breach of peace are by name with us, & covenanting is such when against the Kings consent. The last part of the demonstration is too true, and so farre dishonourable as it blazons the cowardize of men well principled in their religion to God and loyaltie to their King, who for the benefit of a litle fresh aire out of prison, and a titular interest in an estate, the revenues whereof must be excis'd, contributed, fift parted, twentieth parted and particulated into nothing at the pleasure of the blew-apron'd The Cove∣nant disho∣nourable to the English. men in the Citie, and Committee plowmen in the Countrey, would desperatelie cast their soules into the guilt and curse of a covenant which they utterlie detested, and their persons into the slaverie of proud, sinfull unreasonable men, whom before it may be they fed
with their charitie and commanded. The nullitie of this oath upon The nullitie of it. the difference of heart and mouth, is demonstrable, The very taking it being so farre from obliging to be kept, as it subjects them to the judge∣ment of God, because not done in truth nor in righteousnesse. Isai 48. Nec vero ultra quam consesum est juramentum operatur secundum ipsum, quae tunc actul deficit in substantia, desiciente consensu, quem defectum juramentum minime supplet Say the lawyers. And he that sweares to commit sa∣criledge Ioan. Guti∣errez De Iuram: on∣firm. part. 2. cap. 2. ex Alciat. The Revie∣wers. A∣bominable falshood. and murder is as much bound by his oath, which I would faine heare Master Baylie dictate from his chaire against them when they tell him, Iuramentum non est vinculum iniquitatis. The especial aggrava∣tion which he drawes from the Bishops ground is as especial a lie, and as evident a falshood, as ever came out of the mouth of man, & an ir∣recoverable shame to the whole Presbyterie. That a Minister, Pro∣fessour, their great champion & commissioner should utter it, when not onelie the penaltie of two pence hath been threatned, but of sequestration and imprisonment hath been executed upon thousands, and beside these, (because some particular must be instanc'd) upon neare 100. fellowes of Colledges in one weeke banishment out of the Vniversitie of Cambridge, this I can best justifie being one of the number. Which was a leading case to Oxford, when in their power, and the Iudic. Oxon De sol. lig. seci. 2. feare of unjust suffering they threatned, her first argument against their covenant. Therefore let us leave the dishonour we were speaking of where we found it, upon the head of our Nation in part, who dege∣nerated so farre as to take a covenant from the hand of strange re∣bells no otherwise their brethren then in the in quitie of maintaining hypocrisie and license, both which they see with their selves now in thraldome to Atheisme and a mercenarie sword, And beare about them the marke of Gods vengeance in the sight of us who survive to magnifie him in his iustice, saying, Iustus Dominus in omnibus vijs suis & Ps. 145. 1. 7. sanctus in omnibus operibus suis. The Bishops second demonstration need be no beter then the first whereby Covenan∣ters take the Disci∣pline for Christs in∣stitution. you are convicted, as bad as it is, you dare not venture upon halfe of it, but like a cunning old rat that hath before been catch'd by the tale in a trap, will be nibling at the baite, but not enter too farre with his teeth for feare his head goe for't next. This makes you so tender of dealing with the majour, which if not well caution'd why doc not you denie it or attacke it on that side which you guesse weak∣lie guarded? You pervert the minour, though litle to your ad∣vantage. The Bishop sayth not that in the Covenant you sweare the latelie de∣vised discipline to be Christs institution, but that you gull men with it, as if it were so imposing upon them the strictest oath to engage their e∣states and lives in the praeseruation and propagation of it, which is
as much as can be required for Christs institution or Euangel, a title as strange as you make it, often given your Discipline which allreadie I have touchd at. Yet because here you so confidentlie put us upon the words of the Covenant, somewhat not much unlike what the Bishop imputes I finde in the praeface… having before our eyes the glorie of God, and the advancement of the Kingdome of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ… whereby I charge your meaning to be the Presbyteriall Government of your Kirke, if not, I require you plainlie to denie it, and to send me this proposition subscribed by your hand. The plat forme of Disci∣pline to which we sweare in the Covenant, is not Christs institution. Especiallie since your General Assemblie 1642. hath sayd. That the Reformed Kir∣kes do hold without doubting their Kirke officiers and Kirke Government by As∣sembles higher and lower &c to be jure divino and perpetual. Your brother-Presbyters Ans. to the Declar. by the Parl. angl. Aug. 25. Let. to the Gen. As∣semb. S. Iul. 22. it. 4. Vindic. Ep. Philadelph. Protest of the Noble∣men, Ba∣rons &c. 1638. in England. That Presbyterian Government hath just and evident foundation both in the word of God & religious reason. And the praeface to the English Directorie telling you, That their care hath been to hold forth such things as are of divine institution in every ordinance. Were it not to tire out my Reader, I could shew this to be your language ever since your Dis∣cipline was framed, & thought so necessarie a truth that your denial must make Christ not so wise as Solon or Lycurgus, if he left it as a thing mutable by men, or now after so many ages of his Church to be put to the vote in their Parliaments and Synods. So sayth a friend of yours in these words. Equidem non novi, neque credam Christum, qui Dei sapientia suit, remp. suam que omnium est perfectissima, arbitrio stultorum ho∣minura religuisse agitandam… quod ne Solon quidem aut Lycurgus aljusve quis pium Legislator pateretur. For that and the rest of your religion your Confession of faith sayth. That you are throughlie resolved by the ord & spi∣rit of God, that onelie is the true Christian sayth & Religion pleasing God &c… Gods aeternal truth & ground of your salvation… Gods undoubted truth and Accor∣ding to the word of God, a more dubi∣ous & fri∣volous li∣mitationing the Cove∣nant then heretofore in the oath for Episc∣pacie. veritie grounded onelie upon his written word. Nay afterwards you protest and promise with your hearts under the same oath &c that you will defend the Kings per∣son and authoritie in the deferse of Christs Euangel and liberties of your Countrey, which is (or if it be no speake) the same with Religion and liberties in your league. Besides all which otherwhere you blasphemouslie com∣pare both your confessions with the old Testament and the New. That which followes wherein you moderate the first article of your Covenant, imposing an endeavour to reforme onelie according to the word of God, with out introducing Scotes Presbyterie or any other of the best reformed, unlesse it be found according to that paterne, though it served to palliate all blemihes and deformities that were in it; To invite possiblie, some well meaning people into your fraternitie, who like harmelesse bees relishing that sweetnesse, litle thought
what poyson they left behinde for other venemous insectiles to suc∣ke out; To furnish others withan excuse (a petiful one) for using so bad meanes to so good an end and when it undeniablie proves the contrarie (the same it may be they intended) crie they were mistaken though now they can not helpe it; Yet it may be shwed to be a du∣bious 1548. Mi∣nistri Regia authoritate compulsi aut subscri∣bere Epali tyrannidi, aut in car∣ceres aut e∣xlia abire. Multarum ministrorum tuncse pro∣didit imbe∣cillitas in∣stauratae Ecclae ty∣rannidi ho∣monymus subscriben∣tiam adjec∣ta limita∣tione an∣bigua vel potius futii nempe se∣cundum verbum Dei &c. Ep. Phil. Vind. o. Gutier∣vez De Iu∣am. Con∣mpar.. 1. p. 71. Su. 5. & frivolous limitation, the same commendation your friends gave it when translated into an oath tenderd in behalfe of Episcopa∣cie by the King, First infirming that member, and so far disinabling it from bearing part in the mater of an oath, as subjection is required unto the reforming power in a Church. Secondlie, Quitting all that swore it of their engagement every moment, if they see clearlie, or judge erroneouslie, your reforming Principals to digresse from that path. Thirdlie, either supposing your reformed religion in Scot∣land to be allreadie conform'd to that paterne, or else enjoining to sweare contradictions. Lastlie, If leaving every man to judge what is according to the word, and to endeavour according to that judge∣ment, imposing an oath productive of confusion there being as many mindes as men, scarce two united in one touching Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and government. The first might be illustrated & ar∣gued from the fallibilitie and uncertaintie in the Reforming power, a maim'd Parliament & an illegitimate Assemblie then sing, whom I could not be assured to have the spirit of God so illuminating their mindes, as whereby jointlie to judge the same reformation according to Gods word. Secondlie as uncertaine should I bee, seting aside all par∣tialitie and passion, that they would declare what they so judg'd, a∣gainst many of whom, if not the most having a well grounded prae∣judice, whether just or no maters not if not know'n to me) I could not sweare de futuro a conformitie to their acts. In which cases wise∣men advise us to abstaine…Ten apochen tou omnynai prostattei peri toon endcchomenoon, kai aoriston tes ecbaseoos echontoon to peras. Hierocl. in Carm. Pythag. and Iurant presumitur certioratus & deliberatus accedere ad actum super quo jurat, sayth the Lawyer. The second is strengthned sffi∣cientlie by your words which oblige the Covenanter no farther then he findes your great worke proceeding according to Gods word. The suc∣cesse whereof if no beter then in your Discipline and the Directorie, will keep no man in his Covenant, Gods word praescribing many parts of neither. The Third is evident from the very clauses in the article, where first an oath must be taken to praeserve the reformed religion in Scotland, which if not according to Gods word, is contradicted in the next that enjoines reformation onelie according to the word. And if it be then that is it wherewith a uniformitie must be made, and yet you tell us there is no such word, nor any such mater in the Covenant, About the
last let every man speake his minde as freelie as I shall mine. That I See Surv. of the praet. holie Disc. hold no Presbyterian government, Scotish or other, according to Gods word That I have read of much dissension among your selves in for∣mer times, and heard of some in later. That all Papists; all ortho∣doxe persons in the Church of England are jointlie for Episcopacie in the order, as according to Gods word and separatelie for it in the jurisdiction and discipline, neither holding all parts of it exempli∣fied in the word, & so not applicable unto it, & both not the same extensive particulars in the ordinance and exercise of the Church. Besides such as you call Socinians, Sectaries, & separatists, whether Vid. Dis∣cus. Eccles. Disc. Ru∣pel. edit. 1584. individual or congregational. All which having distinct opinions of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government according to the word, if not concentred in the sense of the House or Assemblie but left to their several endeavours, are sworne among them to delineate a pre∣tie implicated diagramme of a Church. But for a farther answer to this article of your covenant. I remit you to the solide judgement of the Vniversitie of Oxford. As likewise to that of several learned men in the Vniversitie of Cambridge, who joined in one minde, & publîshed their refutation of the whole treacherous league A. 1644. Onelie I must adde what persons of knowledge & integritie say they will make good. That your Covenant came into England with some such cluse as this. We shall reforme our Church in doctrine and Discipline con∣forme to the Church of Scotland. Whereof Master Nye & his Independent friends fairhe cheated you, making that be rased out and this inser∣ted which we treat of. By which tricke they have pack'd Presbyterie away, and yet pleade with you in publike, That they still keepe the Covenant and goe on to reforme according to Gods word. The second ground of the Bishops demonstration is no evident errour, it being The Cove∣nant how the same with that of K. 1. 1580. an evident truth, That the principal Covenanters, Noblemen, Gen∣tlemen and Ministers in Scotland protested to Marq. Hamilton His Majesties Commissioner 1638. when it was objected that their Cove∣nant with their new explication was different from the sense of that 1580. because it portended the abolition of Episcopacie. That it was not their meaning quite to abolish it, but to limit it, holding out in the most material point an identitie between them. That they assured many who made K. Ch: , Larg: decl. 1639: pag: 177: the scruple, and would not have come into their covenant, unlesse they had so re∣solv'd them. That they might swearc the same confession, and yet not abjure Epis∣copal government, which the three Ministers in their first answer to the Divines of Aberdene positivelie affirmea. That thus they abus'd many, with an ap∣pearance of identitie in the mater and similitude in the end. And themselves fre∣quentlie confessed that this Covenant was nothing but that general one applied to the particular occasions at that time. It is as certaine
that the Covenant of the Rebells in all the three Kingdomes 1643. was held out at least to them in Scotland that toke it, to be the same with that they toke before, otherwise then as it must be againe ap∣plied to a conjunction with their brethren of the other two King∣domes. Nor was there any other new emergent cause, nor was that one for any new Covenant (and you are not to multiplie solemne oathes and Protest. ag. Kings Pro∣clam. 1638 Covenants, you sayd, without necessitic) Nor is there in this the sense of any one clause that is not in the other as it concern'd your owne Nation. And the enemies with their practices, against whom and which you fram'd it, you professe to be the same, though now in∣creased, in your praeface. All which have elements enough, beside an airie sancie, to make up your grosse errour or affected falshood in denying so demonstrable a truth. Yet that notwithstanding this im∣posture How it dif∣fers from it. there is a real difference in the triplie respect which the Bi∣shop speakes of was never hitherto denied (as I know) by any Epis∣copal writer which are many that occasionallie have mention'd it. So that his Lordship cuts not his owne vine but your fingars that will be medling with his worke, for which he may expect and will have due thankes from his friends that rightlie understand him. For how soever indeed that short confession was at first not onelie draw'n up by the Kings command, nor freelie subscribed with his hand, but obtru∣ded violentlie upon him being devised by a partie of seditious male∣contented Noblemen and Courtiers (made such by the Clergie that were worse) against Esme Earle of Lenox, who they hoped by this test would be discovered to be a Papist, Yet the King made a very good vertue of necessitie, and since he must impose it fist upon his familieand afterward upon his subjects, being supreme could and did it in his owne sense, though it may be, oppositie to theirs that made it, the ambiguitie of the words tolerating both. To which, in that sense, he praefixed his Royal authoritie, whereas your later Co∣venant in yours was absolutelie against his sonnes. That in his sense was for the lawes of the Realme, the praeservation of Episcopacie, This against them for its utter extirpation. That to maintaine the re∣ligion established, which he did to the uttermost of his power. This to its destruction which it is in effecting, though it spoiles in the ca∣sting that golden calfe you intended to set up. So that the words them∣selves which doe not more flatlie contradict the Bishop, then they are contradict by your workes, are not so expresse for the Kings authoritie, the law of the realme and religion established, and wherein they are, such an abstruse meaning have they, as he that takes your league is ouos a∣goon mysteria. the dull creature that ignorantlie caries all the mysteries of your iniquitie on his backe.
In the next paragraph is nothing but a branch or two of your for∣mer Epiphylli∣des taut csti kai stomyl∣mata cheli∣donoon momseia. wild discourse, & therein a nest of small birds chattering what we often heare to no purpose, or never to lesse then here having no significancie at all in answer to the Bishops Memento, which recogni∣zeth Q. Elizabeths indulgence, to whom your praedecessours scra∣ped and whined for militarie assistance & (to say no worse) undeser∣vedlie had it without imposing the Discipline os England. Whereas you to use the words of K. Ch. 1.) are not to be hired at the ordinarie rate of auxiliaris Ex. Bu. Ch. 14. [much lesfe borrowed or bestowed] nothing will induce you to ingage till hose that call you in have pawned their soules to you. The Discipline & Liturgic (which you quarell with some times because different from the En∣glish) was obtruded upon you by no other crast and force then a plaine legal injunction, Deliberated on from the time of K. Iames's investiture K. Ch. 1. Larg. dec. p. 15. &c. The En∣glish Disci∣pline long since setled by law in Scotland, and the Li∣turgie there used in the crowne of England, approved in a general Assemblie at Aber∣dene 1616. (the Liturgie I meane, the Discipline having been recei∣ved long before) read publikelie in the Kings chapell at Haly-rud∣house ever since the yeare 1617. not onelie without dislike but with frequent assemblies of the Councel, Nobilitie, Bishops and other Clergie, Iudges, Gentrie, Burgesses, women of all rankes. In seve∣ral other places in the time of K, Ch. 1. The alterations (which were not of such moment as to be met with opposition, were partlie made generallie approved by the Bishops and principal Clergie in Scot∣land, who in the exercise of it were injoined to proceed with all moderation, and dispense with such for the practice of some things conteined in the booke, as they should finde either not well perswa∣ded of them, or willing to be informed concerning them, or did hope that time and reason might gaine a beter beleefe of them. How The Pr. Sco∣tish never so in Eng∣land, but obtruded. Mot. Brit. otherwise your Discipline was obtruded upon the English, what free long and deliberate choyce they used (beside the sighes and groanes of many pious soules hurried into prisons or disspersed in a misera∣ble exile) your owne Scots Cushi shall beare witnesse. Who, out of no ill meaning to your cause, reveales the truth of your tyrannie from the beginning… That upon your second coming in it was, when some of our Nobles tooke occasion to supplicate for a Parlia∣ment, which the King scarce durst denie for the Scotch armie, nor the Vix aude∣bat rex eis de postulao abnucre propr Sco∣tos &c. p. 28. perpetuitie of it afterward for no other reason… That when it came to armes the Scotes could not sit still in conscience & honestie whereupon they sent a Commissioner from their Synod to the En∣glish Parliament 1642. to move them to cast out Bishops, Then o∣thers to the King at Oxford to signe all propositions, which because he would not doe, they resolve to assist their brethren against him, whom they call the common enemie. The formalitie of an invitation was
used to this purpose, but their inclination and resolution had pass'd before. And indeed your Assemblie 1642. confess'd an obligation Vocatio∣em lubenti animo am∣plectuntur ut pote adi∣dem prius proclives. pag. 4. lay upon them to encourage and assist so pious a worke, but not as you doe here onelie out of brotherlie concernment, but for securi∣tie of yourselves, because without it you could not hope for any long time to enjoy your owne puritie & peace, which had cost you so deare. The Bishops following grounds, which he makes good to be de monstrative, doe not therefore betray the weaknesse of because they Answ. to the let. sent by the Mi∣nisters of Engl; Aug. 5. Ps. 62. 9. adde strength to the praeceding. What wind is in them you follow too fast after, and feed as greedilie upon as Ephraim on the East, which tur∣nes to the same bad nourishment in you both, increasing lies and some∣what else which you may reade Hose 12. 1. And were the softest hand insensible of their substance, they would praeponderate your answers which are as deceitfull upon the weights as he that made them, and allso∣gether lighter then vanitie it selfe. For not a proposition is there in pro∣syllogisme or syllogisme that is seemes you can denie, though you scarce any where shew ingenuitie to grant. For the second, which you thinke so hard to prove let it be adventur'd thus. He that by covenant di∣sposeth The power of the Mi∣litia is the Kings. of himselfe and armes contrarie to the established lawes, which by the Kings right in him he is obliged to maintaine, disposeth of them against that rights. But every Covenanter disposeth &c. For the established lawes enjoine him to defend the Kings person without limitation or reference to religion, at least not to fight against it, which the Covenant by your practike interpretation doth oblige to. Where the power of the Militia resides His Maesties unanswerable Declaration for the Commission of array will best satisfie you. And himselfe tells you trulie it is no lesse his un∣doubted . Ch. 10. right then is the crowne. In the exercise of it though the Parlia∣ment be not excluded, yet their power is never legallie considera∣ble but when they are, as the bodie with the soul, in stain conjunct with the King. Defense of liberties hath no law to arme them against praero∣gative, nor is there a cause imaginable impowering them to take up armes against a partic countenanced by the Kings praesence which can be according to no law but what is call'd such by rebellious people that offer vio∣lence to Royal right. If any such there be, let us have but one imprae∣gnable instance and we'll shake hands. I beleeve you are not much in love with that old custome of the Frisians, long before they be∣came Presbyters, who chose their Earle carying him upon their bucklers, and crying alowd, Haecest potestas Frisiae. You can now a∣dayes H. Grot. lib. DeAn∣ciq. Reip. atav. beter indoctrinate them according to the custome of yourfac∣tion, when praevalent, which is to admit no new King but at the swords point and there to keepe him, crying after this maner, or
somewhat like it, in your proclamational libells, Haec est libertas Pres∣byteriales Scotiae. Yet your Commissioners when in the mood can prae∣sent Answ: to both Hou∣ses 1647. the hilt to his hand, and argue with both houses, as they did upon the new propositions, why the power of the militia should be in the crowne asking. How King otherwise can be able to resist their enemies and the enemies of the Kingdome, protect their subjects, keep friendship or corre∣spondence with their allies … asserting that the depriving them of this power rootes up the strongest foundations of honour and sasctie which the crowne affords, & will be interpreted in the eyes of the world to be a wresting of the scepter and sword out of their hands. So that the Bishops friends may take from yours aswell as from him the same demonstrable conclusion he layd downe, And this for all the Kings acknowledgement, which was never any of the Par∣liaments joint interest in his authoritie against his person, which is the true case though you shamefullie conceale it. Nor did His Maje∣stie so put the whole Militia in their hands as to part with his right when he bound his owne from the exercise, Nor was he sure he was not or might not seeme to be perjur'd for his courtesie (which all Kings will not hazard) though he layd the guilt or dishonour at their doores, whither God hath brought allreadie a portion of their just punish∣ment that constraind him, saying. I conceive those men are guiltic of the en∣forced . Ch. 10. persurie (if so it may seem) who compell me to take this new and strange way of discharging my trust by seeming to desert it, of protecting my subjects by exposing my selfe to danger or dishonour for their safetie and quiet. Therefore what thoughts he had of your parties medling with the Militia may be best jud∣g'd by his words. How great invasion in that kinde will state rebellion in a Parliament, when there's any (as there was none, at that time nor since) shall be told you when the Bishop gives you occasion to de∣mand it. Or if you can not stay so long, I must send you againe to the judicious Digges to satiate your too curious and greedie appetite of such fare as will not well be digested in many stomackes. To the nulling yourCovenant by His Majesties proclamation you say nothing because it separates him from the partie to which you attribute all malig∣nance, and you know you can not securelie medle with him but in a croud. In the Bishops second demonstration we must be beholding to you for giving what you can not keep with any credit which more awes you then conscience. That where the mater is evidentlic unlawfull the oath is not binding. The application of which up to your covenant will be justified when brought to the touch by Gods lawe or the Kingdome's. But you first summon it before reason, which helpes you with no rule. To lay aside what might be otherwise rectified, were there cause for't. Nor any evidence that the burden of Bishops and ceremonies was so
heavie as to presse you into the necessitie of a Covenant. This his Bishops and ceremonies no burden. Lordship need not offer to dispute, since the King ever offerd a regulation of that order and those rites by the primitive paterne wherein it o∣therwise differed then in a necessarie, innocent compliance with the politike constitution of his Kingdome. And the Church had ren∣der'd See Treat. of Cerem. besore Com. prayer booke Hookers El. Polit. Dr. Tayl of Episc. all rational satisfaction aswell for the ceremonies reteined as those abolish'd. And both by particular men most eminent in learning and judgement had been unanswerablie maintained in every graine or scruple that could be quaestion'd or complaind of. Yet the praesent go∣vernment, how light soever, is burdensome especiallie to men that looke for advantages by the change, And the worst of men can seeme as serious in complaint as if their vertues had been the onelie mar∣tyrs to crueltie, and the very common hackneyes for oppression. Bishop Andr. let. to Mlin. &c. Quid reliqui habemus praeter miseram animam came out which a sad sigh from Catiline before his bankrupt Comrades, who had left no such sub∣ject for rebellion to thetoricate on, if their lives had been as good pawnes in the midst of their prodigalitie as their lands. This your To paro∣nai bari tois hpe∣coois. Thc. Salusi. Bell Catil. Parliament can not re∣forme with∣out the King. method of reformation, whereof the Bishop complaines for which you plead custome, failes not onelie in the maner but of the power, the most material requisite to effect it. And the high path way is not so or∣dinarie as you can name the Parliament that ever trod in it before, We in England having no such custome, nor indeed any where the true Churches of God as to alter religion and government without the King. To your quaestion which ever shelters fraud in universals, I parti∣cularlie answer and to our purpose 1. That the Houses of Parliament are not to begin with an ordinance for a covenant or oath,. to change the lawes of the Realme to abolish the Discipline of the Church and the Liturgie lawfullie establi∣shed, by the sword (which are the Bishops words) before the Kings consent be sought to that beginning, much lesse when his dissent is foreknow'n of that and all proceedings in that kinde 2. An ordinance of the Lords and Commons (without and against the King) is no good narrant to change such lawes during the fitting os the Parliament. 3. No law nor lawfull custome of England debarres the King by dissenting to stop that change. Untill which three assertions be refuted in law, it will be needlesse to debate the qua∣lifications and exceptions, which can be none of moment in this case a∣gainst the Kings consent requisite to turne an ordinance into a law. But you take His Majesties concessions to have praevented all can be sayd in the prae∣sent case. Behold you that kindled the sire in his breast here compasse yourselves Isai. 50 11 The conces∣sons of Ch. . not so arge  praetended. with the sparkes of his consent which charitie would have suffered to exspire with the breath that brought them forth, or buried in his a∣shes which they made▪ Yet can not you walke by the light of this fire unto the full accomplishment of your ends, His successour being not yet
conveighd into any such place as Holmebye or Carisbrooke Castle K. Ch. 2. not obliged to confirm them. where you would ave him, some such fatal haereditarie confinement being the fairest apologie (if any) when he should subscribe so many of your uncnscionable desires, and write after his Father in the ex∣tremitie of misfortune, who as litle intended what himselfe accoun∣ted his failings for his copie, as he desired his undeserved miseries should be a patrimonie transmitted to him by your hands. As to the obtaining of what is lacking, your way is not so faire, in which visiblie lies the same Scripture, Antiquitie, law, reason, conscience and honour, which heretofore hindred your journey to the end of your hopes, the ob∣taining His Majesties plenarie consent. Who did not agree to, if you meane approve of the rooting out Episcopacie in Scotland. That he gave so much way to such wild boares as were in your Presbyterie to doe it, he afterward repented, and you rewarded him not so well, as that his Royal sonne should be encouraged to purchase sorow at so deare a rate. 2. He was not willing allthough he yeilded to have them put out . Ch. 17. of the House of Percs in England and Ireland, out of a generous scorne of your uncharitable susspicion that he would have them there onelie be∣cause he was to make use of their votes in State affaires. 3 He divested them of civile power, hoping to perswade such as your Lay Presbyters, by the objections mae against them, out of the Ecclesiasticall which they more irrationallie usurped. 4. He joined Presbyters with them for ordina∣tion, Ibid. because he found it before seldome administred without them. But he never made them coordinate in, nor aequiparticipant of that power. He joined them sor spiritual jurisdiction; as being a fit meanes to avoyd… partialities incident to one man. And tyrannie which becomes no Christians, leaft of all Churchmen. And thirdlie to take away from them the burden and Odium of afsaires, which was a courteous diminution in such times. How sa∣crilegiouslie you roh the Temple of Memorie of the pillar he set up in the period of your Treatie, and erect in the place an impious ca∣lumnie of his abolishng Episcopacie totallie, name and thing will be seen by part of his inscription or ultimate answer to the Rebell Commissio∣ners paper about the Church. The words are these… His Majestie Nov. 18. 1648. at Newport. K. Ch. 1. Immova∣ble from Primitive Episcopa. doth againe clearlie professle, That he can not with a good conscience consent to the total abolition of the function, and power of Bishops, nor to the intire and abflute alienation of their lands, as is desired, because he is yet perswaded in his judge∣ment that the former is os Apostolical institution, and that to take away the later is sacriledge… And if his two Houses shall not thinke fit to recede srom the strict∣nesse of their aemanas in these particular, His Majestie can with more comfort cast himselfe upon his Saviours goodnesse to support him and desend him from all afflic∣tions, how great soever, that may besall him, then sor any politike consideration, which may seems to be a meanes to restore him, deprive himselfe of the inward tran∣quillitie
of a quiet minde. And some of his last words were. I am firme to pri∣mitive Episcopacie, not to have it extirpated, (if I can hinder it) He sayd in∣deed . Ch. 17. Answ. Nov. 18. 1648 Newport. Nov. 20. that by his former answer he had totallie suspended Episcopal government for three yeares, & after the sayd time limited the same in the power of ordination and jurisdiction. Which the Commissioners he dealt with so litle thought Tantamont to a perpetual abolition, that they sayd it met not with their feares, nor could praevent the inconveniences which must necessarilie follow upon the returne of Bishops, and the power which he reser∣ved to them after that time. For that a Bishop so qualified as qualificd as is Majestie expressed should rise againe then they declared whollie in his choyce unavoy dable by Par∣liament, if they agreed not. But behold a pretie peice of aequivocation (call'd Anti-christian Iesuitisme by these Rabbi Presbyters of old) to draw their dull Commissioners out of the mire and as good as inke for ivorie to wash them cleane. His Majestie suspended it till he and Vna opera ebur atra∣mento can∣defacere po∣stules. Pl. Mostel. The Revie∣wers sophi∣strie. his Parliament should agree. All and every one in both Houses had abjured Epis∣copacie by solemne oath and Covenant and so in no hazard ever to agree with him. Ergo He must either agree with them, that is like wise abjure, which is abolition, or coutinue perpetuallte his suspension which is Tantamont unto it. This is very well ordered, especiallie if you call to minde somewhat else that was condition'd for viz. That twentie Divines of His Majesties, nomina∣tion being added unto the Assemblie were to have a free consultation & debate, whence it might be determin'd by His Majestie and his two Houses how Church government &c should be setled after the sayd time or sooner if differences might be agreed. A very free debate when all demonstrative reasons should be forespoken to be silenced by an oath. And a very conscionable treatie, That a faction in both Houses should be (without the resti∣tution of the rest that were beter temper'd) the men that should con∣tinue siting not onelie 3. yeares but 300. if they could live so long, because sworne not to yeild a syllable of their owne tearmes. Yet because you thinke your selfe so witie in your sophistrie letme aske you. What assurance these all and every one in both Houses had to be immortal, If they were not, what you have that the new elected would be Covenanters and if they were not, by what law they could have been excluded the Houses whither they should be sent as Re∣praesentatives of their Electours. If admitted and so reasonable as to hearken to a possible result of the Divines debate in condemnation of Presbyterie, and vote according to it, what then were likelie to become of your perpetual abolition, or the Tantamont unto it. Such measure may you have if ever it come to treatie between you and your sectarian brethren now siting in one House, who having a much abjured Presbyterie that praetends for Royaltie by the enga∣gement that hath renounc'd it, as you Episcopacie by the Covenant,
may they condition for their owne confused Jndependencie three yeares and as much longer as till you and they agree, & may they tell you that can never be because they are engag'd and in no hazard to reerect the roten stooles of English Scotizing repentance, & the corrupt clas∣ses of your Presbyters, which the same sword hath ten times more justlie cut downe then it set them up. But I see your full and formal con∣sent findes no such good footing in your fallacie, and therefore falls at length to a possibilitie of defect, which you praesume with much fa∣cilitie to have supplied His Majestie that now is hath much to thanke you K. Ch. 2▪ much be∣holding to the Revie∣wer. for, that at the first you will make him as glorious a King as you made not his Royal father but after so many yeares experience of his rei∣gne. That being at libertie not onelie in his person from your pri∣sons, but in his reputation from the clogges of those calumnies you cast upon the guiltnesse innocencie of his Praedecessour you will ad∣vance him beyond all those sufferances that were Solemne praepara∣tions to his murder, and in primo imperij momento, as in ultimo you did before, hold him by the haire, onelie not as yet permit the Indepen∣dent hand to cut his throat, untill forsooth he hath taken breath to sup∣plie that wherein his too scrupulous too pusillanimous father fain∣ted, And then crowne him with ribbons and flowers for the fater sa∣crifice of the two by the giving up his honour and salvation beyond a life, the onelie leane oblation of Charles the first. But may His Majestie say you, easilie supplie what his father travaild for, He can no so easilie, will not so readilie grant what his Father denied. without satisfaction to the uttermost limits of reason and conscience, be∣yond the farthest excusable adventures of any Praedecessours in his three Kingdomes or out of them, hazarding, allmost to despaire, his memorie with pious posteritie, especiallie at that distance as shall not repraesent distinctlie every angle of the necessitie he was driven to, and his soul to no other assurance of pardon then what the in∣tegritie of his repentance (not so infalliblie haereditarie as his mise∣ries) and his glorious martyrdom afterwards helpt him to? Would he thinke you so readilie but for a whisper of pernicious counsel in his eares, passe by unregarded his fathers charge to persevere in the orthodoxe religion of England, and hearken to the Devill of Rebellion whom he kno∣wes . Ch. 27. well enough though turnd into a Angel of Reformation? Can he so easilie, after three or fower weekes conference at the Haghe with two ignorant Presbyters, and but twice as many leaden headed Lai∣kes, have his reason convinc'd, & his consience satisfied, which is Ro∣yal Father could not in so many yeares conversation with the ablest Divins, & devout consultations had with the Living God himselfe by his prayers, and his dead, Yet livelie oracles of the Holie Word in his watches? Or would he so readilie, without it, give up his Fa∣thers
invincible reserve to the irrcparable injurie of the Church, his people, & his heire or successour in his Kingdomes? Was he requir'd and intreated by Ibid. Ib ib. Charles the first as his Father and his King (in case he should never see his face againe) not to suffer his heart to receive the least checke against or disaffection from, the true Religion established in the Church of England. And can he so ea∣silie, even while that pretious bloud hath dyed his garments in pur∣ple, and being the Defender's of the fayth speakes the same langua∣ge and calls every morning he puts them on for the same vengeance as Ibid. once did the firstborne, of the faythfull cast such requests and requisites behind him, quit the true Christian guard he is charg'd with, and desert all his constant subjects that must persevere in their religious profession according to the puritie of our canon? Will he, rather then want, weare a crowne which is not wortb taking up or enjoining upon such dis∣honourable Ibid. Ch. 17. unconscionable termes? And will he so readilie beare the infa∣mous brand to all posteritie of being the first Christian King in his Kingdome who consented to the oppression of Gods Church and the Fathers of it, exposing their persons to penvrie, and their sacred functions, to vulgar contempt? Will he Ch. 14. so easilie because his treasure exhausted, his revene deteind, be tempted to use such prosane reparations, if not acting, consenting to perjurious and sa∣criligious rapines? Or will he so readilie instead of huckes give holy things Ibid. unto sivine, and the Church's bread, not onelie the crumbes of it, unto dogs? This his Royal Father durst not for feare a coale from Gods alter should set such a sire on his throne and his consience as could hardlie be quenched; Nor, in all likelihood, will this ever obsequious sonne (whom you call I hope in expectation of no such concessions, the most sweet and ingenious of Princes) unlesse such furies as you fright his conscience away, while his tongue doubleth in an uncertaine consent, having from your pens & practices nothing but insuperable horrour and inevitable destruc∣tion in his sight. Where in if ever you unhapilie praevaile, may the same Royal tongue be seasonablie touch'd with a coale of a beter temper before the unquenchable fire of despaire catch hold of his soul, or that of vengeance of his throne. May it call for the fountaine of living waters to r. 19. 1. wash away the bloud of his slame subjects whose soules lie under the altar crying aloud for judgement, and quaestioning its delay. May that ountaine deriue it selve into the head and heart of this otherwise in∣nocent King, and day and night flow out at his eyes in torrents of teares for himselfe (in no soloecisine) the Virgin Father of his people. Rev. . 14. 17. And may at last his robes be wash'd white in the bloud of the Lambe, and God wipe away all teares from his eyes. Having payd, in dutie, this conditional devotion, which I wish as frivolous and needlesse, as your praesumption is malicious & un∣likelie. I proceed to vindicate the Bishops discourse, which J can
not see how in sense may be sayd to fright the Kings conscience by asser∣ting his right and undeniable praerogative the sinewes whereof you would shrinke up into nothing. The Legislative power is not here stated The King supreme Legislatour or determined by his Lordship onelie the King call'd supreme Legisla∣tour, which he is, What comment tries have been made of it, to the prae∣judice of the right and custome of Parliaments, shall be spoken to when you tell us which of his brethren, and what in their writings it is you meane. No right nor custome can be adjusted to them in your case, which is vowing to God, and sweating one unto another to change the lawes of the Realme &c. by the sword, without and against the King, diffe∣rent Answ. to both Hou∣ses 1647. from the sense of your Commissioners, who would have the Legislative power, aswell as the Militia to be the Kings. For that power that can not constitute can abrogate no lawes, But they will tell you in constituting the King can not be excluded, And we inferre that no more he can be in repealing. If your minde serve you to engage farther in this dispute you were best answer the learned Grotius 8. chap. De Imper. Sum. Pot. to which I promise you my replie. The Bi∣shops pro not injuri∣ous to Kings Lords nor Commons. In the next place, as if you were moderating a matachin dance, from seting the King and Parliament atoddes, you turne both their fa∣ces and powers aganst the Praelates, whom I doe not finde His Lord∣ship puting in competition with the King about the right of making lawes, but aggravating the injurie done them by your partie in the Parliament, and appealing to their conjcience with what justice they could covenant against the rights of a third order of the Kingdome without ei∣ther their satisfaction or consent. If the whole Repraesentative of the King∣dome have thus priviledg'd the Bishops, one lame part can not de∣prive them of it. Their prioritie and superioritie hath been so an∣cient . Ch. 9. that no Lords no Commons would scruple at it, but such as likewise at the original supremacie of their King; And therefore you may know the bill against their priviledges was five times rejected in the upper House the beter Court of honour of the two, and when the sixt time it was caried by a few voyces, it was when the most ho∣nourable persons were forced to be absent. Their share in the Legislative power hath been so great, that since any was allotted them your fore∣fathers never heard of a law made in Parliament without them. The King may passe what he pleaseth, and what he doth so is a an. The two Temporal States with his bae name without his power, can make none, nor yet having it as they account it derived from his Regalitie, not his person. Ius enim serendarum legum, sive generalium, sive spciaiium, sam∣ma H. Grot. poteslas communicare alteri potest, a se abdicare non potest. What one orth' other passe to the injurie of persons fundamentallie concern'd, be it law, can not be justified in conscience, which is all J take to be urged by the Bishop. But what would you have sayd if there had been such a
law in behalfe of Episcopacie in England as there hath been in spaine. That no King could reigne (which is more then a Parliament sit and vote) without the suffrage of the Bishops? Which made Ervigius upon the resignation of Bamba, that turn'd Monke call a Councel of Ano. 681. them at Toledo, to have a confirmation of his crowne. And the time hath been in England when a difference fell between Edward and Ethelred about succession to K. Edgar & a devolution of it unto Lnd. Aur. Peras. the arbitrement of the Bishops. The humble protestation of the twelve Bishops rudelie menaced and affronted did not pronounce the lawes & acts after their recesse null and of none effect in derogation to the praerogative of the King either solitarie or in conjunction with what persons soever he pleas'd to make his Legislative Councel; but in saving to themselves their rights and interests of siting and voting in the House of Peeres, the violation of which they conceived to invali∣date a Parliament at least without the Kings passing a rescissorie Act and an Act of new constitution. Because in law and practice it is usual to any who conceive themselves praejudg'd (even in those things where Acts of Par∣liament passe against them) to protest, Which, if you remember, were the See True Repraesent of the Pro∣ceed of the Kingd. of Scoth. since the late Pa∣is. &c. pag. 31. 2. Book Disipl. 7. Ch. words, and part of a long plea to another purpose (though upon the same advantage of the Bishops right in Scotland) used by those your Countreymen that alike intended their ruine, but could not colourablie offer at it without the Act anext the constitution of the Parlia∣ment. Whether the Bishops being a third order of the Kingdome, and by that craving their share in the Legislative power, be more humble then the Presbyters who take themselves to be absolute without King and two states in making all Ecclestastike lawes, and against King & two states in abrogating all civile statutes & Ordinances concerning Ecclestastical maters that are sound noysome and unprofitable, and agree not with the time … And cen∣suring, punishing all persons, King and Parliament not excepted, I file up with the other references to your aequitable comparers, let them be the Lords and Commons you here pleade for. You may chuse whether you will grant what the Bishop takes as demonstrable. That his brethren had harder measure from the thing call'd King and Parliament, then the Abbots and Friars from Henry 8. When The Revie∣wers beife is no confesn of the Bihops. he devested them of their estates, Your consecutorie Beleese hath no article made up out of any of the Bishops words, Who though he could not keepe intruder, out of his palace and possessions, meanes to have no such troublesome inmates in his minde. And since you have sequestred him from his gardens, keepes out of your reach a Tarasse to exspatiate in his thoughts. He commends your eyes that can see so distinctlie such Platonical Idea's as never had existence, yet when you draw too neare commands you to your distance with the same answer that Bacchus did Hercules in the Comoedie for all his
club. Meton mon oikei noun, echeis gar oikeian. The Bishops last reasoning is as sound as those before, and in all is Aristoph. Ran. there a connexion of those parts which any demonstrative integral Scotish Presbytrie is that me∣ant in the Covenant though dis∣sembled. can require, To your first impeachment by quaestion I answer. That article of the Covenant beares the seting up of the Scotish Presbyterian government in England which is for a uniformitie in both Kingdomes, if taken with the next that extirpates praelacie viz. Church government by Bishops. For when Praelacie is downe, I pray what remaines, according to your principles, but Presbyterie to set up? As for Scotish Presbyterie, you have often told us 'tis the same with that of all Reformed Churches. And if alltogether be not according to the Word of God, after so many yeares Synods, Conferences, and Letters, what blinde Covenanters you are to sweare a league of life & death upon the like or more uncer∣tanitie of future discoverie by a few unskilfull persons whose petie phantastike lights put together must be made a new imaginarie mil∣kie way surpassing in a fermed singularitie of splendour any among the greater & truer luminaries in the firmament of the Church. But I have allreadie shewed how in vaine you aequivocate about that clause, which hath cost your friend Rutherford and others so much paines. What the oath of supremacie imports is evident by the words in it. (The Which de∣tracts from the Kings supremaie. varietie of sences to catch advantages like side windes in paper sailes which are subject to rend in pieces being the poor policie of Pres∣byters that dare not stand to the adventure of plaine dealing) supre∣me Governer of this Realme &c. Aswell in all spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes as temporal. Which the Bishops you see conceald not, though you grate your selfe with the observation onelie of the other title supreme head, and accept his explication of it, which yeilding you in your contracted sense (that might securetie afford him more capital priviledges without encroachment upon Christ or his Holie Curch) supreme Governer takes in what your Presbyterie will never grant him, all power imperative, Legislative, judicial, coactive, all but functional, imediate and proper to the ordination or office of the Minister, which, for ought J know, if he finde an internal call  a supposition drawing neare a possibilitie then likelihood and assurance to have a double portion of Gods gracious power and assistance in both ad∣ministrations, he not onelie may, but must exercise as did Moses and Melchisedech, saving that without a divine institution in this spiritual function his supremacie exempts him not from submitting his head under the hands of holie Church and taking our Saviours commission with the benediction from her month. That Scotish Pres∣byterie is a Papacie the Bishop requires not to be granted upon his word, but to be taken before Publike notaries upon your owne the politi∣cal
part whereof consists in the civile primacie which (at least by reduction) you very considentlie assume. The Bishops contradiction, which is searce so much as verbal, will be easilie reconciled by the words of the oath which he reflects on, and his argument good a∣gainst you, untill without reserves, limitations, or distinctions, you simplie acknowledge the King supreme over all persons in all causes, which would be a contradiction to this clause in your booke of Disci∣pline. The poer Ecclesiastical stoweth immediatelie from God and the Mediatour 2. B Dise. 1. Ch. Iesus Christ and is spiritual, not having a temporal head in the earth, but onelie Christ, the onelie spiritual King and Governer of his Kirke. Lasthe, No Presbterian is there in Scotland but counts it sacriledge to give the King what belongeth unto the Church. And whatsoeu'rit is Statutum Parliamen∣ sse solum quida, & cvilem appr sse tantum Christiani Prinpis ofsicium subjectio∣nem suam Christ & Ecclesiae debitam te∣sianus Phil. Eplae ind. they quit in Ecclesiastike causes is not unto the King, but to King, and Parliament, and the power in both when it informes an Act or statute call'd but accessorie by the Aderdene Assemblers, and (that we may no longer doubt whom they account supreme) dutie and subjection from the Prime) which though spoken by them but of their meeting, must be meant of all causes consultable in their Synods, and is as sensibie a truth as words without ambiguitie can render it. Our of all which hath been sayd it must necessarilie follow, that your Covenant hath all the good qualities computed which needs no arithmetical proofe by weight or measure, the praemises over being coextended, with, and counterpoiz'd by, the conclusion. What you rathlie, if not praesumtuouslie, pronounce of the Bishops judgement doth but vilisie your owne. Qui citò deliberant sacile pronuniant. Had you brought a judgement to the contrarie of any learned Casuist to whom his Lordship appeales, or any Divine of note in Europe, which he calls for, your answer had been somewhat more serious and solide, But here your oracles of learning are all silent. We sinde it not avowed by your especial brethren of Holland and France, by no approbatorie suftrages of Leyden and trecht…Omnium flagitiosorum aque facinorosorum circum se tanquant stipatorum catev habet. A guard is hath, but a blake one, such as Ca∣tilines Foraigae Presbyte∣rianashe∣med to ju∣stifie the Scotish Co∣venant, The Sco∣tish Pr. ne∣ver serious∣lie assrib'd any good intentione to the King. league, and how can it have beter, wherein is sworne a con∣spiracie as bad? The Bishops following vapours meeting with no suneshine of law or reason to dissipate them, will not so vanish upon a litle blast of your breath but that they'll returne in showers of confusion upon your head. Your secret will to asteribe good intentions to the King hath by some of your packe been very stragelie revealed in their expressions tou∣ching Kings, whoss very nature they have declared originallie antipa∣thetical to Christ. This Didoclave avowes as planilie as he can, And when objected by His Grace of Saint Andrewes with your prover∣bial,
yet mystical appendix of their obligation to the Creatuor, not to Christ the Redecmer for their crownes, is so slovenlie answered by Philadelphs Vindicatour, as any man may reade your good wil Natur insitum est omnibus Regibus in Christum o∣dium Altar. Dam. praet…Cosque Deo Crea∣tori non Re∣demptori imperium accepnm debere non obseure praedicâ∣runt. Re∣fut Epil. . Siquis non obscure prae∣dicavit…Non longe aberavit Vindic c∣justd…Non solume lon∣ginquo non impediens, connivens, vel plena∣riam pote∣statem…concedens…sed o∣ram intu∣ens & talis facinoris as∣spectu de∣lectatus. in his words, & measure the sense of your Synods by his lines, your good opinin of the intentions of K. Charles 1. (Beside what you im∣puted to his Praelates) may be guested by what, sometimes in print you have assirib unto his person. An unworthie fellow, your Coun∣trey man that comes runing in hast with the message of your good meaning in his mouth, sayth; His infamous & Barbarous intentions were executed by eathing his sword in the bowels of his people; And this not onctic himselve not impeding, conniving at, and giving full Commission for, in Scotland and Ireland, but in England looking upon with much delight while it was done. And that so faire were negotiations and treaties from retracting him, that it was in publike declared he sayth not byany Praelatical partie) that he would never defist from this enterprise of persecuting Church and Commonwealthso long as he had power to pursue it. Concerning the good intentions of Charles the second, beside what jealousies you expresse by the scrupulous conditions in your proclaemation, your Haghe papers are instancies of your willing asseriptions, which call his answer strange whereby the distance is made greater then before, and farre lesse offered for religion, the Covenant, and the lawes and liberties of your Kingdome then was by his Royal Father even at that time when the difference between him and you was greatest…So that it will constraine you in such an extremitie to doe what is incumbent to you. I have allreadie told you the usual consequences of that cursed word, and what good intentions you are in hand with when you utter it. Tyrannie and poperie are twinnes engendred between your jealousie & malice, to which In∣dependence is more likelie to be the midwife then Praelacie, and if by that hand they get deliverie at last, will besure to pay Presbyte∣sie their dutie when they can speake. The painted declarations caries be∣ter sense to them that rightlie understand them, which I am sure is not prajudicd by any paraphrase of the Bishops. Though agere pocni∣untiam. Be good councel where well placed 'yet egisse non paniundum requires it not. If the conience of the Court continue to be managed by the principles of the Prlates, the hearts of the mist understanding shall, if they will be satisfied withall moral and siducial assurance to have that Religion praeserved which shall by reason and authoritie, aswell divine as hu∣mane, in every particular justifie it selse against all right or left han∣ded sects and factions guiltie of superstition or prosansse, & those lawes observed which appeare now to have constituted the most in∣different mnouous government in the world. Whereas if the conscience of the Court be deluded once into Presbyters hands it will need none
of our angrie wishes to be made sensible of the change, when to be sure, it must take religion, like a desperate patient, from a sullen physician in doses of Covenants and propositions not to be dispu∣ted, and like a bedlam have lawes given it with a whip. The Bishop drawing toward the end of his discourse puts all the The Revie∣wer dares not speake out to the Bishops quaestion a∣bout taking armes for religion. controversie upon trial by that quaestion which if once categoricallie answered would spare much oyle and inke for the future, giving the Magistrate to know that it is not the pen but his sword whereby this difference must be decided. But these spiders of Presbyterie will aswell be spinning webs as spitting poyson, though so thin as can't conceale the uglie shape of their soules, nor that bay which contines the in∣trinsecal venome of their cause. Though had they the reputation of no beter Artists then Master Baylie, the Pallas of Praelacie need not enter on the encounter, but that of Magistracie might in scorne more then envie, teare such wicked worke in peices before their face, and in justice mixed with some litle mercie to beget repentance —Vide quidem. pende tamen improba, dixit Mot. 6. fab. 3. The ambi∣guitie in the Cove∣nanters words lea∣ves religion to the liber∣tie of their conceits. execute Arachne's condemnation in the fable upon the authours. Of the multitude of untruths which the Reviewer, here recriminates upon the Bishop, (that we may by one take a judgement of the rest) the want of charitie is very unjustlie made the first, which he should have done well to have supplied in himselfe, and not so senselesselie to intimate a non realitie of religion in those reverend Fathers, who, beside the visibilitie in their practice hereto fore, and of their Chri∣stian patience in being Martyrs and Confessours for it of late, ever made a profession of that fayth which was consonant to Scripture as interpreted in the primitive purest times of Holie Church. Where∣as the censure his Lordship makes of the Presbyterian phantasme is principallie because in their very covenant appeares no reforma∣tion intended but according to the word of God, without mentioning any rule or authoritie for the interpretation of that word, beside their owne humours & conceits. And the example of the best Reformed Churches, which Se short Causes. be∣gin. best must be that which seemes so unto them, whether the rest yeild to it as such or no, if indeed they meane any, as it may be wel thought they doe not, but themselves, who are so superciliouslie Nulla un∣quam gens in quovis se∣culo… O∣pus Resor∣mationis fe∣liciore pru∣dentia ani∣mo & sue∣cessu admi∣nistravit, quam Scoti in sua pa∣tria Mot. Brit. Ver. Custin. singular from them all, as they disdaine to heare of a inclioration to be had from their example, and such Tyrants over us as they give us no other law nor reason but their pleasure for the reformation they impose, speaking to us in the language of the Pelagians to the Catholikes. Nobis authoribus, nobis principibus, nobis expositoribus, damate quae tenebatis, tenete quae damnabatis, reijeite antiquam fidem, paterna instituta, Majorum deposita, & recipite, quaenam illa tandem? Horreo decere sunt enim tam superba, ut mihi non modo adfirmari, sed ne reselli quidem sine aliquo piaculo
posse videantur. The second untruth he sayth is. That Covenanters beare no ailegeance to the King but onelie in order to Religion, which notwithstanding is the particular limitation in the Covenant, and when all was gran∣ted them but a particle of that by Charles I. they denied to returne to their allegeance without it. And the Crowne of his succes∣sour, our gracious Soveraigne, still hangs out of his reach by that thred, which their proclamation tells him in effect shall for ever keep it off till he consent. To the third I replie. That the Rebell Parlia∣ments Vincent, advers. hae∣res. c. 14. Their alle∣geance con∣ditional. verbal denial makes the Bishop speake no untruth, who will tell them as the King himselfe did, That his person was invaine excepted by a pa∣renthesis of words, when so many hands were armed against him with swords, & the Canon knew no respect of persons. The praetenses of a Popish Praelatical, and matignant faction are wip'd away by His Majestie in that chapter, to which I require a Scotich replie. The fourth is grounded upon a very They fight against. false supposition, which sometimes they will not grant us, nor should . Ch. 9. Their Creed in words the same with ours but not in sense. we (though too many have out of mistake too often) grant it them, viz. That saving Bishops and ceremonies, the religion of Scotizing Pres∣byterians and Catholike English Christians is the same, where as there is neare, if not fullie, fundamental difference in the acception of seve∣ral articles in our Creed, (so that though we say the same words, we can not trulie be sayd to be of the same beleife) in these at least, Christs descent into hell; The Holie Catholike Church; The communion of Saints; The forgivenesse of sinnes, Besides several other accessorie tenets, where in we thinke they detract from the mercie, if not the justice, of God, reveled in Christ and the ordinarie use of his graces restored by our redenption, without respect of persons, unto men. But if here, for their pleasure, they will have the true Church & counterfeit Kirke be the same otherwise then as they are differenced by the corruptions of Bishops and ceremonies, why tried they not the experiment of purging these with the alteration of the rubrike and their persons, without change of the Liturgie for a Directorie, and the abolition of their of∣fice, As their great Pope Henderson once confessed in the Earle of Hender∣son and the Reviewers speaches a∣bout Bi∣shops. Arundel's tent, when General in the North. That Bishops might have been tolerated in Scotland if their persons had been such as they ought. And the Re∣viewer himselfe. when he wondred why the Doctours of Aberdene would not subscribe the covenant, being asked by a friend of his if he thought Episcopacie and the articles of Perth unlawfull made this answer, He never thought, nor ever would thinke them so. Whence may be conjectur'd their modest meaning to be this. That had the Episcopa∣te in Scotland been seasonablie entailed to their tribe, so farre as they could have hindred what they pretie well promoted, their covenan∣ting tables at Edenburgh had been taken downe, and no armie rai∣sed
to purge Malignants out of the Kirke 5. The Reviewer sayth, Religion & libertie no good pre∣tenses for taking ar∣mes. their armes were taken for defense of just liberties, whereof religion was but one. But then it was one, and that the principal, or else when they had the Militia granted them to defend the rest, why stood they upon that, which is an argument that merelie for that, were there nothing else in controversie, they might aswell take, as keepe up armes But what shuffsing was in this businesse hath been discovered by another. Simons's Vindicat p. 30. That about liberties Master Digges hath learnedlie consuted. Nor will the Reviewer and all his complices be able to instance in any one law of the three Kingdomes that justifieth the subjects against the supre∣me power in defece of any liberties by their armes. Saint Austin and all good Christians were of another minde. Ita a plebibus Prinipes, & a servis domini serendi sunt, ut sub exercitationc tolerantiae susineantur temporalia & sperentur eterna. Which I therefore cite not, as if I took it to be the Covenanters case, who did, and might have continued to enjoy all just liberties without any such defense, Yet had they not, they should have ponder'd many beter politike maximes among the heathen such as this in Plutarch cheironeinai monarchias paranomou polemon emphylion In Brut. and that of Plinie in his Panegyrike. Quanto libertate disordi servientibu stilius, unum esse cui serviant. The other horne of the Bishops dilemma is as sharpe, and it need be no shar∣per then the former, The danger whereof makes the Reviewer keep his distance, first not daring positavelie to assert the lan fullnesse of taking up armes for religion. And then muffling himselfe in his cloake, invaine hoping he shall not by this argument de gored unto the quicke. His spitting Atheisme in the face of Reason the native image we beare of God, will set no wisemē on gaping for extraordinarie revelat s nor his false translating the Bishops sense into mere apprehensions and uncertai∣ne conceptions make him, or theirs of his minde, worse then Pagan Secpti∣kes in Religion. His Lordship I beleeve, grants no such postvlate as the The Scotish Presbyte∣rians as en∣thusiastike as the A∣nabaptists & no more excusable by their re∣ligion for taking ar∣es Reviewer seemes to looke for. That every Scotish Ma is a Moses, & every persecuting Presbyter, before Gods jugemen's have humbled him to his conversion, a Saint Paul. He conceives their Catchisme or Directorie can passe for no Pentateuch nor Apal Epissles and sayh they beg the qu that take it to be the Gosp. He argues, That in as∣serting the lawfulenes of taking armes, they justifie the Irdpendents that supplanted themselves, whose new light sines as much like that from Moses's face as they Presbyterians new doctrine sounds like the ora∣cles he received in the mount. That the Anabaptists in Germanie were no more Enthusiasts then the Anabaptists in Scotland, who null the po∣werfull operation of the sacrament, and for ought we know, may be nulls in the missionarie power to administer it. That Iohn of Leyden &
his crue could not be more mad then Iohn Knox and his, nor could they have lesse reason for their militarie proceedings. His Lord∣ship is so farre from placing the summe of Religion in every simple ap∣prehension, that he desires the authoritie of the Chuch should take place of his conceptions untill the truth, if different from that doctrine, which is unlikelie were seald to him by some internal impression of Gods spirit. What every man is perswaded in his conscience to be di∣vine truth he would have him praeferre before other mens apprehensions of a contrarie religion. Yet if that perswasion be dissonant from what was ge∣nerallie among the primitive Christians, he would not that he should mistake himselfe to have a singular infallibilitie, nor a transscendent commission, above that of Christ and his Apostles, to take armes & force all men to his beleefe. The most certain truths, even these divine ones Fayth no so comon, if such as commonlie defined. in religion, if His Lordship doth not, which I did not aske him, I doe thinke to be in many men that praetēd to that supernatural grace cal∣led fayth, were uncertaine conceptions, or inadvertent praesumptions, fin∣ding few so considerate of their very principles in Religion as to build them upon any so much as that subordinatie moral certanitie they might doe with good endeavour, fewer live so devoutlie as without it can reasonablie suppose God miraculouslie infuseth his re∣velatious to assure them. Therefore though all the truths of Christian Religion, wherein controverted, are reveal'd from heaven. Yet I thinke we are to looke a great way backe for the persons by and unto whom, immediate inspirations being now adayes very rare, nor doe we live much like the holie mortified men that were wont to have them of old. You know what Saint Matin told the Divel when he appear'd Sulpit. Se∣ver in vita. arrayed like a King, and would be taken for Christ come in triumph upon the earth. Ego Christum, nisi in eo habitu formaque qua passus est, nisi or stigmata proforensem venisse non credam. He would not beleeue him to be come till he saw him in the habit of his sufferings. So when we see you quali∣fied S. Math. 10. 16. like his disciples, wise as Serpents not craftie as foxes, harmelesse as doves, not rapacious as harpies, patient like sheep, not ravening like The Pr. Scots must bring beter markes then eir bat words for revelations wolves. Delivered up to Councels, not excommunicating in Synods, scourg'd in Synagogues not disciplining without mercie in your Chur∣ches. Brought before Governers and Kings for Christs sake, not bringing Go∣verners and Kings to mooke-tribunals for your owne. Then tell us of Divine truths, the beleefe of Moses and Saint Pauls revelation from heaven, and we will hearken to you as Angels, whom now we take to be no beter then the haereties who Vincet sayth are ranquaedam & cyniphes, & mus∣cae Advers. haeres. cap. 14. moriturae, such contemptable creatures as croking frogs, gnats, and dying flies that would buzze what mischiefe you can before you leave us, and make the oyntment of the Apothecarie stinke with the
corruption of your writings when you are dead; The second part of your apologie is most false both thesei kai hypothesei 1. Because subjects have no armes, while the Magistrate is in being to hold the sword, put into their hands to defend their religion and liberties how legallie soeuer established, They have onelie pleas by that law to claime them, and pe∣titions of right or aequitie to put up unto the Magistrate to maintaine them. 2. If they goe beyond defending themselves in their religion They are cut throtes of Magistra∣tes & planters of Religion by armes. and force others to enter into their league & covenant though con∣trarie to their conscience, this is no other then planting of religion by ar∣mes. And if the difference in any point of religion be such as to state the Magistrate in a condition to be put to death by his subjects, as it doth, in your sense, when he joines in worship with Papists & Prae∣lates, whom you make idolaters, and idolatrie death unpardona∣ble; this is cutting the throates of all Magistartes. And this is maintained to be just and to have the ground of Gods ordinarie judgement by your Patriarch Knox. And to be imitated of all those that praeferre the true honour of the true wor∣ship and glory of God to the affection of flesh and wicked Princes. Your hypo∣thesis Hist. Lib. 4. is false, because the religion and liberties of your Covenant in England were never established by law, and what was so established was never usurped by Papists Praelates and Malignants, And if it had been, from so good a King redresse had probablie been procured upon just com∣plaint without taking armes. To your third I replie, That the Bishop gives no judgement, makes no mention of the Protestants Armes in France We say no∣thing to fo∣raigne pro∣testants ta∣king armes. till they justific yours & & theirs by yours Holland and Iermanie, compares them not with the Anabaptists in Mun∣ster or Sectaries in England. If you can once perswade them to espouse your quarell, (for which you have begg'd long enough at their gates by this time) or publish a parallel between your taking up armes and their owne, the praelatical partie will make no difference between you, but give alike judgement against you all. In the meane time the maximes they give are rational and divine, & they are brutes or A∣theists, divested allreadie of all religion and reason, who praeferre them not to the Presbyterian enthusiasmes, who give out for Mi∣chael the Archangels revelations what counterfeit impostures Mor∣pheus puts of to them in their dreames. Touching a general Councel, with a wish for which His Lordship pi∣ouslie concludes, No Covenanters goe before him, nor will set one step af∣ter The Prae∣lates decli∣ne not the judgement of Councels. him in that desire, who most uncharitablie make three parts of fo∣wer in the Christian world Antichristian, and so no constitutive mem∣bers of such a meeting. An occumenicke Synod of Protestants would un doubtedlie condemne them, which is most shamefullie praejug'd to approve of the rebellion and murder in their Covenant. Nor can their Principals, in honour, be silent at such an horrid impious prae∣sumption
publickelie printed & imputed to them. The Bishops ae his brethren have declined no solemne assemblies of their owne countreyes. those so called were factious schismatical conventicles illegallie gathe∣ed & composed of such mushromes as how numerous soeuer, durst noe admit of twentie Praelatical Divines into debate, lest they should be squeez'd into a litle spungie earth & winde (their originals) having no substantial worth or abilities to support them. You need not pray the Warner to speake unto the question you put, since you have his answer before hand without asking, viz. That its worth the enqui∣ring (even in such an Oecumenicke synod) whether the markes of Anti∣christ doe not agree as eminentlie to the Assemblie General of Scotland as to the Pope. He mentions some that plainlie doe, & meanes, it may be as much of all the rest. To the charge in a Christian Councel they would answer. That they are able to evidence before God & the World, That all bloud & miserie drawn from, & brought upon, the former King & his Kingdomes must be cast upon the Covenant & General Assemblie in Scotland, who will never cease to embroyle all in new calamities untile they be destroyed. That if this King & his whole familie re∣solve not to prosecute Gods cause, which the former did with much Christian courage unto the death, they hazard the tearing their crownes into more peices then the miters, & the demolition of their thrones beneath that of the Praelates chaires, To conclude all. The Re∣viewers Presbyte∣rian cruel∣tie, may by Gods pro∣vidence be restrained. breath, though violent enough, becomes in vaine so defi∣nitive, as to perpetuate persecutions against the providence of God, whom the Bishops looke upon as a potent Protectour of Kings, & a mercifull repairer of the breach made in his Church by their owne ruines. Their resoluti, may be justlie peremptore to persevere in their opinion of the Scotish Presbyterian crueltie to be such That as they, have burjed their Bishops alive, conniv'd at, & if, not countenancd, the Massacring their Kings; so their endeavour will not be wanting to scater the ashes of te Royal familie & three Kingdomes on their graves, Though their consistorian fourmes, & repenting stooles with other luggage be next cast into the flames first kindled by themselves. The mysteries of their religion being murder & dead monuments such as never made those heathen the summe of whose devotion Clemens of A∣lexandria Admon. ad Gent. comprehended in two words. . FINIS.
Errours to be amended. Epist. Ded. pag. 3. line 18. Reade, she or her Ancients. Ans. to Ep'Ded. p. 2. l. 8. for common shoare, r. com. fewer. Ibid. l. 9. for power, r. paper. p. 3. l. 6. for and, r. &c. p. 6. l. 16. for comfort, r. confort. l. 38. for burning. r. warning. p. 7. l. 18. for both, r bold. l. 36. for must. r. most. p. 8. l. 20. r. deceitfull lovers of themselves there are. p. 9. l. 35. r. two or three such words as. p. 11. l. 32. for late, r. babe. p. 16. l. 13. for Reviewer, r. Reviewes. Acolut. p. 8 l. 13. for own, r. owned. p. 13. l. 30. for otherguede, r. otherguesse. p. 19. l. 37. for literal, r. liberal p. 20. l. 8. for apposed. r. opposed. p. 21. l. 15. it delcatur. p. 22. margin, for Chaldaeos, r. Culdaeos. p. 26. l. 10. for then, r. they. l. 11. for all r. a. p. 29. l. 1. for Hierambieorum, r. Hierarchicorum. l. 25. for buselie, r. basilie. p. 31. l. 30. for in that, r. & that is. l. 41. for anomia ergapiria, r. anomias ergasteria. p. 37. l. 17. for stake, r. sticke. p. 38. l. 19. for acknowledge, r. acknowledged. p. 40. l. 2. for reasonable, r. trea∣sonable. p. 45. l. 19. for Vnitglupteu, r. Vuygeastein. p. 48. l. 36. After Oecumenical, adde Councel. p. 53. l. 37. for asgle r. aire. p. 59 l. 24. for acconsequential, r. unconse∣quential. p. 60. marg. for to excom. r. no excom. p. 60. l. 29. for too rigid. r. to rigid. p. 64. l. 32. for halls r. heeles. p. 68. l. 20. for triel, r. Ariel. p. 72. l. 11. for then, r. them. p 73. l. 3. for as, r. is. p. 78. marg. for vicitie, r. nicitie. p. 80. marg. for 493. r. 1593. p. 81. l. 34. r. (though but in the time) Ibid. marg. r. The Bishops Sunday toleration. p. 48. l. 10. pro libra, r. litera. Ibid. l. 12. for jura r. dura. p. 85. l. 19. for papists, r. pupills. l. 33. for its. r. in. p. 86. l. 14. for coloural, r. colourable. Ibid. marg. r. Scotish Presbyterian re∣formation from &c. p. 87. l. 7. for latewarmnesse. r. lukewarmnesse. l. 13. for too. r. 100. p. 88. l. 1. for session, r. cession. l. 14. for Murre, r. Marre. marg. for Ruthuer, r. Ruthuen. p, 92. l. 21. for servidi, r. fervidi. p. 94. l. 9. for scrive. r. transscribe. p. 57. l. 1. for then, r. them. p. 101. l. 39. for superintended, r. superintendent. p. 11. for masters, r, maters. marg, for contracted, r. confuted. p. 117. l. 14. guerts. r. Masters. p. 121. l. 6. for indiscreet, r. in discreet. p. 122. marg. fuos, r. suo. p. 126. l. 9. for on, r. or. p. 127. l. 31. r. from whom I expect &c. p. 142. l. 9. for cession, r. succession. l. 40. for successis, r. successio, p. 145. l. 40. for Autoraniei, r. Autouranici. p. 148. l. 39. for & r. &c. p. 149. marg. for su∣dunt…astragatus, r. sudunt astragalis. p. 152. l. 35. for pallea, r. paleae. for Affltu, r. Af∣flatu [with no point before it] p. 127. marg. for togodaedali, r. logodaedali. p. 153. marg. for odificentur in rumam, r. aedificentur in ruinam. p. 155. l. 41. for manitates, r. inani∣tatis. p. 157. l. 16. for if, r. it. l. 41. for mission, r. omission. p. 159. l. 40. for doubte, r. double. p. 162. l. 14, for forming, r. foming. p. 163. l. 1. for too, r. so. p. 165. l. 13. susplicates, r. sup∣plicates. pag. 169. l. 6. r. to the Bishop. pag. 175. l. 83. for to, r. so large. Ibid. marg. for a estes quos sidem ea vocant, r. testes quos sidemen vocant. for minus, r. munus, p. 177. margfor spirationes, r. conspirationes. p. 175. for many leaves, r. may leave. p 180. l. 5. for quae, r, quia p. 181. l. 26. for quis pium, r. quispiam. p. 182. marg. for homonymus subscribentiam. r. homonymoos suscribentium. p. 185. for momfeia, r. monscia Aristoph. p. 187. l. 38. for up to, r. unto. p. 188. l. 14. for which, r. with. p. 191. l. 14. for guittnesse, r. guildesse. p. 155. l. 15. for fermed, r. feigned. l. 34. for neare, r. nearer a possibilitie then likelihood, p. 157. l. 13. for faire. r. farie. marg. for Cosque, r. Eosque. p. 198. l. 11. for bay, r. bag. l. 35. for inclioration, r. melioration. marg. for vide, r. vive. for se short causes, r. see short conses. p. 200. l. 40. for Anabaptists, r. Abaptists. p. 201. l. 16. for were, r. mere.
TO THE READER. I Am necessarisie to advertise you, That if you be notvery conversant in the Rd Bishops Warning and his adversaries Review before you enter upon my replie, you will in the end be as unsatisfied about the true state of the controversie, as all the way offended at the incohaerence of the paragraphs or periods in the booke, there being, to ease the Printer, not much to advantage me, very litle inserted that mine relates to, which notwithstanding is penned as if you had the other perpetuallie in your sight. The credit I claime to have given to several histo∣rical circumstances of a Countrey, which I yet never saw, where∣with I could not be furnished from printed bookes, is upon the sufficient assurance I have of the fidelitie and abilitie in such per∣sons as are natives, whom I consulted as oracles in many cases, and received their answer in no darke ambiguitie of words; But layd downe positivelie in their papers, which if their indiffe∣rence had been the same with mine: I should have published with their names, whereby to put out the envious mans eye and keep curiositie from a troublesome impertinencie in enquirie. I shall make no apologie at all to you for my engagement in the dispute, having allreadie done it where more due. I shall brieflie this for some tantologie, much indecencie and levitic in my language, Desiring the first may be imputed to some necessitie I was cast upon by the Reviewers frequent repetitions, and some difficultie to recollect what expressions had passed from me with the sheetes, most of which I was to part with successivelie as I pennd them at several distances of time and place reteining no perfect copie in my hands. The second is that dirt which did
sticke like pitch unto my fingars while I was handling the fowle Review, and so hath defild my booke. The third came from no affectation to be facetious, for which I am litle fitted, yet thought I might as well sport it as a Divinitie Professour in his chaire, who having it seemes, made hast to the second infancie of his age, or reassumd his first, would never, it may be, have been at quiet, unlesse I had rocked him in his cradle, or play'd a litle with his rattle. The strange misse-takes many times intro∣duced by his ignorance of our tongue that in my absence prae∣pared all for the presse are rectified with references to the pages where. Which amendments in favour of your selfe aswell as justice unto me should be at first transplanted to their several colonies by your pen. The Greeke leters that have lost their grace by the Latin habits wherein they are constrained to ap∣peare, being crowded here and there out of all significancie and order, & so left at large, have their authoritie made good to the full sense of the commission they brought with them, every where by the English Interpreter or Paraphrast when you meet them. Which intimated, I have no greater courtesie to crave from you, if one the Revievers impartial and aequitable com∣parers, then to hearken to truth and reason, and to signifie what you finde here dissonant from either, which I promise you shall be acknowledged or amended Adieu. Your R. W.
A Table of the Chapters. CHAPT. I. THe Scots bold addresse with the Covenant to K. Ch. 2. Their partie inconsiderable. The Bishop's method, language, and matter asserted. The quaestion in controversie unawares granted by the Reviewer. Page 1. II. The Scotish Discipline overthrowes the right of Magistrates to con∣vocate Synods, and otherwise to order Ecclesiastical affaires. 10. III. The last appeale to the Supreme Magistrate justisiable in Scot∣land. 41. IV. Seditious & Rebellious Ministers in Scotland seldome or never censured by the Assemblie. 47. V. The Discipline exempts not the supreme Magistrate from being ex∣communicate. 57. VI. Kings may sometime pardon capital offenders, which the Disciplina∣rians donie. As they do their Royal right to any part of the Eccle∣siastike revenue. 59.
VII. The Presbyterie cheates the Magistrate of his civile power in ordi∣ne ad spiritualia. 65. VIII. The divine right of Episcopacie beter grounded the that pratended in behalfe of Presbyterie. 93. IX. The Commonwealth is a monster when Gods Soveraignite in the Presbyterie contradicts the Kings. 113. X. No concord between Parliament and Presbyterie. 116. XI. The Presbyterie cruel to particular persons. 124. XII. The Presbyterie a burthen to the Nobilitie, Ministrie, and all Orders whatsoever. 130. XIII. The Bishops exceptions against the Covenant made good, & this proved. That no man is obliged to keep it who hath taken it. 176.
An Alphabetical Principal Table of the Contens. A. THe Disclplinarians rebellious pro∣ceedings in their persecution of Arch. Bp. Adamson. Pag. 43 Poenitent adulterers not necessarilie to be put to death. 169 Litle aequitie in the Reviewers debates & treaties. 190 Alteration in Religion or Church Go∣vernment unsave & sinfull while con∣science is doubtfull. 95 They may be feared to be unchristian that call us Antichristian. 145 Trivial debates among Scotish Presby∣ters about apparell. 125 The Reviewer dares not speake out to the Bishops quaestion about taking armes for religion. 198 That & Libertie no justifiabie praetenses for taking armes. 201 The Pr: Scots that did, no more excu∣sable then the Anabaptist in Germa∣nie. 00 They are planters of their misse-named Religion by armes. 202 K. Ch. 1. had just cause to march with an armie toward Scotland Ans. to Ep. Ded. 9 The Pr. Scots had none for their invading England. Ibid. 11 Their General Assemblies Disobedience to the Kings command, 179. 12 The incohaerent excuses therof. 13 The rebellious Assemblers at Aber∣dene 1605. 16 Appeales in Scotland to the King. 32 And so the ultimate of them every where elce. 41 The proceedings against them no other then legal. 17 Wherein the E. Dunbar caried himselfe impartiallie and noblie. 23 Assemblies summoning the people in armes upon the trial of Popish Lords. 92 Collusion and violence in the election of Members for Assemblies. 133 Why so many Burgesses and Gentlemen in them. 134. 135 B. TReason by statute to impugne the authoritie of Bishops, being one of the three Estates. 19 Bishops perpetuall in Scotland. 21 The calumnie against the three Bishops consectated by the Arch-Bishop of Canterburie refuted. 22 How the Difference hapened between the E. Argile & the Bishop of Galloway. 141 Our Bishops contest not with King and Nobles. 140 Their praecedence and place neare the throne. Ibid. Officies of State. 141 The Antiquitie, &c. Of Bishops justified very judiciouslie by Dr Ier. Tayler, Whose booke is an antidote against the poyson of all the Reviewers objec∣tions. 102 Bishops Apostles. 106 Evangelists, Prophets, Pastours. 107 Doctours. 108
Bishops & Ceremonies no burthen. 187 The Bishop of Derrie's prudence, no boldnesse in the publication of his booke Anf. to Ep. Ded. 2 Very seasonable. 1 In it His Lordship is no slanderer of the King. 4 Blackes rebellious case. 53 Baleanqual, Bruce & other Ministers guiltie of raising the tumult. 56 Blaire and his complices justlie banished out of Ireland. 51 Bothwells notorious crimes. 61 Bruce's bold speach to the King about E. Huntley. 63 The Bishops appeale in the Assemblie at Glasgow not derogatorie to the Kings personal praerogative. 45 C. CAlderwood's ridiculous reverence of Bruce's ghost. 139 E. Cassils demeanour Ans. to Ep. Ded. 1 Canons infirming the Reviewer to be an aceuser of the Bishop. 48 Publike catechizing of Masters and Mistresses indecent. 171 Not very necessarie before their rece∣iving the Sacrament. Ibid. The Kings Chaplanes use no Court arti∣fice, but what becomes such reverend worthie persons in their places Ans. to Ep. Ded. 4 A proposition of trial to be made whether Christ's scepter must be swayed by Bishops or Presbyters. 100 The difference between us & the Church of Rome about ceremonies. 98 Iurisdiction of Commissaries. 52 The Kings Commissioner how off ronted in Pr Sc. Synods. 134 Riot in Scotland to get downe the High Commission Court. Which was not so tyranical as the Pr. Consistorie. 173 Wherein is more rigour then other where among the Resormed Churches, 174 The adventurous concessions of K. Ch. I. extorded by the necessitie or difficultie he was brought to. 104 K. James's dislike of the Scotish short confession. Many unjustificable prae∣tices about it. 14 Conscience not bottom'd onelie up on divine right. 95 Contrarietie of commands at the same time ordinarie under Scotish Presby∣terie. 114 The Reviewers fallacie to salve it in the case of the French Ambassadours. 115 His ignorance of the true stated contro∣versie between vs and the Church of Rome. 8 His cunning in altering the true state of that between the Bishop and himselfe as in many places so. 30 K. Ch. 1. invaded not the Scotish Con∣sistorie, his condescensions leaving them contended. 190 The Reviewers uncharitable interpreting Mr. Corbets's end a punishment from God. 3 Particulars about framing the English-Scotish Covenant. The persons by whom &c. 177 How dishonourable it is to the English that approved it. 179 The Reviewes's abominable affected falshood in defense of it. 180 His impudence in preaching at the Hage that nothing at all had been objected against it. Ans. to Ep. Ded. 7 How destructive it is to the Royal line. Ibid. 12 How the same with that of K. Iames 1580. 183 How it divers from it. 184 Foraigne Presbyterians asham'd to coun∣tenance it. 196 The ambiguitie of the words in it leaves religion to the libertie of their conceits, that take it. 198 Covenants unlawfullie taken are more
unlawfullie kept. 177 The Praelates docline not the judgement of Councels. 202 No inhaerent right in Courts to nominate Commissioners for intervalls. 123 Spirituall crucltie in the prayers of Sco∣tish Presbyters. 125 Their temporal crueltie, as much as they praesume, may by Gods providence be restrained. 203 The Court conscience will, if the expe∣riment be tried, soon finde the diffe∣rence between the Episcopal and Pres∣byterian Clergie. 197 D. NO defensive armes for subjects. 40 Court of Delegates neither unbe∣seeming, not unreasonable. 43 K. Iames's Declaration 1584. How by His Majestie subscribed. 51 The Pr. Scots imprudence as well as in∣justice &c. in delivering up K. Ch. 1. to his murderers. Ans. to Ep. Ded. 14 The old grudge that mor'd them to it. Ibid. 15 The same newlie conceived against K. Ch. II. Ibid. 15 The difference between Vs and Scotish Presbyterians is more then in Bishops and ceremonies. 199 The Sc. Discipline omits what the ancient Canons had among the cases of Mini∣sters deprivation. What it hath con∣concernes more Presbyters then Prae∣lates. 67 It playes the tyrant over the consciences of the people. 124 Divine attributes profaned in asscribing them to the Discipline and Assemblie Acts. 100 Covenanters missetake the Discipline for Christs institution. 180 No legal establishment in Scotland of the first booke of Discipline. 18 K. Iames's consent to the second booke of Discipline how improbable. 24 They anticipate the law in the exercise thereof. 27 The English Discipline long since setle by law in Scotland and our Liturg there used. 16 That of the Pr. Scots obtruded upon England. Ibid. Divine right pleaded for Presbytere frustrates all treaties. 96 Episcopacie wants no Discipline aequi∣valent to that in the Scotish Presby∣terie. 175 Our doctrines about real praesence, justi∣fication, free will, final apostafie, prae∣destinatîon, breissie touched. And a quaestion propounded about Davids case. 98. 99 Dowglasse that murdered Capt. I. Stuart kill'd in Edenburgh high street. 21 E. OUr Episcopacie not reputed Anti∣christian by other Reformed Churches. Ans. to Ep. Ded. 3. 50 K. Ch. I. suspended the jurisciction of Episcopacie in Scotland for no crimes. No full and free Parliament that voted in downe in England. 9 Episcopacie no obstruction to the Kings peace. Why it may not be lay'd aside. 40 What right it hath to become unalte∣rable. 94 The reasons of K. Ch. I. well bottom'd. 95 Some particulars about the historie of Scotish Episcopacie. 111 Abolition of Episcopacie is not that which will ever give the Pr. Scots sa∣tisfaction. 165 K. Ch. I. in his largest concessions yeilded not unto it. 188 The asserrours of the Magistrates just power misse call'd Eraans by the Reviewer. 6 Erastus's Royal right of Church go∣vernment can not untie the Kings cons∣cience if streightned. Nor is that onelie it the Bishops praetend to. 97
The Sc. Discipline exempts not Kings from being excommunicate. 57 Excommunication not mean'd by de∣livering up to Satan. 110 Ignorance no ground for the execution of it. 172 The Scotish Presbyters practice touching excommunication litle lesse rigid then their canon. 227 The inconveniences that follow to be imputed rather to the Kircke then State. 128 Impunitie no good ground for excom∣munication. 61 The Kings pardon quitting poenitent malefactours. 65 F. SCotish Presbyters much too busie in private families. 175 Fayth not so common, if such a grace as ordinarilie it is defined. 201 Church Festivals not legallie abolished in Scotland. 18 Crueltie toward fugitives. 129 G. GIbson's insolent speaches unto the King. 21 The Assemblie's juggling in his case. 52 Gilespie's theoreme for resisting Ma∣gistrates disclaimed by no Assemblies. The substance of it the sense of ma∣ny. 37 The King why concerned to be cautelous in his grants to the Presbyterian Scots. 5 The Bishops Office entirelie authorized in the Assemblie at Glasgow 1610. 23 H. THe proceedings against D. Hamil∣ton's late engagement discus∣sed. 70. 71. &c 115. 117. &c. Mr. Henderson's speach of Bishops. 199 E Huntley's case truelie related. 61 I. K. Iames a greater Anti-Presbyte∣rian then Anti-Erastian. 64 The Praelates title to Impropriations and Abbey lands beter then that of Presbyters. 137 Presbyterian indulgence in cases of sedi∣tion and rebellion. 47 Their monstrous ingratitude for the too liberal graces of K. Ch. I. 104 The Kings concessions to the Irish more justifiable then the other could be to the Scotish Presbyterian demands. 146 The Pr. Scots endeavours to impose their Discipline upon England. 5 The Assemblie at Westminster having no power to authorize it. 6 Many of the Presbyteries in Scotland have very unfit & unable Iudges. 174 Iurisdiction Ecclesiastical sloweth from the Magistrate. 34 Sc. Presbyters usurpe Civile jurisdic∣tion. 69 No power of jurisdiction in what the Reviwer misse interprets the Church. 108 Nor in a companic mot together. 109 K. THe election of a King not original∣lie justifiable in any people. 164 K. Ch. I. not inclinable, though by coun∣terseit promises praevail'd with to cast himselfe upon the Presbyterian Scots Ans. to Ep. Ded. 12 His writings not interlined by the Bi∣shops. The Reviewers commendation of them unawares Ibid. K. Ch. II. hath expressed no inelination to the Covenant. If any praeventive disswasion of His Majesties from it hath been used by the Praelatical pat∣tie, it was a dutifull act of conscience and prudence. 149 His Majestie can not so easilie, will not so readilie grant what his Royall Father
denied. 191 Scots Presbyterians never seriouslie as∣scribed any good intentions to K. Ch, I. nor. 2. 197 L. MOre learning under Episcopacie then Presbyterie. 150 The King supreme Legislatour. 193 The Bishops share in making lawes as great as any one of the three E∣states. Ibid. Our Liturgie why read. A parallel of it with primitive formes fiter then with the Breviarie. 156 The Church of Scotland hath had a li∣turgie not onelie for helpe but prac∣tice. 160 The Presbyterians hypocritical use of it. 161 M. THe Magistrates definitive judge∣ment in Synods owned by the Reformed Divines both Praela∣tical and Presbyterian. 28 Sc. Presbytetie will have Magistrates sub∣ject to the Kirke. 120 Presbyters why against clandestine mar∣riages. 166 Consent of Parents how to be required. Ibid. No obedience due to them command∣ing an unjust marriage. 169 The Bishops cautelous in giving license for clandestine marriages. 170 Gods mercie in praeserving Arch-Bishop Maxwel falsified by the Reviewer. 3 The businesse about the Spanish Mer∣chants sophisticated. 80 Sc. Presbyters controllers in the Mi∣litia. 79 The power of it in the King. 186 Pr. Ministers rebellious meeting at Mauchlin moore. 119 They exceed their commission. 121 Their power with the people dangerous to the government. 122 Their rebellious proceeding in the per∣secution of Arch-Bishop Montgo∣merie and Arch-Bishop Adamson. 43 The murders & other prodigious impie∣ties acted by the Sc. Presbyterians in prosecution of their ends. 82 The scale of degrees whereby they as∣scended to the murder of K. Ch. I. 38 Which might have been foreseen by their propositions, never repealed. 76 Murder may be pardoned by the King who hath been petitioned in that case by the Disciplinarians themselves. 60 N. THe King's negative voyce justified as well in Scotland as England. 77 What is the power of his affirmative. 78 The Sc. Presbyters gave the occasion and opportunitie for the Nobles to get the Ecclesiastike revenue. The Episco∣pacie more then titular they kept up. 15 Presbyterie more oppressive to the No∣bilitie & Gentrie then Praelacie. 130 Noblemen why chosen Elders.  131 Where such, how slighted by the Pres∣byters. 139 O. SC. Presbyters assume the arbitration of oeconomical differences. 68 The Officers appointed by Christ in his Church need not be restrained to the number of five. Nor those taken to be the same the Presbyterians would have them. 106 The Officials Court a more competent Iudicatoric then the Classical Pres∣byterie. 132 No power of ordination in the Presby∣byterie. 108. 142 No comfortable assurance but from A∣postolical succession & Episcopal or∣dination which Presbyterians want. Ibi. The Sc. Presbyterians trial before ordi∣nation more formal then truelie expe∣rimental of abilitie in the persons. 150
The qualification different from that required by the Bishops. 152 The original of the pretended oath taken by the King for securitie of the Sc. Discipline. 163 P. THe Sc. Assemblies decrees to be ra∣tified by Parliament. 24 As those of our Convocations. 32 Presbyterie makes Parliaments subject to Assemblies. 120 The Parliament of Scotland in no capa∣citie to make demands after the mur∣der of the King. 163 Presbyterie hath no claime to the Church patrimonie given by Episcopal foun∣ders and benefactours. 25 Their disputes with Princes about Church revenue. 63 The original right of patronage in Lay persons. 136 Peirth Assemblie 1596. 111 Provision under Episcopacie against the povertie of such as are ordained. 153 The Praelats still of the same minde rhey were about the rights and priviledges of Bishops. 103 Reason of bidding prayer before sermon. 159 In the Canon forme is no prayer for the dead. 160 Set formes of no use to beginers that pray by the spirit. 161 The gift of prayer in the Pater Noster. Ibid. Presbyterians divided about prayer. 162 The injuries by extemporarie prayer. Ibi. Presbyteries when, and how, erected in Scotland Bishops to praeside in them. 20 Christianitie at its first entrance into Scotland brought not Presbyterie with it. 22 Fallacie in the immediate division of re∣ligion into Presbyterian & Popish. 53 No authoritie of Scripture for the many practices of Scotish Presbyterie. 101 Litle knowledge, labour, or conscience shewed in Presbyterian preaching. 154 Scotish Presbyterians beter conceited of themselves then of any other Re∣formed Church to which yet they praetend a conformitie in their new model. 198 K. Iames's speach concerning Scotish Presbyterie. 30 How a King may, and when, exercise the office of a Priest. 195 Sc. Presbyteries processe for Church rents. 33 The same fault under a different forma∣litie not to be twice punished. 126 Q. K. Iames's 55. Quaestions. 111 R. REading Ministers usefull and justi∣fiable in our Church. 154 The Praelats doe not annull the being of all Reformed Churches. 143 Though they have no full assurance. 144 The Reviewers speach of Bishops and Peirth articles. 199 The Church of Rome true, though not most true. 145 A rigid separation from her in many things needlesse. 146 Assemblies can reforme onelie according to canon, not the canon. 84 The Primitive Christians reformation different from that of Sc. Presbyte∣rians. 85 That of the Church of England began rather at K. Edw. VI. then Henr. VIII. 86 The Parliament can no reforme with∣out the King. 188
Resistance against the person of the Ma∣gistrate can not be made inobedience to his office. 35 Reviewer willfullie missetakes the scope of the Bishops booke. 45 His barbarous implacable malice against the dead. 49 A riot under praetense of taking a Priest at Masse. 91 Abetted by Knoxe with his confessed interest in many more. 92 The Pr. Scots must bring beter markes then their bare words for revela∣tions. 201 S. FOraigne Presbyterians tolerate more libertie on their Sabbath then the Bishops on our Sunday. 50. 125 The hypocritical superstition of the Sc. Presbyters in the sanctification of their Sabbath. 81 Offenders quitted to be admitted to the H. Sacrament without publike satis∣faction in the Church. 126 False measures &c under colour of scandal not to be brought into the cogni∣zance of the Church. 66 All civile causes are brought before the Presbyterie under the pretense of scandal. 170 The Pr. Scotish partie inconsiderable. 2 They gave beter language to our Bishops heretofore then of late. 8 Carefull Christians will finde litle leisure on weeke dayes to heare many ser∣mons. 157 Sermons not to exceed an houre. 158 Those that are Rhetorical may be as usefull as many meerlie Textuarie. 159 St. Claud Somais no Countenancer of the late Kirke proceedings Ans. to Ep. Ded. 4. 111 The Sc. Presbyterians coordinate two Soveraignities in one State. 113 Two Scotish Kings at one time avouched by A Melvin. 114 Capt. Iames Stuart vindicated at large. 87 Superintendents aequivalent to Bishops 23 Imperious supplicates from the Presby∣terie. 26 Rebellion the subject of most. 165. 179 The Kings supremacie impaired by Pres∣byterie. 27. 195 Placed upon the People. 29 Scotish Presbyterie overthrowes the right of the Magistrates convocating Sy∣nods. 10. 30 Synods where the Magistrate prohibited them. 31. 36 Receiving appeales not the principal end of calling Synods. 132 Noblemen to have no suffrages in them but when sent thither by the King. 134 T. THe by-tenets of the Discipline. 3 The Texts of Scripture urged a∣gainst Episcopacie, for Presby∣terie, answered. 105.&c. The Presbyterians treason at Ruthuen. 88 At Striveling. 89 V. FAmilie visitations commendable aswell in orthodoxe Priest as Pres∣byters. 173 The Reviewer much in love with the uncleanlie metaphore of a vomit. 176 W. ACcording to the Word of God a more dubious and frivolous limi∣tation in the Covenant them here∣tosore in the oath for Episco∣pacie. 181 FINIS.
