T1408 R4737 11957816 51564
To the honourable Assembly of the Commons House of Parliament. The humble Petition of all and every the Inhabitants of the Town of old Braintford in the County of Middlesex. Sheweth, THat it is too manifest to the world, how that your Petitioners on the 12 and 13 dayes of this present Moneth, were plundered and bereaved of their severall and particular estates, as Money, Plate, Houshold∣stuff of all sorts, and other necessaries of what condition soever, by His Majesties forces, then happening amongst them, The grief whereof is more piercing unto them, then your Petitioners are able to expresse. The consideration of whose losse amounting to neer 4000, as by particulars may appear, together with the mi∣serable and sad condition they are brought unto, your Pe∣titioners humbly leave to the consideration and wisedome of this honourable Assembly. Humbly craving some speedy course may be thought of and taken, for the relief of your Petitioners in this their great distresse by such wayes and means as in your great and grave wisedoms shall be thought meet, And they shall ever pray, &c. Die Sabbathi, 26. Novemb. 1642. IT is this day ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Ministers of Middlesex, and or those Parishes that are partly Mid∣dlesex, and partly of London, do the next Fast day read in their seve∣rall Parish Churches the Relation of the sufferings of the Inhabitants of old Braintford on the twelfth and thirteenth of this moneth by his Majesties Forces, and that they do excite the people to a compassionate considerati∣on of them, and that whatsoever shall be collected upon the next Fast day within the Parishes aforesaid, may be imployed for the relief of the Inhabitants of old Braintford aforesaid, and of such of new Braintford as have been plundered and ruined by the Forces aforesaid. Hen Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
24 Novemb. 1642. ORdered by the Commons Assem∣bled in Parliament, That this Relation, concerning the Passages of the Kings Army at Old-Brainceford, be forthwith Printed and Published; And further, That no Person, upon any pretence whatsoever, shall pre∣sume to Print the same Passages but Edward Husbands and John Frank, untill the 25 of December next ensu∣ing the date hereof. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl Dom. Com.
