T2326AA R220713 99832105 36575
A TRUE ACCOUNT OF A BLOODY FIGHT BETWEEN THE Turks and Christians From The IMPERIAL CAMP; And From The Spanish Ambassador To the MARQUESS de Grana; With An Account likewise from Brussels, Declaring the Total Overthrow of the Turkish Army at Barkan, with the Surrendering of the Fort of Barkan to the Christians. Dublin Re-printed by Andrew Crook in Skinner-Row. 1683.
A Letter from the Spanish Ambassa∣dor to the Marques De Grana at Lintz Dated the Thirteenth of October One Thousand six hun∣dred Eighty three, At Midnight being an account of a second Fight between the Christians and Turks. THat the Imperial and Polish Armies having repassed the Danube on a Bridg of Boats at Wiswar near Comorra, the King of Foland re∣solved to advance with his Troops to Attack the Fort of Barkan, which covers the Bridg of Gran; accordingly his Majesty marched on the seventh of this Month, with so great Diligence, that he got a German mile and a half before the Imperialists. and being come near the said Fort, he caus∣ed his Dragoons to alight, and to attack it, purposing to take it by as∣sault; The Turks at the first came out in small Parties from behind their Retrenchments, to draw the Christians on; The Polish Dragoons behaved themselves very bravely, and the Turks gave ground, but it was onely to amuse the Christians, for in the mean time Five or Six Thousand Janisaries, passing behind a Hill, Fell upon the Christians, who had not percieved them, in their Flank, and put them into confusion, the Regiment of the Grand Mareschal Jablounski particularly suffering very much. The Duke of ∣rain who marched with his Hors, the Imperial Infantry being six miles. be∣hind, knew not that the King was advanced so far, till his Majesty sent him word that he was engaged with the Enemy, and desired him to Ad∣vance without any loss of time; His Highness therupon Marched with all the speed he was able, but having a Defile to pass, he could not joyn the King so soon as otherwise he might have done. The Duke of Lorrain ap∣pearing with the first Squadrons, the Poles retreated to meet him, to avoid the great disorder which they began to fall into; and the German Dragoons hav∣ving joyned the Poles, they returned to charge the Enemy, who not being now able to maintain their ground, retired with some loss. That in this action twelve or thirteen hundred Poles were slain, and among them a Palatin. That the King himself was in great danger. and his Son Prince Alexander being engaged among the forwardest, had his Hors killed under him. That on the eighth they ex∣pected the Imperial Infantry would come up, and that on the ninth the King and the Duke of Lorrain, had resolved to attack the Fort of Barkan, which they believed would occasion a very sharp Engagement.
An Account of a Second Battle be∣tween the Turks and Christians in a Letter from the Imperial Camp near Barkan, of the eighth of Oc∣tober, One Thousand six hundred Eighty three. THat Count Lamberg was just arrived there from the Army, being sent by the Duke of Lorrain, to acquaint the Emperor; That the Christians had on the ninth been engaged with Ten Thousand Turks, and that af∣ter a very sharp Fight, which lasted several hours, the Turks were total∣ly defeated, and most of them cut in pieces; That a small number sa∣ved themselves over the Bridg of Barkan, which being afterwards broke, the Turks were deprived of the means to escape; Some threw themselves into the River, and were drowned, and about Eight Hundred were taken Prisoners, among which was the Bassa of Silestria, and among the killed were found the new Bassa of Offen, and the Bassa of Aleppo; That Barkan immediately after Surrendred on Discretion; and that the King of Poland and the Duke of Lorrain resolved to follow this Great and Happy Success, with the Attack of Gran. An Account of the fight between the Christians and Turks with the total over∣throw of the Turks at Barkan, from Brussels October the 22. 1683. THe Victory obtained against the Turks at Barkan, is the more conside∣rable, for that it was against the Best and Choisest part of their re∣maining Army. The consequences of it are like to be very great, and may occasion the taking of Gran, Agria, and Newheusel. We are told that in the first days action the King of Poland was missing for two hours, and believed to be either Killed or Taken; and that above Thirteen Hun∣dred Poles with many good Officers were slain, and that their loss would have been greater, had not the Duke of Lorrain hastned with extraordi∣nary diligence to their Assistance. FINIS.
