T2532 R10701 12149965 55042
A True and Perfect NARRATIVE OF The Great and Signal Success of a Part Of His MAJESTIES FLEET Under His Highness Prince Rupert, and His Grace the Duke of Albemarle, Burning One hundred and Sixty Dutch Ships within the Ulie: As also the Town of Brandaris upon the Island of Schelling, by some Commanded Men under the Conduct of Sir ROBERT HOLMES, the Eighth and Ninth of this instant August. Published by especial Command. LONDON: Printed by Tho. Newcomb living over against Baynard's Castle in Thames-strees. 1666.
A true and perfect Narrative of the great and signal Success of a Part of His Majesties Fleet under his Highness Prince Rupert, and his Grace the Duke of Albemarle, burn∣ing One hundred and Sixty Dutch Ships with∣in the Vlie: As also the Town of Branda∣ris upon the Island of Schelling, by some com∣manded Men under the Conduct of Sir Ro∣bert Holmes, the 8 and 9 of this Instant August. ON the 29 of July, His Majesties Fleet under his Highness Prince Rupert, and his Grace the Duke of Albemarle, weighed Anchor from within sight of Zealand, and steer'd their Course for the Vlie; but the winds being contra∣ry, they did not make the Island till the 7 of August, in which time several rich ships happened to get in, which otherwise had fallen into their hands. Being come to an Anchor, the Generals were informed, That the Islands of Vlie and Schelling were very ill guarded, notwithstanding there were Store-houses both for the States, and the East-India Fleet, and Riches to a good
value, and what did weigh most, a considerable num∣ber of good Merchants ships usually riding there; up∣on which it was resolved by the Generals, That there should be a speedy Attempt made. A Councel of Flag-Officers was called, and it was determined there, that it should be carried on in the manner following, viz. That 300 Men should be drawn out of each Squa∣dron, consisting of two parts Landmen, and the third Seamen; these to be Commanded by Nine Captains, viz. Sir Robert Holmes, Rere-Admiral of the Red, to Command in chief. Sir Philip Howard to Command 120 Voluntiers. Captain John Bellasis, Captain Ha∣man, Captain Wiltshire, Captain Haddocke, Captain Guy, Captain Silver, Captain Healing, Captain Butler, Capt. John Holmes, each to Command a Company. Sir William Jennings was also Ordered, That in case they had attaqued both Islands at one time, he should have Commanded one Division of the whole. The ships appointed for this Expedition, were the Advice, Hamp∣shire, Tyger, Dragon, and Assurance, Fourth-Rates. The Garland, Pembrooke, Sweepstakes, Fifth-Rates. Five Fire∣ships, and seven Ketches; Which being in a readiness, on Wednesday the 8 instant, about Eight in the morning weighed from the rest of the Fleet, and came to An∣chor about a League from the Buoyes, where they met the Princes Pleasure-Boat, called the Fanfan, who had discovered within a considerable Fleet of ships near the Vlie; which proved to be 170 Merchant men, the least of which was not less than 200 Tuns burthen, with two men of War, who had lately Convoyed near 100 of the aforesaid ships from the Northward, homeward bound; some from the Streights, some from Guinny, some from Russia, some from the East Countries; the rest were outward bound, ships all like∣wise richly Laden.
Sir Robert Holmes considering, That if he should proceed, as his Design was, first to attempt the Land, that numerous Fleet might possibly pour in such num∣bers of Men, as might render the Success hazardous, re∣solved to begin with the ships; and accordingly, having ordered the Advice and Hampshire to lie without the Buoyes, he weighed with the rest of his Fleet; and the wind being contrary, he turned with much ado into Schelling Road, where the Tyger came to an Anchor; and immediately Sir Robert went on aboard the Fanfan, and put out his Flag; upon which the Officers came on board him, where it was ordered, That the Pembooke, which drew the least water, with the five Fireships, should fall in amongst the Enemies Fleet with what speed they could: Capt▪ Browne with his Fireship chose very bravely to lye the biggest man of War on board, and burnt him down-right. Another Fireship running up at the same time to the other man of War, he back∣ing his Sails, escaped the present execution of the Fire∣ship; but so, as to run himself by it on ground, where he was presently taken by some of the Long boats, and fired. The other three Fireships clapped the three great Merchant-men on board, which carried Flags in  Main Tops, and burned them. This put all then Fleet in a great Confusion, which Sir Robert Homes percei∣ving, made sign for all the Officers to come on board again, and presently gave order that Sir Wlim Jn∣nings, with all the Boats that could be spared, should take the advantage, and fall in and burn, and destroy all they could; but with a strict Command they should not Plunder The Execution was so followed, each Captain effecting his share, some 12, some 15 apiece, that of the whole Fleet there escaped not above 8 or 9 ships, one of which a Guinny Man of 24 Guns, and three small Privateers, who being driven up into a nar∣row
corner of the Stream, served to protect four or five Merchant-men that were a head of them; where it was not possible for our Boats to come at them; though even these few were much damaged. This work took up most part of that day, being the 9 of August, so that we had not day enough to fall upon the Island of the Vlie; Sir Robert Holmes being also informed by some Prisoners, that the place was not so considerable as it had been represented; and Night coming on, and perceiving two of our Fregats, viz. the Dragon and Garlamd aground, it was thought most convenient for all hands first to go to work to get them off; Which be∣ing done, he continued in his intention of attempting the Vlie the next morning, as soon as the high Water would permit the motion of his Vessels, but his de∣sign was then likewise prevented; for so great a Gust and Rain hapned that night, that the Arms and Am∣munition in the Boats, Hoys, and Ketches, having received much damage, he thought it best to weigh, and as the wind stood, to attempt something upon the Island of Schelling, which the Morning proving moderate weather, he accordingly prosecuted, land∣ing by the help of his Long Boats, Eleven Compa∣nies on shore, where he discovered only some few scattering fellows, but met with little or no opposi∣tion. Leaving therefore one Company to secure his Boats, himself with Ten Companies marched up three miles to the Capital Town called Brandaris, a very fair Town or Dorp of above 1000 Houses; where keeping five Companies upon the skirts of the Town to prevent any surprise of the Enemy, he sent the o∣ther five to fire and burn the Town; but finding them (as his vigilance was to secure a safe retreat) somewhat slow to execute that order, and fearing they might be tempted to forget themselves in the pillage, he himself
was forced to set fire to some Houses on the windward, the sooner to perfect the Work, and hasten his Men a∣way; which burnt with that violence, that in half an hours time, the most part of the Town was in a flame. The Town was reported by those that were found in it, to have been very rich, and so it appeared by some of the Soldiers Pockets; but very few people were to be seen in it, having had time to run away from the dan∣ger, except some old Men and Women, who were used with all gentleness and humanity. The remaining Villages of that Island, which are two or three, had certainly run the same fortune, but considering it was near high Water, Sir Robert thought it not fit to lose that opportunity of getting off to Sea, which he thought more considerable then to stay 24 hours for the destruction of them, remembring likewise that the channels between the Buoys were very narrow, and not bold without a frank wind. By high Water he got off all his men, and set sail out of that place, retain∣ing still his first intentions of falling upon the Ulie; but as he was going on board, he received Orders from the Generals to return to the Fleet with all speed, which accordingly he did that Evening, being the Tenth of August, leaving behind him the marks of a singular conduct and most vigorous execution, and bringing off, besides a considerable Booty to the private Sol∣diers and Seamen, the States Pleasure-Boat of Twelve Guns, without other loss then of six men killed, and about as many wounded. FINIS.
