T3227 19504455 108904
The true Effigies Of Sr. EDMONDBURY GODF Knight and Iustice Of the Peace who  MURTHERED by Papists the 12th day of October An̄. Dom̄. 1678. F. H. van Hove. Sculp
Memoires OF THE LIFE and DEATH OF Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, LATE Justice of the Peace for Middlesex, who was Barbarously Murthered by the Papists, upon the first Discovery of THE Horrid Plot: TOGETHER WITH A full Account of the strange Discovery of the Murther, the Tryal of the Murtherers, and the Sham-Plot of the Papists to charge the Murther of Sir Edm. Godfrey upon him∣self, Detected. Protomartyr pro Patriâ Moriendo restituit rem. LONDON, Printed for John Hancock at the three Bibles over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, and Enoch Prosser at the Rose and Crown at the East end of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1682.
TO THE KINGS Most Excellent Majesty. Most Gracious and dread Soveraign, THat I should pre∣sume to lay this little Treatise at your Royal Feet, and to implore your Maje∣sties most gracious Patronage of it, is not out of any vain Ostentation of leaping from the distances of my mean Station to approach Maje∣sty; But rather to do that right to
my Subject, as to shelter it against malicious Censurers, under your Royal and powerful protection. Those that Persecuted him while liv∣ing, and at last took away his Life, at once bereaving your Majesty of a faithful Subject, and the Nation of a useful Member, will I question not, endeavour (as they have often at∣tempted) to bear down the true Va∣lue of his Merits by unjust Slanders: but he was too well known to be Scan∣daliz'd by such men, who are as well known (as they were his, so) to be Enemies to your Sacred Majesty, your Kingdoms, and the true Protestant Religion. It was for his firm adhe∣rence to all these that he fell an Inno∣cent Sacrifice to their Revenge and Malice. He faithfully served your Majesty and Countrey, while he had
Life to spend in such Services. 'Tis fit the World should know what he was. He dyed for his Zeal in such Services, for his Loyalty to your Majesty, and Constancy to the Prote∣stant Religion. To whom then should the Protection of his Memory upon such accounts be better (though with a humble respect to your greatness) dedicated, than to our Gracious King and Defender of the Faith? Honorantes me honorabo, is the Royal Promise of the King of Kings to his Worshippers. Sir Ed∣mondbury Godfrey was one that dutifully Honoured and Served your Majesty: And your Maje∣jesty, according to your Native Cle∣mency and Goodness, and (after the pattern of him whose Vice∣gerent
you are) was pleased in compensation of his Duty, to con∣fer many Honours upon him. You Honoured him with the Digni∣ty of Knighthood, with admitting him into the Commission of the Peace, and that great Character your Majesty was pleased to give him of his Abilities for that Ser∣vice. He was honoured with the freedom of access to your Royal Presence, and being imployed for your Majesty in some great Ser∣vices. After his Death, your Ma∣jesty was pleased so far to Ho∣nour him by your gracious Sym∣pathy with your People in his loss, as to extend your Justice by your Royal Proclamation for the Discovering of his Murtherers, and then to grant a special Commissi∣on
of Oyer and Terminer for their Tryal, and to bring them to condign Punishment. Unto all these Honours that living and Dead your Majesty has graciously been pleased to extend to him; May it please your Sa∣cred Majesty to grant one more in his behalf, in graciously conde∣scending to Vouchsafe your Royal Patronage to these Memoires of your late faithful, Loyal and Protestant Subject; and of your Princely goodness, as well to par∣don the presumption of the Author, as the defects of his undertaking. May the divine goodness that hath hitherto (to the unspeakable Joy of your Subjects) preserved your Sacred Person and your Govern∣ment against all the Plots and
Contrivances of your Enemies, con∣tinue to defend you, and increase such Loyalty in the hearts of your Sub∣jects, as this man dyed for. That the Crown may long flou∣rish on your Royal Head, and that you may be bless'd with a long, happy and peaceable Reign over these Kingdoms, is the hearty Prayer of, Great SIR, Your Majesties most humble, Loyal and Obedient Subject and Servant, Ric. Tuke.
Memoirs OF THE LIFE and DEATH OF Sir Edmondbury Godfrey. A Good Name (sayes the Royal Mora∣list) is better than precious Oyntment, Eccl. 7. 1. 'tis this, that while the Body of a good Man is prey'd upon by corrupti∣on,
and insected with stench and faetor in the Grave, perfumes the World with the Odours of grate∣ful and pleasing remembrances fit as well for the delight, as use of the Living. That the worthy Sr. Edmond∣bury Godfrey left such a Name be∣hind him, needs not the confir∣mation of this Narrative; there is no place where ever he had a mention, but is scented with it. The confection of those great and imitable Vertues with which this Good-Name was by himself in his life time compounded, I am now to spread before you, and to open this Box of Nard for your delight and benefit. The very last Act and Apothe∣osis of his Life, though Tragical and bitter to him; yet, as it was occasioned by that loyal Zeal and Resolution for the Service of his King and Country, which pro∣voked the malitious Papists to
cut him off, was an Offering of a Sweet-smelling Savour, and made this precious Unguent to savour in the Nostrils of all good Men with the greater redolencie and sweetness: And notwith∣standing the cursed designs of his revengeful Enemies, after having taken away his Life, to take away his good Name too; it was not in the power of those dead Flies to corrupt this Oynt∣ment. If the accessions of a Gentile Stock, and generous breeding there∣to suitable, might be any advan∣tage to own Personal worthiness, he might boast of both; but Sed genus & provaos & quae non fecimus ipsi. Vix ea no∣stra voco. Ovid. he had more to boast of (had he been given to that idle hu∣mour, which he never was) from his own acquirements; so that what∣ever bequests of Honour or Estate he received from his worthy An∣cestors, were accumulated by the acquests of his own Industry and
Vertue; by both which he became tam famae quàm fortunae suae faber; and Ennobled the Coat of his Ancestors with his own Atchieve∣ments: Yet, to render him a Gentleman of the truest Stamp, he was so qualified as well by Descent as Purchase. The Mora∣list thought the former sufficient, That Nobility was nothing else but ; Plutarchus lib. cont. Nobilita∣tem. Ancient Wealth and Ancient Wor∣ship; but this was not sufficient for him without building upon an Ancient Basis a New Super∣structure of a Personal Merit. His Father was Sir Thomas God∣frey Knight, of an Ancient and re∣putable Family in the County of Kent, where not only his said Fa∣ther, but his Grandfather, and Elder Brother were Justices of the Peace, as was this worthy Knight himself afterwards for the County of Mid∣dlesex. So that in this kind of Se∣ries and Succession of Magistracy from Father to Son, he seemed as
'twere Born to be a Justice of Peace, as 'tis observed by that Learned and Worthy Prelate Dr. Lloyd in Sr. Edm. Godfrey's Funeral Sermon, Page 14. that excellent Sermon he preach'd at his Funeral. His Father (by several Wives) had a Numerous Issue, no less than Ten Sons, Our Sir Edmond∣bury being the Sixth by a Se∣cond Venter: yet though the Father himself was but a youn∣ger Brother, the Grandfather left so plentiful an Estate to him as served to afford sufficient allow∣ances to his Children; None of them but with what was left them, besides the laudable improvements they made to it by Trade and Traf∣fick, lived plentifully and in good repute. Sir Edmondbury had in his youth bestowed upon him an Educati∣on suitable to his Birth and Qua∣lity, being first put to Westmin∣ster School (that Prime Nurse∣rie and Pae dagogie of Tyronick
Learning,) where in a little time by the strength of his extraordi∣nary Parts he arrived to that pro∣ficiency as to be sent to the Uni∣versity in order to his maturati∣on in Studies of an higher Na∣ture. Having continued there for some time a diligent and industri∣ous Student in those parts of Learn∣ing, which afterwards qualified him for great and worthy Em∣ployments; he was afterwards sent over to Travel in Foreign parts, to advance the Theorie of his speculative acquirements by Observation of Men and Manners, and became thereby the better qualified to discharge himself in those publick Places to which he was afterwards called. During the time of his Tra∣vels, he kept himself (by the aids of the Divine Grace) as well free from the contagion of the Immoralities as the (equally dan∣gerous)
false Religion of the places in which he conversed; the two destructive Rocks, upon which most of the unseasoned youth of the Gentry of this Kingdom, when exposed to the like Temptations by their incautelous Parents (out of a vain humour of a fancied accomplishment to be gained by Travel) do infortunately split. For by those sound Principles of Religion and Vertue which he had imbibed by the means of his careful Parents and Instructors, he was sufficiently antidoted against both; returning home ra∣ther informed than corrupted; like the laborious Bee extracting the Hony of useful Experience and Observations from the worst of things. After his return home to his Native Countrey, his careful Fa∣ther, to render him as well ac∣complished in Domestick Learn∣ing as Foreign Experiences, sent him
next to , and admitted hi  Member of the Honourable Society of Greys-Inn, there to Study the Regal and Municipal Laws of this King∣dom; And in this place though he continued not long enough (according to the Rules of such Societies) to assume the Graduates Robe of that Profession; yet he arrived to that mature proficien∣cie as gave him a good Title to it: And wanted nothing but a Complement of time to make him capable of it. But the reason of his so soon leaving the Societie was a sense he had in himself of a defect in his Hearing, or a kind of Deaf∣ness, which (though not very great) was alwayes Natural to him, and was judged by himself and Friends might be an hin∣drance to him in the nice and dif∣ficult practice of Pleading, where the circumstances of debated Mat∣ters
from the Mouths of Pleaders or Witnesses not being audibly received might be a great preju∣dice to the Clyent's Business; and withal some unhealthiness in his Body, which in the laborious employment of the Law-practice might be prejudicial to him. For these Reasons after some Years continuance in that Inn he re∣moved himself into the Countrey amongst his Friends. Amongst whom he diverted himself for some time: but his generous Soul being too active to be confined to the retirement of a private Solitude and con∣versation, could not long rest in this inert and useless Capacity, but put him upon some under∣takings, wherein he might im∣prove the activity of his industri∣ous Spirit for the good of himself and others; Idleness being alwayes a burthen to him to whom La∣bour never was so; the fatigues
of the latter in its most diffi∣cult Quis autem vir bonus & erectus ad honesta, non est labo∣ris appetens justi, & ad officia cum pericu∣lo promp∣tus? Cui non indu∣strioso otium poena est? Senec. lib. de Provi∣dentia. managements were so little ungrateful to him, that he seem∣ed never better pleas'd, than when he had least case: for indeed Bu∣siness was so natural to him that it was never uneasie; He was most in his Element, when he was employed in publick or pri∣vate Offices of doing good, and none was ever more indefatiga∣ble in such Offices than himself. And Providence was so au∣spicious to him in these generous designments, as in a short time to offer him a fair occasion of putting them in Execution, by means of an intimate Friend and Relation of his, who had lost a great part of his Estate by reason of his Services for the King in the late Wars; and having reduced the rest into Stock, resolved to improve the same in way of Trade by taking a Wood-yard, and Buying and Selling Wood
and Coals; an Employment not only creditable, but known to be usually very gainful to the Undertakers; especially such as have any considerable Stocks to manage it with. Sir Edmonbury Godfrey being a younger Brother, and what Estate he had, consisting in Moneys to the value of 1000 l. or there∣abouts, was advised (as a fair way of improvement) to join Stocks with the aforesaid Gentleman, and to come in a Partner with him, in managing the Trade of a Wood-wharf, which he accord∣ingly did; setling themselves first at Dowgate, within the City of London; where in a few Years that they continued Trading to∣gether, it pleased God so to bless their honest industry and in∣deavours, that they advanced their Stocks to a very considerable in∣crease & advantage; so indulgent is
Providence commonly to the honest endeavours of industrious Persons, that the more laborious they are in the Employments they are called to, the more they thrive and are blessed in them. How may the Example of these two Trading Gentlemen, reproach the unthrifty humours of too many of the Gentry of these Dayes, who study no other Arts but that of spending, and waste∣fully to consume the Patrimonies, that their careful Fathers had gathered for them, in all the ex∣pensive Modes of Luxury and Riot? and while they scornfully disdain those laudable Employ∣ments and means of Thrift by which they might be Quis est istorum qui non malit Rem∣pub. turba∣ri quam co∣mam suam, qui non so∣licitior sit de capitis sui decore quam de salute, qui non compti∣or esse malit quam hone∣stior? Senec. de Provid. Cap. 12. service∣able to the Common-wealth and advance their Families, what do they by taking the contrary courses, but precipitate themselves upon the Rocks of unavoidable con∣tempt
and Beggery? and so be∣come themselves the Scorn of those industrious Persons whose wayes of Thriving they formerly contemned. Having thus by their joint Trading (as I have said) acquir'd considerable advantages to their particular Estates, in a few Years that they dealt together; It after∣wards happened that Mr. Harrison, Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's Partner, altered his Condition by Marry∣ing a near Relation of Sir Ed∣mondbury's; the other continuing still, and to the Day of his Death in the state of Coelibacy: but whe∣ther it were upon this account, the Family being too much in∣larged for their commodious Co∣habitation; or that their Stocks being likewise so much inlarged, there might be a necessity (as was the case once between Abra∣ham and Lot) of a Separation, I
know not; but these two Partners having first fairly and justly stated the Accounts betwixt each other, agreed upon a parting: And ac∣cordingly Sir Edmondbury (resolving still to follow the same Employ∣ment) having found out a con∣venient House and Yard fit for his purpose at the other end of the Town, at Hartshorn-Lane, near Charing-Cross, removed thither; And having furnished his Yard with a good Stock of Wares, be∣gan now to Trade for himself: And found the same Providence that had hitherto been propitious to him, to succeed his industry and endeavours in this his new under∣taking, with a suitable Blessing. The Arts he used as means (sub∣servient to the Divine Providence) of his Thriving in the World, were no other than those of an ingeni∣ous industry and unreproveable Integrity, the two best and most solid Bases of a prosperous condi∣tion.
He being in his private Ca∣pacity, as strict an Observer of the Rules of Commutative Justice, as he was afterwards of the di∣stributive, when called to the ex∣ercise of a more publick Fun∣ction. And it was not long that he con∣tinued in this private way of Com∣merce and Trading; but that the great Abilities both of Estate and Parts of one so near residing to the Court being represented to his Ma∣jesty (who as of his piercing Wis∣dom, he is most able to judge of; so of his Native Clemency and Good∣ness is most ready to prefer such Per∣sons to Places of Trust and Ho∣nour, wherein they may become serviceable to himself and People) It pleased his Majesty to admit him into the Commission of the Peace, as one of his Justices for the County of Middlesex, and City of Westminster; in which
Place he faithfully served him, till such time, as for the last Services wherein he performed the greatest act of Loyalty to his Prince and Countrey, that lay in the power of a Subject to do, he was by the malice of his, and our impla∣cable Enemies, the Papists, taken from us. We are now therefore to con∣sider him in his more publick Capacity as a Justice of the Peace, in which place as he spent many and the last Years of his Life, we may remark more so∣lemnly those Graces and Excel∣lencies which alwayes did illu∣strate his most imitable Conver∣sation. But whether or no any hap∣py Conjunction of Sydereal in∣fluences might auspicate this Ho∣nour to him by way of Succes∣sion to his worthy Ancestors; 'tis
certain one of the greatest of Princes thought him not unwor∣thy the Office. And was so well satisfied in his choice of him, that in confirma∣tion of his approvement, He [that ought to know best (sayes the Learned Doctor in his Threnodia) Sir Edm. Godfrey's Funeral Sermon. hath often said, He took Sir Ed∣mondbury Godfrey to be the best Ju∣stice of Peace in this Kingdom;] and adds a great Word of his own in the first Clause of that Paragraph; That [He was per∣haps the Man, the Man of our Age, that did the most good in that Sta∣tion; He did (saith he) Dedicate himself wholly to it; made his Coun∣trey his Family; his Parish his Wife and Children; attended wholly to their good; to keep up Law and Justice, and Safety and Liberty; to save others from Violence and Wrong, to reduce them from Disorder and Vio∣lence.
What greater Testimonies, than these of so judicious a Prince, and so Learned a Prelate, could be expected or desired to Illu∣strate the Merits of a worthy and deserving Magistrate? But if we may Comment up∣on this Royal Theme, it will be worth our while to consider those Excellencies apart which rendred him capable of so great a Cha∣racter. And here we may not un∣fitly take the opportunity to give you in brief the Character of this Excellent Person, both as to his Natural and Moral Indowments; by which it may be easily judged, how well qualified he was as well for the Honour as Trust of that Eminent Place in which he served. As to his Person, the Graver hath furnished you in the Frontispiece with a Copy (not much disa∣greeing
to the Life) of his come∣ly and graceful Countenance; in which, as if Nature had cast him into a Mould fit for the purpose of his future Office, we may per∣ceive a duly composed Feature equally mixt with gravity and sweetness, a becoming mien that carried as well Authority as ingenuity in it, and commanded at once both awe and love from the beholders. The gracefulness of a Mans presence (in the Fancies of some) adds much of respect and reve∣rence to their Persons, especially where their Characters require it or deserve it. And therefore Howell treating of the qualifica∣tions of Embassadors, gives this for one: That being to represent Howels Treatise of Embas∣sadors. the Person of his Prince, he ought to be a comely and graceful Person. And such an one was Sir Edmondbury;
his Stature was elevated some∣what above the common Size of ordinary tall Men: the habit of his Body spare, far from Corpu∣lencie; but well set and exactly pro∣portioned. He was indeed (as most tall Men are) somewhat inclined to stoop in his going, which might be occasioned by the Thought∣fulness of his musing Head, most∣ly working upon some good and generous Designs in the way of his Business. His disposition and humour were such as obliged love and respects from all that knew him, being Naturally of a kind, courteous, and affable tem∣per, free of access, and ready to hear the meanest Persons, that in way of complaint, or business, had any thing to do with him; and this accompanied with a facete∣ness and pleasancie of humour, that was no less Natural him, rendred his Conversation lovely
and delightful to all Persons. If it may not seem imperti∣nent, I will give you one in∣stance for all of the Urbanity of his temper. That he being one Night attending at the Council Table at Whitehall, till it was some∣what late, and being then to go to the Temple upon Business, called a Coach at the Court Gates; and perceiving a Gentleman standing there, whom he had observed likewise attending upon Business at the Board, was pleased cour∣teously to enquire of him, whe∣ther his way lay towards the Tem∣ple: understanding which, he was pleased, though a Stranger, to take him into the Coach with him, and gave him his passage thither. Civility and Courtesie were the Flowers and Ornaments of that excellent temper; the ground
of which consisted of an exact Justice and Compleat Charity; both these were Eminent in this Worthy: None more punctual and exact as to the Commutative parts of Justice than he; in his dealings, in the keeping of his Accounts, in performance of his promises, rendring to every Man his right, and discreetly looking to his own. And for his Chari∣ty, as he was Naturally indued with a large and bountiful Spi∣rit, so the expressions of it were Visible in such circumstances and instances, as may perhaps be pa∣rallel'd by few Men of this Age, if we respect either the Charity of his Mind, or the Charity of his Hands. And as to the First, how free was he from a censorious Spirit; the unhappy temper of too ma∣ny of this Age; and no doubt
the main ground of our present dif∣ferences both in Church and State? when Men not content to enjoy the satisfaction and liberty of their own perswasions, do injuriously censure and perhaps maliciously despight those that are of the con∣trary: But this Good Man was none of that Leaven; he was him∣self of a Sound and Orthodox perswasion and principles; yet censured none that differed from him in lesser Circumstances not material to the Essence and Vi∣tals of Religion; but honoured many such for the Characters of a solid goodness appearing in them from whom he differed in his own private Judgment and Opi∣nion: though he was most strict in reproving and punishing grosser Enormities; yet he could chari∣tably bear with the lesser infir∣mities of such in whom a con∣trouling Vertue did more emi∣nently
prevail. In fine, though he had a severe regard to himself, and his own actions; yet he could bear with others for great∣er miscarriages than he allowed in himself: though he alwayes frown'd upon the frontless Sin∣ner; yet (such was his candour) that he would rarely put a mo∣dest Transgressor to the Blush. As to the Charity of his Hands, it must be a labour (though a delightful one) to any that should go about to enumerate those la∣bours of Love, those Offices of a true Christian Charity in which he abounded. It may now be lawful to de∣clare to the World, that which in his Life he most laboured to conceal; for indeed his Charity was so truly Christian and Hero∣ick, that in the expressions of it,
his left Hand was a Stranger to what his right Hand did: few have more merited applause in this kind than himself, none sought it less; being coted to have done his duty, expecting his reward from his Heavenly Father, and leaving the fame of it to the con∣tingent notice of a posthumous Me∣morie. It is now known which durst not before be mentioned, how kind he was to a Religious, but suffering Family in the City of Westminster, allowing them Ten Pounds per Annum, towards their support, and this Annuity he conti∣nued to them for several Years together. But this was but one Family of many that were in the like nature, though in different pro∣portions, relieved by him.
Although he was ever severe against idle Beggers and Vaga∣bonds, such as refusing the honest wayes of Industry and Labour to maintain themselves, lived altoge∣ther upon the Alms of others; yet he was so much a friend to those that were necessitatedly poor, and whose poverty was neither occasioned by ill Husban∣dry, nor continued by idleness, that such should never want his Cha∣rity; but he would either set them on Work, or otherwise re∣lieve them by some charitable donation. Although, as I have said, it was the Christianity of his tem∣per to do his Alms in secret, there are many Hundreds of living Wit∣nesses that are able to give in their Testimonials to this part of his Character, that he was a truly charitable Man.
And as he arrived to this grade of the beatifying Scale of being Mer∣ciful; Mat. 5. 9. so he declared himself to be a true , a Child of God by ascending another; he was a Peace-maker, one that coveted not so much the Triumph of the Lawrel as the shadow of the Olive-bough: Moderation and Peace were the proper Elements of his Nature. If he observed any differences to arise betwixt any of his Friends or Neighbours, how industrious would he be to re∣concile them! nor would he rest, whatever pains he was exposed to, till he had accomplished his ends. The reputation of his Peace∣making humour occasioned him much trouble by such as desired the benefit of it, by putting him frequently upon Arbitrations and
composing of differences: which province as by reason of his great judgment and experience, he was very capable to manage; so he rarely declined it, though it were a great hindrance both to his Publick and Private Business; it is well known by the Neigh∣bourhood amongst whom he lived, how much of his time and pains were laid out in such friendly Services. Thus was he as a Man: take him as a Christian, and a Reli∣gious Man; and I cannot give you his Character more truly and fully than is mentioned by the aforesaid Learned Prelate in his Funeral Sermon: one who as by reason of his intimacy with him, he had the greatest opportunity; so by his faculty was most capa∣ble to judge of him in this par∣ticular. His words are these:
As to those things which be∣long Funeral Sermon pag. 12, 13. to a private Christian, I ought to know him better than most others. And I did know that by him which gives me abundant comfort in his Death. I knew him to be a just and charitable Man; A Devout, a Zealous, and Conscientious Chri∣stian. His Religion was more for use than shew. And yet he was constant in all the Acts of Gods worship, as well out of Judgment as Affection. And though the compassion that he had for all Men that did amiss, extended it self to all manner of Dissenters, and amongst them he had a kindness for the Persons of many Roman Catholicks: yet he alwayes declared a particu∣lar hatred and detestation of Po∣pery. I say this on purpose to be remembred (because some would have him a Papist, or in∣clined
that way) I never plea∣sed him with any duty I per∣formed, at least he never thank∣ed me for any so much, as he did for those Sermons which I preached here against Popery. Thus far the worthy Doctor, whose words I have quoted at large, as a Noble confirmation of what has been before hinted, of his Piety, Charity, Moderati∣on, and Religion; and withall (under this Head) to take off that groundless and malicious calumny, devised no doubt by the Papists themselves, of his inclina∣tion to their Religion; a Scan∣dal so grosly absurd (to them especially that were acquainted with his Conversation) that if the known opposition he made against them and their Practices in the first discovery of their pre∣sent Plot, and his dying for it by their violent and malicious
Hands, were not a sufficient refu∣tation; we have here an unex∣ceptionable confirmation from the Mouth and Pen of this worthy Bishop; whose judgment was too great, and who knew him too well, to be deceived in so material a cir∣stance. We have by these rude touches given you a rough draught of some of those lineaments that made up his Excellent composition; some faint Ideas of his well featur'd Soul, whose several Graces as they were singly most Excellent and Lovely, so the Harmony of their contexture agreeing in an exact Symmetry, rendred him a pure form of Vertue: the complexion of which was not of a faint or fading Nature, like some tender Consti∣tutions that change with every Air; but strong and permanent, not to be altered by any Vicissi∣tudes of Fortune or Condition: What he was, he was alwayes,
of whom it may be said, as it was . vita Arhan. once of the great Athanasius, That he was A living and immortal Pillar of Vertue. We shall lastly consider him in his more publick Capacity as a Magistrate or Justice of the Peace, in which province as he stood more lyable to Vulgar notice, we shall observe those re∣markables of him that may be satisfactory to the Readers at∣tention and his own due merits. How well he deserved this Of∣fice, needs no higher or greater Confirmation, than that he was elected to it, and approved in it by him that bestow'd it on him: A Great and Wise Prince, who as he is himself the Fountain of Ju∣stice, cannot be thought to commit the Administration thereof (espe∣cially to one in vicinity, so near, and so well known to him, as Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was) but to Persons of exact approvement.
Besides, what we have before hinted of his fitness for this Ser∣vice by the happiness of his Edu∣cation, having been brought up a Student in the Laws of England; he was otherwise qualified for it, by many excellent Endowments of Nature, requisite to the com∣position of a good Magistrate; a deep and piercing Judgment to search into the Niceties and Intricacies of such difficult busi∣ness as he often met with, and to determine accordingly; An inde∣fatigable Patience mixed with a genuine serenity of Mind, where∣by he could bear with the Cla∣mours and Impertinencies of such as came before him, leisurely at∣tending to the Allegations both of Appellants and Criminals, and fully hearing whatever (and so long as) they had any thing in reason to offer to him; rather than the Truth on either side should be undiscovered by any
prejudicate fore-stalling of the E∣vidence. A right and sound Integrity of Mind, the golden Vein that ran through the whole body of his Actions, and all the parts of it, not to be corrupted by gifts, bribes, or pensions (the common taint of Justice) nor to be warp'd or byas'd by any sinister Interests, but plain and upright, uninterest∣ed, and regularly conformable to the exactest rules of Justice and Honesty, in all the particular ad∣ministrations of his Province, be∣ing well known, as to any partia∣lity in his actings, to be no Re∣spector of Persons. Add unto all these, an Heroick Fortitude, and Invincible Courage of Mind, which was the Shield of his other Vertues, and whereby he was bravely armed and defen∣ded against all the difficulties and discouragements (which were not a few) that he met with; still
keeping his ground with a stedfast Uprightness, and unmoved Ver∣tue amidst such Tryals, as persons of less Courage than himself would have sneaked and grovel'd under; . Plato in Lachete. Fortitude is stiled by Plato, One of the most Fair and Excellent Ver∣tues; And is by Aristotle in his Ethicks made to bring up the Van of the Four Cardinal Vertues, Quia haec virtus circa res arduas & difficilimas versatur; Virtutis autem proprium est versari inter difficiliora. A Vertue therefore certainly most becoming a Good Magistrate, who must dare to be such in the worst of times, and greatest of dangers. 'Tis vulgar Vertue (says the Learned Prelate, speaking on this head) that puts men only upon Safe good things; 'Tis Vertue Funeral Sermon pag. 16. in its perfection, when one dares do well, and suffer for it: And of this Degree he shewed some as great proofs as perhaps have
been given in our days. We shall in the first place give you one Instance which (with due Allowance to the unusualness of the Practice) may give suffi∣cient proof of the greatness of his Mind, in daring to be just to him∣self, (Justice as well as Charity beginning at home,) in a case wherein a Sneaking Softness or Complyance might have betray'd him to the ruining advantages of a Sconc'd and Insulting Adversa∣ry. Having a considerable Debt owing to him from a Great Per∣son at Court, to whom he had made many and often applications for the Payment of it, without any other satisfaction than that of fair promises, from time to time, and nothing performed: Sir Ed∣mond-Bury well knowing the Abi∣lity of the Person, and that his pretences were but so many for∣mal delays to deferr the Payment
of that which (though justly due) he knew (by reason of his privi∣ledge) he could not in an ordina∣ry course of Justice be troubled for, resolved however to sue him at Common-Law, (notwithstand∣ing his said Priviledge) and rather to cast himself upon His Majesties Clemency, for infringing the Priviledge of his Houshold, than to suffer himself to be unjustly de∣frauded of his due Debt, by one that would make such a Protecti∣on an Asylum to that Injustice, which he knew His Majesty would never patronize or allow of. Accordingly after all other fair ways, unsuccessfully attempted; he got the said Courtier Arrested by vertue of the Kings Writt, and a Warrant thereupon granted by the Sheriff: and the Defendant was thereupon taken into Custo∣dy, till such time as he should give in sufficient Bail to answer
the Action, instead of which the Defendant insisting upon his Pri∣viledge: sent to White-Hall, and got an Order for the Commit∣ment of Sir Edmond-Bury, for breach of Priviledge, upon which he was taken into Custody, and so remained for the space of six days a Prisoner, and was so to con∣tinue till such time as he should discharge the other of the Arrest, which Sir Edmond-Bury would not consent unto, but rather suffered the severity of that uneasie re∣straint, than to gratifie his Ad∣versaries stubbornness with a too easie compliance: His Majesty being then ac∣quainted with the Circumstances of the Case, was pleased graci∣ously to Order Sir Edmond-Bury Godfreys discharge; and taking notice, in his Princely Judge∣ment, of that Magnanimity and Heroick disposition he shewed, in hearing the brunt of this trouble,
was pleased not only to pardon the Misdemeanour; but by this Acti∣on to take such farther notice of him, as to conferr upon him the Honour of Knighthood: and as a more special token of his Grace and Favour, to admit him again into the Commission of the Peace, out of which he had, by means of his Adversary, been then lately be∣fore strucken out. But a more noble instance than this to prove the fortitude of his mind, as well in daring dangers, as bearing troubles, appears in his staying in Town in the time of the last great Sickness, when the two great Cities of London and Westminster were in a manner deserted by their Inhabitants, and few left but such of the poorer sort who wanted Mony or Friends to remove themselves farther; when the Arrows of the Al∣mighty were scattered abroad in every corner: when almost every
House was turned into a Sepul∣chre, and Epitaph'd with the dole∣ful Inscription of a Miserere Do∣mine, while the Dead and Living seemed buryed together; when the fear of the Contagion ren∣dered the few Inhabitants as un∣sociable to each other, as they would with wild Beasts in a Wilderness, every man fearing to come near another, lest he should meet with his own Executioner, when their very words (conveyed with a lethiferous Air) were fear∣ed as Bullets: when breath it self the Instruments of Life in one, should be death to another as it passed from him. In fine when death and danger filled all places, and turned the whole Town into one universal Scene of Misery and Mortality: then it was that this worthy Magistrate shewed the greatest proofs of a true Christian Courage and Resolution, in ad∣venturing to stay for a Publick
Good in all the greatest heats of this dangerous Contagion. The famous Roman, Curtius, is cele∣brated in History for his unexem∣plary Courage, in that for the love of his Country, and to evert a great Judgment then upon them, he fearlesly rode headlong into a vast devouring Gulph, becom∣ing so the Sacrifice of their Re∣demption. The action was full of Gallantry and Bravery, suitable to the Heroick temper of a true Ro∣man Spirit: but Sir Edmond-Bury, from a better Principle, of a truly Christian Zeal, at least equalliz'd his Courage in this great under∣taking; wherein death in a thou∣sand several appearances, seemed ready to devour him, if his Tu∣telar Angel (consigned by the Divine Providence) had not pre∣serv'd him to greater purpo∣ses. It was no unadvised forward∣ness, or injudicious temerity that
put him upon an exploit so hazar∣dous as this was to his life and safety, neither any designs of ad∣vantage by it, but a Just and Conscientious regard to his Duty in that place wherein he knew he might (in the absence of those his fellow Magistrates that were fled from the danger) be instrumental as well to preserve the Lives, as Properties, of such as should be exposed both to the danger of the Contagion, and the Rapine of some ill minded people, who fre∣quently take the advantage of such Publick Calamities to in∣rich themselves with the spoils of the miserable Deceased. These were the only ends he had of his staying in Town, for a Publick Good, and was therefore esteemed by the Inhabitants of Westminster, as their Guardian Genius; as the Asylum and Sanctuary of their distressed con∣ditions.
He was the man (shall I say the only man of his Place,) that stay∣ed to do good, and did the good he stayed for; shall we go about to instance in particulars? 'tis im∣possible, they are innumerable. 'Tis easier to say, what good did he not that lay within the Verge of his Province? His House was not only the Seat of Justice, but an Hospital of Charity, where be∣sides that Relief which he com∣monly afforded the Poor at other times for the necessity of Living, he now extended his Charity to give them Physick, to preserve them from dying, when they were in a more immediate danger by the Contagion, then of Starving; He was the Man, (and where was there such another,) that laying aside the Grandeur of his Cir∣cumstances, would familiarly vi∣sit his Poor Sick Neighbours, and Administer suitable Reliefs to them; He was the Man, that at
that time durst venture himsel into the very Garrison of Death the Pest-house (the ordering o which, he took into his peculiar Care and Administration) and there amidst the deadly Fumes that arose from their Putrid Sores, would he stand by the Diseased Lazars, and see them dressed, not denying them any Relief or Assi∣stance that lay in his Power to afford them. His Justice was no less re∣markable then his Charity, when there was any need of it, as ma∣ny times there was, to right the Dead, as well as to relieve the Liv∣ing; a notable instance whereof, we shall give you in this follow∣ing Narration. A Profligate Wretch that had taken up a new way of Thieving, (yet 'tis said too much Practised in those times) of Robbing the Dead, notwithstanding the Hor∣ror that is naturally concomitant
to such Actions, had in the dead time of the Night used to Invade the Cemeteries and Church-yards that were now more Peopled then the places they belong'd to; and there breaking up the mournful Clods, would Sacrilegiously ran∣sack the Graves, and pillage them with as much freedom, as Souldi∣ers do the bodies of their vanquisht Enemies in the Fields of War, ta∣king from them their Dying Ap∣parel, the Sheets and other Lin∣nen in which they were Inhu∣med, and decently covered, leav∣ing the Poor Carcasses inhuman∣ly Naked. This Trade he followed so long till he furnished a Ware-house with the Spoils of the Dead; and had gotten into his Possession (some say) to the number of a Thousand Winding-sheets: when by some means being at last dis∣covered, information of these bar∣barous Actions being given in to
Sir Edmnud-bury, he condiscend∣ed to go himself with the Con∣stables Guard, to the Place where (he was informed) the Good, were Harboured, and Seized them. In the mean while the Criminal having got notice of the design against him, was fled; and being hardned against the fear of Infecti∣on by his too much familiarity with the Dead, had taken Sanctu∣ary in the Pest-house, where he thought himself sufficiently secu¦red against the Attacques of any that should pursue him; for who should venture upon so imminent a danger, as to seize a Malefactor in that place, where possibly they might run upon their own Deaths? And indeed, the Officers to whom Sir Edmund-bury had directed his Warrants to that pur∣pose, were too faint-hearted to do it, and declined the Service; But then the Noble Knight himself (as a Pattern of unpresidented Mag∣nanimity)
out of his Zeal to Ju∣stice, ventured in his own Person to go unto that Fatal Place (made Sacred against all Approaches by the danger of it,) and there with his own hands Seized and carryed off the Offendor, then delivering him into the hands of the Officers to be secured, in order to be at a convenient time Examined about the Fact. And upon due proofs made out to him by several Witnesses, the Criminal being Convicted, Sir Ed∣mond-Bury Godfrey in respect to Justice, and to make so great a Villain an Example for the future to all that should be tempted to any such execrable designs, pro∣nounced this Sentence upon him, as most suitable to the nature of his Crime, That he should be car∣ryed to the Church yard, the place where he had perpetrated his Nefandous Villanies, and there to be strip'd naked to the Waste, and
by the Beadle belonging to the Parish, to be severely scourged round the place; which Sentence was accordingly Executed upon him, in the presence of a great number of Spectators, who were assembled out of Curiosity to see so remarkable an Execution: Mor∣tui non Mordent, it is proverbial∣ly said; but one that durst so bold∣ly venture to spoil their passive Carkasses, found an active revenge inflicted on him, for so doing, in the very prospect of their injured Relicks; yet neither the smart, nor shame of his punishment could mollifie the hardned wretch to any kind of relentings for his notorious Villanies; but rather excited in him a Spirit of Revenge against the Authors of it: which he especially designed against the worthy Sir Edmond Bury, by whose Sentence it was inflicted, so that turning his Covetous designs a∣gainst the Dead, into a malicious
Revenge against the Living, he vowed and resolved upon his death whenever he should find an op∣portunity for it: And in pursuance of such his Devilish resolves, being one time late at night, unhappily befrien∣ded with an occasion of meeting Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey, in the Street going homewards towards his own House, the Barbarous Villain, in an inhumane manner, assaults him with a Cudgel that he carryed about him (perhaps for that purpose) and had certain∣ly brained him, if Sir Edmond-Bu∣ry, perceiving his design, had not prevented it by a timely defence, which he did by drawing out his Sword, and therewith Warding the blows that were aimed at him, yet without any offensive violence or hurt to his Adversary, but only to defend himself, which he did till such time as Company coming by, and taking notice of
the Out-rage, Rescued him from the Assault, and seized upon the Ruffian, who was thereupon Com∣mitted to Newgate, where he con∣tinued till the next Sessions of the Peace holden for London and Mid∣dlesex, at the Old-Bayly, and there (besides for this) several other In∣dictments comming in against him for Felony, he was Convi∣cted, and received Sentence to dye; but by the mercy of the Court he was only Transported into some Foraign Plantation, where persisting still in his wick∣ed Courses, not withstanding these seasonable warnings, being Con∣victed of some Criminal Fact, that by the Laws of the Country deserved death, he had Judge∣ment of death accordingly pas∣sed upon him, and was Hanged. During all the time of this great and dreadful Sickness, Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey, (as we have said) continued his Station: and did
worthily, that while, supply the defect of those that out of a Pu∣sillanimous Phil-auty, had deser∣ted their Charges to secure them∣selves; such selfish Principles as theirs were abhorrent from his Ge∣nerous and Publick Spirit, who durst attend his Duty in the Face of the greatest difficulties and dangers. And it pleased God (as an incouragement to others in the like discharge of their Duties) to reward his faithfulness with a singular Protection, preserving him from those imminent Perils, that he was (by his forwardness to be useful) continually exposed to, that he might continue to be farther serviceable to his King and Country in better times. And many years after this it pleased God to continue him to us for a Publick Blessing: in which time, though we cannot note any great remarkables of him to sup∣ply a History, yet remarkable it
is, and worthy note, that he was still the same; the same Good Useful man that he always was; none of the Fleeting Mo∣bile that aspire at Names, and to be made the Discourse of the World by their fluctuating and giddy Changes, he kept his Sta∣tion, and contented himself with a private and retired acting in that Sphere, wherein he had opportu∣nity enough of doing Good, and being Useful to the World, the greatest thing that he ever aspired to. About the Year 1678. Having been by the constant Fatigues and Labours of his Business, reduced to a sickliness of Body, and Di∣stempers growing upon him, he was advised by the Phisicians to go to Montpellier in France, the Air of that Country being ac∣counted very Restorative to wast∣ing and decaying Constitutions; according to whose advice, ha∣ving
setled his Affairs in England for the short time of his intended stay, he went over thither, and took, together with, the benefit of that Salutiferous Air, a Pro∣spect of several remarkable Places in that Kingdom; especially of a Great Work that the French King was then undertaking, in making a Navigable River through those Countries into the Levant. He continued for some months in that Country (in which time it having pleased God to restore him to a good measure of Health, (the end he went for) he returned again to bless his own Country, and Relations, with his much long'd-for presence. And not long after his return it was, that the late (I fear we have too much reason to say the present) Hellish and Damnable Plot of the Papists against the King and Government, broke out in England. An unhappy Jun∣cture
in which his last actings, that concluded the Catastrophe of his worthy Life, exposed him to an untimely and cruel Death, by the hands of those bloudy-minded Pa∣pists; the Proto-Martyr of those Innocents that were designed by them to a merciless destruction; but blessed be God, his Death, how∣ever maliciously designed by them, occasioned a prevention of the ill effects of their Malice a∣gainst others, by awakning the Magistrates, and generally the whole Kingdom, by this early in∣stance of their Treachery to a more narrow watchfulness of them and their proceedings. The History of the first begin∣ning and Discovery of this Plot, is so generally known, and men∣tioned in so many Narratives and Informations Published of it, that it were needless for us to say much of it, or more than is ne∣cessary to let you know how far
Sir Edmond-Bury was concerned about it. Dr. Oates, Reputed the first Dis∣coverer of this Plot, having been beyond the Seas, and here in Eng∣land, a long time Conversant with the Managers of it, as being Listed one of their Party, and privy thereby to all their Designs and Managements, Was resolved to make his Discovery of this Mystery of Iniquity, and the Intrigues of it, upon the first fair opportunity that offered it self to him. And having got into some acquain∣tance with Dr. Tongue, a Worthy and Learned Person, who had lately before Translated a Book, Intituled the Jesuits Morals, into English, the said Book reflecting so severely upon that Brood of Vi∣pers, exasperated them to that height, that nothing would sa∣tisfie them but his blood (the usual Alloy of their merciless Revenges) and Dr. Oates, then a great Con∣fident
of that Party must be the man (injoyned thereto by their Provincial Whitebread) that should dispatch him. Dr. Oates could do no less than accept the service, but (as it never was in his purpose) was so sar from Executing what he had promised that after a lit∣tle time of acquaintance with the Doctor, he Discovers to him not only what they had designed against his own life, but the Plot in General, with their de∣signs against the King and Go∣vernment, and Protestant Religi∣on Established in these King∣doms; and looking upon the Doctor (as he was) as a per∣son of approved Trust and In∣tegrity, did at the same time Communicate to him the Ge∣neral Heads of this multi-form Treason, with the names of the Actors concerned it it.
But the business being of so Ex∣traordinary Consequence, and Mighty Opposition and Difficulty supposed to be met with upon the Discovery of it; it was consul∣ted between them, what fit Per∣son they should pitch upon to ac∣quaint his Majesty with it. And accordingly they agreed upon Collonel Kirby, a Person of known Fidelity to the King, and Zeal to the Protestant Interest; the Collonel chearfully undertakes the Service, and taking a conve∣nient opportunity of meeting the King walking in St. James's Park, begs his Attention, and informs him some heads of the Treason, and particularly, of the Designs of the Papists, to take away His Sacred Life, and that Pickering and Grove, besides others, were In∣gaged to Attempt it in that very place of His Recess; His Ma∣jesty was much Surpriz'd, to hear of a Danger, (that by reason of
his Native Innocency and Good∣ness) he needed not to have feared, but graciously accepting at the hands of his Loyal Subject, this seasonable Notice, was pleased thereupon to Order him, together with Dr. Tongue, to wait upon Him that Evening at White-hall with the Informations, which they accordingly did; delivering to him an Information consisting of Forty three Articles, drawn up by Dr. Oates: the Origional of which, (this being but a Coppy) he kept in his own hands His; Majesty graciously received the Papers, but being to go the next Morning to Windsor, was plea∣sed to order them to be left in the hands of a great Lord and Emi∣nent Minister of State, whom His Majesty would intrust as well for the safety of them, as his Secre∣cie in the Affair, and according∣ly they were left with him, and several Attendances were spent
upon his Lordship, in order to ac∣quaint him with other Matters relating to the Concern. In the mean while Dr. Oates discovered himself to Collonel Kir∣by, who had not had all this time any acquaintance with him; and gave him in some further Infor∣mation, as namely, of the coming to Town of the Provincial White∣bread, Bedingfield a Jesuite, and others of that Gang and that they having by some means got intima∣tion of this Discovery, had him in Suspition for it; And had de∣sign'd to prevent his Progress therein, by making him away: this they thought in their devilish Policy the likeliest way to for∣ward their Designs, by first re∣moving such Persons out of the way as should be likely to be In∣strumental in the intended Dis∣covery. This they then attempted a∣gainst Dr. Oates, and this they af∣terwards
Executed upon the wor∣thy Sir Edmund-Bury, who was not so lucky to escape their Mur∣derous Hands, as he was. For the Doctor more than mistrusting their Designes against him, had the good luck to avoid the brunt of their Revenge against him, by a timely flight; the particulars of which, he related to Dr. Tongue: and that now having thus got himself loosed from his Treasona∣ble Company, he was resolved to cast himself upon the Mercy and Protection of his Majesty; which Resolution of his, Dr. Tongue very well approved, and till such time as they could meet with a conve∣nient opportunity of accomplish∣ing it, did kindly invite him to continue with him (as a good place of Safety and Retirement to him,) at his Lodgings at Fox∣hall. During which time, Dr. Oates wrote over fair Copies of his In∣formations,
and upon the King's Return to White-hall, Notice was one day given to Dr. Tongue and Collonel Kirby, That it was his Majesties Pleasure, that they two should Attend him the next Morn∣ing in Councel, to be Examined be∣fore that great Presence, about the Particulars of their Informations. In Order to which, it was ne∣cessary, that their several Copies should be Sworn to, to render them the more Authentick when they should be delivered into the Councel; And Sir Edmund-Bury, as a Person of known Loyalty to his King and Country, was the Magi∣strate whom they chose to be Sworn by, and to intrust with this great Secret. A Loyal, but unhappy piece of Service to this poor Gentleman, who having with Horror and Astonishment perused the said In∣formations, and taken their Oaths of the truth of them (which they
Swore to before him) would needs desire a Copy of them, to be left with him, that he might in his own Loyal and Judicious thoughts take them upon an af∣ter view into a more serious con∣sideration, and so be the better in∣abled to Act in that Province he was in, if need should be, for the prevention of the growing mis∣chief. Little dreaming (Dear Soul) at that time, that his Loyal Inten∣tions therein, should expose him to that Malice of his Enemies (who too well knew the honesty and in∣tegrity of his mind, not to be con∣cern'd at it) that should be the occasion of his Death; the sad and doleful Narrative of which, as it was by this means occasioned, we shall presently give you: The Two Informants having thus sworn to their Informations, went with them before the King and Councel, who afterwards sent
for Dr. Oates, and they were all Three severally Examined before them, and their Services herein so well accepted, that to secure them from the Malice of their Ene∣mies, His Majesty (out of his Na∣tive clemency and goodness) was graciously pleased to take Dr. Tongue and Dr. Oates into his Roy∣al Protection, and to order them Lodgings in his Pallace at White-hall. The Plotters (that had Spies in every Corner to observe the pro∣gress of their Designs, and the suc∣cesses of them) were now strange∣ly surprized, that the scent was ta∣ken, and that we were already in pursuit of the game, before they were aware of it; They dreaded the Rumour of it more then any particular Informations; They knew that Information had been given in and Sworn to; They knew who it was that gave them their Oaths, and that he had Co∣pies
of the Informations; They knew so Loyal a Person, so True a Protestant, would be more then a Speculative or idle Observator up∣on such Treasonable Subjects, they knew his Place, they knew his Parts, they knew his Power, they knew his Interest at Court; his free access to the King, his esteem amongst the People, and were not ignorant how able, how ready he might be to improve all these ad∣vantages to the ruine of their De∣signes: They knew his Integrity, that there was no hopes of cor∣rupting him, and therefore resol∣ved to destroy him; that by such an Execrable instance of their Re∣vengeful temper they might deter all other Loyal Magistrates from intermedling with their Affairs, and to render their Arcana inferna Sacred against all such intermed∣lings Flectere si uequerunt superos A∣cheronta movebunt. by the danger of their Reven∣ges. His Murther now is fully re∣sov'd upon, and several persons im∣ployed to effect it.
The Persons principally con∣cerned were Father Girald, and Father Kelly, two Irish Priests, Robert Green Cushion-man to the Queens Chappel, Laurence Hill, Servant to Dr. Godden Treasurer of the said Chappel, Henry Berry Porter of Somerset House; Mr. Miles Prance a Goldsmith in Co∣vent-Garden, and Captain William Bedloe, who though he was not an actor in the Design, yet was made privy to it, and afterwards made his discovery of it: besides there were others that were like∣wise privy to it, as namely, one Lawson a Priest, and Phillip Ver∣natti (belonging to the Lord Bel∣lasis) who afterwards fled, Pri∣chard, Le Fair, Welch, Kains, and others; these last Five being all Jesuits. Vernatti and the Priests were the Persons (it is believed) that first undertook the Design, and then drew in first Green, Hill and
Berry (the actual Murtherers) and afterwards Mr. Prance, to en∣gage with them in this Hellish Conjuration. The Scene of the contrivance was the Plough-Ale-house, near the Water-gate by Somerset-house: the time upon a Sunday after Eve∣ning-prayer, when the said Preists coming from the Chappel met with Mr. Prance there, and upon confe∣rence with him, told him, That Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was a bit∣ter Persecutor of Catholicks, and a particular Enemy to her Majesties Servants, (of whom Mr. Prance counted himself one, as being im∣ploy'd to work in work of Gold and Silver for Her Majesty: and that he had very lately Examined People against them, and got Depo∣sitions to fix base Crimes and Scan∣dals on their Religion, and that Catholicks would be ruined unless he were taken off; and therefore it was necessary, for the Glory of God and
good of the Church, that it should be done: And when Mr. Prance seemed to scruple at what they proposed to him to ingage him in the Murther, the two Priests Girald and Kelly told him, It was a meritorious work, and no sin, but a work of Charity—How cruel are the very Mercies of the Wicked! How impious the Re∣ligion of such unsanctified Zea∣lots! They prevailed with him, at least he seemed to be prevailed upon, to ingage himself in the Design, and several consultations were afterwards had about the management of it. Upon Saturday the Twelfth of October, Lawrence Hill, one of the Conspirators (as they had laid their design) was imployed to go to Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's House in the Morning about the time of his stirring, to speak with him, but what his Errand
was, is unknown: afterwards the said Hill meets with Girald and Green, and they three together way-lay Sir Edmonbury at his com∣ing forth, which was about Ten or Eleven a Clock (the usual time of his setting out) being all alone; they follow'd him and watched him all that day from place to place, till about Six or Seven a Clock in the Evening: And then these that lay in wait to shed Blood, having lodg'd their innocent prey at a place where they saw him enter, sent their fellow Green (while they in the mean watched his forth-coming) to Mr. Prance, to summon him with all speed to hasten to So∣merset-house Water-gate leading down to the Thames, where Kelly and Berry the other two designed Executioners were to meet him, in order to accomplish the Tra∣gedy. These three Assassinates abided
for some hours the Horrors of the Night, with a devilish impa∣tience of seeing their expected prize; when about Nine a Clock their companion Hill comes with cruel hast to inform them he was coming: and now for a Gin wherewith to intrap him into their bloody Hands, it is present∣ly contrived, That Kelly and Ber∣ry should begin a seeming quar∣rel; and in the mean while Hill that watched for that purpose, was to ingage Sir Edmondbury at his coming by, to come down and use his Authority for the part∣ing of them. When Theeves fall out (it is said) honest Men come by their Goods; when Murtherers feignedly do so, it appears such Men may lose their Lives. The Innocent Gentleman not dreaming of any other Treache∣ry (if he thought of any) than what he knew intended against
the Publick, soon after comes by, when Hill (the Judas in the Plot) having treacherously in∣sinuated himself into so much ac∣quaintance with him as to be known by him; meets him up∣on his approach, in a seeming great earnestness and counterfeit concernedness, Intreating him for Gods sake to come in, for there were two Men a quarrelling, and he was afraid there would be blood shed: Murther be sure there was, as it was by this artifice designed and executed; his presence (as a Ma∣gistrate) was urged as a likely means to chill the heats of their fury, and to make them quiet. Sir Edmondbury was unwilling to ingage himself, especially at that season of the Night; but the other by his importunity in a manner forced him to it, Hill leading the way, and Sir Edmondbury Godfrey following him through the Gate leading down toward the place;
Girald and Green were watching near by, and observing the mo∣tion, immediatly fell in after them; Mr. Prance as soon as Sir Edmondbury was entred the fatal limits, goes down to secure the Water-gate, that no Body should enter that way to disturb their proceedings; and Berry at the same time (that the Scene of their mischiefs might be altoge∣ther inaccessible) was to watch the Stairs and Passage by the Chappel; but first He and Kelly the pretended Quarrellers stood a∣bout the Rails by the Queens Stables; and as Sir Edmondbury went down towards them, (sweet Soul whose Thoughts were only then affected with generous designs of hindring the Effects of a pre∣tended Outrage, and little dreaming that himself was the designed Sub∣ject of it) that Villa in Green suddain∣ly threw a twisted Handkerchief about his Neck, and forthwith
all four of them pulled him down and throtled him, drawing between them the ends of the strangling In∣strument so hard, that at last his pure and innocent Soul, after some Convulsive struglings against the violences of such an unnatural dis∣solution, was dislog'd from the Body, and convey'd by Angels to the place where blessed and Mar∣tyr'd Saints lye under the Altar, crying out their Quous{que} Domine's, for a just revenge of their inno∣cent Blood upon the Heads of their malicious Enemies: It was no easie death, and he being a Man of a strong Make and Constitu∣tion, they were fain to use the more violence to dispatch him, giving him (when prostrate on the ground) many violent punches on the Breast with their Knees; and Green to perfect the Exe∣cution, wrung his Neck almost round with all his force. Prance and Berry being come
to them by that time he vvas quite dead, they alltogether help'd to carry the murthered Body in∣to Dr. Goddin's Lodgings, where the said Hill lived; who went before and opened the Door; when they were got in, they carried him five or six Steps in∣to a little Room on the right hand, and there left him that Night and Sunday all Day and Night. There were some unhappy O∣mens of this Tragedy which Sir Edmondbury himself had conceived Vide Nar∣rative of the Tryals of Green, Berry and Hill. (it seem'd in his ovvn mind) some time before the Execution of it, which he not long before declared to Dr. Oats, after he had received the Informations; That he had re∣ceived Affronts from great Persons, for being so zealous in that business of the discovery of the Plot; and that (being threatned by some great Men of the Popish party) he went in fear of his life by that party, having been dogged by them
for several Dayes; but (being advised to take his Man alwayes with him) Answer'd, That he did not fear them, if they did but come fairly. And to Thomas Robinson Esq; (discoursing with him about the Plot) he declared himself to him in these Words: Upon my Con∣science, I shall be the first Martyr; but I do not fear them if they come fairly, I shall not part with my life tamely. But notwithstanding these (more than suspected) dangers, being fortified with his own In∣nocence, that meant wrong to no Man, he adventured so far as Murus hic heneus esto—Nil conscire sibi. Horat. to become at last a prey to his Malicious Enemies. But to return to our History: The Monday Night following, Hill and some others of them re∣moved him into a Room in the upper Court; and Prance having a mind to see where they had laid him, they all went toge∣ther
with a dark Lanthorn to the said place (Dr. Goddins Lodgings,) where also Captain Bedloe came, who had not hitherto before ingaged himself in any actu∣al performance with them, and per∣ceiving Mr. Prance there amongst the rest, took sch particular obser∣vation of him, as served him after∣vvards to make a discovery of him and the rest concerned in the Mur∣ther. On Tuesday Night they con∣vey'd the Body to another Room in the long Entry over against Dr. Goddins Lodgings; And the Wednesday Night following, be∣ing removing it again from thence to the place where, it was first lodged, Mr. Prance happening to come suddenly upon them at unawares, they fearing it had been a Stranger, left the Body in the Entry and ran away to∣gether in a fright, till such time as Mr. Prance (perceiving their
mistake) called out to them, and discovering who he was, they went back together, and carried the Body into the little Room where it was first placed. And now to perfect their Vil∣lany to the heighth of malice, (that they might as well Mur∣ther his Reputation as they had done his Person, a thing more than once by them attempted) the two Priests, Girald and Kelly advised to carry him out into the Fields, and there to leave him, run through with his own Sword, in some obsure place; where (upon discovery) he might be supposed to have murther'd himself; and therefore his Money, Rings and such other things of value as he had about him, were all to be left with him. Captain Bedloe had before the Murther been acquainted by them with the design, and fain they would have ingaged him to have
assisted them in the Execution; for which they told him there was 4000 l. to be given by a great Lord of the Popish Party; and acquainted him with the time when they intended to dis∣patch him, then desiring his assi∣stance, but he honestly failed them; which made Monsieur Le Faire (one of the Undertakers) very angry with him; but meeting him on the Munday following, told him that the business was done without him; and having shewed him the Body (as we have before told you) would then have ingaged him to assist them in carrying it off, accord∣ing to their last mentioned con∣trivance; and bound him to it upon the Sacrament he last took (a pretty knack of prophane Conjuration, by which they usu∣ally adjure their Parties to Trust and Secrecy) Captain Bedloe promised to meet them at Twelve
a Clock that Night to that pur∣pose, as judging that the fittest time for such deeds of Darkness to be transacted in; but failed them again, and came no more at them; but instead thereof taking a journey to Bristoll, where some time after, the horror of this fact had made such impres∣sions on him, that thereup∣on changing his mind as well as he had done his Company, he sent up to one of the Secretaries of State, in writing, together with a discovery of other matters rela∣ting to the Plot, an Account (so far as he knew) of this Mur∣ther. But in the mean while the aforesaid Complices being thus de∣feated of his assistance, went about the work themselves; to which end they had procured a Sedan, into which (though with some difficulty, by reason of its stiff∣ness) they crouded the Murther∣ed
Body; this was done about Twelve a Clock (the Hour ap∣pointed,) Prance and Girald car∣rying him out at the great Gate, the Door of which Berry the Por∣ter opened to them; having (to avoid their taking notice of the action) invited the Souldiers who used to attend there, to his House, and there treated them with Drink and Tabacco, till such time as they had conveyed away the Body. What breasts besides those of these hardned and cruel wretches, would not have quiver'd with the horror of such inhumane acti∣ons? to deal so familiarly with the Carkass of a murder'd person, a person murdered by their own hands, and whose blood they could not but think at the same time cryed loud for vengeance upon their heads! But oh the Stiffness of a Romish Zeal! how immalle∣able does it render their Stony
Natures to the force of all hu∣mane Impressions! Yet neither the horror of the Fact, nor yet that of a dark night, could scare them from their hi∣deous purposes; but they pro∣ceeded with their dead Burthen (carrying it in the Sedan by turns between them) till they came to So-hoe Fields, near the Grecian Church there lately built; and there Hill attended with an Horse ready for their purpose, upon which they placed the Body before Hill, who held it from falling; (Oh horrid Boldness!) Mean while the rest conveyed the Se∣dan into an House that was build∣ing, but unfinisht, that stood near by, to remain there till they came back: And then Girald the Priest said, I wish we had an hundred such Rogues as secure as we have this. Mr. Prance then because he was an House-keeper, took his
leave of them and returned home, and the other four went away with him, one leading the Horse, Hill riding and holding the Body, and the other two walking by. They carried him into an ob∣scure place, about two miles out of Town, towards Hamstead, near a place called Primrose-Hill, and there in a ditch they left the Body, after all these harrasings to its quiet repose; this was the Grave they had prepared for him; but before they left him (as a token of their malicious design) Girald runs Sir Edmond∣bury's own Sword through him, laying the Scabbard together with his Gloves on the bank, at a small distance from the Body. In the mean time Sir Edmond∣bury's Servants, and then his Friends, and then the whole Town were not a little concern∣ed for his absence; and there was once a Proclamation order'd to
discover him, but countermanded, by reason of false Informations spread about by some of the Po∣pish Party, that he was living and well: And there were seve∣ral persons that went designedly up and down to Coffee-houses to spread false Reports upon this Subject; as that he was gone in∣to the Countrey to be married to a certain Lady, whom they took upon them to name, and that they saw him in such and such places. Upon Saturday the twelfth of October, the very Evening that Sir Edmundbury was Murthered; Father Harcourt the Jesuit after∣wards Executed, sent away a Let∣ter to Father Ewers a Priest at the Lord Astons in Stafford-shire, wherein were these words; This Night is Sir Edmondbury God∣frey dispatcht. This Letter was received there on the Monday, and shewn to Mr. Dugdale, as he
hath since made Oath at seve∣veral Tryals, and the same since confirmed by Mr. Chetwin a wor∣thy Gentleman, who being then in that Countrey, heard a re∣port of it there by means of that Letter on the Tuesday; vvhich was before ever there was any disco∣very of it at London. But as Murther the great Ob∣ject of the Divine Justice, does most unseldom escape Discovery; but that the Murther is detected, and the Murtherer by some means brought to light; God was plea∣sed by his Providence so to or∣der it, that the Murther of this good Man (the miss of whom had caused great Thoughtfulness of Heart (I may say) all the Kingdom over) was in a fevv days after Discovered. For upon Thursday the Seven∣teenth Day of October, which was the next Day after they had left him in his uncover'd Grave, two
Men by chance passing over the Fields, spied the Gloves and Scabbard, and upon further search discovered the Body it self ly∣ing in the Ditch, with the Sword run through it, in such manner as his Murtherers had left it; besides that they found about him, his Rings, Watch, and some Moneys both Gold and Silver, all which the Covetousness of his Enemies dispensed with the loss of, to gratifie a more unjustifiable end thereby, of a malicious Slander, which they thought might be thereby occasioned, of being his own Murtherer. These two honest Discoverers well weighing the circumstances of what they had seen, and that there was no Blood any where appeared, upon the Wounds made by the Svvord run through him, concluded it vvas some Extraordi∣nary case, and thereupon one of them fetching a Constable and
some others to assist them, con∣vey'd the (yet restless) Body to an house, vvhere he lay not long before upon the rumour the Body vvas, knovvn to be the Relict of the much desired and wanted Sir Edmondbury Godfrey. The Coroner of Middlesex vvas then sent for (as is required in such Cases of unnatural Deaths) to inquire of the Death of this person; who by the Oaths of a Jury of substantial Credits, found that Sir Edmondbury Godfrey vvas murthered, (not murthered him∣self as the design vvas laid) and the Verdict vvas recorded. But yet the Felons concerned in the Murther, could not be yet dis∣covered. His Majesty being graciously inclined to be concerned as vvell as others in the loss of this good man and faithful Subject; under∣standing that vvhat vvas feared vvas novv certainly proved, that he
vvas Murthered, vvas pleased up∣on the twentieth day of Octo∣ber following to issue out his Royal Proclamation; Commanding all his Subjects and Officers to use their utmost Diligence to find out and Discover the Murtherers of Sir Edmondbury, graciously promi∣sing 500 l. reward to any that should make such Discovery; and if any one of the Murtherers should Dis∣cover the rest, he should not only be Pardoned, but likewise have the same Reward. But this Royal Offer could not prevail with them to come in for the present, (guilty Consci∣encies are aw'd as well by the Clemency as Justice of the Ma∣gistrate) but they seem'd more hardened in their Wickedness by its Success. For it was not above a Fort∣night afterwards, that they drew up a Narrative of this so meri∣torious Act of theirs in killing a
Protestant Magistrate, in writing, which Vernatti read in an in∣sulting manner at a meeting they had at the Queens-Head at Bow, where he declared that the same was drawn up to be shewed to one of the Popish Lords (now in the Tower) and other great Persons that were the Original Designers and Promoters of the business, for their Satisfaction, by whom it might possibly be sent to Rome; and there no doubt it would find a great approbation and acceptance. The Murther we see is found out, but the Murtherers yet un∣discovered, notwithstanding his Majesties gracious Proclamation, with promises of reward (besides Pardon) to the Discoverer: Captain Bedloe had (as we have told you) sent up a general ac∣count of it, but not being him∣self present at the Murther, could not give a particular account
of those that were actually con∣cerned in it: So that the Assassi∣nates for about ten weeks had lull'd themselves into a fond Se∣curity, becoming almost as fear∣less as they were graceless: But the Keeper of Israel, that neither slumbereth nor sleepeth, and from whom no Secrets are hidden, was then pleased (to make the Triumphs of his own Wisdom and Justice the more Illustrious, when all humane attempts to that end seemed in a manner de∣feated) to work out a Disco∣very by such unthought-of means, as plainly shewed it was Digi∣tus Dei and the Lords own do∣ing. We have before informed you that Mr. Prance was drawn into the cursed Combination, and how far he Acted in it; vvho as he was bound by the Tyes of Secrecy to a sinful Silence, had hitherto concealed the Fact: But there
happening some misunderstand∣ing betwixt him and a Neigh∣bour of his, the latter knowing Mr. Prance to be a Zealous Pa∣pist, and having understood by some of his Servants that one time about Michaelmas then last, he had absented himself two or three nights from home; an ima∣gination came into his Head, that Mr. Prance might be concerned in Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's Mur∣ther; although indeed, such his absenting was a fortnight before Sir Edmondbury's death, not upon the account of that, but some others more dangerous to him; The Proclamation being then new∣ly issued, prohibiting all Papists and Popishly affected persons from staying in Town; about which time, when the Plot was first noised abroad, Fenwick, Ireland, and others of the Conspirators were seized, whom he was so Zealous to defend in a pub∣lick
Coffee-house; that for some Words then spoken, he was threatned by some persons pre∣sent to be Prosecuted; and upon that account only lay from home the said two or three nights, (as he was able to prove by credi∣ble Witnesses) till such time as the business might be composed; However, this Neighbour of his, upon the bare suspition, took out a Warrant against him to appear before the Council; which Mr. Prance readily obey'd, as know∣ing Vide Mr. Prances Narrative, pag. 20, 21. him not able to prove any thing against him upon that ac∣count. But being taken by Ver∣tue of that Warrant, upon the tvventy first of December, and be∣ing first carryed into the Lobby by the House of Commons, Cap∣tain Bedloe (whom he did not then know, having been seen by him but once before, (viz.) upon the View of Sir Edmondbury God∣frey's body in Somerset-house, be∣fore
mentioned, at which time Mr. Prance took no great notice of him) knew his Face again, and charged him with that Mur∣ther, whereupon, after a strict Examination, he was Committed Prisoner to Newgate. The next day being the 22th of December, he made his Dis∣covery, (the Narrative of which is since by License of Authority Printed, and thereby charged the before named Dominick Kelly, Ro∣bert Green, Henry Berry, and Lau∣rence Hill, as Confederates in this Murther; of whom the three last were apprehended, but the two first Escaped; the Subtil Priests, according to the old Pro∣verb of those that have the bet∣ter luck, shifting for themselves, and leaving those whom they had drawn in to answer for them∣selves. Although afterwards Kelly was taken up in Surrey, by the name of Daniel Edmonds, as a Re∣cusant;
but understanding Pran∣ces being taken, got out upon Bail (hired by him for that Ser∣vice) before he was known to be Kelly, though afterwards the same was Discovered; the ac∣count of which, because it is not so pertinent to our present History, we shall here Omit. The 24th. of December Mr. Prance was Examined before the King and Council, and having given in the particular Circumstances of the Murther, and in what re∣spective Rooms and places the Body was kept as aforesaid, several Lords were ordered to go with him, to see if there vvere such Rooms as he had described, and whether he could readily go to them; which he did to their full satisfaction. But some time after, remaining in Prison without any assurance of his Pardon, he was so far pre∣vailed vvith, to retract by vvord
of Mouth what he had truly Confessed upon Oath; As once upon a further Examination to say before the King and Council, that He was Innocent, and they All were innocent: But as to the Temp∣tations he was under, and the Cir∣cumstances that sway'd him to that ill Action he hath since (in that Narrative which he hath pub∣lished to the World of these mat∣ters) so ingeniously set them forth, as may satisfie any un∣byass'd person, and take off that Calumny vvherevvith the Papists have endeavoured to bespatter him, and to Invalidate his Evi∣dence on that account: In an∣svver to vvhich, he offers these considerations (as the just and Mr. Pran∣ces Narrat. pag. 24. true Sentiments of his Soul;) These are his Words, as you may find them in his Book, pag. 24. That vvhat he had declared
concerning the Murther in man∣ner herein before set forth, was Solemnly upon Oath: That the supposed Retractation was sud∣denly done, under Consternation and Fear, and not upon Oath. 2. That he vvas at this time under certain danger of his Life, if he had persisted in that Con∣fession, for he had no Pardon granted, nor any certainty of obtaining the same. 3. That if he should obtain his Pardon, he considered that yet his Life vvould be still in danger, from the Revengeful and bloody Priests and Jesuits. 4. That his mind vvas sore∣ly troubled, as vvith all these dangers, so vvith this further Apprehension; that if he should escape vvith his Life, yet by this Discovery he should lose his Livelyhood, and in all hu∣mane probability, both he and all his Family be certainly un∣done;
For he vvas the Queens Servant, and that his Trade and Subsistence chiefly or indeed vvholly depended on her Ma∣jesties Custom (vvhich vvas certain and considerable) and that of other Roman Catholicks; so it vvas not to be doubted but the most crafty and im∣placable Priests vvould soon use means   Represen∣tations and Scandal to deprive him thereof, if he proceeded in his Discovery. 5. That he retained still a certain respect to the Popish Religion, in which he had so long been educated; for that he had not yet intirely got his Soul out of that Snare; and there∣fore he did then conceive, being swayed by such power∣full inducements, that he might lawfully say he was Innocent, and so they were all; which ☜ Note in Popish Construction, is not to
deny that they killed Sir Ed∣mondbury Godfrey; for that, ac∣cording Note the sincerity of Popish principles, where such Equi∣vocations are allow∣ed of to justify the greatest Villanies. to their Divinity, and what the said Priests had So∣lemnly declared, was no Sin or Crime, and consequently they might all in such their Ca∣tholick Sence still be innocent: Yet this he must acknowledge, he somewhat doubted, because he never was at Confession nor received Absolution since the Fact committed; which all the rest (as some of themselves had declared) had done, and so might more peremptori∣ly persist (as they did) in averring themselves to be In∣nocent; and he does ingeni∣ously declare, that had he re∣ceived Absolution, 'tis his Fear he should never without ex∣tream Difficulty have been brought to any acknowledg∣ment. These Circumstances together
with a great Distemper of Bo∣dy, contracted by the Incom∣modities of Confinement, want of Air, &c. occasioned that sud∣dain revolt of his Reason and Duty, under that perplexity of Spirit; but as soon as he had done it, Conscience slew in his Face, and would no longer be laid asleep with any delusive Popish Charms. When he be∣gan to recollect himself, the power of Truth dispersed all these Temptations of Interest, Fear and Superstition: If it were true, that he might hazard his Life and lose his Trade if he did persist in the Confessi∣on of the Murther, it was as true, and he found it by expe∣rience, that he never should have peace of Conscience if he de¦nyed it. And therefore, he was no sooner returned from the King and Council to Newgate, (which
coming in a Coach, 'tis certain was not half an hour) but he most earnestly requested Cap∣tain Richardson, (who had been with him, and heard what he had said that Morning) for Gods sake to go back, and as∣sure the King and that Honour∣able Board from him, that the first Confession which he made on Oath, was true in all Circum∣stances, and that whatever he had said before them that Morn∣ing, was occasioned only by the Consternation, Fear and Per∣plexity of mind he was under: which the Captain immediate∣ly did, and hath since declared the same upon Oath. Thus far the words of Mr. Prances own Narrative, which we have thought pertinent to be in∣serted: The perusal of the Nar∣rative it self, may serve not on∣ly for the Readers Satisfaction in
this, but as vvell to inform him of the several notorious Villanies of a great number of Popish Priests, therein by name exposed; to vvhich as a very confirming cir∣cumstance vve may add, that fall∣ing very dangerously ill soon af∣ter, he then vvhen he had no∣thing but a certain Prospect of approaching Death before his Eyes, declared and asserted to divers Per∣sons his first Confession to be true in all points; and also aftervvards as soon as he had recovered his health, he repeated the same vvith all Stedfastness before the King himself, and the Lords of the Council: whereupon his Majesty was most graciously pleased to grant him his Pardon. From all which it is most plain, that all the noise which the Priests and Jesuits have made about this matter is but empty Air, as good as nothing, and the just Truth thereof is become
Evident to any ingenious person that will but impartially look into these transactions, and con∣sider them as they are, and not as they are Represented by their false Perspectives. Thus far we have given you (according to the most exact accounts that have been hitherto produced) a Narrative of the Discovery of this most Horrid and Execrable Murther, and by what strange and unthought of means it pleased God to effect it. In Order of History, we should before this have acquainted you with the Passages of his Funeral; It was fit so good a Man, so Loyal a Subject, so great a Sufferer for the publick Interest, should not goe without Honour to his Grave. After his Relicts, so long di∣sturbed by his restless Murther∣ers, had been View'd by the Co∣roner, and then quietly deposed
into the Hands of his Relations, care was taken that he should have a Burial suitable to that ge∣neral Esteem that all persons had of him; which accordingly upon 31th of October next after the time of his Murther, was per∣formed by his said Relations in a most decent and becoming man∣ner, without any Pomp or Pa∣geantries of Ostentation (that which in his Life-time he was most averse to, and no man ever declined more than he did:) The Body being first carried to Old Bridewell, a place agreed upon for that purpose; as being for its amplitude most fit to receive the numerous Congress of Persons, that out of the City and other places adjacent, came thither to pay their last respects to this Martyr'd Worthy. From thence accompanied with great numbers of persons of Qua∣lity, eminent Citizens, Ministers
and others, that were all hearty Mourners upon this sad occasion: He was carryed in a Solemn manner through Fleet-street and the Strand, to the Parish Church of St. Martins in the Fields, and there decently Interred: The Fu∣neral Sermon upon this occasion being then Preached by the late Reverend and Learned Prelate Dr. Lloyd, then Incumbent there, and since by him Published; a Discourse so Sympathising with the Subject, and so excellent in all its parts, as deserves better than a transient Mention. WE have hitherto given you a Summary of the Ex∣cellent Life, Tragical Death, and lastly the Discovery of the Mur∣ther of this worthy Gentleman: It remains now (and it may be ex∣pected by the Reader) that we give some Account of the Trial
and Execution of those Villains that were concerned in the Mur∣ther. You have heard before, how that upon the discovery made thereof by Mr. Prance, and of the Actors in it, Three of them, viz. Robert Green, Henry Berry, and Lawrence Hill, were taken and committed to the common Gaol, in order to their Tryals. The Parliament sitting about that time, were pleased to take such notice of the fact (consider∣ing what relation it had to the Plot, about which they were then sedulously inquiring) that it was Order'd by the House of Commons, that Sir John Earnly a Member of that House, should immediately carry an Address from them to his Majesty, That his Majesty would be pleased to issue out a Commission of Oyer and Terminer for the Tryal of the aforesaid Ma∣lefactors: Which Address his Ma∣jesty
graciously accepted, and was pleased to say, That a Commissi∣on should forthwith be issued out for that purpose. Which was accordingly done; and upon Wednesday the 5th of February, the said Green, Berry and Hill, were brought to their Try∣als at the Kings-Bench Barre at Westminster, where before the Judges there sitting, they were severally Arraigned, and pleaded Not Guilty—And a Rule of Court entred for their being brought to Tryal on Friday the tenth of the same Month; and then a Jury of able and worthy persons (being Impannel'd by the Sheriff) were Sworn to trye the fact: Their Names were as follow, viz. Sir William Roberts, Bar. Sir Richard Fisher, Bar. Sir Michael Heneage, Kt. Sir Thomas Bridges, Kt. William Avery, Esq
Charles Umphrevile, Esq John Bathurst, Esq Richard Gowre, Esq Tho. Henslow, Esq John Sharpe, Esq John Haynes, Esq William Moyle, Esq Dominick Kelly and Girald the two Priests, and Philip Vernatti, (whom we have before mention∣ed to be principal Actors in this Murtherous Design) stood charg∣ed in the same Indictment for the Murther, but they being more wary than the rest, were fled, and for that time escaped the hands of Justice. Mr. Prance (the principal Evi∣dence) according to the Infor∣mations he had before given in to the Council, declared the Se∣ries of the whole matter from first to last, according as is before related, but declared that he ne∣ver had any Conference with
Captain Bedloe in his life, before he was committed to Prison. Captain Bedloe swears, that a little before the Fact, Le Fair, Prichard and Keynes, three of the Confederates and some others of them, (all of them Priests) dis∣cours'd him about killing a cer∣cain Gentleman, whom they would not name: and incouraged him with the promise of a very con∣siderable Gratuity to be assistant to them; and then directed him to insinuate himself into Sir Ed∣mondbury Godfreys acquaintance. Which in complyance to their Wicked humours, (which he durst hardly refuse to do) he did: and did under several spe∣cious pretences insinuate himself into an Acquaintance with Sir Edmondbury, (who was never hard of accesse to any) but made not that advantage of his ac∣quaintance that they maliciously had designed.
But he informed the Court, that the very day Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was murther'd, Le Fair (at a Tavern near Temple-Barr) told him there was a Gentleman to be put out of the way, (that is, in their Popish sence,) to be murther'd, that Night; and would engage his assistance: And that there would be 4000 l. reward given by a Great Lord of the Popish party to recompence the Undertakers: For (said these de∣vilish Polititians) should not this Gentleman be cut off, things would be discovered to that degree, that they should not be able to bring their designs to pass; they knew what a Remora the activity of his Loyal Spirit would be to their proceedings: To prevent which, they request Captain Bedloe to meet them at Somerset-house near the Cloysters that Evening, being the place in which they design∣ed to act the Tragedy. This he
promised to do, and (as we have said before) he durst do no less; but knowing against whom their designs were intended, he wilfully failed them. That on the Munday following, Le Fair again meeting with the said Captain Bedloe, charged him with breach of pro∣mise, and appointed him to come to Somerset-House about Nine of the Clock that Evening; where he told him he had done ill, in that he denyed to assist them in this business, but if he would help to carry him off, he should still have part of the before mentioned reward: Why, said the Witness (as surpriz'd at the News of it) is he murther'd? Yes, replyed Le Fair. Whereup∣on the Witness askt if he might not see him? which was grant∣ed, and Le Fair led him through a dark Entry into a Room where there were several people, that had no light but a dark Lan∣thorn
amongst them, and were consulting together how to car∣ry him off: When one of the company throwing off the Cloth with which the body was co∣vered, Captain Bedloe had a View of his face and presently knew it to be Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's, with whom (by the instigation of these Murtherers,) he had been so well acquainted as easi∣ly to remember him. The Captains advice to them was, to tye weights to his Head and Feet, and throw him into the River: but this they did not think fit to do, but said they would put it upon himself. And to that end resolved to put him into a Chair (or Sedan) the Porter Berry being to sit up to let them out at the Court-gate, and at Twelve a Clock that night was the hour appointed to carry him off; Cap∣tain Bedloe promising to them, upon the Sacrament which he
had took the Sunday before, to return again to them, and help them; but being got from them, never came at them more. The Constable that View'd the body in the Ditch, gave an ac∣count how he found it with the Sword Sticking through it, but no blood appearing upon the ground. And that he found a great deal of Gold and Silver in his pockets. The two Chyrurgeons moreover Swore, that they verily believed the Sword was run through him after he was dead and Cold; but that he died of Suffocation and breaking of his Neck, toge∣ther with the bruises on his Breast. To confirm Mr. Prances Evi∣dence, that they had been several times at his house, inquiring for him, and that Hill (as he and the rest told Prance) was there on the morning of that day in which
he was murther'd, there was pro∣duced one Elizabeth Curtis, that at the same time dwelt with Sir Edmondbury, his menial Servant; she Swore directly that Green had been at her Masters about a fortnight before her Master was killed, and talked with him about a quarter of an hour in French: And that Hill was there that very Saturday morning on which he was murthered, and spake to him before he went out, and was there a good while in the Par∣lour with him, but could not tell what his business was: That the night before, there was a strange man brought a Note to her Master, which she gave to him, and the man staying for an Answer, Prethee (said Sir Ed∣mondbury Godfrey) tell him I do not know what to make of it: But this was none of the three persons at the Bar, but supposed to be one of their Fraternity.
As for Hill, she was sure he was there on the said Saturday morn∣ing, by the same token he had then on the same Cloaths as he now had at the Bar; though now he denyed he was there, yet he acknowledged he had not changed his cloaths, but wore the same Suit ever since before that time. The man at the Plow Alehouse (where Mr. Prance swore the Murther was consulted) and his Servant, did both Swear, that Prance did use to come thither with Hill, Girald and Kelly, seve∣ral times within five weeks be∣fore the Murther. The relation that Mr. Prance gave of the meeting at the Queens-head at Bow, is confirmed by a Messenger that they sent for a Gentleman living about a Mile from that place, to come to them. Sir Robert Southwell deposes, that Mr. Prance having related
these things to the Council, and being to attend the Duke of Mon∣mouth and the Earl of Ossery, to shew them the places he menti∣oned, He readily went to them, and they appeared to be all such as he had described them; only as to the Room in the upper Court, where the Body was laid one Night, having never been there but once, and that in the dark too, he said he could not positive∣ly assign it, but pointed to some Rooms, and said he was sure it was thereabouts, and this doubt∣fulness the Court observing did give more credit to the rest of his Evidence. For a person that right or wrong will Swear any thing, will stick at nothing. Lastly, It was proved that Berry the Porter, pretended Or∣ders given him, that he should Suffer no Strangers or persons of Quality to come into Somerset-house on the twelfth, thirteenth
and fourteenth days of October, the first being the day on which Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was Mur∣thered, and the two days fol∣lowing the time that he lay there; and that Prince Rupert coming in there within that time, was denyed entrance. These were some of the prin∣cipal heads of the Evidence that were given in against the Priso∣ners, which, notwithstanding the directness of the circumstances to prove the Fact upon them, they had all the Stoutness to deny. And it was no wonder that men of such profligate Consciences that would not stick at the per∣petrating such Villanies, should not boggle at the denying of them. The defence they made for themselves was very Strained and unconvincing. Hill would needs except against Mr. Prances Testimony, because
he once formerly denyed it (the reason of his so doing you have had before related, from the words of his own Narrative.) But this exception the Court ea∣sily over-ruled, for that besides the before mentioned reasons that induced him to it, he had now affirmed the truth upon Oath, and his denying of it was but his bare saying, and so he could not be now Perjured upon that single assertion, nor the credit of his now Evidence be any wise the more mistrusted, considering the circumstances he was then under. And further, the said Hill to Evade, offers some Witnesses of his own Religion, to aver he was never from his Lodgings after nine a Clock at night. But these did it so nicely and gene∣rally, that no Stress could be laid upon them, it being proved that they had several Keys to the
door, and Hill might go in and out without their knowledge; and one of his Witnesses makes See Narra∣tive of the Trials. a palpable mistake of an whole Month, p. 55. and two of Green's Witnesses a whole Week, p. 66. So unhappy were they in their Calculations of the time they were brought to speak to. The Evidence that Berry gave in to the Court were the Soul∣diers who were placed Sentinel at the Gate. They say they saw a Sedan come in, and so far they agree with the Kings Evidence, but then they confidently aver that they saw none go out all night. But what was this to matter of Fact? or what did it relate to the Murther Committed, so po∣sitively in all its circumstances Sworn to by the Kings Witnes∣ses? The Sentinel might be from his Post, and 'tis most probable he was so: For Mr. Prance had before informed the Court that
Berry had inveigled the Sentinel in to drink, and so not being in the way at the time of doing it, he might truly say without any discredit to the Evidence of the other side, That he did not see the Sedan go out, it might be morally impossible he should; At least the Sentinel knowing he had committed a dangerous fault by so doing, might be so wise for his own safety as to conceal it. Yet these poor and slender Evasions were the best defence these Wretches could make for themselves; which besides their own weakness being opposed with so many undeniable Arguments of truth and certainty by the Witnesses of the other side, found so little Credit with the Jury, that after a little time of Con∣sideration, they brought them in all three Guilty of the Mur∣ther. Upon Tuesday the eleventh of
February, they were brought a∣gain to the Bar in Order to re∣ceive their Sentence, which (after a grave and seasonable Speech made to them upon that occasion by Mr. Justice Wld, whose province it then was, as being second Judge of the Court) was pro∣nounced against them in com∣mon form: That they should be carried back to the place from whence they came, and from thence to the place of Execution, and there be Hang'd by the Necks, till they were dead. According to which Sentence Robert Green and Lawrence Hill were Executed at Tyburn on the twenty eighth day of the same Month. At the place of Execu∣tion they behaved themselves with the Courages of true Romans of the new Stamp, denying the Crime they Suffered for, with that their formal Evasion of being Innocent as the Child un∣born;
that is as no body. A Child unborn may be a Non ens—Had it been as a Sucking Child, I question whether their dying Consciences could so well have dispensed with the Expression. But what other might be expect∣ed from Consciences so charm∣ed as theirs was, by the Sophi∣sticating Juggles of their Superi∣ours, ty'd up by so many Oaths and Sacraments to conceal that truth which by the divulging must ne∣cessarily turn to the Scandal of the Romish Church—whose prin∣ciples will rather admit the blame and punishment of a Crime than the shame of it. And that there were some de∣signs contrived to oblige them to such a prophane concealment (in so solemn a case as dying I can give it no fitter an Epi∣thet) is evident by one notori∣ous Circumstance: That when Hill and Green were Hang'd and
dead, Captain Richardson the Keeper of Newgate, with seve∣ral others, saw the Executioner (amongst other things) take a Paper out of Hill's Pocket, pur∣porting to be the form of the Speech that he should use to the People at the Gallows, which being penn'd in a singular way of expression, I shall take leave to insert Verbatim, as followeth. I Am come now to the fatal place where I must end my Life, and I hope with that Courage that may become my Innocence. I must now appear before the great Judge who knows all things and Judges rightly; and I hope it will be hap∣py for me a Sinner, that I am thus wrongfully put to Death. I call God, Angels and Men to Witness that I am wholly Ignorant of the Manner, Cause, or Time, of the Death of Justice Godfrey; al∣though
on that account by the Malice of wicked men brought to this shame∣ful death, which I hope will give me a speedy passage to Eternal Life. In this hope I dye chearfully because of mine Innocence, and the benefit of the precious wounds of my bles∣sed Saviour, by whose Merits I hope for Salvation. I dye a Ro∣man Catholick, desiring all such to Pray for me: And I beseech God in his Justice to discover this horrid Murther, with the Contri∣vers thereof, that my Innocence may appear. And though from my Heart I forgive my Accusers, Yet I Cite all such as have a hand in this bloody Contrivance, before the great Tribunal of Gods Justice to answer for the wrong they have done the Innocent; and particular∣ly the Lord Chief Justice, and the Brothers of Sir Edmondbury God∣frey, with Jury, Witnesses and all their Partakers. Oh Lord bless and Preserve his Majesty and be mer∣ciful
to this poor Nation, and lay not Innocent Blood to its Charge. Dying words ought to have their just allowances of credit, as sup∣posing men, if ever they dare speak the truth, will do it then when they are within an imme∣diate prospect of a sudden ap∣pearance before the Omnient and righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, to answer for what they have said and done. But when the truth has been once determined (as in this case) by no less than a Cloud of Wit∣nesses, some of them unknown to the other, yet all of them har∣moniously agreeing in the parti∣cular circumstances of the Fact; and the Fact it self sufficiently proved on all hands by persons that prosess such a Religion as gives no allowances to lying or dissimulation. When on the other hand the
truth so proved shall be denyed by persons instructed in such false prin∣ciples as these; to deny the truth when the secular Interest of their Idoliz'd as well as Idolatrous Church shall be indanger'd by it; to invert the moral nature of good and evil, and to account those acti∣ons and things good, vertuous and meritorious, which in their own nature (besides the express commands of Gods Word) are wic∣ked and sinful; No wonder if such persons upon such principles should deny or conceal the truth, especially when they can make such unhap∣py distinctions betwixt the form and reality of a Fact; as to de∣ny the crime of Murther when they know themselves to be guil∣ty of killing a person, killing in their sence being sometimes no more Murder than it was for the Priests of old to kill a Sacrifice, or for the Jews to slaughter the reprobated Amalekites, they arro∣gating
to themselves the same dominion over the lives and pro∣perties of Hereticks (as we are accounted by them) that the Jews (that priviledged people) of old had over the execrated Pagan Nations; so that in their sence, Killing is no Murder. Upon which considerations it  easie for any impartial man to judge how much credit such dying attestations may admit of, against such clear and undenia∣ble proofs as were brought against them. And it is more than probable, that the words of the aforesaid Paper were not Hill's own words, but dictated for him in that form by those of his party that were afraid of a Confession, and durst not trust the reputation of their cause to the hazard of any un∣wary expressions, that the conster∣nation of death might extort from him.
Wherefore otherwise might not a verbal expression of his Inno∣cency (if he were minded to declare it) be lookt upon as more credible from one in his dying circumstances, than a set and Studyed form of Speech cal∣culated for the purpose? But they feared either the ter∣rors of death would force him to a plain Confession, or that the power of truth fortified with such awful Sentiments, would over-bear his Tongue in some circumstance; or at least that he would not deny the Fact so reso∣lutely, and in such a taking man∣ner as might fix a Suspicion and odium upon the Witnesses, Judge and Jury in the minds of the People, which was the great thing they aimed at. No doubt therefore this form of what he should say at his Execution, was drawn up for him by some of the Religion, that
every word might be according to their mind, and to the pur∣poses of their designs, how re∣mote soever it were to his thoughts or the truth. And no Wonder it is that they should instruct their Proselytes to make Speeches just as they say Prayers, resting in the Opere Ope∣rato, without any understanding or attention, or consent of mind to the words they use, when a bare doing or a bare saying can excuse an intention. To conclude, It is evident that the words were framed by ano∣ther for him to Con by heart, and not of his own doing, by this un∣denyable circumstance, that he never had Pen, Ink nor Paper all the while he was in Newgate, and his Wife being Examined about it, testified that it was not of his hand-writing, nor did she ever see it before, or know how he came by it; yet he began his
Speech with these very Words, and repeated as much thereof as his memory under such confu∣sed circumstances would serve him to do. In the Speech it self we may observe the great Charity of the Author of it (whoever he were) in citing all such as had any hand in his Death, before the great Tribunal of Gods Justice, particu∣larly the Lord Chief Justice, Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's Brothers, with the Jury, Witnesses, and all their partakers—And yet, but in the words just before, he declares that he does from his Heart forgive his Accusers. We may see by this Passage of what nature such mens Forgiveness is; seem∣ing to Pardon, when at the same time they cry out for Venge∣ance upon their Adversaries. The Papists (for the still bet∣ter colouring of the business) have commonly reported that Berry
was alwayes or at least dyed a Protestant, which is notoriously false, having been known to be a Papist for many years; indu∣ced thereto (as he confessed to the Ordinary) out of Lucre, and to get an imployment; And though he did not believe many things (as he declared a little before his Execution) which the Romish Doctors teach as necessary Arti∣cles of Faith (which is no more than many other Papists will af∣firm) Yet the said Berry nei∣ther before nor at his Executi∣on, would ever disown the Ro∣mish Church, nor in the least de∣clare himself a Protestant. I would not have these last Passages thought altogether an (at least impertinent) digression from our Subject, the design of their rehearsal being chiefly to Evidence the truth, against the subtil Designs of the Papists to suppress it, which they have
managed not only by suborning (if I may so say) or at least sedu∣cing their mischievous Agents to persist to the very death in deny∣ing of what they did: But (de∣spairing upon just grounds of the success of that Imposture, so ly∣able to detection) they have since by their malicious slanders endea∣voured to remove the Charge of the fact from those that were the real Actors, and from all their own party, to those that were most clear of it. And perceiving that the Belief of their designs and actings against the Life of this Innocent Gentleman, was in the length of time not only the more confirmed, but that the credit of it had a fatal influence upon their further pro∣ceedings, they were so effrontless in their Villanous Prosecution, that they stuck not to commit a second Murther upon the good Name as well as they had before done upon
the Person of this worthy Martyr for his King and Countrey, by en∣deavouring to charge the Mur∣ther upon himself, a brief account of which, to shut up this Tragical discourse, I shall now give you. But by the way it may be ob∣served from this last account of Hills Confession, that he or his Party had at that time no thoughts of fixing such a slander upon him, of his being Felo de se, but did own it as a Murther committed upon him by others (though Hill would have shifted it off from himself) as appears by the words of his Confession—I beseech God in his Justice to discover this Horrid Murther: The manner of the ex∣pression may sufficiently evince that he meant it not of his being Murther'd by himself, but others. The Popish Plot, which by the goodness of the divine Providence was hitherto prevented in its pro∣gress
by surprizing discoveries, was forced to shift its Scenes, and assume new forms of Enterprize, upon the defeats of the former: And now a new Instrument of theirs is brought upon the Stage: One Fitz-Harris lately Executed for Treason; who upon his first Arraignment before the Justices of the Kings Bench, did offer upon a private Examination to discover to them some persons (before un∣known) who were instrumental in the Murther of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, himself (by his own con∣fession) being one that was con∣cerned in it, and so had the better opportunity to know the rest. These Examinations were ta∣ken in private, and therefore what the Effects of them were, and who the persons particularly were that were thereby accused, Time (the Parent of Truth) may hereafter discover. But whether the Accusation of
some persons mentioned in the Informations might provoke them to it; or that the Revival of this new Evidence might Sti∣mulate the malicious party to the undertaking, a new design is contriv'd to fix this Murther upon the Murther'd Person. This was one of their Sham-plots; many of which they have set up with an irrefragable per∣sistance, by such Methods (if possible) to amuse us into a dis∣belief of the real one, then and yet in Prosecution. They never want Instruments to effect their Villanies, when they have once contrived them; and had one at this time fit for their purpose, an Irish-man, Mac-gar by name, a Zealous Papist, and one of a suitable reputation; who coming lately over from Ireland, and judged by them to be a man fit enough for the purpose of an ill design, they engage him to
spread about reports up and down the Town, that Sir Edmondbury Godfrey had Murthered himself; but that to save his Estate from a forfeiture, by reason of his so doing, His Brothers had enga∣ged him (the Informant) to run Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's own Sword through him, and so to leave him in that Condition in which he was found in the ditch upon the first Discovery. This Tale could get little cre∣dit amongst the Towns-men—who were upon just grounds more apt to abhorr it than believe it; so that not succeeding with the mobile (as the People by the wits of this time are finely termed) it is resolved that he should ap∣ply himself to persons of great∣er note and influence. And to that purpose Mac-gar is next in∣structed to apply himself to a Great Person then a Prisoner in the Tower, to whom he sends
word, that he had such a matter to inform him of concerning this murther. But the other refused to have any discourse with him about it, till he had acquainted the Constable of the Tower with it; who upon notice thereof came and Examined Mac-gar about what he had to say of the business; he formally relates the Story as aforesaid: But the Constable of the Tower judging it to be a matter of too great importance to be slightly canvas'd; resolved to ac∣quaint the Privy Council with it, and Mac-gar was carryed be∣fore them to be Examin'd about the particulars—He there gives in the same Information, and obstinately persists in the as∣serting of the truth of it; but that Honourable and Judicious As∣sembly, though sufficiently convin∣ced in their own minds of the maliciousness of this Calumny, yet the better to find out the
depth of the design of it, Or∣der'd the said Mac-gar to be ta∣ken into a Messengers hands, in order to a further Examination at such time as he should be ap∣pointed again to be brought be∣fore them. While he continued thus in Custody, being conscious to him∣self as well of his Crime, as of the likelyhood of its Discovery, and the disgrace that thereupon would fall upon him and his par∣ty; he contrives with himself how to acquaint his Imployers with his condition, and to desire their further direction and Assistance, either to carry on the design, or to bring him off (as to what he had already acted) impunè. To this purpose he gets leave of the Messenger (in whose Custo∣dy he was) to have Pen, Ink and Paper, in order to writing to one of the Secretaries of State some things that he had in his
mind about the present business; which favour being granted him, he Seals up a Paper directed to one of the Secretaries as he pre∣tended, but withall, at the same time had written a Letter to Mris Celliers the Popish Midwife, (so notoriously infamous for her contrivances and actings in the Popish Plot) acquainting her with his Proceedings, and what kind of success he had met with; that if she and the rest of the Friends that ingaged him in the design, would not now stand by him, the Cause must perish and he too. The aforesaid Letter to the Se∣cretary, was but a colour to make way for the pasport of this; so having gotten a Messenger to car∣ry the former (which was al∣low'd him) he slips the latter (directed to Mris Celliers) into his hands, expecting no doubt but it would be delivered, and
to have a certain return of it. But his confidence failed him, for the wary Messenger part∣ly knowing his Circumstan∣ces, and knowing what a per∣son Mris Celliers (to whom the Letter was directed) was; in∣stead of carrying it to her, con∣vey'd it to White-hall to be per∣used by the Council, who upon consideration of the particulars of it, perceiving the Intriegues of the design, were resolved to take it into a more strict Examina∣tion: And to that end Order'd Mac-gar (at a time appointed) again to be brought before them; when at first taking no notice to him of the surprized Letter, they began to Interrogate him about the points of his former Evi∣dence, which he still stiffely stood to the Justification of, so far as Lying and Dissimulation would help him, but at last perceiving his Incorrigible Obstinacy, they
produced the aforesaid Letter against him, the Autography of which he had not then Confi∣dence enough to deny, but by the irresistible Convictions of his now over-powered Conscience was forced to Confess both the Writing of that, and (upon Que∣stions put to him) to Discover the whole Design; upon what account it was contriv'd, and who were the Contrivers of it; de∣nying all his former Evidence, as false and Forged, without any grounds of truth. So it pleased the Divine good∣ness, alwayes propitious to the Innocent, to detect this new up∣start Villany; which if it could have met with any hopeful Suc∣cess, must have been both a se∣cond fate to the Reputation of that Martyr'd worthy whom they themselves had Murther'd, and to the repute of those worthy and honest Gentlemen his Bro∣thers;
whose pious Zeal in Vin∣dicating his Memory, and pa∣cifying the cryes of his Blood, by a just Avenging it upon the Heads of his Murtherers, is too well known to be in any wise contradicted by such sly and ma∣litious Artifices of a plotting Faction. Thus we have given you some short (yet we hope, not unsa∣tisfactory) accounts of the most imitable Life and Tragical Death of this Excellent person; taken off by the hands of his bloody Enemies in the six and fiftieth Year of his Age, and in a time of our greatest expectations from him: Gods Providence Suffer'd it, though wicked men contrived it, and our sins deserved it, that he must then dye: There was such a sinful necessity for it, as was once pronounced by Caiaphas against the Life of our Redeemer; he was too much a Friend to Religion
and goodness, too much an Ene∣my to Irreligious men and their Practices, to be suffered to live by such men: had he been less good, less useful, less just, he might have lived unto this day. But had he lived (they thought) their cause must have dyed, their Treasons would not have pros∣per'd; they knew he was firm and fixed to his duty; They could not scare him from it, they could not Bribe him, but they could Kill him. They could not have thought of a more compendious way than this. Funeral Sermon, p. 28. We have related to you, the strange manner of the Discove∣ry of this Murther, the Tryals of the Murtherers, their Executi∣on and manner of their Dying; and lastly, the happy discovery of their Sham-designes, to turn off the Murther from themselves upon his Friends. We shall here conclude our Memoirs; only by way of Postscript, with which
we shall entertain you, instead of Musick, upon the close of this Tragedy, with some strains of excellent Poetry, composed by two of the greatest Wits of this Age (as their writings testifie) upon this Subject; the one a Pin∣darique Stanza, Selected out of an ingenious Poem (by an un∣known hand) called Bacchana∣lia, or the drunken Club, Printed in the Year 1680. the other a Poem calculated for the very Pur∣pose, upon the issuing out of his Majesties Proclamation against the Murtherers, by that late Prodi∣gie of Wit and Fancy, Dr. Ro∣bert Wild: We recommend and leave them to the Readers Judg∣ment; but as to our own pre∣sent undertaking, we shall here conclude with FINIS.
Bacchanalia, OR THE DRUNKEN CLUB. Stanza 11. ARe these the Popes Grand Tools? Worshipful Noddies! who but blundering Fools Would ever have forgot To burn those Letters that reveal'd their Plot? Or in an Alehouse told that Godfrey's dead, Three dayes before he was discovered;
Leaving the silly world to call to mind That common Logick, They that hide, can find? But see their Master Policy On Primrose-Hill, Where their great Enemy Like Saul upon Mount Gilboa doth , Fal'n on his Sword, as he himself . But oh the Infelicity! , That blood was fresh and gusht  the This so congeal'd that not one spot was sound, No not upon his Sword, as if it wou'd Tell us 'twas guiltless of its Masters blood; Some Carkasses by bleeding do declare, This by not bleeding, shew'd the Murtherer. But to his broken Neck I pray What can our Politicians say? He hangd, then Stab'd himself, for a sure way; Or first he Stab'd himself, then wrung about His head for madness that advis'd him to't; Well Primrose, may our Godfrey's Name on thee (Like Hyacinth) inscribed bee:
On Thee his memory shall flourish still (Sweet as thy flower, and lasting as thy Hill.) Whil'st blushing Somerset to her Eternal Shame shall this Inscription bear, The Devil's an Asse, for Jesuits on this spot Broke both the Neck of Godfrey and their Plot.
THE PROCLAMATION Promoted, OR AN HUE-and-CRY and Inquisition AFTER TREASON and BLOOD; UPON The Inhumane and horrid Murder of that Noble Knight, Impartial Justice of Peace, and Zealous PROTESTANT, Sir EDMONDBURY GODFREY of WESTMINISTER. An Hasty POEM. O Murder! Murder! let this Shriek fly round, Till Hills and Dales, and Rocks and Shores rebound.
Send it to Heav'n and Hell; for both will be Astonish'd and concern'd as much as we. First send to Endor where of old did dwell An Hagg, could Fates of Kings and Kingdoms tell. If that cannot be found, to Ekron go, To Pluto's Oracle and Hell below. There serve this Hue and Cry, for there 'twas hatch'd, (Except the Priests their Gods have over∣match'd.) Methinks Belzebub, if he be outdone In his Grand Mysteries, and Rome needs none Of his Black Arts, but can Out-Devil Hell, His Envy and Revenge this Plot should tell: And by disclosing in his own defence, Not only Vindicate his Innocence; But hasten their destruction, and prevent Loss of his Trade, (the Jesuites intent) Unless he fears them, as indeed he may; When once in Hell, none shall Command but they. But if this Tragedy be all his own, And Roman Actors (taught by him) have shown How they can play all parts he can devise; Female or Male, with or without disguise:
And need no Cacodoemons prompting Art Or Whisper, but can fill up any part; Fast, Pray and Weep, Swear and for swear, decoy, Trappan, Kiss, Flatter, Smile, and so Destroy, Stab, Pistoll, Poison Kings, Unking, Dethrone, Blow up or down, Save, Damn, make all their own. Knows not he then, tho' founder of the Stage, The Laws of Theatres in every Age? That th' Actors, not the Author of the Play, Do challenge the Rewards of the first day? Make then their Names renown'd, and come to hide Such Children of thy Revels and thy Pride; Send to their Father, and thy eldest Son That Lucifer of Rome, what feats they've done: That he may make their names be understood, Written in Kalenders of Martyrs Blood. But if the Fiends below be Deaf and Dumb, And this conjuring cannot overcome, They and their Imps be damn'd together: I To Gods on Earth will send my Hue and Cry. Arise Just Charles Three Kingdoms Soul and mine, Great James thy Grandfather could wel divine;
And without spell the bloody Riddle Spell, Writ by like Secretaries of Rome and Hell. And if Thy Proclamation cannot do, We pray Gods Spirit may inspire Thee too. If thy Prophetick Usher did not erre, The Mass would enter by a Massacre. The Wounds Thy Godfry found were meant for Thee, And thou ly'st Murder'd in Effigie. In Gods, Kings, Kingdoms Cause this Knight was slain: Let him a Noble Monument obtain, Erected in your Westminsters great Hall, That Courts of Justice may lament his Fall And may (when any Papist cometh near) His Marble Statue yield a bloudy tear. Yet let him not be buried, let him lie, The fairest Image to draw Justice by. There needs no Balm or Spices to preserve The Corps from Stench, his innocence will serve. Ye Lords and Commons joyn your speedy Votes: A Pack of Bloud-Hounds threaten all your Throats. And if their Treason be not understood, Expect to be dissolv'd in your own Blood. O Vote that every Papist (high and low) To martyr'd Godfreys Corps in person go;
And laying hand upon his wounded Brest, By Oath and Curse his ignorance protest. But oh the Atheism of that Monstrous Crew, Whose Holy Father can all Bonds undo: Whose Breath can put away the heavi'st Oath; Who fears no Heaven nor Hell, but laughs at both. Therefore a safer Vote my Muse suggests, For Priests and Jesuites can swallow Tests As Hocus Pocus doth his Rope or Knife, And cheats the gaping Farmer and his Wife. Oh Vote each Sign-post shall a Gibbet be, And hang a Traytor upon every Tree. Yet we'le find Wood enough for Bone-fire piles, T' inlighten and inflame our Brittish Isles Upon th' approaching fifth November night, And make Incendiaries curse the light. November Fires Septembers may reveal, One Burn (we say) another Burn will heal. Lastly, And surely, let this Hue and Cry Reach Heaven, where every Star looks like an Eye: To that High Court of Parliament above, Whose Laws are mixt with Justice and with Love;
Whither Just Godfrey's Soul's already come, And hath receiv'd the Crown of Martyrdome; Where Murder'd Kings and slaughter'd Saints do cry, Their Blood may never unrevenged lie, Ye Saints and Angels, hath that Scarlet Whore, Whose Priests and Brats before your shrines adore, And in their Massacres your Aid implore; Staining your Altars with the precious Gore. Pour down your Vials on their Cursed heads, And in Eternal flames prepare their Beds. And Thou Judge Jesus Hang'd and Mur∣der'd too, By Power of Rome and Malice of the Jew, In Godfrey's Wounds Thine own do bleed anew. Oh Rend Thy Heavens! Come Lord and take Thy Throne, Revenge Thy Martyrs Murder and Thine own. FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT. THere is now Published a Book, In∣tituled, The Plot in a Dream, or the Discoverer in Masquerade; fully and truly relating the History of the present Popish Plot, from its Original until this time; as namely, the first Contrivement of it beyond the Seas: The Ways and Me∣thods there resolved upon for the effect∣ing of it: The manner of its first Disco∣very: The Description of the Papists Grand Consult, and proceedings upon it: Sir Ed∣monbury Godfrey's Murther related: The several Trials and Executions of Staly, Cole∣man, the Jesuits that were employed to kill the King: Reading's Subornation and Punishment: The Story of the Meal-Tub-Plot, and other Sham-Plots since: The Pro∣ceedings against the Lords in the Tower, with the Trial and Execution of the Lord Stafford: An account of the last Parlia∣ment held at Oxford, with the Proceed∣ings against Fitz-Harris, &c. Intermixt
with Verses and variety of Fancies; with several Cuts to illustrate the Design; and the whole digested into Chapters, with Contents for the better Satisfaction of the Reader. By Philopatris. Price bound 1 s. 6 d. The Life and Death of Captain Willi∣am Bedloe, one of the Chief Discoverers of the horrid Popish Plot; wherein all his more Eminent Cheats, and whatever is Remarkable of him, both Good and Bad, is Impartially discovered. 8o. Price bound 1 s. Both these are sold by John Hancock, and Enoch Prosser, Booksellers, at their Shops at the Three Bibles at the end of Popes-Head Alley over against the Royal Exchange, and at the Rose and Crown in Sweetings Alley, at the East end of the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1681.
