W1975A R21502 12297072 59059
AN Expostulation WITH THE BISHOPS IN ENGLAND, Concerning their Jurisdiction over the Peo∣ple of God, called QƲAKERS; with a few wholesom words of Exhortation and Advice tending to unite Them and Ʋs in one true Spiritual Worship. FRiends, Consider that many years are passed, wherein God's hand hath eminently appeared in divers over∣turns, since the former Bishops were taken away, or did cease to exercise that office in their respective Dio∣cesses; whether because they were discountenanced by autho∣rity, or for want of their Revenues, or for want of love & faith in Christ (whom they said called them to watch over, and feed his Lambs) we shall not now determine; Act. 20.28. Witness also the Ecclesi∣stical History of the Church for the first 300 years. though we are perswaded that the Office of a Bishop or Over-seer, that is made  by the Holy Ghost, is to watch over the Flock of Christ and eed them, as well (if not more chiefly) in the most perilous times of Persecution, as in the times of greatest Pro∣sperity: For the Over, seers that were ordained by the Holy
Ghost in the Primitive times did watch over their Flocks, when they had neither large Revenues, nor temporal Prin∣ces to uphold them, but were under most grievous Persecu∣tion: But when men in Authority began to dislike your Way, and the temporal Power and large Revenues which were annexed to your Offices wre taken away, we know not one of the Bishops that di stand in the Power of God, wil∣lingly and of a ready mind, to watch over his See; but We the poor Flock, were left to wander or become a prey to such as God did never send or ordain to be his Ministers; who whilst they were countenanced by Authority, endeavoured with force and cruelty to rule over us, and did feed them∣selves with the Fat, and cloath themselves with the Fleece, but did not feed us the poor scattered Sheep, but with their covetousness and cruelty, alienated our minds from them, whilst in sincerity we did seek the Lord God; And when he saw that we were dsolate and forsaken, and none sought af∣ter us, then did he remember the Promise that he had made of old, Read Ezek. 34. declared by the mouth of his holy Prophet Ezekiel, and did both seek and search us out from wandring upon the barren Mountains, and from amongst the briars and thorns of the wilderness, which did tear the wool from off us, and the Lord himself did become unto us a Shepherd, and hath gathered us into his Fold, where our souls find rest; and he feedeth us in fresh pastures, so that we have no cause at all to turn aside from following of him, for we are in truth the Sheep of his hands, not at all gathered by your labours, nor by the Priests whom ye have ordained and sent forth; nei∣ther hath any one of your Curates ever healed our wounds, nor strengthened us when we were weak and diseased; there∣fore in Justice and Righteousness you cannot claim any Spi∣ritual Jurisdiction over us, nor at all blame us from separa∣ting from you, seeing you were first separate for us; but if you have the mind of Christ, you will rejoyce that we meet together in his Name, Mark. 9.38. and obey his Light in our Conscien∣ces, though we follow not you. But if you object and say, you have Spiritual Jurisdiction over us, and may justlie blame us for separating from you, because that many of us when we were Infants, were Bapti∣zed
into your Church, and did enter into Covenant to con∣tinue in the same, &c. We answer, That then we were not at all capable to know or understand the doctrine of your Church, and much less of true Faith and Baptism, and therefore we could not then enter into any such Covenant as you speak of; but if you say, that we did it by our Sureties, who did promise and vow in our names: We answer, That to no such thing were we then capable of consenting, therefore you must wholly look to the Sureties which your forefathers took; and if they caused them to promise and vow that which they are in no wise able to perform, you may do well to take heed of doing the like to others: And now that we are come to years of dis∣cretion, till we can see your Church in the Life and Power of God, and your Doctrine in all things according to Godli∣ness, we cannot for Conscience sake joyn with you. Therefore (Friends) in all your Visitations, Mind the Apostles example, who went forth only to visit those to whom they had preached the Gospel, that did believe, and were ga∣thered from the Jews Synagogues and Heathens Temples; Acts 16.36. and do not you stretch your selves beyond your line, nor am∣bitiously seek to be Lords over U S, whom ye have not con∣vinced, nor laboured at all amongst us; for what have you to do to judge them that are without? Therefore take heed, 1 Cor. 5.12. lest the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls (who doubtless hath Sheep which are not of your Folds) do judge you as bold In∣truders that would Lord over those of his Heritage, John 10.16. which he never committed to your charge. Therefore receive this ad∣vice from Us, Job 31.21, 22. who in humility do respect the Office of a Bi∣shop, and can give double honour to those Over-seers that rule well, Prov. 28.21. though we cannot give flattering Titles, nor respect the person of any man; for in so doing, our Maker would soon take us away. First, Come ye to the Light wherewith Christ hath en∣lightned your Consciences, that while you seek to take the motes out of your brethrens eyes, Luke 22.25, 26, 27. you may see that there be no beams in your own, which may so blind you, that you cannot discern Tares from Wheat, nor a Wolf from a Lamb. Therefore first begin the work of Reformation in your own
hearts and housholds, till ye be whollie blamless as the Ste∣wards of God, &c. according to the Apostles Doctrin, 1 Tim. 3. & Tit. 2.7, 8, 9. and be not ye called Lords, because Christ said to his Disciples, the Princes of the Gentiles exer∣cise Lordship, and their great Ones exercise Authority, but it shall not be so amongst you: 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. So in obedience to Christ be ye good examples to the Flock, that you and your Ministers have convinced to your Way, and to all People, that you may have a good report of them that are without; and be not lifted up with pride, lest ye fall into reproach, and the snare of the Divel. Secondly, That there may not be a Cry of Oppression in the Countrie, Reform your Officers, Priests and Curates, un∣til they be everie way blameless, as the Ministers of Jesus Christ, and set them not up meerlie because they have natu∣ral parts and humane Learning, but try (if you can) whe∣ther they be of God or no, and whether they have received power from on high by the gift of his Spirit, and be made apt to teach or no, before you send them forth; see whether there be a necessity laid upon them to preach the Gospel; if so, then they will do it freelie, as well in time of persecution, as in time of prosperitie: And if you would have your Courts esteemed as Spiritual, then let not your Officers in them be carnal earthlie men, but vertuous, impartial, men fearing God and haring covetousness; and let none of your Priests be such as say, Read Mat. 23. but do not; nor be called of men Ma∣sters, nor have the chiefest seats in the Assemblies, nor go in long Robes, nor lay heavie burdens upon the People, nor devour Widows houses, nor for a pretence make long Pray∣ers, Isa 56.10, 11. nor use vain repetitions in their Prayers, as the Heathens, chief Priests and Pharisees did, which Christ cryed woe a∣gainst; neither let your Priests preach for hire, nor your Cu∣rates divine for money, Micha 3.11, 12 Jude. which thing the Prophet Micah cry∣ed wo against; neither let them be such as Isaiah called gree∣die-dumb Dogs, which can never have enough, but all look to their own way, verie one for his gain from his quarter; neither let them be such as go in the way of Cain, which will envie and persecute, nor such as go in the way of Ba∣lam for rewards, nor such as will sell chaff for Wheat, which
have hearts exercised with covetous practices, 2 Pet. 2.14, 15. nor such grie∣vous Wolves as the Apostes said will not spare the Flock (but een sue people for wages, Act. 20.29. whom they do no work for) neither let them be at all Hirelings, for Christ said, such care not for the Sheep; but let them be such as do everie way ac∣cord with the Primitive pattern; Joh. 10.12, 14. and let none of them be profane swearers, nor drunkards, nor idolaters, nor adulte∣rers, nor fornicators, nor gamesters, nor scoffers, nor such as speak lies, and are given to lightness and foolish jesting; Mat. 12.34. for how can they that be evil speak good things? Thirdly, Reform your people, that one may distinguish between your Church and the world: separate the precious from the vile, and withdraw from everie brother that walks disorderlie; and let not your Church be made numerous with unbelievers, Jer. 15.19. nor such esteemed Members as do live in covet∣ousness, pride, envy, or malice, Gal. 5.19, 20, 2 nor any that is an extorti∣oner, or an oppressor of the poor, fatherless and widows, nor any that live in gluttonie, drunkenness, rioting and ex∣cess, nor any that be profane swearers, lyars, cheaters, and cozeners, nor any which abuse themselves with mankind, Eph. 5.3, 4, 5. nor any that be murderers or man-slayers, nor any that be adul∣terers or adulteresses; because such have no inheritance in the Kingdom of God, nor of Christ. And you that pro∣fess to be Bishops or Overseers of the Church, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. which is his Body; let not any be admitted members, but such as are baptized into it by the Spirit; Chapt. 1.13. for if any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his, and such will scoff like Ishmael, at the movings of the Spirit in those that are his. Rom. 8 9. Fourthly, Reform your Worship if you can, till it differ neither in matter nor manner, in whole nor in part, from the Apostles and primitive Christians Worship, Mat. 15., 8, 9. and let it not be made vain with the Doctrines, Commandments, Tra∣ditions and invented Ceremonies (of men) which will all perish with the using; Joh. 4.23. but worship God (who dwelleth not not in Temples made with hands) wholly in Spirit and in Truth; if you have received the one, and know the other, Col. 2.2 you will see that no other worship besides the Worship in Spirit, is either decent, orderly, or accepted with God. Act. 7.4. And when you have so reformed your selves, your Officers,
Priests and Curates, your People and your Worship, till you be both in Word, in Spirit, in Worship, & Conversation, one with the Primitive Christians, that men may joyn with you, and not touch an unclean thing; then see if we cannot have unity and fellowship with you: but in the mean time, let us quiet∣ly feed in our green pastures, and follow Christ the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, who leads us to living Fountains of water; and take heed of cursing us whom the Lord hath bles∣sed, lest it fall upon your own heads; for until you have sound Doctrine, and the example of a good Conversation, with Christian love and charity, to draw us to a conformity, ye may despair of hope to drive us by force and cruelty; for the more of that ye do exercise upon us, the more shall we be confirmed; Rev. 17.5, 6. and it will also manifest your Church not to be the Lambs Wife, but rather a Daughter of that mother of Harlots, that hath drank the blood of the Saints and Mar∣tyrs of Jesus. Therefore consider of these things, and think not to set∣tle your selves with threatnings, excommunications, prisons and the like; for by such things ye cannot convince gain∣sayers, that your way is right, nor at all shake them that be in the Truth, though ye may fright Hypocrites, and make them come bending under you for a season, till they can get over you; therefore it, will be your wisdom to shew your zeal in casting out the filth from amongst your selves, and such as profess your way, and by a vertuous life and wholsom do∣ctrine, seek to win such as differ from you: For things are not now as they were thirty years ago in this Nation; for Light is broken forth as the morning, and your steps will be marked; Matth. 7.12. therefore wait that God may direct you the right way, to do unto all men as ye would they should do unto you. The 5th. of the 7th. Month, 1662. Having spoken the Truth in love, We rest your Friends, desiring that in love ye may receive and read these lines, and do not slight that which concerns your peace in them, because they are sent from us that be in scorn called QUAKERS. JOHN WHITEHEAD. MARTIN MASON.
LOVE is a vertue that endures for ever, A link of matchless jewels none can sever. Had I the tongue of men and Angels too, If Love were wanting what good could I do? Love far surmounts all earthly Diadems, Though deckt with pearls, with rubies and with jems; Love is the life of all things under th'Sun, Love must the Lawrel wear, when all is done. Love's eye is tender, Love does gently draw The mind to God, without a penal Law. Love thinks no ill, Love never did invent, Fines praemunire, Goals nor Banishment For Innocents, Love hath no spleen nor Gall, Love's like the Royal Sun; Love shines on All. THE END.
