W2504 12484691 62276
Their Majesties DECLARATION For Encouragement of Officers, Seamen and Mariners, Employed in the present Service. WILLIAM R. THeir Majesties out of Their Princely Care and Wisdom, with great Ten∣derness and Regard having taken into Consideration the Condition of their Seafaring Subjects, as well Officers as Seamen and Mariners, and with in∣tent and purpose that their Resoluti∣on and Forwardness, Valour and Faithfulness in the present Service, necessarily undertaken for the Honour and Defence of Their Majesties Dominions, the Support of the Protestant Reli∣gion, and Security of the Commerce and Trade of their Subjects may be duly Rewarded and Encouraged, By and With the Advice of their Council, have thought fit to Pub∣lish and Declare, That all Captains, Seamen and others that do or shall Serve in any of Their Majesties own or Merchant Ships Employed in Their Service, shall (for time to come in lieu of all Prizes) Have and Receive from Their Majesties for every Ship or Prize they shall Lawfully take, whether Merchant Men, or Men of War, Laden or Light, the Sum
of Ten shillings for every Tun the said Ship shall measure, according to the ordinary Rule of Shipwright's Hall, and Six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence for every Piece of Ordnance, whether Iron, or Brass, the same to be paid by the Collector for Prize Goods within Ten days after the payment of the Ships (in case Adjudication be made of the Ship in the Admiralty Court) to be shared and divided amongst them proportionably, according to the respective Places and Offices in the Ship in which they Serv'd, and according to the Custom of the Seas in that case. And further, That it be Lawful for all Captains, Seamen, and others, serving as aforesaid, to take and have to them∣selves as Pillage, without further or other account to be gi∣ven for the same, All such Goods and Merchandizes as shall be found by them, or any of them, in any Ship (they shall take in fight as Prize) upon or above the Gun-Deck of the said Ship, and not otherwise: And for every Man of War sunk or destroyed by Firing or otherwise, to have Ten pounds a Gun only, to be divided as aforesaid, to be paid by the Commissioners for Prize Goods, within Ten days after the payment of the Ship as aforesaid, upon Certificate of the Matter of Fact stated by the Council of War. That in paying the Wages of all Seamen and Mariners, that now do, or hereafter shall Serve on Board any of Their Majesties Ships, the following Method and Regulation shall be observed; That all Seamen and Mariners that on the First of No∣vember next, shall have been in Their Majesties Service Six Months, shall by themselves or assigns receive full Two Months pay; and in like manner those that on the First of May next shall have been in the Service Six Months, shall receive other Two Months pay, and so (till their Ships be paid off) shall continue to receive Two Months pay▪ after having Served Six Months from the aforesaid days of Pay∣ment; For which Pay or Pays for Two Months from time to time, as aforesaid, Tickets shall be given gratis under the Hands of the Commander, and other Officers usually ap∣pointed in Signing them, and Letters of Attorney shall be also Attested under the Hands of the aforesaid Signing Of∣ficers
gratis, in such manner as shall be thought to conduce most to the Benefit, Support, and Ease hereby intended to Seamen in general and their Families, of whom Care shall be taken that these Payments be made accordingly. And all Commanders are hereby strictly Charged and Required not to Discharge any Seaman from Their Maje∣sties Ships, without giving the Person so Discharged the usual Ticket for the time of his Service. That Care shall be taken for defraying the Charges of Sick and Wounded Men, and for the Relief of Widows, Children and Impotent Parents of such as shall be slain in the Service at Sea; And for Medals, or other Rewards to such Officers and Seamen of the Fleet, as shall be found to have done any Eminent or Extraordinary Service: And that for Supplying of necessary Provisions for Sick and Wounded men on Board, there shall be allowed by His Majesty Five pounds for Six Months Service for every Hun∣dred Men. That upon the Discharge of Sick and Wounded men from the Ships in Their Majesties Service, Care shall be taken for the payment of their Tickets and Conduct Money. That Directions shall be given to all Mayors, Bailiffs, or other Magistrates in any Port Towns to take Care for all necessary Accommodations at the charge of Their Maje∣sties, for the Relief and Cure of such Sick and Wounded men as shall be sent on shoar. That the Moyety of Our Hospitals in England, employed for the Cure of Wounded and Sick People, be reserved du∣ring the time of War at Sea, for such as shall be Wounded in the Service of the Navy, as they shall become void from and after the First day of June next. 1689. Given at Our Court at Hampton-Court this 23d. Day of May, 1689. In the First Year of Our Reign.
At the COURT at HAMPTON-COURT, The Twenty third of May, 1689. PRESENT, The King's most Excellent Majesty. His R. Highness Prince George of Denmark, Lord Privy-Seal, Duke of Norfolk, Duke of Schonberg, Earl of Oxford, Earl of Shrewsbury, Earl of Nottingham, Earl of Maclesfeld, Earl of Portland, Earl of Fauconberg, Viscount Newport, Viscount Sydney, Lord Bishop of London, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Admiral Herbert, Mr. Russell, Mr. Boscawen. IT was this Day Ordered by His Majesty in Council, That Their Majesties Gracious Declaration for Encouragement of Officers, Seamen and Mariners, Em∣ployed in the present Service be forthwith Printed by His Majesties Printers: And that so many Copies thereof as shall be required by the Right Honourable the Commis∣sioners for Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of England, be disposed of as they shall think fit and direct; And so many also to the Principal Officers and Commissioners of His Majesties Navy Royal, by them to be Distributed to such Persons and Places as in their Judgments shall seem Convenient: some of them also to His Majesties Principal Secretaries of State, and to the Lords of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Council. Cha. Montague. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and Queen's most Excellent Majesties, 1689.
