C6373 11779413 48973
A DICTIONARY OF Barbarous French. OR, A COLLECTION, By way of ALPHABET, OF Obsolete, Provincial, Mis-spelt, and Made Words In FRENCH. Taken out of COTGRAVE's Dictionary, With some ADDITIONS. A Work much desired, and now performed, For the Satisfaction of such as Read Old FRENCH. By GƲY MIEGE, AUTHOR of the New FRENCH DICTIONARY. LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Thomas Basset, at the Sign of the George near Clifford's-Inne, in Fleetstreet. 1679.
AVIS. LE Lecteur saura que, si cet Ou∣vrage est de quêque Utilité, on en est obligé à quêques Curi∣eux, qui ont fait passer mon Nouveau Dictionaire pour un Dictionaire Imparfait; & à des Envieux, qui ne l'ont pas si tôt veu naître qu'ils ont voulu l'étoufer dans sa naissance. Les uns & les autres ont protesté hautement, qu'il ne valoit rien; parce qu'il y manquoit ce Ramas de Termes barbares, en quoi Cotgrave avoit si bien reüssi. Et ce Prejugé a prevalu quêque tems en Angleterre d'une maniere si étrange, qu'en fin j'ai eté contraint d'y reme∣dier. C'est dans cette veuë que j'ai entrepris cet Ouvrage, qui n'est au fond qu'un Recueil de Cotgrave, avec quêques Additions. Et c'est en quoi je l'ai trouvé d'autant plus penible & in∣supportable, qu'il n'est rien de plus contrai∣re à mon genie que de copier des Volumes. Cependant je l'ai fait, pour fermer la bou∣che à ceux qui ne vouloient pas qu'un Dictio∣naire
François fût parfait sans ces Barbarismes. Il est vrai que peu de tems apres que je l'eu entrepris, cette Erreur si commune commen∣ça à s'évanouir, & mon Dictionaire à étre de bon debit. Neanmoins je n'ai pas laissé que de pousser l'Entreprise à bout, pour contenter les Curieux. Ainsi, pour dire deux mots de cette Piece en passant, sachez, qu'outre les vieux Mots François, quantité de Mots de Province, & d'autres faits à plaisir, il y a quêques Termes d'Art, des Noms de Plantes, d'Animaux, &c. qui auroient pû passer dans mon Nouveau Dictionaire, mais que j'avois rejettez comme des Noms qui sont en effet peu conus & usi∣tez. Et, afin que rien ne manquât à cet Ouvrage, j'avois fait dessein d'y mettre plusieurs Mots en usage habillez à la vieille mode, qui ne se trouvent dans le Nouveau Dictionaire que selon l'Ortografe moderne. Il s'y en est même glissé quêques uns sur ce pié là. Mais, com∣me je m'apperceu bien tôt que l'Affaire iroit trop loin de cette maniere, & que le Jeu ne valoit pas la Chandelle, je coupai court là dessus. Outre que, si on veut remedier à cet Inconvenient, il n'y a qu'a voir les Regles que j'ai données sur l'Ortografe ancienne & mo∣derne dans ma nouvelle Grammaire.
A DICTIONARY OF BARBAROUS FRENCH. A A Achée, a doleful cry, or la∣mentation. Abaque, a plinth, or flat square stone on the capitel of a pillar. Abbatial, Abbot-like. Abbay, a barking, or baying. Abbée, a hole (or overture) for the passage of some part of a stream that's held in by a dam, sluce, &c. Abbougrir, to hinder from growing, to keep from rising; also, to grow crooked, or wither in the top like an ill-thriving tree, to beggar. Abbreviateur, an abbreviator; a maker of briefs, or of writs. Abbreviature, a breviate, a short note. Abducteur, one that leads out, or a∣way, a withdrawer, or puller a∣way. Abedissimon, a Serpent of the kind of Dragons. Abeillanne, the white muscadine-grape. Abeilland, a dorre, or drone-bee. Abeillion, a nest (or swarm) of bees. Abequer, to feed, as birds do their young. Abequeter, to peck at. Abesté, mounted on horse-back, or that hath an horse to ride on. Abestin, perpetually burning. Abhorrer, to abhor. Abhorrant, Abhorrent, Abhorris∣sant, abhorrent, averse from; also unusual, unaccustomed, out of course. Abier, a faulcon-gentle. Abilé, as Habile in the New Dicti∣onary. Abiler, as Habiller in the N. D. Abisme, & Abismer. V. Abyme in the N. D. Ablation, a taking from, or away. Ablaye, whereon corn grows, or wherein it hath been sowed. Ablays, corn growing, or in sheaves. Ableret, a small fish-net. Ablution, a washing away. Abominer, to have in abomination. d'Abondant, moreover. Abonnassé, calmed, quieted, appea∣sed, pacifi'd. Abonnir, to make good. Abonni, made good. Abordable, assable. Abordade, Abordée, an approach, or drawing near to. d'Abordée, at first, at first sight. Aborné, limited, bounded, or stin∣ted, &c. Abornement, a limiting, bounding, or stinting, &c. Aborner, to limit, bound, or stint; also to compound with, or for; to set a certain rent on; to stand at a certain rate for; to receive (or deliver) by former agreement any thing otherwise than in kind. Abortif, abortive, untimely, still-born. Un oeuf abortif, an addle egg, whose shell is not yet hard. Abouchon, groveling, laid on his face, or on all four; also stooping, having or holding the face down∣ward. Abourdeler, to tell a feigned thing. Abourjonner, to bud, sprout out, put forth. Abourné, Abournement, Abourner. See them without u. Abouter, to draw to a head, or to bring to an end. Abouvier, to unyoke oxen. Abradant, paring, having, seraping, raising, wearing away. Abrier d'arbalete, the tree of a cross-bow. Abrier (a Verb) to cover, shrowd, shelter, shadow. Abroton, the herb Southernwood. Abruption, thruption, a breaking off, or bursting asunder. Abruvé, Abruver, Abruvoir. See
Abbreuver, &c. in the N. D. Abruy for Abri, a sunny place. Abscis, cut off, divided, separated from. Absconsé, hidden, or concealed. Absconsement, a hiding or concea∣ling. Absconser, to hide, or to conceal. Absorber, to sup (or drink) up all, to devour, swallow, consume. Absolte, Absoulte, or Absoute, an absolute pardon, a general absolu∣tion. Abstraction, Abstraict, abstraction, a drawing out, or away. Abstrainder, to binde fast, to knit hard. Abuseux, full of abuses, deceitful, guileful. Abusion, an abusing, error, or fallacy. Abutter, to aim, or to shoot at. Acabler, to fasten with, or unto a cable. Acace, a thorny plant. Acacie, a medicinal juice or liquor drawn from the seed of that plant. Academie, besotted, dozed with too much study. Acalli, hardened, inured, accustomed to, that hath got a habit of. Acamusé, flatted, or beaten flat; blunt, or flat-pointed. Acarer, to confront, to set face to face, to bring neer unto, or toge∣ther. Acariastre, hair-brained, rash, furious. Acariastreté, mad wilfulness, hair-brained fury. Acasané, loving home, ever within doors. Acaser, to inhabit, sojourn, lodge, or dwell in; also to rent, or let out upon a yearly rent. Accagnardement, laziness, sloth, idle∣ness. Accagnarder, to grow lazie, idle, or slothful. Accelerateur, a hastener, or dispatch∣er. Acceleration, acceleration, or haste. Acceleré, accelerated, hastened, or dispatched. Accelerer, to accelerate, hasten, or dispatch. Acceptilation, a payment, or verbal discharge of a Debt made from a Creditor unto a Debtor. Accession, access, or coming unto; also accession, addition. Accessoire, casal, accidental, hap∣pening by chance. Accessoirement, accidentally. Acclampé, fastened, pinned, or pegged. Acclamper, to fasten, pin, or peg. Accodepot as Accotepot. Accoeviller, to benum, or besot. Accoinct, Accoint, acquainted, or familiar with; also neat, fine, or spruce. Accointable, easie to be acquainted with. Accointance, Accointement, ac∣quaintance, or conversation. Accointer, to make acquainted; al∣so to prank up. S'accointer de, to get acquainted. Accoisé, quieted, appeased, or pacifi'd. Accoisement, a quieting, appeasing, or pacifying. Accoiser, to quiet, appease, or pacifie. Accolite, a Novice, or young profi∣cient; also the boy that ministers to the Priest at Mass-time. Accommodation, an accommoda∣ting, or fitting of a thing. Accompagnable, sociable. Accomparageant, comparing, mat∣ching with, resembling unto. Accomparager, to compare, match, equal, confer one thing with ano∣ther. Acconditionné, given (or granted) upon condition. Acconditionner, to give (or grant) upon condition. Acconduire, to lead, or bring to, to conduct, or to guide unto. Acconsuyvre, to overtake, or attain unto. Accordance, an accord, or agree∣ment; a concord, or concordance, in Musick. Accordant, agreeable, accordant, concordant, well sitting unto. Accordement, an according, con∣curring, or agreeing with; a yielding, or granting unto; also a bargaining, or compounding for; also a reconciliation, or compositi∣on of differences; an agreeing upon. Accorné, horned. Accort, affable, complying, courteous; also wary, circumspect; also subtil, cunning. Accortement, assably, kindly, cour∣teously; warily, circumspectly; subtilly, cunningly. Accortesse, Accortise, affability, compliance, courteousness; wari∣ness, circumspection; subtilty, cun∣ning. Accoté, underpropped, supported, or born up, reared, or leaned against. Accotement, an underpropping, sup∣porting, or bearing up. Accoter, to underprop, support, or bear up. S'accoter contre, to rear himself, or to lean against. Accotepot, a prop (or stay) for a seething pot; a thick piecs of iron (made somewhat like a half Moon) wherewith the one side of the pot is supported. Accoudement, a leaning on the elbow. Accoulpé, accusé d'un crime, bla∣med for, charged with a crime. Accouplable, fit to be coupled. Accouplage, a coupling, or conjun∣ction. Accourager, Accouragé. V. Encou∣rager in the N. D. Accourber, Accourbir, to bow, or bend inwards. Accourement, a concourse, a coming or running of many men together to one place. Accousiné, taken (or acknowledged) for his Cousin. Accousiner, to take (or acknow∣ledge) for his Cousin. Accoustement, a hearkening or listening to. Accouster, to hearken, to listen. Accousteur, one that hearkens, or listens. Accouvé, brooded, overshadowed. Accouver, Accouveter, to brood; also, to overshadow, cover, hide. Accravanter, Accrevanter, to over∣burden. Accravanté, Accrevanté, overbur∣dened. Accrazer, to crush. Accresté, proud or stately. Accrester, to grow proud, or stately. Accresie, growth, increase. Accrever, to burst, or thrust out the guts of. Accroissance, Accroist, growth, in∣crease. Accrosser, to clasp, or to grapple together. Accroüé, drooping, as a bird that sits with her feathers loose, or sta∣ring about her. Accubes, couches, or resting places, cabins to lye or to rest in. Accueuré, sick at the heart. Accumulateur, a heaper up. Accumulation, a heaping up. Accumulé, accumulated, heaped up. Accumuler, to accumulate, to heap up. Accusant, an Accuser, or Informer against. Accusement, an accusing, or infor∣ming against. Accuvé, put into a sat.
Accuver, to put into a fat, to let stand (or let work) in a fat. Acensiver, as Acenser in the N. D. Acerbité, sharpness, or sowrness. Acertené, certified. Acertenement, a certifying. Acertener, to certifie. Acertes, of a certain; also heartily, affectionately, without feigning. Acetabule, an antient measure, con∣taining about six spoonfuls of li∣quid things, and two ounces and a half of dry; or (according to our weight) an ounce three quar∣ters; two carats, twelve grains, and a half. Aceteuse, the herb sorrel. Aceteux, sharp, sowrish. Acetosité, sharpness, sowrness. Achaneri, cankred. Achantique, mastic achantique, a sweet tasting mastick or gum, bred on the top of the calthrop or star∣thistle. Achasser, to drive, or chase towards. Achate, the precious stone Achates. Achemé, decked, trimmed, or attired. Achemer, Achemmer, to deck, trim, or attire. Achemeresse, Achemmeresse, an at∣tire-woman. Achemes, Achesmes, attires, deck∣ings, ornaments for women. Achenal, a channel. Acher, to set the teeth on edge. Acheramin, a kinde of smallage, or crow-foot resembling smallage. Acheteresse, a woman that buyes or purchases. Achetiver, as Chetiver; also, to inthral, or captivate. Achevement, an ending, or bringing to perfection. Achoise, an occasion, an opportunity. Achoison, the same; also, election, or choice; also, an accusation. Achoisonner, to accuse, to pick a quarrel against. Achommer, to rest, or make holy∣day; also to stay, or attend. Achon, a kinde of long axe. Achopé, stumbled at, or on. Achoper, to stumble at, or in. Aciever, to temper with steel. Acné, a witless and graceless fellow. Acoint, Acointer. See Accoint. Aconduire. See Acconduire. Aconsuyvre. Seek Acconsuyvre. Acope, a Medicine compounded of beating and mollifying Simples. Acore, the sweet cane. Acorné. See Accorné. Acort. See Accort. Acoter. See Accoter. Acouärdir, to make coward. Acoup, quickly. A-coup-venant, the name of a fair ruddy apple. Acouter. See Accouter. Acquerement, a purchasing. Acquereur, a purchaser; also a chal∣lenger or claimer of one that pre∣tends a title unto land. Acquesté, purchased, acquired. Acquesteresse, a woman that pur∣chaseth. Acquesteur, Acquisiteur, a purcha∣ser, acquirer. Acquester, to purchase, to acquire. Acquoisir, to pacifie. Acravanter. See Accravanter. Acrediter. See Accrediter in the N. D. Acrester, Acresté. See Accrester. Acreu. See Accreu in the N. D. Acroamatique, musical, harmonious. Acroc, any thing to hang another thing on. Acromion, the shoulder-pitch, or point, wherewith the hinder and fore-parts of the neck are joyned together. Acrotaires. See Acroteres in the N.D. Actifs, an Order of Friars, that wear tawny habits, and seed on nothing but roots. Actourné, an Atturney. Actournée, a Warrant, or Letter of Atturney. Acuité, sharpness, or keenness. Acuré, Oiseau acuré, that hath had casting given her. Acutelle, the herb Camocks, rest-harrow, petty-whin, ground-furs. Adage, an adage, or proverb. Adagial, proverbial, full of adages. Adanté. See Adenté. Adaptation, an adapting, or sitting of one thing to another. Adarce, a salt foam that cleaves unto reeds and other marsh-herbs in drought and dry weather. Adayé, provoked, urged, or incensed. Adayement, a provoking, urging, incensing. Adayer, to provoke, urge, or incense. Adayeur, a provoker, a quarrelsome man. Adcensement. V. Acensement in the N. D. Addenté. V. Adenté. Additament, increase, or addition. Addomestiqué, tamed. Addomestiquer, to tame. Addorsé. See Addossé in the N.D. Addoüez homme à homme, scuffled together. Adduire, to bring forth, or to bring unto. Adebtz, a kinde of Seignoral Duty within the Jurisdiction of S. O∣mer. Adelantade, a Lord Deputy, Presi∣dent, or a Lieutenant for a Prince in a Country. Adeneré, prized, valued, rated, set to sale for money. Adenerer, to prize, value, rate; to make money of, to set to sale for money. Adenes, little kernels in the mouth or throat, and diseasing either of them. Ades, presently. Adeser, to touch, or handle slightly. Pic. Adestre, quick, ready, nimble; also apt for any thing he under∣takes; also comely, graceful. Adestrer, to make quick, ready, or nimble; to make fit, able, or apt for; also to follow the humour of. Adeuillé, Adeullé, heavy, sad, or mournful. s'Adeuloir, to moan, to mourn. Adex. V. Adebtz. Adextre, as Adestre. Adfiliation, adoption. Adfilié, adopted. Adglutinatif, glewy, clammy. Adglutiné, glued, or fastened with glue. Adglutinement, a gluing, or fasten∣ing with glue. Adglutiner, to glue, or fasten with glue. Adheritance, a possission, a Livery and seisin. Adherité, inseisined, put into posses∣sion of. Adheritement, a giving possession, a making of Livery and Seisin un∣to. Adheriter, to make Livery and Sei∣sin of an Inheritance, to put into possession. Adhesion, an adhering, cleaving, or sticking fast unto. Adhorer, to come at a good hour. Adjancer, Adjancé, Adjancement. V. Agencer in the N. D. Adjour, a Commission of summons, or adjournment; also the report or the return thereof made by the Ser∣jeant or Summoner. Adipeux, full of fat; also breeding fatness. Adire, a difference. Adiré, wandering, or going out of
the way; also forsook, left, aban∣doned. Adirer, to wander, or go out of the way; also to forsake, or bid fare∣wel to. Adismé, tythed, on which a tythe is set. Adismer, to tythe, or to set a tythe on. Adjudicataire, he to whom a thing is adjudged, or delivered by Judgment. Adjudication, an adjudging, or de∣livering of a thing by Judgment. Adjurateur, an adjuror, or earnest swearer; also one that exacts an oath. Adjuration, an adjuration, or earnest swearing unto; also the exaction of an oath from others. Adjutoire, the upper bone of the arm toward the shoulder. Admener, as Amener in the N. D. Admignoter. V. Amignoter. Adminicule, an aid, help, or sup∣port. Administratoire, administring un∣to. Admissible, fit to be admitted, or allowed. Admonesté, admonished. Admonestement, an admonishing, or admonition. Admonester, to admonish. Admonesteur, an admonisher. Adnection, an annexing to. Adnuicter. V. Annuicter. Adobber. V. Adouber in the N. D. Adolescent, a youth, or a young man. s'Adolorer, to grieve, or to take grief. Adombré, adumbrated, or shadow∣ed. Adombrement, a shadowing. Adombrer, to adumbrate, to sha∣dow. Adomestiquer, to tame. Adonc, then, at that time. Adot, a blow, or thump; also trou∣ble, or business; also a kind of fish. Adoulcir. V. Addoucir in the N.D. s'Adouloir, s'Adoulourer, to grief. Adpropriance, as Appropriance. Adquiescer, Adquiescement. V. Ac∣quiescer in the N. D. Adscrire, to ascribe, to attribute; also to inroll, or reckon among o∣thers. Adscrit, ascribed, attributed; in∣rolled, or reckoned among others. Adsigné. V. Assigné, in the N. D. Advaluation, a valuing, rating, or setting a price on. Advalué, valued, rated. Advaluer, to value, rate, set a price on. Adveillé, sad, heavy; also watchful, wakeful. Advenamment, handsomly, decently, gracefully. Adventif, Biens adventiss, Goods coming or given by chance, casu∣alties, windfals unlooked for. Adveré. V. Averé. Advestir, to invest, or give possession of. Advesture, an investure, a delivering over; also fruit hanging by the root, or standing on the ground; as Advesture de bled, corn stan∣ding. Advisager, Advisagé. V. Envisager in the N. D. Advisement, heed, wariness. Advisément, advisedly, warily. Adulateur, a flatterer, or cogger. Adulation, flattery, cogging. Adulatoire, adulatory. Adulte, grown to full age. Adulterer, to commit adultery. Advocassé, pleaded for. Advocasseau, a Pettifogger. Advocasser, to play the Advocate. Advocasserie, a pleading, or playing the Advocate. Advocatie, the duty or place of Ad∣vocate; also the countenance or support of a great person in a suit. Advoerie, Advoeson, Advoison, guard, protection, defence. Advolé, fled unto. Advolement, Advolée, a flying un∣to. Advoler, to flie unto. Advouaison, an advowing, or a∣vouching, a taking into protection. Aduoüateur, an advower, avoucher; also one that acknowledges and challenges his beast, taken damage fesant. Advouërie, Advorie, defence, pro∣tection, patronage. Aduré, hardened, stiffened, or made strong. Adurer, to harden, stiffen, or make strong. Aeditue, a Church-warden, or Sex∣ton; the Officer who is to look un∣to a Church and the Church∣goods. Aemorrhoides, for Hemorrhoides, the hemorrhoids. Aeré, airy; also aired. Aereux, airy, full of air. Aerolle, a blister, a wheal. Aeromantie, divination by the air. Aerugineux, full of (or like unto) verdigrease. Afaner, to get hardly, or with much toil. Affaçonner. See Affassonner. Affadi, made or grown unsavoury. Affadir, to make tast less, or unsavoury. Affadissement, unsavouriness. Affaicter. See Affaiter in the N. D. Affaireux, busie. Affaireusement, very busily. Affamement, a starving, or famish∣ing. Affan, extream toil, or grief. Affassonner, to form, or to fashion. Affeager, to create a tenure in Fee∣simple. Affené, fed, or inseamed with hay, stall-fed. Affener, to feed, or inseam with hay, to stall-feed. Afferant, becoming; also concerning or belonging to. Affermable, to be let out; also af∣firmable. Afferme, Affermement, a farming, or letting out. Affertilé, made fertile. Affertiler, to make fertile. Affessé, sit, or settled on the top of. s'Affesser, to sit, or settle it self on the top of. s'Affessir, to grow weary, lumpish, or heavy. Affetardi, made (or become) dull, or lazy. Affetardir, to make dull, or lazy. Affeubler, Affeublage. See Affu∣blage, Affubler in the N. D. Affeurré, foddered with straw. Affeurrer, to fodder with straw. Afficter, to annex, or give for a time. Affié, assured, or confirmed. Affiement, an assurance, or confir∣mation. Affier, to assure, or give his word for. Affiert, (a Verb Impersonal) it be∣cometh; also it concerneth, or be∣longeth to. Affieux, a good fellow, a boon-com∣panion. Affiliation, adoption. Affilié, adopted. Affilier, to adopt. Affiloire, a whet-stone. Affin, that. See Afin in the N. D. Affin, a Kinsman, or Allie. Affiniter, to ally. s'Afflaquir, to wax flaggy. Afflat, a blowing in. Afflater, to flatter. Affleurir l'eau, to go close by the water.
Afflictif, sad, grievous. Affloui, blurred, also blunted. Afflouir, to blur, also to blunt. Afflux, affluence. Affoiblement, a weakening. Affoisonement, increase. Affolé, foiled, wounded, or bruised. Affolement, Affolure, a foil, bruise, or wound. Affoler, to foil, wound, or bruise. Affoncer, to sink in. Affondé, sunk down to the bottome. Affonder, s'Affonder, to sink, or to go down to the bottom. Affor, Afforage, a piercing or broach∣ing of wine, &c. Afforagé, pierced or set abroach; also rated, licensed. Afforer, to pierce a vessel of wine; also to take a rate from the Ma∣gistrate, and a licence of the Landlord, for the retail thereof. Affouchié, put into (laid among) fearn. Affouler. See Affoler. Affourager, Affourrer. See Affeur∣rer. Affrequane, a Tigre. Affres, fright. Affreté, fastned, clasped. Affrioler. Se Affriander in the N.D. Affrodille. See Afrodille in the N.D. Affronitre. See Afronitre. Affublage. See Affublement in the N. D. Affuir, to fly unto for help. Affuler, as Affubler. Afiliation. See Adfiliation. Afrodisiace, a kinde of stone, or mineral, of a whitish colour min∣gled with red. Afrolitre, Afronitre, a kinde of light, brittle, and purple-coloured nitre. Afuselé, fashioned as a spindle. Afuselement, a fashioning of things like spindles. Afuseler, to fashion, or make small towards the end, like a spindle. Afyer. See Tromper in the N. D. Aga, here. Agacé, urged, provoked; set on edge; blunted. Agacement, an urging, or provoking; a setting of the teeth on edge; a blunting of weapons, or the like. Agacer, to urge, or to provoke; also, to set the teeth on edge; also, to blunt a weapon, or the like. Agache. V. Agasse. Agaillardé, grown jocose, or merry. s'Agaillarder, to grow jocose, or merry. Agalloche, the sweet wood called Lignum Aloës. Agamber, to step, or stride over. Aganni, faded, withered, or consu∣med. Agannir, to fade, wither, or con∣sume. Agart. See Hagard in the N. D. Agasse, a mag-pie. Agasser. See Agacer. Agassin, a corn in the feet or toes; also, the lowest bud or branch of a vine. Agay, the marrow of fowl. Agember. V. Agamber. Agenouillon, kneeling, or upon his knees. Agesimos, a wondring voice, or ex∣clamation. Aggere, a heap of stones, earth, or turffs; a bulwark, fort, or block∣house; a causey, bank, or dam. Agglué, glued. Aggluer, to glue. Agglutinatif, proper to glue toge∣ther. Agglutinement, a gluing together. Agglutiner, to glue. Aggraffe, as Agrafe, a clasp. Aggravanter, to aggravate. Aggravanté, aggravated. s'Aggraver, to be gravelled. Aggressé, assaulted, or set on. Aggressement, an assaulting, or set∣ting on. Aggresser, to assault, or set on. Aggripper, to catch hold. Agiar, a bearing-cloth for a childe. Agiers, the ways or turnings of a house or place. Agiographe, a holy writing, holy writ. Agios, sacred, holy. Agiotare, a holy man. Agnafile. V. Aquafile. Agnelette, Agneliere, the coif or biggin of a womb-lodged Infant, the childs shirt. Agnelin, lambs fur, budge. Agobilles, trifles, trash, trumpery. Agonarque, a Master of the Revels. Agoranome, the Clark or Comptrol∣ler of a Market. Agoubilles. See Agobilles. Agoué, half-choaked. Agoure de lin, the weed dodder. Agouster, to have a smack or taste of, to give a taste, or season any thing. Agoutter, to drop, as rain from an house-cave. Agouttis, the droppings of a house. Agrailir. V. Agreslir. Agraphiner, to take hold of. Agré, willingly, with a good will. Agreableté, agreeableness. Agreation, an agreement. Agrener. See Aggrener in the N. D. Agrerer, to chuse, or lay out his part of the fruits of his land let out to parts. Agreslir, to make thin, or lean. Agreste, sowr; also rude, or clow∣nish. Agricole, a husbandman, a plough∣man. Agrier, as Terrage. Agrimenseur, a Surveyor of land. Agriote, the sharp or tart cherry. Agriotat, the syrrop or juice of that cherry. Agrippine, leacherous stuff. s'Agrouper, a horse to knit and ga∣ther himself close together, as if he would yerk out behinde. Agu. V. Aigu in the N. D. Aguafile, a kind of Moorish Trum∣pet. Aguelette, a thin soft skin or shirt, wherein a child is wrapped in the matrix, besides the after-birth which is more gross. Aguement, sharply. Aguerriment, martial order, war∣like discipline. Aguigner, to leer, to aim at. Aguillade, Aguillar, a kinde of fish called Thornhound. Aguillanneuf. See Auguillanneuf. Aguille, and its Derivatives. V. Ai∣guille in the N. D. Aguiser, and its Derivatives. V. Aiguiser in the N. D. Aguyon, a gentle wind (called so a∣mong Brittish and Norman Ma∣riners.) Agyos. V. Agios. Ahan, a loud, painful, and short ex∣pression of toil or vexation. Ahané, toiled; ploughed. Ahanable, as terre ahanable, land that requires much labour. Ahaner, Ahanner, to sigh out; also to labour, or to toil; also to plough. Ahanneux, toilsome. Ahen, Ahenner. See Ahan, Ahan∣ner. Ahennage, ploughing. Aherdre, to snatch, or pluck, Ahocquer. See Accrocher in the N. D. Ahonti, made ashamed. Ahontir, to make ashamed. Ahutir, to fright, to scare. Ajetter un Oiseau, to cast, or whistle
off a hawk, to let her go. Aiglantier, as Eglantier, sweet briar. Aiglas, Eaglets, young Eagles. Aiglesse, a hen-eagle. Aigneau, and Aignelet, as Agneau, Agnelet in the N. D. Aigneaux, manacles. Aigneler, to lamb. Aignelette, Aigneliere, as Agneliere. Aignelin, white budge, white lamb. Aigras, verjuice. Aigrebelheur, the name of an apple. Aigre-douce, a Sevil-orange, an Orange that is between sweet and sowr. Aigre-sin, a certain Turkish coin; also the Liver-fish. Aigrun, any thing that exasperates a disease or sore. Aigue, water; also a mare. Aigue marine, Sea-water, green colour. Aigueux, waterish, or full of water. Aiguier, a sink. Aiguillat. as Aguillade. Aiguillé, like a needle, or full of needles. Aigument, sharply. Ailasse, a great wing. Ailées, donner les ailées à un Che∣val, to give a horse the head. Ailer, to give wings unto, to set wings upon. Aileures, comings, or carlings, two beams that run along the hatches of a ship, and with the Traversins make a long square hole. Aillade, garlick-sauce; also the smell of garlick. Ailler, a Quail-net. Ailloignon, great garlick. Ailporreau, great mountain-garlick. Aimantin, adamantine, like an a∣damant, or load-stone. Aime-bal, a lover of dancing. Aime-carnage, bloudy-minded. Aime-esbats, gamesome, sportful. Aime-humains, gentle, sociable. Aime-loix, just, a lover of Justice. Aime-lyre, harp-loving. Aime-maistre, obsequious, dutiful. Aime-Mars, martial, warlike. Aime-noise, a contentious brabler. Aime-nouveauté, a lover of new things. Aime-paix, a peace-lover. Aime-pleurs, given to weeping; al∣so cruel, pitiless. Aime-silence, a lover of silence. Aime-tout, most kinde, most loving. Ain. See Haim. Ainçois, Ains, but, but rather, before ere, or ere. Ainsné. See Ainé in the N. D. Ajolié, pranked, or set out. Ajolier, to prank, or to set out. Ajoliver, to be merry, to make much of himself; also to prank, or trick up himself. Ajourner, se faire jour, to be near day. Ajous, surze, gorse. Air, choler, anger. Aïré, angry. Araigne (or Aragne) a spider. Aireau, a plough. Airée, a floor full, a bed full of. Airer, to airy, to make a nest, or airy. Aireste. See Arête in the N. D. Airon, a hern, or heron. Airure, the earing, or plowing of land. Aisance, ease, facility. Aisances, Aisemens, a privy, a house of office. Aiscette, a little plaining axe. Aiser, to take ease, to live at ease. Aisle, Aisné, and their Derivatives. V. Aile, Ainé. Aisneage, eldership. Aissade, an Instrument wherewith Gardeners open or break up the ground. Aisseliere, Aissellaire, the vein which passeth along the arm-hole. Aisseuil. V. Aissieu in the N. D. Aissi, Aissil, a shingle of wood. Aistres. See Agiers. Aitiologie, a shewing of a reason or cause. Alabandique, pierre alabandique, a kind of black stone mingled with purple. Alâchi, slackened, hung flagging; decayed, or grown feeble. Alachir, to slacken, to hang flagging downward; also to decay, to grow feeble. Alâchissement, a slackening, or slackness; a decay, or failing in vigour. Alaigreté, mirth. Alaine (for Halene) breath. Alainer la langue, to hold out the tongue, as a bird or beast that in extremity of heat breathes for air. Alaire. See Allaire. Alampers, a kinde of peach. Alan. See Allan. Alangouri, languishing, pining a∣way. s'Alangourir, to languish, to pine away. Alanter. See Allenter. Alaterne, barren privet. Albacore, a certain fish in the In∣dian Sea. Albassan, a kinde of white and hard stone, whereof lime may be made. Albastrin, white as alabaster. Albe, as Able. Albereau, a very hard white free-stone, that resembles the Albassan. Albergame, the amorous apple, the golden apple. Albergation, an alienation in see-farm, and for a fine or income. Alberge, a kinde of small peach. Alberger, a kind of small peach tree. Alberger, to alien in fee-farm. Albugine, a whitish film in or over the eye. Albugineux, whitish, like the white of an egg. Alcali, sel alcali, salt calcinated, then beaten to powder, and set on a piece of glass in a moist cellar. Alchange, the herb Alcakengy, or winter-cherry. Alcharade, a scorpion. Rab. Alchechange, or Alchequange, as Alchange. Alchermes, a grain wherewith crim∣sons are died. Alchimille, Lions foot, Lady's man∣tle, great sanicle, (an herb.) Alcibienne, vipers-herb, snakes bu∣gloss. Alcofribas, a greedy glutton. Alcret, as Halecret, a Corslet. Alebastre (for Albâtre) alabaster. Alebastrin, of alabaster. Alebrenne, a salamandar. Alebromantie, divination by barley-meal mixed with wheat. Alectoire, the Cock-stone (a chry∣stal-coloured stone, as big as a bean, found in the gizern or maw of some cocks.) Alectorophoneme, the crowing of a cock. Alegerir, to lighten, or make light. Aleine, Aleiner. See Halene in the N. D. Alemelle. V. Alumelle. Alenois, cresson Alenois, garden-cress. Aleron, a little wing; also a twig, or sprig. Alesnes, cockle, corn-rose, wild ni∣gella. Aleve, the wild Pine-tree. Aleuf, see Aleu in the N. D. Alexitere, a preservation against poyson. Algame, mixtion of gold and quick∣silver. Algarie, a Catheter; a kind of In∣strument
wherewith Surgeons pro∣voke urine. Alge. See Algue in the N. D. Algesié, the Lote, or Nettle-tree. Algorisme, the art or use of Cy∣phers, or of numbring by Cyphers. Fol d'algorisme, a fool by figure, an Ass in grain. Algousant, a Lieutenant. Alhatrat, a Serpent whose biting wounds, but poysons not. Alhidade. See Alidade. Aliage. See Alliage in the N. D. Aliayre. See Alliaire. Aliboron, a busie-body. Alicacubut. V. Alchange. Alicté, bedrid. Alictement, a lying sick in bed. s'Alicter, to lie bedrid. Alié, Alier, as Allié, Allier in the N.D. Alier tremaillé, a trammel net, or double net. Alimenté, sed, nourished. Alimenter, to feed, to nourish. Alimenteux, nourishing. Alimonner, to put into the thill of a cart. Alipte, he that in old time anointed Wrestlers before they exercised. Aliqualement, indifferently, so so. Alis, solid, compacted, hard wrought, laid close together. Alise, or Alize, the sweet berry of the Lote-tree. Alité, for allité, bedred, so sick as to keep his bed. Alkali, as Alcali. Alkerenge. See Alchange. Alkermes, a Confection made of the decoction and infusion of silk into the juice of the grain Chermes (a Sovereign Remedy for all swoun∣dings.) Allagant, washing, watering. Allaire, a little walk or alley in a Wood; or a tree growing therein. Allambre, copper. Allan, a kind of big, strong, thick-headed, and short-snouted dog. Allanguir, to make languish or pine away. Allant, a crafty cheating fellow. s'Alaschir. V. s'Alâchir. Allayé, allay'd. Allayer, to allay, to mix gold or sil∣ver with baser metals. Alleage. See Alliage in the N.D. Allebouter. See Haleboter. Allebrent. See Albren in the N. D. Alleché, allured, or drawn on. Allecher, to allure, to draw on. Allecter, to wamble, as a queasy sto∣mack. Allege, ease; also a lighter-boat. Allegeance, ease. Allegoriser, to use Allegories. Alleinée, Allenée, a breath, air, or puff. Allelyon, Allerion, a bird (in Bla∣zon) wanting beak, feet, and legs. Alleran. See Alezan in the N. D. Alles, as ils curent alles, they had a reputation, or they passed currently. Alleud, Alleuf, & Alleut. See Aleu in the N. D. Alleure, for Allure, pace, going. Alleutier, a free-holder. Alleyer, a Merchant to declare up∣on his oath to a Toll-gatherer, what and how much ware he carries a∣long with him. Alliaire, an herb called Jack of the edge. Allicher, and its derivatives. See Allecher. Allignée, a Vine coupled with an Elm-tree. Allitti, bedrid. Allochons d'un rouët, the teeth of a wheel in a clock, &c. Allode. See Aleu in the N. D. Allodial. See under Aleu in the N. D. Alloigné, driven, chased. Alloigner, to drive far from, to chase. Allotement, a parting, or dividing. Allotir, to part, or to divide. Alloué, a Seneschals Lieutenant. Allouer, to allow; also to impute. Allouvi, as hungry as a wolf; also fleshed or cruel as a wolf. Alloyandier, a roster of short ribs of beef. Alloyé. Seek Allayé. Allumelle. See Alumelle. Allumement, a lighting, a kindling. Allume-sang, bloud-inflaming. Allumetier, a maker or seller of matches for tinder-boxes. Alluvion, an increase of waters. Alluz, all out, or a brimmer drunk up. Almadie, or Almande, a little boat made of the bark of a tree, such as are in use among the savages of Africk and India. Almandine, a course kinde of Ruby. Alme, fair, clear, or calm; also nourishing. Alme-beau, goodly. Almoire. See Armoire in the N.D. Almucantaraths, certain Circles in an Astrolabe, denoting the heights that are above our Hemisphere. Alocation, a placing, or setting in a place. Alode, Alodial. See Aleu in the N. D. Aloe, a lark. Alogique, unreasonable, inconside∣rate. Aloine. See Alvine. Alonges, hawk lns. Alongeail, Alongissement, a leng∣thening, or drawing out in length. Aloser, to colour (or cloak) a mat∣ter. Aloud. See Aleu in the N.D. Alouër. See Allouër. Alourdi, dulled. Alourdir, to dull. s'Alouser, s'Alozer, to praise him∣self. Aloyne. V. Alvine. Alpestre, hilly, mountainous. Alphe, a morphew, or staining of the skin. Alphitomancie, divination by bar∣ley-meal. Alphonsin, a coin of gold, worth a∣bout 1 shill. sterl. Alquequinges. See Alchange. Alteratif, thirst-increasing. Altercation. See Conteste in the N. D. Altere, a poise of lead which Rope-dancers hold in their hands for a counterpoise; also a piece of lead to lift up for exercise. Alteres, vehement passions of the minde, strong conceits, extasies. Alternation, an interchange, or suc∣cession by turns. Alterquer. See Contester in the N. D. Altitonant, thundring from above. Alveole, the hollow part of the jaw wherein a tooth is fastened. Alvette. See Gargatte. Alvine, wormwood. Alvincux, bitter as wormwood. Alumelle, the blade of a sword or knife. Aluté, bedawbed, or besmeared. Aluyne, wormwood. Alys, smooth, sleek, polished. Alysson, the herb mad-wort, moon-wort, or heal-dog. Alzan. See Alezan in the N. D. Alzatin, the fat call wherein the bowels are lapt. Amadées, a certain Order of Grey Friers. Amadis, a neat Speaker. Amadité, quaint, prankt with fine words. Amadoüé, flattered, coxed. Amadouëment, a flattering, or co∣xing.
Ama louër, to flatter, to coxe. Amadouëur, a flaterer, a coxer. Amafrose, blindness, caused by the obturation of the Optick sinew. Amainer, to strike sail. s'Amaisonner, to lodge, or harbour himself. s'Amalader, to fall sick. Amalgame, a mixture, or incorpo∣ration of quick-silver with other metals. Amalgamer, to mix, or incorporate. Amanché. See Emmanché in the N. D. Amandé, mingled  seasoned with almonds. Amandin, a kind of reddish mar∣ble. Amanite, the name of a wholesome toad-stool. Amanoter, to manacle. Amanoté, manacled. Amantelé, covered with a cloak. Amaphrose. See Amafrose. Amareur, Amaritude, bitterness. Amarri, the womb of a woman. Amase, Amasement, a Messuage, or Tenement. Amasé, housed, or having a Tene∣ment on it. Amassement, a heaping, or gather∣ing together. Amasse-miel, that gets honey. Amasseresse, a woman that heaps up. Amastiné, grown dogged. s'Amastiner, to become dogged. Amati, trained up unto; also quelled, abated, allayd. Amatir, to train up unto. Amaurote, a Moor. Amazé. See Amasé. Ambages, Ambagoye, a going about the bsh in speaking. Ambagieux, full of idle circumstan∣ces. Amballage, as Emballage in the N. D. Ambarvales, Rogation, or Gang∣weeks. Ambe, with, together with. Ambezas, a bes ac. Ambi, a wooden instrument of two pieces, used for the putting of a shoulder into joynt. Ambier, to go, to go about; also to bribe for an Office. Ambler, to amle, to pace. Ambligone, a blunt angle, or a tri∣angle. Amiopie, daess, or dimness of sight. Ambouchoer. See Emboucholler. Ambulatif, ever walking, or stirring. Ameiller, to milk, or to suck. Amelette, a little pretty soul. Ameliorer, to better, mend, improve. Amelioré, bettered, mended, im∣proved. Ameliorement, a bettering, men∣ding, or improving. Amelot, a kinde of small bitter-sweet apple. Amenage, carriage. Amendable, finable, that may be fined. Amendaye, a Grove (or Orchard) of Almond-trees. Amendeur, a mender, or amender. Amenée, the circuit of a Bayliff, wherein he may arrest, summon, or adjourn; also an arrest, summons, or adjournment. Amenement, a leading, or bring∣ing unto. Ameneur, a bringer or fetcher unto; also a kinde of Sergeant or Bayliff in some parts of France, belonging to particular Lords. Amenité, delightfulness, pleasantness. Ameos, herb-William, bull-wort, Bishops-weed. Ameret, cider made of bitter ap∣ples. Ameril. See Emeril in the N. D. Amerine, Abrahams balm, Park-leaves. Amertumer, to make bitter. Amesnagé, managed. Amesnager, to manage an estate. Amesson (for Hameçon) a bait. Amessures, Cas d'amessures, the re∣viling, striking, or fetching bloud of a man; or the suspicion of an offence, whose punishment is but pecuniary. s'Amesurer, to live within compass. Ameté, bounded, limited; measured out. Ametiste (for amathyste) an ama∣thyst. Amette, a little soul. Amettre. See Admettre in the N.D. Ameubler, Ameublir, to furnish. Ameuri, ripened, or made ripe. Ameurie, to ripen, or to make ripe. Ameute, Chasse amentée, a close running or hunting of dogs toge∣ther. Ameuter, to hold up the dogs in hunting close together; to run and hunt very close together; to a∣gree. Amezeau, a pipe of wood through which the Sea-water (whereof Salt is made) passes. Amiableté, friendliness. Amidonner, to starch. Amieller, to sweeten; also to draw on by any sweet means. Amielleure, an Oyntment of the thickness and colour of honey. Amiette, ones little love, or sweet∣heart. Amignarder, Amignoter. See Mi∣gnarder in the N. D. Amiot, a little friend; also a kind of Pear whereof Perry is made. Amission, loss. Ammaires, or Ammarres. See A∣mare in the N. D. Ammenteler. See Ementeler. Ammeubler, to furnish. Ammi. See Ameos. s'Ammignonner, to grow pretty; also to set out himself. Ammitonné, lapt in fur like a Cat. Ammodite, a creeping Vermine like a Viper, but of a sandy colour, and full of black spots. Amnestie, for Amnistie, Amnisty. Amnie. See Aguellette. Amobilié, made movable. Amobilier, to make movable. Amoitir, to moisten. Amolir, to remove with much ado; also to depart, or go away. Amollissable, apt to be mollisi'd. Amomite, encens amomite, a whi∣tish kind of Incense, which in han∣dling becomes soft as Mastick. Amomon. See Amome in the N.D. Amonestement, admonition. Amoraye, a Coin used at Ferara, and worth 12 quadrins. Amorceure, a bait. Amorcher, to prime a gun. Amortissable, quenchable, extingui∣shable. Amoureau, a little Love; also the little God of Love. Amourescher, to wooe. Amoustillé, sweetened with Must. Amoustiller, to sweeten with Must or new sweet wine. Amparlier, a Pleader. Ampes, raspises. Ampeser. See Empeser in the N. D. Amphiblistroide, the fifth thin mem∣brane of the eye, bringing inward light into the christaline-humour. Amphibole, ambiguous, doubtful. Amphibolie, Amphiologie, a doubtful or double meaning in one or many words. Amphisbeine, the Amphisbena, a swall spotted and worm-like Ser∣pent, that hath a head at both
ends, bites, and goeth both ways. Amphitrite, the Sea, Amphore, an ancient measure of a∣bout 36 quarts. Amphytane, a square and golden-colour stone, of the nature of a Load-stone. Ampliateur, an amplifier. Ampois, starch. See Empois in the N. D. Amprise, an enterprise. Amputer, to pare away. Amuletté, a counter-charm. Amuletier, a counter-charmer, a wizard. Amurer, to wall up. Amuse-sol, one that with vain pratling or toying holds fond peo∣ple at gaze. Amuseller, for Emmuseller, to mus∣sle. Amusoire, a thing to wonder at, a gazing-stock. Amusse, for Aumusse, a fur worn by Canons. Amuté. See Ameuté. Amygdales, kernels rising in the neck or under the root of the tongue; also almonds. Anacampserote, an herb whose touch renews decayed love between man and man. Anacarde, the East-Indian fruit cal∣led Anacardium, or bean of Ma∣laca. Anacardin, of anacardium. Anacophalaeose, recapitulation. Anachorete, the Hermit called an Anchorite. Anaile. See Agnasile. Anagal, the herb Pimpernel. Anagnoste, a Reader. Anagrammatiser, to make ana∣graws. Anagrammatisme, a making of a∣nagrams. Anagyre, the Plant called Bea∣trisoly. Analemme, an instrument whereby the course and ation of the Sun is found. Analogiser, to compare one thing with another. Anangé, fatal. Anaphore, a ascension of the Pla∣nets from the East by daily course of the Firaent; also a Figure called Repetition, when two Ver∣ses begin with o word. Anapotique, a kinde of circular Dial for Winter. Anaquil. See Anasile. Anarche, Anarchique, without Go∣vernment. Anastomose, the communication of veins without arteries, whereby they help one another. Anaté, a duck, or drake. Anathematisation, an extreme cur∣sing. Ancelle, a hand-maid, a maid-ser∣vant. Ancholie, the Columbine herb or flo∣wer. Anchraige, anchorage. Anchuses, wild bugloss, orchanet. Ancoigner. See Encoigner. Ancoigneure, as Encongnure, an angle, or corner. Ancon, a long and heavy axe, in former times used amongst souldi∣ers. Ancrier, an inkhorn. Ancrier, (adj.) yielding ink. Ancrouëlle, a shrike. Andoille, as Andouille in the N. D. Andoillois, of links, or chitter∣lings. Andrin, an ill-savoured black colour of a horse. Androginé, made of both sexes. Anelet. See Annelet. Anematiser, to anathematize. Anemophylace, an Observer of hea∣venly Rules. Anestie, the season. Anette, a Duck. Aneurisme, a soft swelling. Aneurissement, an ulcer, or ul∣ration in the skin of a sinew. Anforge, a leathern wallet. Anfractueux, fll of turnings. Anfractuosité, a turning (or winding) about. Angar, an open shead or brl, wherein husbandmen set their ploughs, &c. out of the Sun and Weather. Angarie, personal service or drudge∣ry; that whi h a man is forced to perform in his own person. Angarié, tolled, or put to any drud∣gery. Angarier, to toil, or to compel unto any drudgery. Angele, a she-Angel, a woman-An∣gel. Angelet, Angelette, Angelot, a little (or pretty) Angel. Angine, the squisy. Anglantine, a eglanti, or sweet-briar; also a certain witty Game wher in onely Pots content, and to the best do a Silver Eglan∣tine, to the second a Marigold is given. Angler, to shut up in a corner. Anglet, an angle, a corner. Angleuk, full of angles, or like an angle. Anglois, (in this sense) a Credi∣tor that pretends he hath much money owing, which is never like to be paid him. Anglué, for Englué, covered with bird-lime. Angoissé, grieved, filled with an∣guish. Angoisser, to fill with anguish, to grieve. Angoisseusement, with great an∣guish. Angoisseuseté, much anguish. Angoisseux, full of anguish. Angonailes, Angonnages, poy sores. Angoüe, as Agoüe. Angoule-vent, a swallow-wind. Angourie, the great long pompio. Angousle, a locust, or grashopper. Angué, the herb wall-wort. Anguillade, a lash, or blow with an eels skin. Anguillette, a grig, or little eel. Anguilliere, a pond, or place to keep eels in. Anguillonneux, a crafty fellow, a sly man. Anguleux, as Angleux. Angurie, as Angourie. Anguste, straight, narrow, sant. Angustie, straightness, narrowness, scantss. Anheler, to breath on; also, to fetch wind, or draw breath with difficulty; also, to be very greedy of. Anhelé, brthed or; drawn (as the breath) with difficulty; much longed for. Anhelit, difficult breathing. Ani, for Anis, the herb anis, and ansed. Anichiler, for Annihiler, to annihi∣late. Aniler, to abate; , to darken. Animadversion, an animadversion; also a rproof. Anime, n easie kinde of Armour; also, the name of an i-Indian Gum. Animelles, the stories of . &c. Animeusement. . Animeus, , resol. Anir, an Indian herb usd  Dyers. Ani,  with  ¦creased,
or multiply'd. Aniser, to season with anis-seed; al∣so to increase, or multiply. Aniveller, to measure by plumb-line, or plumb-rule. Anizé. See Anisé. Anneantir. See Aneantir in the N. D. Annelé, decked with rings; also, made into curls like a ring. Anneler, to deck with rings; also to curl like a ring. Annelet, a little ring. Annicher, to put into a nest. Annicheur, a putter of things into nests. Annichiler, to annihilate. Annion, Privilege d'annion, a years Protection granted by the Prince or Magistrate unto a Debtor. Annombre, annumerated. Annombrer, to annumerate. Annonce-salut, health-declaring. Annonchali, grown careless of him∣self. s'Annonchalir, to grow careless of himself. Annone, a kind of Indian fruit; al∣so the corn whereof brown bread is made for the people. Annotation, annotation, mark, or observation. Annotation de biens, a seizure of the Goods of Offen∣ders, that appear not in person or by Atturney, within a year after they have been summoned. Annoté, noted, marked, or obser∣ved. Annoter, to note, mark, or observe. Annulaire, (a Subst.) the Chancellor of France. Termed so in old time, when the Kings Signet was his great Seal. Annulaire, (an Adj.) annular, round like a ring. Doigt annulaire, the ring-finger. Anoirci, blackened. Anoircir, to blacken. Anombrer. See Annombrer. Anonces, Banes of matrimony. Anonchallanti, Anonchaly, negle∣cted. Anonciade, Ordre de l'Anonciade, an Order of Knighthood instituted in the year 1350, by a Duke of Savoy. Annorexie, Anorexie, impatiency; also queasiness of stomack. Anoué, almost choaked by letting down too great a morsel. Anouër, almost to choak himself with greedy eating. Ansaret, a certain bitter gum. Ansé, eared, that hath an ear or handle. Ansée, a kinde of basket having two handles or ears, to be car∣ried between two. Anseré, as Ansé. Ansette, a little handle or ear of a pot, &c. Ansouple, as Ensouple. Ansule, a little handle. Ante, an Aunt; also the jaumb of a door. Antecesseurs, Ancestors. Anteins, the sail-yard. Anten, the last year. Antenais, shoots or sprigs of a years growth. Antenois, a hog, a year-old sheep, a lamb of the last year. Anthere, the yellow tuft in the mid∣dle of a rose. Anthosal, made of rosemary. Anthracite, a precious stone, where∣in there seem to be flames or sparks of fire. Anthromantie, Divination by the raising of dead men. Anthropopathie, humane (or mans) passion. Antiborée, a North-Dial. Antibust, Ceinct à Pantibust, girt loosely, carelesly; also girt back∣wards. Anticipant, (subst.) an anticipator. Antidore, a requital, one good turn for another. Antidotaire, serving for a counter-poison. Antidoté, furnished with (or pre∣serv'd by) antidotes. Antidoter, to furnish with (or pre∣serve by) antidotes. Antifortunal, a cross fortune. Antille, a wooden latch of a door, or the ring that serves both to lift up the latch, and pull the door to. Antinomie, contrariety (or oppositi∣on) of two Laws. Antinormies, enormous contrarie∣ties. Antipelargie, the reciprocal love of Children to their Parents; any requital, or mutual kindness. Antiphones, the reciprocal voices or answers of two companies that sing by turns, as in a Quire. Antiphonnier, the Book of Anthems in a Cathedral Church. Antipodium, a surplusage, or over∣plus. Antiporte, an outward gate, or a gate that is just opposite unto ano∣ther. Antiquaille, an Antick, an ancient Monument. Antiquaire (Adj.) old, ancient, stale. Antiquement, anciently, after the old manner. Antistrophe, an Antistrophe, or alter∣nal conversion of two things which be somewhat alike. Antonnoir, for Entonnoir, a funnel. Antonomasie. See Antonomase in the N. D. Antonomarie, excellent. Antorc, yellow Monks-hood, Aconits mithridate. Antrac, a Carbuncle (stone or sore.) Anubet, the name of a cidar-apple. Anuicter, to defer, or keep until night. S'anuicter, to wax night. Anulaire, as Annulaire. Anuller (for Annuller) to null. Anuot, a blind-worm. Any (for Anis) the herb Anis, or Anis-seed. Aorner, Aornement. See Orner, Ornement in the N. D. Aorolat, as Rolat. Aorte, artere aorte, the mother of arteries. Aouillé, cloyed. Aourser, to burn at the bottom of a pot. Aousté, reaped; ripened. Aouster, to reap; also to ripen. Aousteron, a reaper. Aousteux, full ripe, as most fruit is in August. Aparier, for Apparier, to match, to couple. Apast, for Appats, baits, tempta∣tions. Apedeftes, ignorant people. Apensement, purpose, or intent. Apenser, to purpose, or intend. S'a∣penser, to bethink himself. Apentis, for Appantis, an addition to a house. Apercher, to pearch. Apert, apparent, plain, manifest. Apert (the Verb) as Appert. Apertement, apparently, plainly, openly. Apertise. See Appertise. Aphorretique, unsetled in opinion. Aphronitre, saltpeter. Aphyer, as Afyer. Apier, a place where bees are kept and tended. Apilé, well-set. Apistolé, baited, cozened; also made a cuckold. Apistoler, to bait, to cozen; also to cuckold one. Apitoyer, to take pity of.
Aplanoyer, Aplanir, for Applanir, to even, to level. Aplegement, as Appleigement. Aplet, a kind of great draw-net. s'Aplomber, to fall down plumb. Apointir, for Appointir, to sharpen a thing at the point. Apollinaire, henbane. s'Apoltronner, to grow coward, or lazie. Aponeurose, the sinewy separation of the muscles. Apophyse, a process in Anatomy. Aporetique, ever doubting. Apostater, Apostatizer, to play the Apostate. Aposteme, an impostume. Apostemer, to swell into an impo∣stume. Aposter, for Apposter, to suborn, to get false Witnesses. Apostil, Apostile, for Apostille, a postscript. Apostoles, Letters missive from a Prince; also Writs of appeal sent from the Judge appealed from to him that is appealed unto. Apostolizer, to play the Apostle. Apotherapie, pastime, recreation. Apothecaire, for Apoticaire, an A∣pothecary. Apothecairaisse, of an Apothecary, or Apothecary-like. Apoué, satiated, so full as he can eat no more. s'Appaillarder, to turn Whoremon∣ger. Appali, made, or grown pale. Appalir, to make pale; to wax pale. Appané, that hath had a portion. Appaner, Appanner, to give a youn∣ger son his portion. Appaouvrir, for Appauvrir, to im∣poverish. Apparagé, fitly matched, well pai∣red. Apparcevoir, for Appercevoir, to perceive. Appareillement, a preparing, or pro∣viding for. Appareilleuse, an Attire-woman; also a Bawd. Apparenter aucun, to challenge or acknowledge one for a Kinsman. s'Apparesser, s'Apparessir, to grow idle, or lazie. Apparsondir, for Approsondir, to dig further, to search the bot∣tom. Appariation, a matching; also a perpetual Association or Correspon∣dency of Jurisdiction between the King and a Lord Spiritual or Temporal, or between a Lord Spi∣ritual and a Lord Temporal. Apparietaire, as Apparitoire. Apparissant, appearing. Appariteur, an Apparitor; also a Hangman. Apparitoire, Palitory of the Wall. Apparoissance, appearance; also an eminency, or standing above o∣thers. Appastelé, fed with the hand. Appasteler, to feed with the hand. Appasteux, full of allurements. Appeau, for Appel, an appeal; also a challenge. Appeaux, Chimes, or the chiming of bells. Appellement, a calling. Appelleur, a caller. Appelourdé, falsifi'd; cheated; soiled, or stained. Appelourder, to falsifie; also to cheat; also to soil, or stain. Appendicule, a little appendix. Appenné, for Appanagé, that hath an Estate as it were to use only. Appenser, as Apenser. Appercevance, an inkling of a mat∣ter. Appert, expert, ready, nimble. Appertement, expertly, readily, nim∣bly. Appertise, expertness, readiness, nim∣bleness. Appetence, appetency, appetite. Appetit, for échalote, shalot. Appieceter, to piece, or patch. Appigres, the nets, hooks, &c. used by fisher-men. Appiler, to pile, or heap together. Applaner (for Applanir) to level. Applausement, applause. Applege, Appleige, Applegement, a bill of complaint for land; also a giving bond for a thing. Appleger, Appleiger, to complain; also to become pledge, to enter into bond for. Appleger son marché, to warrant the things he sells. s'Appleiger, to put into the Court a bill of Complaint for land. Applommé de sommeil, fast a∣sleep. Applommer de sommeil, to cast into a heavy sleep. Appoinct, opportunity. s'Appointiser, to grow sharp at the end. Appoissonné, stored, or furnished, with fish. Appoissonnement, a storing, or fur∣nishing, with fish. Appoissonner, to store, or furnish, with fish. Apportement, a carrying or bring∣ing to; also a drawing near to the shore. Apportionner, to give a portion. Appostile, an answer unto a Peti∣tion, set down in the margent thereof. Appostiler, to answer a Petition, in the margent thereof. Appreci, price, rate, or value set on things. Apprimer, to incourage one about a thing, which before he durst not meddle with. Apprins, learned. Approbatif, approving. Approchement, an approaching. Approfité, made profit of, profited by, received or gathered as the re∣venue or fruits of an Inheritance. Approfitement, a bringing of profit unto, a receiving or gathering of the revenue or profits of an Inhe∣ritance. Approfiter, to make profit of; to bring profit unto; to receive the profits or revenues of an Inheri∣ritance. Appropriance, appropriation. Appropriement, a fitting, confor∣ming, accommodating. Approsse, de grosse approsse, vio∣lently, vehemently, with great strength. s'Approvisionner, to provide him∣self of necessaries. Approuvement, approbation. Appuie-pot, any thing that stays a pot on the fire. Appuré, purifi'd, clarifi'd, cleared, discharged. Appurement, a purifying, or clari∣fying, a clearing, a discharging. Appurer, to purifie, to clarifie. Ap∣purer un compte, to clear an ac∣count. Appurer une debte, to discharge a debt. Appurer une amende, to rate an amercement. Appuyal, a leaning-stock. Appuye, an open and out-standing Terrace or Gallery sit on the out∣side with rails to lean upon. Apres-disnées, the fees accruing un∣to Judges and their Assistants by giving of afternoon-Orders; or the afternoon-sittings or hearings; or the Affairs transacted in the afternoon. Apres-germain, Cousin apres-ger∣main, a Cousin-germane remo∣ved.
Aprique, sunny, that lieth open to the Sun. Aprisonner, to take prisoner. Apron, as Aspron. Apte, apt, sit, satable. Aptitude, aptitude, aptness, sutable∣ness. Aquatil, watery, lying in the water. Aquiescer, for Acquiescer, to ac∣quiesce. Aquilon, the North-wind. Aquilonel, Aquilonien, Northerly. Aquoest (a Gase. word) this. Arable, arable. Aracte, the blood-sucking Serpent. Aragnoide, a membrane of the eye. Aragon, a sort of Oyntment good a∣gainst Cramps and Convulsions. Araigné, Araignée, for Aragnée, a spider. Araigneux, full of spiders, or cob∣webs; also feeding on spiders; whence souris araigneuse, a shrew∣wouse. Araignier, of (or like) a spider, or cobweb. Arain, for Airain, brass. Araire, a Plough. Araisonner, as Arraisonner. Aramme, a Fine set on a Plaintiffs or Defendants head, for not ap∣pearing. Aransor, a red herring. Araroye, a round and skree-like Ornament of feathers worn by the West-Indian Savages at their backs. Arasser, See Traier in the N.D. Arbalestrage, the shooting in a Cross∣bow. Arban, a days work in every week due by soule Vassals that hold by Villanage unto their Lords. Arbausier, for Arboisier, an abut∣tree. Arbaux, as Herbaux. Arbenne, a kind of white Par∣tridge. Arbitrateur, Arbitrator, Ʋmpire. Arbitré, arbitrated. Arbitrer, to arbitrate. Arborise, a kind of white free∣stone. Arboriser, to study the nature of trees. Arbouce, Arbouse, for Arboise, an arbut, or strawberry. Arbosier, for Arboisier, an arbut∣tree. Arboutan, for Arc boutant, a but∣tress. Arbreau, a shrub. Arbret, a little tree. Arbriet, the tiller of a cross-bow. Arbrisselet, a little shrub. Arbuste, a shrub; also a Grove of trees that are lopt and cut. Arbuster, to plant a Ground with thick ranks of shrubs. Arbustif, shrubby; also running or growing up by the side of a shrub. Arcanne, red-oker. Arcasse, the Counter in the poop of a ship. Arcelet, as Harcelet. Archade, for Arcade, an arch. Archediacre, for Archidiacre, an Arch-deacon. Archediacone, Arch-deaconry. Archée, a bow-shoot, as far as a bow will carry. Archelette, a little arch, or ark; also a womans car-wire. Archenocher, a chief Mariner. Archeprètre, for Archiprètre, a chief Priest. Archerie, a Match of shooting; also a Ground to shoot in. Archerot, a little Archer, a young Bow-man. Archiatre, a principal Physician. Archier, for Archer, an Archer, or Bowman. Archimandrite, a General or Go∣vernour of Hermits. Archimarmitonerastique, an Abbey∣lbber. Architecté, contrived, built, set up. Architecter, to contrive, oversee, or set up a building. Architectonique, belonging to Ar∣chitecture. Archool, dust. Archure, a mill-hoop, or mill-ase. Arçoir, yesteright. Arçon, (s.) a burning, or setting on fire. Arçonneux, Arçonner, of, or be∣longing to a saddle-bow; also sit to hang, or to be carried at a saddle-bow. Arcotie, benumming, stupifying. Arcou, a kinde of latten, or copper, whereof Kettles are made. Arcture, the star Bootes, which fol∣loweth Charles's-wain. Arcuer, to arch, bow, or bend. Arcure, an arching, or bowing. Ardans, S. Hermes fires. Ardentement, ardently. Ardid, as Ardit, a farthing. Ardille, clay, or mould. Ardillé, done over with clay. Ardiller, to do over with clay. Ardillier, as Terre ardilliere, tough earth, or clay, whereof brick and tile may be made. Ardit, a farthing. Ardoir, to burn, or be on fire; to be eager in a business; to desire ser∣vently; to inflame, or set on fire. Ardoisé, covered with states; of state. Ardoiseux, full of slates. Ardoisin, of slate. Ardouë, a little brook running along a field. Ardre, as Ardoir. Ardu, hard, difficult. Ardy, as Ardit, a farthing. Arechal, for Archal, wire, copper∣wire. Areille, for Oreille, an ear. Arene, sand, gravel. Areneux, sandy. Arenger, (for Ranger) to set in or∣der. Areniere, a sand (or gravel) pit. Arentelles, gossymere; the long, white, and cobweb-like exhala∣tion that flies in the air, in Sunny and Summer days. Arenuleux, full of sand, or gravel. Arer, to plough. Arere, a plough. Ares-metys, presently, by and by. Areste d'une espée, the crest of a sword, a sharp rising in the middle thereof. Aresteux, full of small bones, as a fish. Areteuse, the herb Sorrel. Arex, presently, by and by. Arfie, a horn-fish. Argolice, a raddish-root. Argalie, a Surgions syringe. Arganete, a Wire-drawers bench. Argatile, a kinde of Titmouse. Arge, a lightning which blasteth and maketh black. Argentangine, the silver Squinsy. Argenteux, full of silver. Argentiere, the place wherein me∣tals are tried, before Coin be made of them. Argerite, the silver-coloured foam of tryed lead. Argilier, the Pontic Acatia, (a thor∣ny shrub.) Argiliere, a clay-pit, Argillette, fine clay, or mould. Arglantier, for Eglantier, an Eglan∣tine-tree. Argolet, a light horseman. Argot, &c. See Ergot in the N.D. Argoteuse, a scold. Argouil, a ring of iron. Argousin, the Lieutenant of a Gal∣ley.
Argu, la teste pleine d'argu, the head full of proclamations. Argué, argued; chidden, provoked. Arguer, to argue; to chide, to pro∣voke. Arguer, an arguer. Arguillonneux, litigious, contentious. Arguties, quirks, subtleties. Argyrite. See Argerite. Ari, dryed up. Aridelle, a jade, a skeleton. Arietant, leaping, or fighting as a ram. Arignée (for Aragnée,) a spider. Arigot, see Argot in the N.D. Aristocratiquement, Aristocratical∣ly. Armaire, for Armoire, a cup-board. Armaison, as, ceci est plus d'armai∣son que cela, this is stronger than that. Armelin, an ermin. Armeries, as Armoires. Armeurerie, Armour. Armilles, the Iron-rings, or braces, wherein the gudgeons of a (wheels) spindle turn; also certain little round members in Pillars, &c. Arminette, for Erminete, a Joyners hollow axe. Armoiré, bearing arms. Armoires, the flowers called sweet Johns, or sweet Williams. Armoirie, an Arsenal, a store-house for Arms. Armoise, the herb called Mugwort, or Mothwort. Armoisin, taffata. Armonie, for Harmonie, harmo∣ny. Armorial, belonging unto armour. Armorier, an Armourer. Armottes, a broth or pap made of meal sleeped in liur, and sod∣den till it be thik. Armoux, choux armoux, a kinde of green colworts, whose laes are of an oval form. Armoyer, to tip (or deck) the haft of a knife, or handle of a sword with any work. Armoyse. See Armoise. Arneat, a shrike. Arné, weak-backed. Arnement, a weakning of the back. Arner, to weaken the back. Arnoglosse, plantain. Arollé, See Arrollé. Aromat, aromatical. Aromatic rozat, a certain sweet powder, good for the stomack and heart. Aromaticité, sweet savour, pleasant smell or taste, as of spices. Aromatizé, perfumed, or sweetened with spices. Aromatizer, to perfume, or sweeten with spices. Aron, the herb aron, calves-foot. Aronde, a trunk to shoot in. Arondeau, arondelet, a young swal∣low. Aroy, a plough. Arpailleur, a seller of old trinkets, or of old iron; also, a siner of morals. Arpentement, a surveying, a mea∣suring of land, Arpilleux, ravenous, devouring. Arquebouse, for Arquebuse, an har∣quebuse. Arquemie, for Alchimie, Alcumy. Arquer, to arch, bow, or bend. Arrabler, to snatch away, to get by hook or by crook. d'Arrache-pied, continually, imme∣diately, without intermission. Arrachis. Set Arrachement in the N. D. Arraisonné, talked, or discoursed with. Arraisonnement, a talking or di∣scoursing with. Arraisonner, to talk, or discourse with. Arramir, to swear. Arrapé, snatched away. Arraper, to snatch away. Arrasade, a salamander. Arre, tart, or a choaking, as a wild pear. Arrecer. See Arresser. Arreche, a fish-bone. Arréement, good aa, order, equi∣page; also, a giving of money in earnest. Arrené. See Arné. Arrer. See Arrher in the N. D. Arrerager, to come into aars. Arrerailles, con sowed late in the year. Arres, for Arrhe, an earnest. Arressement, the rising, or stiffness of the yard. Arresser, to stand, as a mans yard. Arreste, for Arête, a fish-bone. Arrestement, a stopping, or staying. Arreste-nes, ship-staying. Arrhemens, earnest. Arrierage, for Arrerage, arrars. Arrieré, come or cast behind. Arriere-chambre, a back-chamber. Arriere-coin, a back-corner. Arriere-cour, a back-yard. Arriere-demandé, slightly deman∣ded, slowly asked. Arriere-foin, after-grass. Arriere-fosse, a back-ditch, or dike. Arriere-main, a blow given back∣ward. Arriere-ouvert, wide open. Arriere-poincté, back-ithed. Arriere-poincter, to back-stitch. Arrierer, to go backward, also to set back. Arriere-taille, a second or later tax. Arriere-vasseur, an Ʋnder-villain. Arigateur, a Waggoner. Arriger, s'arriger, to rise, or stand up stiff, as a mans yard. Arrivement, an arriving, or coming to. Arrobe, a measure coming to 25 pound. s'Arroger, to presume, to ascribe too much unto himself. Arrollé, at work, set to work. s'Arroller, to fall to work, to set himself to it. Arroiie. See Arrobe. Arrouler, to rowl, to tumble. Arrouter, to put into the way. S'ar∣router, to meet together. Arroy, array. Arroyé, arrayed. Arroyer, to array. Arrudir, to make rude. Arruner, to put in order. Arry avant, on afore, away there hoe. Ars, the breast, or brisket of a horse. Ars, brûlé, burnt, consumed with heat or fire. Arcide, a pricy murderer. Arseirole, a pear-like fruit, that comes of a hawthorn grafted on a quice. Arsel, See Arzel. Arson, for Arçon, a saddle-bow. Artail, for Orteuil, a toe. Artemon, the mien Mast or Sail of a ship. Arterial, of, or belonging to Arte∣ries. Arteriotomie, an incision of Arte∣ries. Arthetiques, Cowslips. Arthritique, Ive arthritique, herb Iy. Arthrodie, an half conjunction of two bones, the head of the one being but half lodged in the ca∣vity of the other. Artialiser, to make an art of. Artichauliere, a bel, or plot set with aticlokes. Articulaire, belonging to a joynt. Articulation, a growing or shooting up from joynt to joynt; also the
hurting, or bursting of young joynts. Artien, an Artist. Artiere, a small fish called Shar∣pling, Stickling, or Stickle-back. Artifier, to make by art or craft. Artiller, to furnish with artillery. Artillier, a Bowyer, or Bow-maker. Artimon. See Trinquet in the N. D. Artiron, for Artison, a greenish worm, cleaving in great numbers to the leaves of Coleworts and o∣ther plants; also a kind of moth. Artisonné, moth-eaten, worm-eaten. Artoir, the great toe. Artre, moth; also a Kings-fisher. Artre grise des bois, a wood∣louse. Artrose, a natural and movable con∣nexion of bones. Artuson. See Artiron. Arzel, a horse with a white foot on the right or further side. Asare, the herb fole-foot, haslewort. Asarole, See Azarole. Asbetir, a kind of flax that will not be brnt, and yields cloth which fire scours better than water. Ascalabe, Ascalave, Ascalavette, the starry lizard. Ascaride, a small round worm which is in the bowels. Asçavanté, throughly instructed, made skilful in. Asçavanter, to instruct throughly, to make skilful in. Asçavoir, to wit, that is to say. Asche, and Aschée. See Ache, A∣chée in the N. D. Ascite, a kind of Dropsie. Ascles, shivers, or splinters of wood. Ascouter (for Ecouter) to hear. Aserches, wild prick-madam, stone-crop, worm-glass. Asereiner, to clear, or chear up. Asgrandissement, for Aggrandisse∣ment, an inlarging, or making bigger; also preferment, advance∣ment. Asinin, ass-like, of or belonging to an Ass. Asme, Asmatique, V. Asthme, Astm∣matique in the N. D. Asnée, an ass-load of. Asne-feuille, a kind of Origan, which Asses love exceeding well. Asnesque, ass-like, sottish, dull, igno∣rant, blockish. Asnichon, a young ass. Asnier (a Verb) to ride an ass. Asnonner, to fole, or bring forth an ass. Asoter, Asoté. See Assoter. Aspalathe, a kind of shrub whose aromatical wood is used by Per∣fumers. Asparge (for asperge) sparra∣grass. Asperer, to sharpen, to exasperate. Aspergé, besprinkled. Aspergement, a besprinkling. Asperger, to besprinkle. Asperger, an holy-water sprinkle. Aspergiere, a bed of sparra-grass. Aspergule, Aspertule, claver, goose-grass. Aspersé, besprinkled. Asphalte (for bitume) bitumen. Asperelle, for Aprelle, an herb called horse-tail. Aspresse (for âpreté) sharpness, ea∣gerness, tartness. Asprir, to sharpen, aggravate, ex∣asperate. Asprissement, a sharpening, &c. Assagi, become wise. Assagir, to make wise. Assagissement, a becoming wise. Assaieret, pillules d'assaieret, a sort of pills. Assassinement, a murdering of one. Assation, a rosting, a concocting by an outward dry heat. Assavanter. See Asçavanter. Assavoir, for savoir, to wit, viz. Assauvagi, made wild. Assauvagir, to make wild. Asse, the ancient Romans As, a cop∣per-coyn worth somewhat more than a penny sterl. Asse-douce, the sweet gum that is∣sues from the sacrificed or cut stalks and roots of the African and Cyrenian Laserwort. Assecher, as Asseicher, to dry. Assediacre, an Arch-deacon. Assee, a wood-cock. Asseeur (for Asseyeur) a Cessor in matter of Taxes, &c. Asseiché, dry. Asseicher, to dry. Asseller, to go to the stool. Assemblement, Assemblure, a joyn∣ing of things together. Assence, assent, consent. Ascensement, Ascenseur. See A∣censement, Acenseur in the N.D. Assene, or Assenne, an assignation, or laying out of a dower or joyn∣ture for a widow or wife. Assene & adois, a portion or gift bestow∣ed by a father on his younger sons, or on his daughters, for their pre∣ferment. Assens, a certain profit made of Fo∣rests and high-grown Woods, as the pawnage, mastage, &c. Assentation, flattery. Assentatoire, flattering. Assenti, agreed to; also scented. Assentir, to agree to; also to take the wind or scent of. Asseral, a kind of Turkish drug. Asseré (for aceré) tempered with steel. Assermenté, sworn, put to his oath. Assermenter, to put to an oath. Assertivement, affirmatively, reso∣lutely, as one that will stand to what he says. Asservagi, made a slave. Asservagir, to make a slave. Asservissage, Asservissement, thral∣dom, slavery. Assessoriat, the Place, or Office of a Judge lateral. Asseulé, forsook, or left alone. Asseuler, to forsake, or leave alone. Asseur (for asseuré) sure, secure. Asseurement, Asseureté, the peace or good behaviour granted unto against another, who, if he break it, commits felony (by some Customs in France;) also protection, safe∣guard, or safe conduct. Assiduellement, for Assidument, con∣tinually. Assiement, a sitting. Assier (for acier) steel. Assignal, Land assigned or laid out unto a woman for her Joynture or Dower, and which she injoyeth until she have levy'd as much as she brought with her. Assignal de rente, rents assigned unto a woman for the same purpose. Assignat, an assignation, or appoint∣ment; an allotment; also a day or place appointed. Assillonnement, a making of balks in ploughing. Assillonner, to balk, or plough up in balks. Assimenter, to cement. Assimilation, a comparing, or liken∣ing. Assimilativement, by comparison. Assimilé, compared, likened. Assimiler, to compare, to liken. Assis (a Subst.) assesments, or impo∣sitions. Assode, decay'd with sickness, also weary of his life, or careless of himself. Assolé, sunned, seasoned, or dried in the Sun; also settled (as a horse) upon all his feet. Assoler, to s, to season or dry in
the Sun. S'assoler, to settle him∣self upon all his feet. Assommeiller, to cast into a slum∣ber. Assommeresse, main assommeresse, a deadly heavy hand, that fells down whatever it strikes. Assopir, Assopi, Assopissement. See Assoupir, &c. in the N. D. Assorbir, to drink, or to soak up. Assoté, besotted, doting on. L'As∣sotée de quêcun, a mans Sweet∣heart or Mistriss on whom the fool dotes. Assoter, Assotter, Assotir, to besot, to make dote on. Assoubjecter, to make subject, or bring under. Assouchement, a genealogy, stock, progeny. Assoupli, suppled, or made soft. Assouplir, to supple, or to make soft. Assourdi, made, or grown deaf. Assourdir, to make deaf. Assourdissement, a making deaf. Assouvagir, to asswage. Assubjecter, as Assoubjecter. Assuefaction, an accustoming to a thing. Assumpter, to take up into a high place. Assus, on, upon. Ast, armes d'ast, weapons to be cast as darts. Astace, a lobstir. Astalabore. See Ascalabe. Astelles. See Attelles. Astellier, a stall. Asterion, a fish, whose coat is set with star-like spots. Asterique, starry, star-like, of or be∣longing to a star. Asthamatic, pursie, short-winded. Astheme, pursiness, short-wind. Astillier, a Work-house for Masons, a Carpenters Yard. Astipulateur, a Record, or Witness; also one that makes an agreement with another; also a help, or as∣sistant. Astivité, craft in buying and sel∣ling. Astour. See Atour in the N. D. Astragalomantie, divination by hac∣ckle-bones. Astraict. See Abstraict. Astranti, the herb Master-wort. Astrapade (for Estrapade) the strap∣pado. Astreinct, forced, compelled, or con∣strained; also costive, or belly∣bound. Astreindre, to force, compel, or con∣strain; also to binde, or make costive. Astrelabe (for Astrolabe) an Astro∣labe. Astrologier (for Astrologue) an A∣strologer. Astronomien (for Astronome) an Astronomer. Astrucier, one that keeps or catches Ostridges. Astruser, to press (or keep) down. Astuce, craft, subtlety, cunning. Astur, crafty, subtle, cunning. Asur, &c. See Azur in the N. D. Asymbole, scot-free. Atabal. See Attabale. Artant, forthwith. Ataraxie, resolution, constancy; also tranquillity, or quietness of minde. A-tard, late, slowly. Atastre, the plain part or face of an Architrave; also a large fillet, or bend in a pillar, &c. Atedier. See Attedier. Atelles. See Attelles. Atermoyer, &c. See Attermoyer. Aterrer, &c. See Atterrer in the N. D. Athanasie, for Atanasie, the herb tansy. Athaner, to kill. Atheiste (for Athée) an atheist. Atheisterie, Atheism. Atheronne, a kinde of impostume. Athle, a wretched fellow. Athletique, Champion-like, or be∣longing to a Champion. Atiffer, as Attiffer in the N. D. Ativelles, trinkets. Atizer, for Attiser, to stir the fire. Atourneresse, as Attourneresse. Atout, with, together with. Atrabiliaire, for Atrabilaire, sub∣ject to melancholy. Atrainer, to trail, or drag along. Atre, a hearth. Atrebiliaire, as Atrabilaire. s'Atrister, for s'Attrister, to be grie∣ved. Atrophe, that is in a consumption, or to whom meat doth little or no good. Atrophie, a kinde of consumption. s'Atrophier, to consume, or pine a∣way. Atruander, as Attruander. Atlens, bounds, limits. Attabale, a kinde of brazen drum used by the Moorish horsemen. Attainct, Attaincte, Attaindre. See Atteint, Atteinte, Atteindre in the N. D. Attalenter, as Entalenter. Attavanat, a horse that's flea-bitten only in the flank or in the neck. Attayne, pettishness. Attayneux, pettish. Attediation, a wearying, or cloy∣ing. Attedié, wearied, cloyed. Attedier, to weary, cloy, or trouble with too much of one thing. Attelements, harness for draught∣horses or oxen. Attelier, a work-house, or shop for an Artificer. Attelle, a splent, or stick to make a splent of. Attelles, the haumes of a draught∣horses collar, the two flat sticks that encompass it. Attenance, a dependency upon, or a belonging unto. Attendant, an attendant. Atten∣dant que, whilst that. Attendue, an attendance, or atten∣ding. Attenir, to keep back, to detain. S'attenir à, to hang upon. Attenu, bound, or beholden unto. Attenuri, made thin, or slender. Atterissement. See Atterrissement. Attermoyé, that hath a time granted for the payment of a debt. Attermoyement, the granting of a time for the payment of a sum. Attermoyer, to grant a term for the payment of a debt. Atterrasseur, an overthrower, an op∣pressor. s'Atterrir, to rot on the earth, to be∣come as earth, to fall unto the earth. Atterrissement, an overthrowing to the earth, a covering with earth. Atteyner un chien sur queleun, to turn a dog upon one. Attiffets, attires. Attiler, to deck. Attiltrer. See Attitrer in the N.D. Attiné, provoked; also fastened on. Attiner, to provoke, urge, or incense; also to fasten on. Attinté, decked, or trimmed up. Attinter, to deck, or trim up. Attiques, little notes, or tickets. Attirantons, an Artificers tools. Attirement, a drawing to. Attise-feu, Attise-querelle, a fire∣brand of contention, a raiser of sedition. Attisonné, stirred, as the fire; also scorched, or half-burnt. Attisonner (for attiser) to stir the fire. Attorné, attired, decked, or set out.
Attorner, to attire, deck, or set out. Attouche, a gentle touch; also a glance at, o short mention of. Attoucher, to handle gently, to mention briefly. Attour, for Atour, Womens attire. Attouré, attired, dressed, set out. Attourné, attired; also atturned as a Tenant. Attournement, an attiring, decking, or dressing; also the Atturnment of a Tenant. Attourner, to attire, deck, or dress; also to atturn, as a Tenant. Attourneresse, a waiting-woman. Attourneur, a waiting-man. Attrabilaire, for Atrabilaire, subject to melancholy. Attrahiere, escheatage, or an escheat. Attraiement, an attracting, or draw∣ing unto. Attraire, to attract, or to draw un∣to. Attrament, ink, or bleach for Shoo∣makers. Attraperie, Attrapoire, a catching. Attrayamment, attractively, inti∣cingly. Attrayeres, escheats. Attrectation, a soft and often hand∣ling. Attrempé, tempered, moderated, of a temperate or stay'd humour; mixed, seasoned; soaked in moi∣sture. Attrempement, a temper, or mode∣ration, even-measure, stay'd beha∣viour; also a soaking in liquor. Attrempément, temperately, mode∣rately, staydly, soberly. Attremper, to temper, moderate, use a st and even measure; also to mix, or season; also to soak in moisture. Attributif, attributive. Attriste-coeur, that grieves the heart. Attrit, rubbed, etted, wasted, worn away. Attrition, a rubbing, fretting, or wearing out. s'Attruander, to loyter, to grow an idle trant. Aturé à une opinion, obstinate in a opinion. Avachi, slackened, or grwn slaggy. s'Avachir, to slackn, to grow slag∣gy. Avail, a wild oar. Availlon, a kinde of shell-fi h. Avale, ; gone; si upon it. Avallage,  a small wing dow; also the fall of a river; also a Porters hire for the laying of wine down into a cellar. Avallanche, a great falling, or sink∣ing down, as of earth. Avallasse, an inundation; also a swallowing Gulf. Avaller, &c. See Avaler in the N. D. Avalloire, Avallouëre, a hole, or trap-door, to let a thing down by into a lower room. Avalluer, &c. See Evaluer in the N. D. Avanceur, an advancer. Avanchaye, a Grove of Oziers, or such like trees. Avanger, to suffice, or to serve the turn; to furnish throughly, to bear the whole charge of. Avant, (for Avent) the time of Ad∣vent, which is about a month be∣fore Christmas. Avant-chien, the lesser Dog-star, which appears when the Dog-days begin. Avant-conce, fore-conceived. Avant-courement, a fore-running. Avant-coureux (for Avant-coureur) fore-runner. Avant-coureux (Adj.) fore-running. Avant-jouëur, he that begins the Game or Comedy. Avant-jugé. See Prejugé in the N. D. Avant-logis, a room or lodging in the fore-part of a house standing alone; an outward gate with lodgings in it; also a Court∣yard, or coming in; and a Court, Porch, or Portal before a house. Avant-main, the fore-part of the hand, or that part which is be∣tween the wrist and knuckles; or before-hand. Avant-parleur, a fore-speaker, or one that is too forward to speak. Avant-pas, the start, or an advan∣tage in a rae or cours. Avant-penser, to premeditate, or be∣think himself before-hand. Avant-perse, the greatest kind of A∣prick; or as, Avant-pesche, the hasty Peach. Avant-pied, the part of the foot next to the s. Avant-poignet, so much of the hand as is between the writ and k∣kls. Avant-propos, a Pro. Avant-promenoir, a  Walk be∣for the dr of a reat . Ava, d of wares or mrch∣d; leaking of wies; also  charges of the carriage, or mea∣suring thereof; also the vails of a Cook, &c. Avau l'eau, down the water. Aubain, a foreiner, and properly such a one as is born in a Country so neer ours as notice may conveni∣ently be taken of his original and name. Therein differing from E∣spour, who comes one knows not whence. Aubaineté, Aubanité, Escheatage. Aubeau, the white poplar-tree. Aubee, the pith of wood and tim∣ber. Aubeine, a kinde of grape; also Escheatage. Aubel, as Aubeau. Aubelieve, a huffler. Aubenable, subject unto Escheatage. Aubenage. See Aubain in the N. D. Auber, to flit, or to remove from place to place. Auberet, for Aubereau, a kinde of Eagle. Aubergé, lodged, harboured. Aubergeon. See Haubergeon. Aubert, coin, money. Aubes, the short boards which are set into the outside of a water∣mills wh el. Aubespin (for Aubepine,) the white-thorn, or aw-thorn. Aubicon, a kind of great fig. Aubier, the pith of timber, or that part of it which is subject unto worm-ating. Aubin, as Aubier; also the white of an egge. Aubinage, as Aubaine in the N. D. Aubour, as Aubier. Aubourt, a kind of tr e. Aubun d'oeut, the white of an egg. Aueaigne, dogs ather well-dressed. Auche, a round hasp of iro, where∣in the barrel of a windlace t∣. Aucunessois, sometimes, now and . Audiencé, came to a hearing. Auditif, of a aring prty. Audro, wit, or towards; also  i, directly upon, all a∣ . Ave, , lean, withred. Aveill, for Abeille,  oney-bee. Aven, wealth, gods, iis. Avenage, a quantity of oats pid  a ord i lin or a   duty; , ; a as Au  N. D. Aveaire, a , a strange.
Avenat, oat-meal. Avene (for avoine,) oats. Aveneri, oaten-straw, or stubble. Aveneray, Aveneron, wild oats. Aveneux, strangers, foreiners. Avenger, as Avanger. Avenier, belonging to oats, or feed∣ing on oats. Averement, an averring, or avouch∣ing; also a searching, or sifting out; also a just estimation of things. Averlan, a good fellow, or merry companion. Averne, hell, or the pit of hell. Avernal, hellish. Averon, as Aveneron. Averroncation, a weeding; a put∣ting away of evil; also an ap∣peasing. Averronquer, to weed; to put a∣way evils; also to appease. Avertin, frensy, lunacy; also stub∣borness, or wilfulness. s'Avertiner, to become frantick or lunatick; also to grow stubborn, or wilful. Avertineux, frantick, lunatick; al∣so stubborn, or wilful. Avesprement, a drawing towards night. Avesprir, to grow towards night. Avet, a sir-tree. Avette, a little bee. Aveuëment, a view. Avengleté, blindness. Avenglette, à avenglettes, blindly, blindfold. Aufuege, a kinde of pale, red wheat. Augée, a trough (or manger) full. Auget, a little trough, or manger. Augibis, a kinde of grape. Augmentatif, augmentative. Augué, wall-wort. Augurement, a divining. Au-guy-l'an-neuf. The voice of coun∣trey-people begging New-years-Gifts in Christmas. s'Aviander, to feed, or victual him∣self. Avictuaillé, furnished with victuals. Avictuaillement, a furnishing with victuals. Avictuailler, to furnish with victuals. Avier, to set in the way; also as ∣viver. Avigouri, grow lusty. Avilener, to disgrace, or do a vil∣lany unto. Aviler, as Avilir, in the N. D. Avilissement, an imbasing, or dis∣esteeming. Avillonné, affronted, troubled, mo∣lested; also environed. Avillonner, to affront, trouble, or mo∣lest. Aviner un vaisseau, to season, or to fill a vessel with wine. Aviné, seasoned or filled with wine; also turned into the nature of wine; also that hath drunk too much wine, or that is given to drinking of wine; also tasting like wine. Avironner, to row with oars. Avisement, heed, forecast, wariness. Avision nocturne, a night-dream, or vision. Avitin, as Biens Avitins, heir∣looms, Goods that come by Inhe∣ritance. Avivé, quickened, revived. Aviver, Avivre, to quicken, to re∣vive. Aulbespin, for Aubepine, the white thorn. Aulbin, & Aulbinage, as Aubin, Aubinage. Aulmosné, given in alms. Aulnée, helicampane, sabwort. Aulonnes, the canvas whereof sails for ships are made. Aulonnier, a kind of strawberry-tree. Aulx (for ail,) garlick. Aulx-oignon, great garlick. Aulx (for autres,) others. Aumaille, great cattle. Aumoire (for armoire,) a cup-board. Aumonner, Aumosner, to bestow in alms. Aumosné, bestowed in alms. Aumosner, to bestow in alms. Aumosnerie, an Alms-house. Aumosnier, (Adj.) charitable. Aumosniere, an alms-purse. Auner, (for unir) to make one, or to joyn into one. Aunir, to close, or shut up. Aunon, a si h called Keeling. Aunoye (for Aunaye,) an alder-grove. Avoie, or Avoye, a sloe-worm, or blind-worm. Avoie, advowed, avouched. Auque, a g. Aure, a  air. Aureill (for orele) an ar. Aureillons, the mps. Aurelles, ll-berries. Aurele (for areole,) sparge, or little lawd, Auriflamme, as Oflamme in the N. D. Aurillage, an Imposition laid (in some parts of France) upon the Pofits made of Bees. Auriol, Auriou, the greatest kinde of the fish Turdus. Auripeaux, the mumps. Aurislage, as Aurillage. Aureosne (for aurone) the herb Southernwood. Auron, wild (or barren) oats. Auron, as Aureosne. Aurorin, of, or belonging to the morning; also early. Austerons, Reapers; also the fruits of August, or harvest, corn. Austour (for Autour,) the Goshawk. Austral, Southerly. Austre, Austrie, South-wind. Austrin, of the South, warm as the South. Autan, a Southern wind. Authenriquer, to make authentick. Authrice, a woman-Author. Autins, as Utins, in the N. D. Autographe, written with his own hand. Autom, Autumne (for automne,) Autumn. Automnal, Automnel, Autumnal, of Autumn. Auvernas, a kinde of black grapes. Auviez, a kinde of wild pine. Avulse, plucked away. Auxerrois. See Megle. Auxiliateur, a helper. Axillaire, of, or belonging to the arm-hole. Axionomantie, divination by a hatchet and Jeat burnt. Axonne, Axunge, fat of swine. Aygue, water. Ayguer, a sink. Ayguiere (for aiguiere,) an ewer. Aymact (for aimant,) a load-stone. Aymer (for aimer,) to love. Aynets, little rods or twigs where∣in herrings are threaded, and laid on hardles to be redded. Ayré, aired. Aysement, a akes or prity. Aysle (for aile,) a wing. Az. See As in the N. D. Azagaye, as Zagaye. Azarole, a kinde of medlar-tree. Azaron, a kinde of herb. Azime, unleavened. B BAbat, a panting, or often beating. Babaye, as faire la babaye, to gpe, o make a moth at. Babbiner, as Babiner. Babure, butter-milk. Babillerie, prating, t ri.
Babine, the lip of a beast. Babiner, to play with the lips, to prattle, or to talk hard. Baboles, (for babioles) gewgaws. Babort, the larboord of a ship. Babote; a little black caterpiller. Babou, as faire la babou, to bob, or to make a mow at. Babouïner, to play the monkey. Babouinerie, apish tricks. Babouleur, a babler, a tale-teller. Babovye, a fib, a tale. Baboyer, to blabber with the lips; also to tell tales. Bacbue, a bottle. Baccal, a wesel. Baccar, the herb Haslewort. Bacces, berries. Bacchanaleries, Bacchanales, Bac∣channals, or Bacchus his feasts. Bacchanaliser, to play mad pranks. Bacchanalisante, Bacchanete, a mad∣dish woman. Bacche, a kind of wild pear. Bacchique, belonging to Bacchus. Bacclé, bolted on the inside. Baccler, to bolt on the inside. Baccoler, to play at titter-totter, to heave often up and down. Bacées. See Brisées in the N.D. Bacelle, as Chasteleine. Bachat, (for Bassa) a Turkish Bassa. Bachelerie, Batchelorship. Bachelette, a marriageable maid. Bachelier (Adj.) belonging to a Batchelor. Bachevalurux, as Chevaleu∣reux. Bachot, a small ferry-boat. Bachouë, a kind of basket. Bacille, the herb Sampire. Bacinet. See Bassinet in the N.D. Baclé, and Bacler. See Bacclé, Bac∣cler. Bacon, bacon. Bacquaige (for bagage) baggage. Bacquet (for baquet) a pail, a milk-pail. Bacqueter, to drain any water with pails. Bacquier, a slye-fed hog. Bacul (for bacule) a crupper. Baculer, to beat one upon the back. Badauderie, Badaudise, silliness. Badé, a cry, as of bounds. Badecoquille, a small shell-fish. Badelaire, a short and broad back-sword. Badelori, a silly man. Badelorié, besotted. Badigoines, the hanging lips of beasts. Badinement, foolishly, apishly. Baditin, the water-lilly, or water-rose. Baffouer, Baffouement. See them with a single f in the N. D. Baffray, Baffroy, a Beacon. Bagagier, a Carrier of souldiers bag∣gage. Bagasse, a Baggage, or a Quean. Bagatelleries, idle tricks. Bagateur, a maker of playing cards. Bagatin, a sort of brass coin. Baglon, a gag. Bagnoire (for baignoir) a bathing-tub. Bagnolet, a wooden dish. Bagois, gibridge. Bagos, a pimp. Bagué, adorned with jewels. Baguenauder, to trifle out the time. Baguenaudeur, a trifler, a loyterer. Baguenaudier, the Sene-shrub. Baguer, to adorn with jewels. Baguetté, commanded, or beaten with a stick. Baguetter, to command like a Ste∣ward; also to strike with a stick or switch. Baguetteux, full of switches. Baguier, the male bay-tree. Bahutier (Adj.) of, or belonging to a trunk. Baignerie, a Bath, a private room to bathe in. Baigneur, a bather. Baigneux, that useth much bathing. Baignolet, as Bagnolet. Bail (for bay,) bay. Baile, Bayliff, Serjeant, a Jaylor. Bailif. See Baillif in the N. D. Baillarge, a kinde of small barley. Baille, a Steward, a Sollicitor; al∣so an ordinary Bayliff. Baillet, a pale-red; also a horse that hath a white spot or star in his forehead. Baillet, (Adj.) a pale-red. Baillette, a lease, or grant; also a little water-fowl. Bailleures, sweepings. Bailli. See Baillif in the N. D. Bailliager, belonging to a Bayliff. Baillie, Jurisdiction; also a Bayly∣wick. Baillisseur, Baillistre, a Guardian. Baillistrerie, Guardianship. Bailliveau, as Baliveau in the N.D. Baillot, a trough. Bailly, as Baillif in the N. D. Baimaux (for Baliveaux) standers, or trees left for increase. Baiocque, a sort of coin. Bair, a kinde of urr. Bairer, (for baiser) to kiss. Baise-nue, high, tall, or reaching to the clouds. Baiseret, a little kiss. Baisler, (for baailler) to gape. Baisse de marest, a low bottom, turneth into a marsh, bog, or quag∣mire. Baistieres, the lees of wine, also the dregs of any liquour. Balade, a ballet. Balafreux, a cutter, a swaggerer. Balafrure, a slashing. Balaine, (for balene) a whale. Balan, an acorn, or any thing like it. Balanceur, a weigher of things in a ballance. Balanceux, belonging to a ballance, also full of ballances. Balancier (Adj.) of, or belonging to a ballance. Balancieur, as Balanceur; also the Officer that weighs money assoon as it is coyned. Balane. See Balan. Balauste, the blossom of the wild Pomgranate-tree. Balayeuse, a drudge, or sweeping Wench. Balbucie, a stuttering, or stammer∣ing. Baldachin, Baldaquin, a Cloth of State. Balenchouëres, a Game called tit∣ter-totter. Baler, to dance. Balestrier, cross-bow like, of a cross-bow. Balet, a beesom, or broom. Balevolter, Balevoter, to wag, as a streamer in the wind. Baley, (for balay) a broom. Balievre, the chaps of a man or beast. Baligaut, a great lobcock. Balise, Balisse, a beacon, or a mark set up for the direction of Saylers in a navigable river. Balite, an ancient Engine, whereout stones are thrown. Balivaginer, to prattle, to use too many words. Baliverner, to tell idle tales. Balladin (for baladin) a great dan∣cer. Balladiner, to dance much. Balladinerie, sprightly dancing. Balle. See Bale in the N. D. Balles, twelve gross. Ballet, a cape of a cloak; also a dancing. Balletrou, a sweep-hole. Ballier, and its Derivatives. See
Balayer, &c. in the N. D. Balliverne (for baliverne,) a tale. Ballizer une Riviere, to scowr, or cleanse a River. Ballocher, to totter, as one that goeth on a rope. Ballon (for balon) a bale. Ballot (for balot) the same. Ballote, Balloter, Ballotement. See them with a single I in the N. D. Ballouetter. See baloter in the N.D. Balluque, gold or, or gold unfined; also a vessel whereinto gold is poured. Ballustres (for balustres,) ballisters. Balme (for baume) balsam. Balme, a cave, or den. Baloste, a course bed, or mattress; also the chass of oats or barley. Baloié (for balayé) swept. Balong (for barlong) more long than broad. Balongue, a trough, or vessel, &c. which is much more long than broad. Balorde. See Balourde. Balorderie, sottishness, blockishness. Balotade, a bouncing. Balousse. See Baloffe. Balourde, sottish, blockish, foolish. Baloyer (for balayer) to sweep. Balroter, to froth in bubbles. Balsamine, the balsam-apple. Balsane, as balzane. Balser, to bound. Balthée, a belt. Balzan, a horse that hath a white leg or foot. Balzane, the white of a horses leg or foot, or a white spot or mark in any part of his body. Bambelotier, as Bimblotier. Bancage, the Circuit of a Country within which the Inhabitants are bound to repair to a certain Mill, Oven, Wine-press, &c. paying a fee for their several uses unto the Lord thereof; also the Royalty or Priviledge of having such a Mill, &c. also the reeaue or benefit made of it. Bancelle, a little bench, seat, or bank. Bandage, a swath-band; also the gaffle of a cross-bow; also a truc∣kle for a pully; also a bending as of a bow. Bandie, as Bancage; also a Privi∣ledge of some Lords to forbid all their Tenants to sell their Wines for 40 days together, that in the mean while they may the better vent their own. Bandier, the Lord or owner of the aforesaid Royalty. Bandiment, as Ban in the N. D. Bandon, leave, liberty, free scope to do a thing. A bandon, at ro∣vers, at random. Prinse de bè∣tes à bandon, the suffering other mens cattel for hire to graze all over his pastures. Bandouillier (for Bandolier) a rob∣ber. Banie, Banissement, banishment; also confiscation. Banir (for bannir) to banish. Bannage, Bannal, Bannalité. See them with a single n in the N.D. Banne, a hamper, or great basket. Bannée, as Bancage. Bannerie, low Jurisdiction. Droict de bannerie, the same Royalty as Bancage. Bannerole (for banderole) a little stag or streamer. Banners, Ground-keepers. Banneux, of, or belonging to a ham∣per. Bannie, Bannier. See Banie, Banier, under Ban in the N. D. Bannon, Banon, the season wherein the Cattel belonging to a whole Town is turned out into, or may feed all over common Pastures. Cela est en banon, that is com∣mon, or for every body's use. Banoyement, a proclaiming, or publishing by sound of trumpet, &c. Banquage, as Bancage. Banquerotier (for Banqueroucier) a bankrupt. Banqueterie, a banquetting, or fea∣sting. Banqueteux, of, or belonging to bankets. Banquier (for Banal.) See Banal under Ban in the N. D. Bans, the banes of matrimony. Baptismal, of, or belonging to bap∣tism. Baptistaire, or Baptistere. See Ba∣tistaire under Batême in the N. D. Baque, a berry. Baquelette, a young wench. Baqueter, as Bacqueter. Bar, the fish called a base. Baradon, a drone, or dorr-bee. Baragant (for barracan) barracan. Barat, truck, exchange; also cheat. Baratelle, as Cagnole. Barater, to truck; also to cheat. Barateur, a trucker, or barterer; also a cheater. Barateux, Baratier, cheating, de∣ceitful. Barathre, an abyss. Baratte, a churn. Barbacane, a casemate. Barbaïan, the great horn-owl. Barbaresque, like a barbarous fel∣low. Barbaresquement, barbarously, rude∣ly. Barbarin, a small river-barbel; also the sea-barbel. Barbarine, a piece of coin. Barbasse, a goat-like beard. Barbasse, as un boue barbasse, a bearded goat. Barbaude, beer, Brewers liquor. Barbaudier, a Brewer. Barbecane, as Barbacane. Barbel (for barbean) a barbel-fish. Barbelé, bearded. Barbelotte, a land-toad. Barbelu (for barbu) bearded. Barber, to barb, shave or trim. Se barber, to get a beard. Barberie, barbing, also a Barbers shop; also the name of an apple. Barberies, feathered Gillovers. Barberiot, a kind of apple. Barbes, pushes, or little bladders un∣der the tongues of Cattel. Barber (Adj.) rough, or shag-haired, like a water-dog. Barbeter (for barboter) to make a noise as a seething pot, also to mmble or mutter words between the teeth. Barbette, a small beard; also a wa∣ter-bitch. Barbidant, part of a womans &c. Barbiere, a Barbers wife. Barbillon, a little barbel; also the beard of an ear of corn; also the less sin of a fish. Barbillons, the frounce, a disease bred in the tongues of hawks by a cold rhn. Barbillonné, bearded. Un dard barbillonné, a dart that hath a forked or bearded head. Barbin, a little beard. Barboire, a mask, or mummery; al∣so a vizard. Barbolle, part of a womans &c. Barbon (for barbot) a barbel-fish. Barbot, Barbotage, the wallowing of a sthing pot. Barbote, an eel-powt. Barbotin, bearded. Barbotte, the chin-piece of an hel∣met. Barbouillage, Barbouillement, a blotting, a besmearing.
Barbouilleries, trash, riff-raff. Barbu-marses, starch-corn. Barbute, a riding-hood; also the beaver of an helmet, also a man of arms. Barbuteur, a Sycophant, a secret Tale-teller. Barc, a kinde of smooth red earth, whereof vessels were made in old time. Barce, as Berche. Barchaux, great barks, or boats. Barche, a little bark. Bardachiser, to bugger. Bardacoculé, as Bardococulé. Barde, (for sot) sottish, dull-witted. Bardelle, the canvas saddle where∣with Colts are backed. Bardeure, the trapping of a horse. Bardococulage, a being covered all over with Monkish habit. Bardococulé, dressed like a Monk. Bardou, a sot, or blockhead. Baretter, to churn. Barge, a fowl that hath no spleen; also the bank of a river or water. Barguignard, (for barguigneur) a haggler. Barguigne, a haggling. Baricquer, to bray like an elephant. Baril, (for barril) a barrel. Barillet, a little barrel. Barillier, a maker of barrels; also an Officer that looks to the Vessels of a great mans Cellar. Bariner, to churn butter. Bariquade, (for barricade) a barri∣cado. Bariqué, barricadoed. Barique. See Barrique in the N.D. Bariquelle, a little boat. Bariteau, a sieve made of hair. Baritonner, to wag, or dangle up and down; also to bray like an Elephant. Barizel, a Leader of Catchpoles, an ordinary Provost-Marshal. Barlonguer, to make (to grow) more long than broad. Barlue, (for berlue) dimness of sight. Barme, the bank of a river, &c. Barnag, all the train and baggage attending a great person in his Journey. Barnez, the Nobility, or Barons. Baron (for mâle,) of the male kinde; also manly, hardy, strong. Barone (for Baronne) a Baroness. Barquette, a little bark. Barrage, a barricado; also a pas∣sage-toll. Barragouin. See Baragouin in the N. D. Barragouiner, to speak a strange dialect. Barraté, churned, or tossed as butter is in the churning. Barraut, a little barrel. Barretade, the putting off of the hat or cap by way of salutation. Barrette, a cap, or bonnet. Barrez, the Carmes, or white Friars. Barricave (for Baricave) a low bot∣tome. Barriquade, (for barricade) a bar∣ricade. Barriqueau, half a barrel. Barriquer, to barricado. Barrit, the braving of an Elephant. Barroir, a turrel, wherewith Coo∣pers make holes for the bar-pins of a piece of cask. Barrot, half a barrel. Barroyer, to use delays in a Law∣suit. Barroyements, delays in Law. Barry, a barrel; also a kinde of fire-work. Basaner, to make of a swarthy com∣plexion. Basanne, as Bazane. Basard, a Market-place. Basauchieux, Lawyers Clarks. Baschat, a Tarkish Bassa. Baschelier, as Bachelier in the N. D. Basclé, as Balé. Bascule, Basculle, a scoop; also as Bacule. Basculer, to sit upon his tail; also as Baccoler. Baselie (for basilie,) a Cockatrice. Basenne, as Bazee. Basenné (for basané,) sun-burnt. Basennier, a seller or dresser of co∣loured sheep-skins. Basilaire, as Os basilaire, the cuneal or fundamental bone of the head. Basique, belonging to the basis. Basme, (for baume) balsam. Basoche, the whole company of Law∣yers Clarks in the Pallace of Pa∣ris, having among them a King, and their peculiar Laws; also a certain Court, wherein Wives that beat their Husbands are censured. Basochiens, Revellers, or Associates unto that Company, who for the most part are very unruly; or such as belong unto the Court afore∣said. Basse, (for base) a basis. Les basses de la Mer, the shallows of the Sea. Bassecule, as Bascule. Basse-dunse, a measure. Bassement, basely, poorly. Bassenne, the mizzen-sail of a ship. Basse-taille, raised (or imbossed) Imagery. Basseté, baseness, abjection. Basseur, humbleness, lowliness. Bassier, Bassiere, the tub that receives tap-droppings; or a tub to put lees of wine in. Bassieres, the lees of wine. Bassille, crestmarine. Bassine, a deep, or bason-like and foot∣less Posnet, used most by Confecti∣oners. Bassinement, a warming with a warming-pan. Bassinet, (for petit bassin) a little bason. Bastage, a certain Toll exacted by some Country-Lords, for every horse that passes by them sadled with a pack-saddle. Bastance, what is enough. Bastardage, bastardy. Bastardaille, a crue of bastards. Bastarde, a demy-cannon, or demy-culverin, a smaller piece of any kinde. Baste, (a Subst.) an odde trick, a shrewd turn; also the skirt of a doublet. Basteler, to juggle, or tumble; also to play the fool or buffoon. Bastelerie, Basteliere, juggling, or tumbling, puppet-playing. Bastelet, a little boat. Bastier, a maker of pack-saddles; also a base lubberly fellow. Bastier, (Adj.) sadled with (or usual∣ly bearing) a pack-saddle. Bastilde, a fortress. Bastillon, a little fortress. Bastine, the skirt of a doublet or coat; also a pad; also as bar∣delle; also a pack-saddle. Bastionner, to fortifie with bastions. Bastissage, a framing, or building. Bastonnadé, banged, cudgelled. Bastonneau, Bastonnet, a little staff, or cudgel. Bastonnée, the stroke of a pump in a ship. Bastonnement, a beating, or cud∣gelling. Bastonnier, a Staff-bearer, or Verger; also the Carrier of the Crucifix in Processions; also a great man in any Company. Basty, a Territory (or Demesne) be∣longing to a place. Basty (for bâti) built. Bat, a stroke, or beating. Batable, beatable. Batail (for battant) de cloche, a bell-clapper.
Batalogie, obscene discourse. Batant, tout batant, just now; as je vien de là encores tout batant, I come from thence but even now. Or else it is thus rendred; as il les chassa tout batant, he pursued them very hard; il les a mené batant jusques aux portes de la Ville, he pursued them even unto the Gates of the Town. Batans de poisson, the gills of a fish. Bat-beure, a churn-staff. Bate, (for batoir) a rammer, a pa∣ving beetle. Batelage, juggling. Batelée, a boat full of. Bateleresque, juggling, or Juggler-like. Batemare, a wag-tail. Batiture de fer, the scales that flie from iron in the hammering there∣of. Batsain, a rude alarm given to a whole Country by ringing and beating of pots, kettles, basons, &c. Battans. See Batans. Batte, the bolster of a saddle. Les battes d'une porte, the piece of wood that runs all along upon the edge of a lock-side of a door or gate. Batte-eul, a great linnen Vail, such as Nuns wear. Batteler, as Basteler. Battelerie, as Bastelerie. Battellessisuie, the little yellow wa∣ter-wagtail. Battequeüe, the same. Battue, a beating, or stroke with the feet, in a settled and proportioned time, (a term of horsemanship.) Bature, a stripe, a stroke. Battus, as Batus. Batue, as Battue. Bature, as Batture. Batus, an Order of Friars, who in their nightly Processions whip their own backs extremely. Bau, as le Navire a tant de pieds de bau, the ship is so many foot broad. Bau de bite, the forepike, the part of a Ship, wherein the Bits are placed. Bavarder, to drivel, also to prattle. Bavasse, an idle tale. Bavasser, to tattle. Baubance, as Bobance. Baube, a prattler. Bauboyant, faultering. Baue, or Bauch, a sot, an ass. Baucal, or Baucale. See Bocal in the N. D. Bauche, a row of stones or bricks in building. Baucher, to lay even; also to square timber. Baucheron, a Squarer of timber. Bauci, the root of a parship or car∣rot. Baud, bold, saucy. Baude-bite, as Bau. Baudement, merrily, jollily. Baudere, beaver. Baudet, an ass. Baudiner, two to ride upon an ass or horse; also to teach something unskilfully, to do any thing like an ass. Baudir, to cheer up. Baudouïnage, Ass-lechery. Baudouïner, to ingender like an Ass. Baudrayer, & Baudrier. V. Bau∣droyer in the N. D. Baudroy, a ravenous and ugly fish called the Sea-toad. Bauds, a kinde of white hounds. Bauduffle, the great rush wherewith poor houses are thatched; also lit∣ter, or bedunged straw. Baverole, Baverotte, a bib. Bavesche, the socket of a candle-stick. Baveur, as Bavard in the N. D. Baveuse, a certain fish without seale, that covers her self when she lists with her own foam. Baveusement, foamingly. Bauffrer, to devour, or eat greedily. Bauffreur, a devourer. Bauffreure, a devouring, or greedy feeding. Bauffroy, a watch-tower. Baugart, a scoundrel, a scurty or beastly companion. Baviere, (for baveret) a bib. Ba∣viere d'un armet, the br of an helmet. Bauldrier, to dress or carry leather. Bauldrieur, a leather-dresser. Bauldroy, as Baudroy. Bavois, a table or paper containing the estimate of the Rights of Sci∣gneuriage, Foiblage, & Brassage, according to the several rates of gold, silver, and bllion then cur∣rent, or made current by the Kings Ordinances. Bavoler, to wag, or fly low, like a gnat in winter-time. Bavolet, (for volant) a shittle-cock. Bavoleté, giddy-headed, shittle-brain'd. Bavon, a bib. Bavouer, as bavois. Bauracineux, salt, or clammy. Baus, as Bauds; also the beams or floor-timber of a ship; the great pieces of timber that lie from side to side within the hould. Bausonins, streamers in ships. Baut, jocund, merry. Bayard, bay; also a greedy beholder, or one that stares at a thing. Bayart, a basket or dosser used for the carrying of earth, and fastened for the same purpose about the neck with two leathern thongs. Baybaye, a scornful mow made. Baye, (for un conte) a sib. Bayer, to gape, to gaze. Bayeul, (for bahu) a trunk. Bayeure, a gaping or gazing. Bayle. See Baillif in the N. D. Bazane, sheeps leather dressed like Spanish-leather, and coloured red, green, or yellow, &c. Bazaner, as Basaner. Bazanne, as Bazane. Bazaveresque, a sort of pear. Baze (for base) basis. Bazenne, as bazane. Bazette, toile bazette, linnen cloth which is but half white. Bazilles, crest-marine. Bazoche, as Besoche. Beat, happy, blessed, holy, sacred. Beatiles, Beatilles, toys, trumpery; also women of a low stature. Beau-regard, a Summer-house. Beauvois, the name of a fruitful red Vine. Becasseau, Becasson, a snipe. Beccane, a kinde of black grape. Beccard, the female Salmon. Beccasse (for becasse,) a wood∣cock. Beccasseau, Beccasson, Beccassine, for becassine, a snipe. Beccu, beaked, having a beak; sharp or hooked as a birds bill. Beccusse, an uproar. Becdasse, a wood-cock. Becdoye, a dolphin. Bechebois, a wood-pecker. Bechet, a pike-fish. Bechevet, à teste bechevet, the play with pins called heads and points; also the lying of two in a bed, the one right, the other with his head at his feet. Becheur, a digger. Bechique, a medicine for the cough. Bechistre, a tempest, or storm. Bechu, as Beccu. Bechus, a deformed thing in the Sea, that's neither fish nor plant, yet seems to move of it self.
Becquade, a bck. Becque, a ditch or trench made upon the high-way; also a spade. Becqué, beaked (in Heraldry.) Becquebo, a wood-pecker, or highaw. Becquée, a bill, (or a beak) full. Becquefigue (for becfigue) gnat-snapper. Becquer, Becqueter, (for bequeter) to peck. Becquet, as Bequet. Becquillon, a little beak, or bill. Becu, as Beccu. Bedacier, of, or belonging to a Bea∣dle, Beadle-like. Bedaine, a short bar of steel or iron; also a forked arrow for a cross∣bow; also ill luck; also a fat guts or gorbelly; also the belly. Bedat, an inclosed wood. Bedaud, a darling, or favourite. Bedegar, our Ladies thistle. Bedengue, a certain apple that yields most excellent Cider. Bedier, a sot, a coxcomb. Bedon, a tabret, also the belly. Bedondaine, that part of the belly which is between the navel and privities. Bedonal, Bedonau, a young brock or badger, also a sea-gull. Bedone, a badger. Bedonner, to play upon the taber. Bée, the bleating of sheep; also a hole in a wall, or the like. Béement, a gaping. Been, an Arabian plant. Beer, to gape. Beffleries, tricks, gulleries. Begauder, to loyter. Begude, a cottage. Begue (for mouëtte) a sea-mew. Beguet, a Serjeant or Officer that executes the Orders given, and Commissions sent out by the publick Magistrate. Beguiner, to put on a biggin. Beguines, an Order of old Nuns. Beguoyement (for begayement) stuttering. Behen. See Been. Behistre, a rrible storm. Behistreux, tmpsts, stormy. Behourd, a Juste or Turney of ma∣ny together with laes and bat∣tle axes; also a bustling voise. Behourdir, to just together with ces, &c. to make a bustling ise. Behourdis, a bustling, or blustering. Fu de behourdi, a bone-fire. Bejaunage, simplicity, want of expe∣rience. Bejaune, a novice, an ignorant fel∣low. Payer son bejaune, to pay his welcome (a fee exacted by Scholars of such as are newly ad∣mitted into their Society.) Bejaunerie, Bejaunise, as Bejau∣nage. Beille, as Begue. Beillottes, acorns. Beisle, the Ʋnder-hatches of a ship. Belaud, as Bedaud. Beler, Beleter (for Beeler) to bleat like a sheep. Beliard (for belier) a ram. Belie, a kind of red in Heraldry. Belin, a ram. Mascher en belin, to mumble as one that wants teeth. Beliné, rammed, also coened. Beliner, to ram, also to coen. Belinge, as Tiretame in the N.D. Belistraille, Belitraille, a rasally re. Belistreau, Belitreau, a young rascal. Belistrément, rascally. Belistrer, Belitrer, to play the rascal. Belistrerie, Belitrerie, rascalliness; also a thing of little or no worth. Bellistresse, a base Quean. Bellastre, pretty fair. Bellateur, a professed Souldier. Bellatrice, a Virago. Belleque, a coot. Bellette (for belette) a weesel. Bellettement, prettily, also fair and softly. Belle-videre, the flower called blue-bells. Bellic, as Belic. Bellin, as Belin. Belliquusement, martially. Bellirie, a round mirabolan-plani. Bellistrandie, roguery. Bellistrandier, a needy rogue. Belloce, a wild plum. Bellocier, a wild plum-tree. Bellot, pretty. Bellotte, for belette, a weesel. Beluge, as belugue. Belvedere, the name of a shrub. Belugue, a spark of fire. Belusteau, Beluteau, a boulting-cloth. Belutage, Belutement, a sisting of meal. Beluter, to sift; also to swie. Belzoin (for benjoin) benjamin. Ben, the oily acorn. Benarie, a goat-snapper. Bende, Bendelette, Bender. See Bande, Bandelette, and Bander, in the N. D. Bene, a measure of coals worth a∣bout three sous. Benedict, blest, happy. Beneficial, belonging to a Benefice. Beneficience, beneficence. Benest, or Benet, a (simple or silly) fellow. Benestier (for benaitier) a holy-water-pot. Benevole, kinde, or friendly. Benisson, a blessing. Benistre, to bless. Benne, a hamper; also a great sack for corn or coals; also the head or horns of a stag. Bennel, a tumbrel, or dung-cart. Bennerie, low Jurisdiction. Benoict, as Benet. Benoicte, herb avens. Benoist, as Benet. Benoistier (for benaitier) a holy-water-pot. Benzoin (for benjoin) benjamin. Beque, a sea-cob, or sea-gull. Bequebo, a wood-pecker, or highw. Bequée (for bechee) a heak full. Bequenauld, a pratile-basket, a pra∣ting boy. Bequenaulde, a prattling girl. Bequer, as Becquer. Bequeru, a Weevels, a little black and corn-devouring vermine. Bequerut, a kind of olive. Bequet, the pike-fish; also the name of a sowrish apple. Bequet de Mer, a dainty, little, and long∣nosed rock-fish. Bequillon, a little bill of a bird. Bequu, as Bechu. Ber, a Baron; also a cradle. Berangene, a kind of fruit like a pea, growing near the ground as a mellon. Berberris, the barbary-tree. Berche, the piece of Ordnance called a Base. Bercherie, a store of Bases in a ship. Berchot, the little wren, our Lady's ben. Berdin, the shell-fish called a Lem∣pt. Berée, a chassinch. Bergamaque, as il boucle sa femme a la Bergamasque, he buckles up his wife as the Italian Berga∣masks. Berrerette, a drink made of old hard wine and on. Bergerolle, Bergerotte, a young Shpherd. Berhot, as Berchot. Bericles, a pair of spectacles. Berille, as Beril in the N. D. Berlaffe, a slash, or a deep cu.
Berlaffer, to slash, or wound extream∣ly. Berlaffé, slashed. Berlin, as Berdin. Berlingasse, Berlingue, a piece of coin worth about six pence sterl. Berlong, for Barlong, more long than broad. Berlue, prblinde. Berluement, purblindness, or dim∣ness of sight. Berluquer, to trifle out the time. Bernadet, a kind of dog-fish. Bernage, carriage; also nobleness, gallantness of humour; also mes∣lin, or several sorts of corn min∣gled. Bernagoë, a Carpenters wimble. Bernaque, the fowl called a Bar∣nacle. Berne, a sieve, or van; also a great kettle; also a kind of Moorish garment, or such a Mantle as Irish Gentlewomen wear. Bernie, rug, also a mantle thereof. Berretin, a little cap. Berrouette (for brouëtte) a wheel∣barrow. Bers, as Ber, Bers de chariot, the sides, racks, or rails of a Cart. Bersaut, a Quintain for Country-Youths to run at. Berser, Bersé, Bersean. See Bercer, Bercé, Berceau in the N. D. Bertonneau, a Bret, or Turbot. Bertouder, Bertouser, as Bertauder in the N. D. Bervl. See Beril in the N. D. Besacier, a bag-bearer. Besanner, to give leather a grain in dressing, or to dress a sheeps skin like Spanish leather; also as Ba∣zaner. Besas, ambsas. Besch, a South-west-wind. Beschage, an opening, or digging up of the ground. Besche-bois, a wood-pecker. Beschevet, as Bechevet. Bescau, the side of a loaf which in the Oven cleaves to another loaf. Besiale, as Champ besiale, a Com∣mon. Besicles, a pair of spectacles. Besiclier, a Spectacle-maker. Besier, the herb Orage. Besle, as Beisle. Besmus, a sot. Besoche, as Bezoche. Besongner (for travailler) to work. Besongnette, a little work. Besot, the last, or youngest childe one hath. Besquée, as Bequée. Besse, a shovel headed with iron, or as besche. Bessieres, the tiltings of low-running wine, &c. Besson, twin. Besteau, a bell-clapper. Bestelette, a little beast. Bestement, beastly. Besterie, sottishness. Bestial (for bétail, or bestiaux) cat∣tel. Bestion, a little beast. Bestoquer, to stab. Bestourner, to amaze. Besycles, a pair of spectacles. Besyclier, a Spectacle-maker. Besyn, fuddled. Bete, as Betty. Betelle, a kind of herb. Betosne (for betoine) betony. Betourné, dizzie, or giddy in the head. Bettes, sipping, quassing; as entrer en bettes, to grow merry, or mel∣low in drinking. Bettescher, to tackle a ship; also to set out any thing. Beturre, a sink-hole. Beuffroy, a watch-tower. Beur, as Moyne beur, a lubberly Monk, or a quaffing Monk. Beuratte, a churn. Beurée, the name of a pear. Beurichon, a wen. Beurrette, a churn. Beurrier (Adj.) of, or belonging to butter. Un pot beurrier, a but∣ter-pot. Beuvailler, to qast. Beuvande, small wine, servants wine. Beuverau, a sippr. Beuveron, a drench for a horse. Beuveter (for beuvoter) to sip. Beuvete, as Buvette. Beuvoire de Venus, the Fallers thistle. Beuvrage, beverage. Bezanne, as Bezane. Bezarder, to die. Bezer, a cow to run up and down, holding up her tail, when the brizze doth sting her. Beset, as aller à S. Bezet, to run up and down like one that hath a brie in his tail. Bezeche (for hoyau) a mattock. Bezele, the name of a fish. Biains, as Bians. Biaisement, astop, bas-wis. Biaiscure, soent. Bians, days works both of mn and beasts due unto Landlords by all Tenants (who are no Gentlemen) within the County of Poictou. Biaque, rse, or white lead, where∣with women paint. Biarn, a white cloth of course wool, with interwoven streaks of blew, whereof the Country-people about Languedoe make cloaks. Biaut, a kinde of Brittish course garment, or jacket, worn loose o∣ver the apparel. Bibaille, a present, fairing, or new-years gift. Bibelots, buckle-bones, or the play at huckle-bones. Bibet, a gnat. Bibette, a wheal, or blister. Bibliopole, for Libraire, a Book∣seller. Biblot, as Bibelot, or a small square piece in checquer-work, or where∣of checker-work is made. Bibul, the stalk of great hemlocks, us d by the Country-people of some places, instead of a Kan or Pot to drink in. Bibule, blotting, or brown paper. Bibus, as une affaire de bibus, ou de neant, a thing of no concern∣ment, an insignificant thing. Bicarne, the great verjuice-grape. Bichard, a binde-calf, or a red-deer-calf. Bichecoter, to leacher it. Bichecoterie, a leacherous trick. Bichet, a measure for corn. Bicherte de Lyon, the half of the bichet, about a bushel of Paris. Bicheteau, Bichot, a little ide-calf; also a measure for corn used in Burgundy, and containing a∣ ut sive of their bushels. Bichoterie, as Bichecoterie. Bicle, as Bigle. Bicorne, Bicornu, having two orns. Bicque, a Goat, or as biche. Bidaulx, Bidaux, cowardly strag∣glers after an Army. Bidenté, that hath two teeth. Bidon, a great cage, or open basket, to keep or feed poultry in. Bidonne, a kinde of Sea-purslan. Biece, a spade. Biecer. to dig. Biendisance, eloquence. Bien-en-allée, a farewel. Bienhuré, happy, prosperos. Bienhurer, to make happy, or pro∣sperous. Bienhureté, happiness, prosperity. Bienseamment, decently.
Bienveigner, Bienvienner, to wel∣come. Bienvenement, a welcome. Bien-voulu, well-beloved. Bienvueillant, a well-wisher. Biés, (for biais) byas. Bife, Biffe, a counterfeit jewel, also a fool that would seem wise. Bifer. See Biffer in the N. D. Bifement, Biffeure, Bifferie, a ra∣sing, defacing, or blotting out. Biforme, that is of two several forms or shapes. Biformité, double form. Bifourché, consisting of two forked parts. Bifourcation, a forked form. Bifre, (for bievre) a beaver. Bigarruge, motley colour. Bigaut, a fool, an ass. Bigearrement, fantastically. Bigearrer, Bigearrure, Bigerrerie. See Bigarrer, and Bigarrure in the N. D. Biglement, squintingly, askew. Biglesse, a squinting wench. Bigne, a swelling after a knock. Bignoter, as Binoter. Bigorne, a Smiths anvil. Bigorneau, Bigornet, a periwincle, or as Nerite. Bigotage, Bigotation, Bigotie, Bi∣gotise, superstitious devotion; al∣so hypocrisie. Bigotte, as chausses à la bigotte, close breeches tyed below the knee. Bigotté, turned superstitious, or hy∣pocrite. Bigotter, to make superstitious, or to fill with hypocrisie. Biguarruge, as Bigarruge. Bihay, byas. Bihayser, to byas. Bihore, a word wherewith French Carters hasten on their horses. Bihoreau, a kinde of little heron. Bijon, liquid roen. Billard (Adj.) as pié billard, a splay foo. Billardier, that goes in at the knees. Bille-barré, cross-barred. Bille-boquet, a Gardeners line to measure beds and borders withal; also a bob. Biller, to play at billiards; also to soften the  of a boat to the wood which rans cross the hams of the horses that are to aaw it. Billeron. See Maille. Bllette, a illt of wood; also a lit owl, ewhat longer than an ordinary one; also a passage-toll. Bille-vezées, trash, trifles. Billion, a million of millions. Billos, certain Imposts leavied upon Wines. Bimauve, the white mallow. Bimbelote, furnished with paultry ware. Bimblotier, a paultry Pedlar. Binage, as Binement in the N. D. Bineur, a labourer, a digger. Bingu, troubled, molested. Binoire, as Bisnoire. Binotage, Binotement, Binotir, the second digging of soil. Binoter, to dig land the second time. Bios, God. Bipartient, parting, or dividing in∣to two. Bipedal, double footed; also two foot long or wide. Biquoquet, the peak of a Ladies mourning-hood. Birer, as Virer. Birrasque, a high-going Sea, or a tempest at sea. Bisacquier, a bag-bearer. Bisaguë (for besaguë) a twibil. Bisantin, as Besant in the N. D. Bisarme, as Guisarme. Bis-biane, wheaten bread. Biscantin, drink made of bullace. Biscapit, a double imployment of one sum in an account. Biscaye, a vantage at Tennis. Bischard, a sawn, or hinde-calf. Bischet, as Bichet. Bisclant, Biscle, squinting, looking askew. Biscoter, to swive. Biscuteau, fine bisket bread. Biseau, such a slopeness as is in the point of an iron leaver, &c. Biseté, wrought or stript with plate, as some kinde of stuffs be. Bisette, plate of gold, silver, or cop∣per, wherewith some stuffs are stri∣ped. Bisexte. See Bissexte in the N.D. Bisneur, as Bineur. Bisnoire, a forked mattock, or pick-axe. Bison, a kind of wild Ox. Bisongne, as Bison; also a rascally fellow; also a raw souldier. Bisouart, a paltry Pedlar. Bisse, an adder. Bissestre, ill luck. Bislins, spruce terms, fine words. Bissole, as Bizole. Bisarde, a bird called Bustard. Bistorie, a kind of launcet. Bistorié, Bistorin, crooked, awry. Bistortier, a rolling-pin, or pestle of wood. Bite, beets. Prendre, du potage de la bite, to do that a maid should not do. Bites, the bits, two great wooden pegs whereto the cable is fastened when an anchor is let fall. Bituminer, to mingle with bitu∣men. Bivet, faire bivet, to make an end of a candle stick with a drop of tallow upon the edge of a candle∣stick. Bizarderies, fantastical tricks. Bizarreure, diversity of colours or fashions in one subject. Bize, for Bise, the North-wind. Bizeau, as Biseau. Bizet, as Biset in the N. D. Bladier, a Merchant of corn. Bladier (Adj.) of, or belonging to corn. Blaffastre, somewhat pale. Blaier, Seigneur Blaier, the Land∣lord that may amerce all such Fo∣reiners as turn their Cattel into the vaines pastures, or wast grounds belonging unto his Lordship, which without his permission (paid for) they ought not to have done. Blaime (for pale) pale. Blaimeur, paleness. Blaimir, to grow pale. Blairie, Droit de Blairie, a Lords power to fine, &c. as you have it in the word Blaier. Pais de blai∣rie, a Country plentiful of corn. Blanc-doux, a white sweeting. Blanchard, an Order of Friars go∣ing in white sheets, and wearing neither hats nor shoes. Blancheastre, (for blanchâtre) whi∣tish. Blanche-puce, Blanche pute, the Sea-ground-pine (a whitish herb.) Blanche-putain, the herb rank-goat, or stinking motherwort. Blanche-queuë, the ravenous Kite, called a Kingtail. Blanchet, a wast-coat, a blanket for a bed; also the apple called a White-sweeting. Blanchet, (for blanchâtre) whitish. Blanchette, fine white flour of wheat. Blanchiment, a whiting, or whi∣tening. Blanes-ma, wit Cloaks, an Order of begging Friars. Blancuier, a bird like a Whittail. Blande, a Salamander.
Blandices, flatterings, allurements. Blandi, flattered, or soothed up. Blandir, to flatter, or sooth up. Blandissant, pleasing, flattering. Blandissement, blandishment, flat∣tering, or soothing up. Blandisseur, a flatterer. Blandureau, a kinde of white ap∣ple. Blanquet, a sort of the best white wine in Languedoc. Blanquette, a delicate white Sum∣mer-pear. Blareau (for blereau) a badger. Blasser, to foment, moisten, or bathe gently with the hand a hurt (espe∣cially about a horse.) Blatir, to gather up, draw, or shrink in himself. Blattaire, an herb called Moth∣mulleyn. Blatte, a moth, a beetle, a kinde of red wheat, a silk-worm, a wee∣sel. Blattier, a Merchant of corn. Blavée, corn-land. Blavelles, Blavcoles, Blaves, blew-bottles. Blavier, of, or belonging to corn. Blaureau (for blereau) a badger. Blayer. See Blaier. Blayeries, a corn-Ground, or corn-Country; also the feeding of cat∣tle upon Corn-lands; also the season (from the Annunciation to the end of harvest) wherein cattle may in some places be turned by some pri∣viledged persons into common corn-grounds. Blece-esprit, wounding the spirit. Bleecure (for blessure) wound. Bleche, Blecque, over-mellow. Pom∣me blecque, an apple that's too ripe, or too mellow. Bledier, of, or belonging to corn. Terre-blediere, Corn-ground. Blemy, grown pale. Blesme, as bleme, pale. Blesmet, somewhat pale. Blesmir, to grow pale. Blesmi, grown pale. Blesmissement, Blesmisseure, pale∣ness. Blessable, that may be wounded. Blet, a block-head. Blete, a turf, or peat. Blette, as poire blette, an over-ripe pear. Blisires, as Belistres; also the herb called Bleets. Bloccageux, Bloccailleux, full of rubbish, &c. Blocul, the chiefest pole that up∣holds a Tent; also a block∣house. Blondir, Blondoyer, to grow light, or flaxen. Blondore, of a golden yellow. Blondoyement, a making, or be∣coming light yellow. Blondurel, as Blandureau. Bloquaille, for Blocaille, shards, rub∣bish. Bloquil, as Blocul in the first sense. Blosse, as poire blosse, an over-mel∣low pear. Blot, for Bloc, a block. Bloti, squat, hidden, or kept close. Blotir, to squat, also to hide, or keep close. Blotte, as Bloutre. Blotter, to blot, to stain. Blouse, a close Tennis-court. Bloutte, a clod of earth. Bloutté, full of clods. Blouttoir, a Rowler. Bluard, blewish. Blute, the blew-bottle. Bluteau, a boulting cloth. Bluterie, a boulting, also a boulting-tub. Bluttage, Blutement, a boulting of meal. Bluttis, a boulting-tub, or a room to boult meal in. Bo, word. Boage, a place in Abbeys full of drawers, wherein they lay up Copes, &c. Bobance, Bobans, riot, luxury; al∣so pride, insolency. Bobelin, a patch, or piece set on a shooe or garment. Bobeline, an old patched shooe or garment. Bobeliner, to patch, or to cobble. Bobelineur, a patcher, or cobbler. Bobulaire, big, huge, unweildy like an Ox. Bobulaires, toyes. Bocageux, full of groves. Boccabreve, a kinde of apple. Boccanner, as Boucaner. Boccasin, for Bocassin, a kinde of fine buckram. Boce, for Bosse, a bunch. Bochaise, a wilde chesnut. Bocie, a Limbeck. Boclus, as Bouclus. Bocon, as Boucon. Bocque, a kind of fish, also a slace. Bocquer, to bul, or jurr. Bocquet, a grove. Bode, a young bull. Boesseau, (for boisseau) a bushel. Boësselet, a little bushel. Boëtouyer, to halt, or be lame. Boëttelette, a little box. Bohade, as Bouäde. Bohourd, as Behourd. Bohourder, as Behourder. Bohu, empty, vacant. Boicheron, a wood-cleaver, or wood-seller. Boie, a kinde of great water-snake, that uses to sack whole herds of Kine. Boiffer, to slubber over things in haste. Boiffeur, one that slubbers over things in haste. Boileau, Boilesve, an ordinary drinker of water. Boiler, to will. Boise, a log, also a brace of timber. Boisé, woody. Boissé, hasted, or trimmed with box. Boissel d'osier, a weel, or weer of oser-twigs. Boisselet, a small French bushel. Boisselier, a maker, or seller of bushel-measures. Boissiere, a plot of box-trees. Boissonnerie, excessive drinking. Boiste, for Boëte, a box. Boistellette, a little box. Boistément, lamely. Boistusant, limping, halting. Boite (for boëte) a box. Boitouser, to limp, to halt. Boitte (for boëte) a box. Boitte (for bote) de foin, a bottle of hay. Boivin, a wine-drinker. Bolar, a kinde of asp-resembling tree. Bole d'Armenie, bole-armenie. Bolet, Bolete, a little mushroom, or toadstool. Bolieme, a lip, or chap. Boline, a rope used when a ship sails with a side-wind, or goes near a wind. Boliner, to lay tack aboard. Bolleau (for bouleau) the birch-tree. Bollettes de Cypres, Cyprus nuts, or clogs. Bolouët, a bulwark. Bolus, a morsel, or mouthful; also clay which hath no mineral sub∣stance in it. Bombance, as Bobance. Bombarde (for Bombe) a murther∣ing piece. Bombarder, to discharge a murther∣ing piece. Bombardier, a discharger of mur∣thering pieces.
Bombycine, the worse kinde of the Levant-Manna. Bonace, (Adj.) calm, quiet. Bonadies, good morrow. Bonasse (for bonace) a calm. Bondelle, a fish much like a great smelt. Bondener, to argue; also to grum∣ble. Bondonné, stopped up with a bung. Bondonner, to stop up with a bung. Bondrée, a kind of short-winged Eagle. Bone, for Borne, bound, limit. Bon-enten-tu, a nimble wit. Bon-Henry, the wild sorrel. Bonhort, as Behourd. Bonifié, made good, or rich. Bonifier, to make good; also to make rich or wealthy. Boniton, a sort of fish. Bonnage, as Bornage. Bonnaire, bountiful, sincere. Bonnaireté, bountifulness, sincerity. Bonnairement, bountifully, sincere∣ly. Bonne, (for borne) bound, limit. Bonnes-dames, the herb Orage, or Golden-herb; also Beet. Bonneter, to pull off his cap to one. Bonneton, a little cap. Bonniere, a measure of Land not much differing from the Arpent. Bons-hommes, (for Minimes) an Or∣der of Friars. Booie, the water-serpent Boas. Boolingue, as Boulingue. Boote, a Northern star. Boque, as Bocque. Boquet, a Grove of trees. Borax, for Borras, Borax, a green Mineral. Borborigme, the rumbling of the guts; also the murmuring noise of running waters. Bordage, edge, side, or brim; also Villenage. Droict de bordage, the drudgery, or base services re∣served by some Lords, upon the letting of their Cottages or small Tenements; which cannot be gi∣ven, sold, nor ingaged by the poor slaves that have taken them. Borde, a scattered house in the Country, a farm, or farm-house; also a stalk of pilled hemp. Bordeau, (for bordel) a bawdy-house. Bordeler, to haunt bawdy-houses. Bordelier, a wencher, a whoremon∣ger. Bordeliere, the name of a fish that resembles a Bream, and hath nei∣ther teeth nor tongue. Bordelois, the name of a very great grape. Bordereau, a ticket, a bill, an ac∣count. Bordeux, full of hems, edges, &c. Bordieux, small Tenements, little Cottages. Bordonné, as Bourdonné. Borée, the North-east wind. Borgner, to wink with one eye and look with another. Borgnesse, a woman that hath but one eye. Borgnet, almost blinde of one eye. Borgnoyer, to want an eye, to look or see but with one eye, to wink with one eye. Borgue, a weel for fish. Borlet, for Bourlet, a roul of cloth. Bornage, bounds, or limits. Droict de bornage, the Royalty of laying out bounds for other mens Lands. Bornal de miel, a honey-comb. Bornion à miel, a honey-comb, or bees-nest full of honey. Borrache, a Spanish leather-bottle. Borrais (for borras) Borax. Borrasque (for bourasque) a storm. Borret, a beast about a year old. Borrette, a heifer about a year old. Borriere, as vache borriere, a Cow that hath a Calf running after her. Borrugat, the name of a Sea-fish. Bortiere, the female-salmon. Bos, wood. Bose, the name of an apple, also wood. Boscal, a little Wood. Boscale, Champ boscale, a piece of ground or Common (without any House upon it) wherein divers have certain and several parts. Bosne (for borne) bounds, limits. Bosné, bounded, limited. Bosquillon, a Wood-seller, or a Wood-cleaver. Bossé, swoollen, knobby. Bosseler, to bruise, or make a dint in a vessel of metal or piece of plate. Bosselure, such a kind of bruise. Bossetier, a Stud-maker. Bossetiere, a lettle bunch or knob; a little heap, rising, or swelling of earth; a boss set on a book; a stud on any part of a horses fur∣niture. Bossis, high grounds, or little hills raised by the hands of men. Bossuer, to make crooked; also to swell or puff up unevenly. Bot, a wooden shooe, or patten; al∣so an ill-favoured big piece of any thing. Botaige, Temps de botaige, the time from the ninth of October to the last of November. Botanique, of, or belonging to herbs. Botanomantie, divination by the vertue of herbs. Botargues, the hard rows of the Murene, or of a kind of Mullet salted, and then dri'd, and eaten, to provoke drinking. Boteau, a bottle of hay, &c. Bothoral, full of wheals. Botineur, a buskin-maker; also one that continually wears boots or buskins. Bortyte, Cadmia in grape-like clu∣sters gathered from the roofs of copper-houses, or over the furnaces wherein copper is ordinarily melted or made. Botte, Botter, and Botté. See them with a single t in the N.D. Botteler (for boteler) du foin, to make bottles of hay. Botterol, a Toad. Bou, a boying, or bubbling. Bouäde, the Work of two Oxen, or Ʋse of a small Cart due certain days in Summer by Tenants (that hold by Socage or Villenage) unto their Landlords, for the labouring and dressing of their Vineyards. Bouban, and Boubance. See Bo∣bance. Boubax, the name of a kind of O∣lives. Boucal, a Weesel, also a vent for the fire or heat of a furnace. Boucan, a he-Goat. Boucaner, to do like a Goat. Boucané, ridden by a Goat. Boucanier, out of date, out of sea∣son. Bouccalart, plain Chamlet. Bouchard, a kind of great-eared brown Wheat. Boucharde, a Masons hammer, or pick, pointed at both ends like a diamond. Bouchasses, wild or bastard Ches∣nuts. Bouchelette, a little mouth. Boucheron, a faggot-maker. Bouchet, a kind of broth for a sick body; also a drink made of water sweetned with Sugar and Cinna∣mon. Bouchette, a little mouth. Bouchimbarbe, Goats beard (an herb.)
Bouchonnet, a little wisp, or stop∣ple. Bouconneux, full of stopples, wisps of straw, bunches, clusters. Bouclas, Birch. Bouclette, a small buckle. Bouclure, a buckling; also a swel∣ling, or bearing out in the middle; also a buffetting. Bouclus, trenches, or ditches. Boucon, bit, morsel, mouthful. Ba∣iller le boucon, to poyson. Bouconnier, a poysonner, one that gives a poysoned bit. Boucque (for bouche) the mouth. Boucquine, a rammish, or lascivious quean. Bouc-soufflé (for boursoufflé) swoln, or puffed up with wind. Boudinal, of, or belonging to a pud∣ding. Boudine, the navel. Boudrée, as Bondrée. Bouë de fer, the small flakes that flie from a hot iron when 'tis beaten. Bouée, a buoy for an anchor. Bouër, to heal, to mattar. Bouërande, the weed Cammock. Bouëtte, as Bonnette; also a little box; also a wheel-barrow. Bouëur, a Scavenger. Boufage, as Bouffage. Boufément, puffingly. Boufeux, a great eater. Bouffage, cheek-puffing meat. Bouffanes, puffs in a garment, &c. Bouffant, puffing up. Bouffard, often puffing, also swelling with anger. Bouffe, the part of our cheeks which we puff up in blowing or feeding, a swoln or swelling cheek. Bouffe, puffed, blown, or swoln up. Bouffement, a puffing, blowing, or swelling up. Bouffément, puffingly. Bouffer, to puff, blow, or swell up. Bouffer de courroux, to swell with anger. Bouffeux, a great eater. Bouffiné, greedily eaten. Bouffir, as Bouffer. Bouffissure, a swelling or puffing up; also a kinde of dropsy. Bouffon, Bouffonner, Bouffonnerie. See them with a single f in the N. D. Bouffonesque, Buffoon-like. Bouffonneur, a Buffoon. Bouffron, a Cutle-fish. Boug, the little and venemous green frog, or hedge-toad. Boug coupé, a tortoise. Bouge, valise, a budget, or wallet. Bougeon, a bolt, or arrow with a great bead. Bougié, seared with a wax-candle. Bougier, to sear with a wax-can∣dle. Bougiron, Bougironner, and Bou∣gironné. See Bougeron, &c. in the N. D. Bougnette, the fork-fish. Bougoir, a sort of candlestick. Bougonner, to bungle. Bougonneur, a bungler. Bougrande, Cammock. Bougrin, buggering, or fit for bug∣gery. Chausses à la bougrine, strait Venetians without codpie∣ces. Bougrisque, buggering, committing Sodomy. Bouhourd, as Behourd. Bouhourdi premier & second, the first and second Sunday in Lent. Bouillonneux, boyling, or bubbling; also dirty; also full of puffs. Bouillu, for Bouilli, boyled. Boujon, a boult, an arrow with a great or broad head. Boujotte, a pigeon-hole in a dove-coat. Bouissiere, a plot of ground stored with Box. Boular, the little round nest of a Martin, Titmouse, &c. Boulay, a Birch-tree. Bouldure d'un moulin, the conduit of a Mill, wherein the wheel goes. Boulengé, baked, or made into bread. Boulenger, (a Verb) to bake, or make into bread. Bouler, to bowl. Boulerot, a kinde of Gudgeon that lives continually in mud. Boulesche, a great fish-net. Boulette, a little bowl. Boulever, Bouleverd, Boulevert, a balwark. Bouleverse, an over-turning. Boulge, as Bouge. Boulie, (for bouillie) pap. Boulieux, of, or belonging to pap. Boulime, Boulimie, a canine appe∣tite. Boulin, a pigeon-hole in the Dove-coat. Boulinage, a laying of tack aboard, or sailing with a side-wind. Boullause, a pout, an eel-pout. Bouller, to cozen, also to box. Boullon, as Boulon. Boullonné, puffed, or drawn out with puffs. Bouloers (or Bouloirs) d'un vis, the circles or circling of a scrue. Bouloire, a Bowling-alley. Boulon, a great peg of wood where∣with Carpenters joyn great pieces of timber together. Boulon de fer, a great pin of iron, such as Tradesmen shut in their shop-win∣dows withal. Boulouer, a Bulwark. Boulture, a boyling, seething, or bubbling. Boune, for Borne, bound, limit. Bouquanier, as Boucanier. Bouque, for bouquet, a nosegay. Bouque d'Ange, conserve of Lettice-stalks. Bouquer, to kiss another mans thumb; to take or give a kiss; also to strike sail, or to pay custome. Bouquetier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to nosegays, or nosegay-like. Bouquetiere, a woman-seller of nose∣gays. Bourache, as Borrache; also a lit∣tle candle-case; also an engine (like a candle-case) wherewith fish is caught. Bourachon, a small leather-bottle; also a candle-case; also a drunk∣ard, or toss-bottle. Bouras, the tow of hemp, the coursest part of any such like stuff. Bourasse, a leather-bottle. Bourbe, for bourbier, dirt, mire. Bourbelier, the breast, or essay of a wild swine. Bourbeter, to wallow in the dirt, also to mutter. Bourbeteux, full of mud or dirt, al∣so loving dirt or mud. Bourbetre, a small fresh-water-fish, that altogether lives on, and lies in mud. Bourbetter, Boubetteux, as Bour∣beter, Bourbeteux. Bourblier, as Bourbelier. Bourboulene, the name of a Vine. Bourcier, for Boursier, a Purse-keeper. Bourdaine, a kinde of hedge-tree, exceedingly loved by stags. Bourdant, feasting, passing the time. Bourdé, gravelled as a Cart, &c. Bourdelage, a Tenure in the Domi∣nion of Nevers, whereby the Te∣nant is bound to pay unto his Landlord a yearly Rent in money, corn, and feathers, or in any two of them; which if he omit three years together, he forfeits his estate.
Bourdelois, a certain Vine or Grape that yields very sowr wine, and therefore it is usually set about Ar∣bours, more for the shadow than for the fruit it yields. Bourdelasier, full of jests, or tales. Bourder, to tell tales, to sell a bar∣gain to one. Bourdereau, as Bordereau. Bourdeur, a tale-teller, a jester, a guller. Bourdican, a begging Friar. Bourdonnasses, a fashion of great hollow launces used in old time. Bourdonnesque, drone-like. Bourdonneur, a hummer, or buzzer; also a player upon a bag-pipe. Bourdonniere, the gudgeon that's in the top of a bar or hinge-band of a gate. Boureler, &c. See Bourreler under Bourre in the N. D. Bouret, a kinde of shell-fish. Bourgage, a Township, or Borough∣ship, the Inhabitants of Houses in Lands belonging to a Town or Borough; also an estate or tenure in Bourgage, held either of the King, or of other Lords of the Borough, and subject to no other than the customary rents and ser∣vices thereof. Bourgalois, a Spanish coin worth a∣bout 18 d. sterl. Bourgamaistre, (for Bourgmestre) a Burgomaster. Bourgeonneux, full of buds, richly set with pimples. Bourget, a round stool. Bourgrain, buckram. Bourguignotte, a burganet, or Spa∣nish murrion. Bourjassotte, the name of a certain fish. Bourjon, Bourjonner, as Bourgeon, Bourgeonner in the N. D. Bourlesque, (for burlesque) burlesk, merry. Bournage, as Bornage. Bournal, and Bournois, as Bornal. Bourrabaquin, a great carousing glass. Bourrachiere, as Corneille bour∣rachiere, a roysten crow. Bourrachon, a toss-pot. Bourrade, a storm, or tempest; also the cuffing or ruffling of a bird by a hawk; also the tossing or muz∣zling of a hare by a greyhound be∣fore he bear her. Bourranflé, puffed up. Bourraquin, as Bourrabaquin, or a Spanish leather-bottle. Bourras, (for borras) borax; also silkrash; also course canvas. Bourrasser, to bastinado. Bourre, (for canard) a Duck. Bourrée, a fagot of twigs, a bundle of any such like stuff. Bourrelet, (for bourlet) a wreath, or roul of cloth. Bourrelier, tormenting, torturing. Bourrette, the uppermost part of the clue or ball of silk yielded by the silk-worm, the coursest of silk. Bourreux, full of flocks, &c. Bourriquet, a kinde of tumbrel or dung-cart; also as Bourrique, an ass. Bourroche (for bourrache) borage. Bours de Chevres, stables for goats. Boursal, a younger Brother. Boursal, (Adj.) of a younger brother. Fief boursal, the portion belonging to a younger brother. Boursalement, by the title of Youn∣gership, different from that of the elder Brother, who is to do homage unto the Lord for the whole In∣heritance. Boursavit, a purse for a mans yard; also a kinde of big leathern purse. Boursaul, the cane-willow. Boursaux, younger brethren. Boursé, put up in a purse; also bulching, or bearing out, as a full purse. Bourseau, a little blister. Bourselle, a Mariners Compass. Bourser, to put up in a purse. Bourseron, a little purse. Bourseteux, Bourseaux, purse-like; full of purses; belonging to a purse. Boursicouter, to make a purse. Boursiller, the same; also to put his hand into ones purse. Boursillon, a little purse. Boursoufflade, idle vanity. Boursouffleure, any swelling, puf∣fing, or blowing up. Bousant, Bousat, a buzzard, or bald kite. Bouscheron, a faggot-maker. Bouse, Bousée de vache, a cow∣turd. Bouset, petit bouset, a little odious fellow, a paltry crop of a cow∣turd. Bousfler, to puff up, or blow wind into. Bousilles, stuff to daub with. Bousiller, a dawber. Bousin, a soft and mouldring sub∣stance that cleaves to the outside of freestone in quarries. Bousinier, as pierres bousinieres, soft and mouldring stones, apt to melt away in water, or by wea∣ther. Boussade, the rot, or plague among sheep. Bousse, a bunch, the bunch of a Ca∣mels back. Boussin, a bit, or morsel. Boussu, for bossu, crooked. Boustargues, as Botargues. Boutage, Droict de boutage, a cer∣tain Duty or Fee exacted by the Lord of Breci (a Member of Bour∣ges) for the wine retailed within his Jurisdiction. Boutant, thrusting forward; also budding, or putting forth. Boutant, a buttress, or shore-post. Boutargues, as Botargues. Bousé, thrust forward, also budded or put forth. Boute-cul, a new Monk, or Friar. Boutée, a thrust, a jert, a violent attempt; also a budding. Boutefoire, a certain shitten yew game. Bouteillerie, a cupboard, or table to set bottles on. Bouteillette, a small bottle, or bubble. Bouteilliere, a tympany. Boutement, a thrusting forward. Bouter, for mettre, to put. Bouterolle, the chape of a scab∣bard. Bouteuffle, a bubble. Bouticle, for boutique, a shop; also a well, or lepe, for fish. Bouticlier, a shop-keeper, or he that looketh to a shop. Boutiffle, a bubble of water. Boutignan, the name of a kinde of Olive. Boutillier, as Bouteiller in the N. D. Boutine, the navel. Boutis, the rooting of a wild boar; also as boutement. Boutoir, a Farriers buttress. Boutonnerie, a buttoning, or clas∣ping; also a budding, or sprouting out; also a cauterizing. Boutonneur, a buttoner, or an in∣strument wherewith buttons are pulled through their over-strait holes. Boutouër, the snout of a wild swine. Bouts, a great bottle, or as Oudre. Boutrice, an ashler, or binding-stone in building. Boutton, for bouton, button. Boutture, as Bouture under Bout in the N. D. Bouvaux, a kinde of figs.
Bouveau, Bouvelle, a bullock. Bouvi, as qui sent le bouvi, smelling like an Ox. Bouviere, a river-fish. Bouvine, all kinde of oxen. Bouyau, for boyau, gut, bowel. Bouys, for bouis, the box-tree. Bouze, as bouse. Bouzine, a rustical Trumpet or wind-Instrument, made of pitched bark. Boye, an Executioner. Bozel, a thick or great boultel com∣monly in or near unto the basis of a pillar. Bozine, as Bouzine. Braçal, for Brassal, an Archers brace, or bracer. Braçats, vambraces, an armour for the arms. Brace, for Brasse, a fadom. Brachial, Brachieux, of, or belong∣ing to the arm. Brachialement, with main force of arms. Braconnier, a hunter. Bradypepsie, slow concoction. Bragard, flaunting, pert, bragga∣dochio-like. Bragardement, flauntingly, pertly, braggingly. Bragarder, to flaunt it, to swagger. Bragardise, flaunting, proud vanity, swaggering. Bragmarder, to be leacherous. Brague, a kind of mortaise, or joyn∣ing of pieces together. Braguer, to brag, to swagger. Braguerie, bragging, swaggering. Bragues, short and close linnen-bree∣ches worn next unto the thighs. Braguesques, large Venecians having Cod-peeces, and gathered, or full of stuff at the knees. Braguette, a cod-piece. Bonnet à quatre braguettes, a four-square cap. Bragueur, as Bragard. Brahiers, linnen-breeches. Brailler, to make a great noise, to cry out. Brain, the branch of a tree. Braisillonner, to roast upon quick coals. Braismer, for bramer, to roar. Braisset, the green toad. Branc d'acier, a cuttelas. Brancal, and Brancas, as Brancar in the N. D. Brance, bearded red wheat. Branchet, as Espervier branchet, a brancher, or young hawk, newly come out of the nest. Branchette, a little branch. Branchiere, a Passage-toll, so called, because the little log that's a signe thereof hangs on the branch of a Tree. Branchieres, the out-places, or parts of the highway wherein the said logs or billets have been a long time hung up. Branchillon, a little branch. Branchue, a kind of Cray-fish. Branchure, a branch. Brand, as Branc. Brandes, healthy grounds. Brandif, brandishing, lusty. Il man∣gea un gigot de mouton tout brandif, he eat a whole leg of mutton. Brandilloir, Brandilloire, a swing. Brandonner, to seize land by pitch∣ing down into it a staff topped with straw. Brane, boeuf brane, a kind of wilde Ox in Languedoc and Provence fit onely for the Shambles. Branglage, a kind of Toll or Tax. Branquar, as Brancar in the N. D. also the edge of the Deck of a ship. Branque ursine, an herb called Brank∣ursine, or Bears breech. Branquetter, as Bransquetter. Branseat, spoil, ravage. Bransloire, a swing, a brandling. Bransquetter, to ravage, or ran∣sack. Braque, for Brac, a little hound. Braquemar, ou Braquemard, a wood-knife, hanger, whineyard. Braser, to slope the edge of a stone, as Masons do in windows, &c. for the gaining of light. Brasillé, broyled. Brasiller, Brasillonner, to broyl upon quick coals, or hot embers. Brassage, the fee which the Masters of the Mint have out of every sort of money coyned. Brassart, and Brassat, as Brassal in the N. D. Brassier, a Brazier; also a sling; al∣so a cudgel; also the tab that re∣ceives the droppings of a tap; also a labouring man. Brassiere, a womans or a childs wastcoat; also the doublet some women wear in child-bed; also the arm or branch of a river; al∣so a brace; one of the staves whereby men turn the beam of a Crane, &c. Brassin, a brewing. Brassique, Colewort. Brater un Chariot, to turn, set, or bend a cart on the right or left hand. Bravache, a swaggerer. Bravacherie, a swaggering. Brave (a Subst.) the reward or prize for him that hath done best in Plays or Games. Braveux, he that gives the prize. Brayant, Brayart, braying, or crying like an Ass. Brayer, Brayement. See Broyer, broyement in the N. D. Brayere, a flax-wise. Brayetter la chemise, to put his shirt between the legs. La Lan∣gue me brayette, my tongue trips, or faulters. Brayeul, the parts or feathers about the hawks fundament, called the brail in a short-winged, and the pannel in a long-winged hawk. Breant, the bird called a Siskin. Brebiail, Brebiaille, sheep, ews. Brebiette, a little sheep, or ew. Breborions, old dunsical books; also charms against the tooth-ach, &c. Breché, having a breach made in it. Brechedent, one that wants divers teeth, or as Breschedent. Brechet, the brisket. Brecheure d'une Riviere, a breach in a River. Bredaille, a great paunch, or belly. Bredailler, a gor-belly, fat-guts. Brediner, to pronounce imperfectly. Bredouillard, one that speaks or pronounces imperfectly. Bredouille, a lurch at Cards or Ta∣bles. Ma ptite bredouille, my little rogue. Bredouiller, to speak, or pronounce imperfectly. Brehaigne, a barren woman or fe∣male, or (adjectively) barren. Brei, as Bret. Breil de forest, a thick-grown wood, or corner of a forest, where∣in wilde beasts use to lurk. Breits, for Bray, a kind of ship∣pitch. Brelaté, slashed. Brelm, Brelandier. See Berlan, Berlandier in the N. D. Brelengue, Brelingue, a piece of coin worth about 8 pence sterl. Breller, to bat-fowl, to catch birds by bat-fowling, also to twinkle, or glitter. Brelles, cives. Brelue, for Berlue, dimness of sight.
Bremant, as il n'a enfant ne bre∣mant, he hath neither childe nor chick to care for. Bremer, for Bramer, to cry out like a Hart. Bremme (for brame) a bream. Bren, a turd. Brenasserie, shitten stuff. Breneux, beshitten. Bresche, the name of a very hard and sundry-coloured marble. Bresché, as Breché. Breschedent, as Brechedent; also an Ironical allusion to President. Bresillé, made red as Brasil-wood. Boeuf bresillé, Martlemas-beef. Bresin, the hook of a Crane, and in a ship the Cane-hook. Bressaudes, the crispy mammocks that remain of fri'd hogs grease. Bressaux, a kind of fine cakes, or wafers, or as Pain de Quinque. Bresse, a brush; also a thin leaf or cake of wax, &c. Bresseron, the Sow-thistle. Bressille des yeux, the twinkling of the eyes. Bressiller, to twinkle with the eyes. Bret, a little Engine (made of two sticks joyned together) wherewith Fowlers catch small birds whilst they wonder at an Owl that's set of purpose to amaze them; also as Bray in the N. D. Etre, ou par∣ler bret, to stammer. Bretauder, for Bertauder, to cur∣tail. Breteler, to brabble. Breteleur, a brabbler. Breteque, Bretesche, Bretesque, and Brethecque, a publick place in a Town wherein Out-cries and Pro∣clamations are ordinarily made; also a port, or portal of defence, in the rampire or wall of a Town. Bretonner, to speak thick and short; also to stammer. Bretté, notched like a Saw. Brettesse, the Battlements of a wall. Brettessé, furnished with Battle∣ments. Bretteure, a notching. Bretueil, the iron piece called a fow∣ler, or port-piece. Brevade, Brevetade, as Brevet un∣der Brief in the N. D. Breveter, to abbreviate, to reduce into briefs or breviates. Breuil, as Breil. Breulet, as Bret. Breusse, a bowl of tin. Breusté, broosed, or knapped off. Breuvoer, liquor, or any liquid stuff that's fit to be made into drink. Breze, for braise, a burning coal. Brezil, for bresil, the wood Brazil. Breziller, as Bressiller. Bribe, a piece of bread given to a beggar. Briber, to beg his bread; to eat greedily; to run up and down. Bribeur, a beggar, a greedy eater; a goer up and down. Bribonner, to mumble up his Pray∣ers. Briborions, Prayers mumbled up. Bric, as Prendre au bric, to take advantage of a word spoken by another, also to give a dead list. Brichet, as Brechet. Bricot, the stump of a shrub, or little tree; an up-sticking stub of a late∣cut shrub or tree. Bricoteau, a quoit of stone. Bridaveaux, hollow, round, and wreathed cracknels of fine flour, sugar, salt, and yolks of eggs in∣corporated together with water and white-wine. Bridoye, a goose-bridler (a Nick∣name for a Lawyer.) Brief, for brevet, a brief. Brief (an Adv.) in short. Briemart, poor folks drink (made of bran, leaven, and water.) Briere, as Bruyere in the N. D. Brifaut, Brifeau, a greedy eater. Brifec, a morsel eaten greedily. Brifer, to eat greedily. Brigader, to keep company together. Brigaille, a notable smell-smock. Brigande, for brigade, a great body of horse-men. Brigandeau, Brigandereau, a little Robber. Briganderie, a robbing and kil∣ling. Brigandin, for Brigantin, the Bri∣gantine Vessel. Brigandine, an ancient armour so called. Brigant, for brigand, a highway∣robber. Brignon, the name of an excellent plum. Briguerie, an underhand suing for an Office; also a wrangling, or contending; also a sharking, or robbing. Briguet, a mongrel; also one that is nobly born but of one side. Brihat, one that is hot and loud. Bril, a sparkle, a glittering. Brillonner, for briller, to sparkle, or glitter. Brimbalatoire, as Brimballatoire. Brimbaler, sonner trop fort les clo∣ches, to set the bells agate. Brimbalé, tumbled headlong, shaken, swagged. Brimbales, the bells worn by Cart∣horses. Brimballatoire, swagging, or shaking ill-favouredly. Brimballotier, Brimbeur, Brimblo∣tier, a paultry Pedlar, one that hath nought but trash to sell; also a spangle-maker. Brimborions, as Breborions; also the knacks or bawbles wherewith fools caps, &c. are garnished. Il dit ses brimborions (for brevi∣aire) he mumbles up his prayers. Brimboter, to mumble. Brindells de balay, the sprigs or twigs of a beesom. Bringue, a drinking to. Bringuenarder, to swive. Bringuenarilles, wide nostrils. Bringuenaudée, a common whore. Brioche, a brake for hemp; also a rowl or bun of spiced bread. Brioler, to glide, or slide on the ice. Brionie, Briony, white vine. Briquer, to lay bricks, or to build with bricks. Briquerie, a brick-kiln. Briquet, as Briguet; also a young hare. Briquettes, little toys. Briqueux, full of bricks, or fit for bricks. Briquier, a brick-maker, a brick∣seller. Brisable, apt to be broke. Brische, a bush made of lime-twigs, and a stale hung at it to draw birds unto it. Briscoter, to leacher. Brise, a piece of ground that's new broke up for tillage, and hath lai long untilled. Brise-grain, corn-breaking. Brisement, a breaking. Brise-ponts, bridge-breaking (said of a River.) Brise-tour, tower-breaking. Brisette, a little scale or husk, a little splint or shiver broken off any thing. Briseur, a breaker. Briseux, breaking, crushing. Brisgoter, as Briscoter. Brisseures, broken pieces. Brit, as Bric. Brive, a bridge. Britascher, as j'ai ouï britascher d'une telle chose, I have heard some such muttering.
Briz, as Bris under Briser in the N. D. Brize, for bize, the North-wind. Brizer, for Briser, to bruise, to break. Brocar, for Brocatel, Satin purfled with gold; also a cutting jest. Brocardé, jeared, derided. Brocarder, to jear, to deride. Brocarderie, a jearing, or deriding. Brocardeur, a jearer, or derider. Brocelles, for Brossailles, thick bushes. Brochant, broaching. Brochard, as Brocar; also a peg of wood. Brochereux, little pickerels. Brocheton, a small pike. Brochoir, a Farriers shooing ham∣mer. Brode, broth, pottage, brue; also a Sun-burnt wench. Pain de brode, brown bread; Langage brode, a loose or an effeminate language. Brodes, a leather cloak or mantle. Brodeure (for broderie) imbrode∣ry. Brodier, the arse, or bum. Broisse, for brosse, a brush. Brommart, drowsie. Bronchique, as muscle bronchique, one of the four Muscles which open the Larinx. Brondes, green boughs, brouze-wood, or brouzing for cattle. Bronzé, covered with grass. Bronzer, to cover with grass. Brossailleux, full of little bushes. Brossettes, brushes. Brot, a drinking Jack; a flagon, or great tankard. Un brot de vigne, the bud of a Vine. Brotonne, male Southernwood. Brouailles, washing of dishes; also guts and garbage of fowl; any such outcast trash. Brouaz, as Brouhaha. Broudier, as Brodier. Brouë, a little white cloud. Broüée, a mist, or fog; also a blu∣ster, hurry, or hurly-burly. Brouër, a mist, or fog. Brouëtteur, one that works with a wheel-barrow. Brouffer, to snurt with the nose, like a horse. Brouhaha, Brouhou, a bluster, hurry, hurly-barly. Brouil, for Brou, the outward husk of a green walnut. Brouillar, Brouillas, a mist, or fog. Brouillasser, Brouillasseur. See Brouiller, & Brouillon in the N.D. Brouilleur, for Brouillon, a trouble-house. Brouillis, for brouillerie, confusion. Brouïné, blasted, or burnt with mists. Brouïr, to rustle, or bluster; also to humme. Brouïssement, a rustling, or bluster∣ing; also a humming. Brouser, for Brouter, to brouze.. Broussaille, as Brossailles in the N. D. Broussin, a bunch, or knurr in a tree. Broute, the root of the box-tree sea∣soned and fit for use. Brouteur, a brouzer; also as Brou∣ëtteur. Broutement, Brouteure, a brouzing. Broutilles, beggars scraps. Broutique, a Monkey. Broutonner, for boutonner, to bud. Broüy, burned, parched with heat. Broüyr, to burn, or parch with heat. Bruchet, the craw-bone, or merry-thought of a bird. Bruel, Brueil, the brail, or pannel of a hawk. Bruge-espine, buck-thorn. Brugier, to bellow, or make a hide∣ous noise. Brugne, a fashion of Corselet, or Bri∣gandine used in old time. Bruiement, Bruiment, a rumbling, rustling, or blustering. Bruiné, blasted and burned with mist; also hoary. Bruinement, a blasting or burning with hot mists; also a glazing over. Bruiner, to blast or burn with hot mists; also to glaze, or set a hoa∣ry gloss on. Bruineux, full of hot blasting mists. Brule-langue, as Brusle-langue. Brumal, of, or belonging to winter, or winter-like. Bruman, a son-in-law, the husband of a daughter. Brumbay, brown bay, or dark bay. Brume, the shortest day in the year; also the midst of winter; also winter. Brumestre, the name of a kinde of Vine. Bruncher, Brunchement. See Bron∣cher, Bronchement in the N. D. Bruneau, clos bruneau, the bum, the ars. Brun-fauve, Deer-coloured. Bruni d'un Cerf, the burnishing of a Stags head. Brunie, as Brugne. Brusable, apt to be burnt. Brusle-ser, iron-burning (a Nick∣name for Smiths.) Brusle-grain, corn-burning. Brusle-langue, tongue-scorching, tongue-inflaming. Brusquet, as vin brusquet, brisk, or sharp wine. Brute-bonne, the name of a pear. Brutesse, brutality. Bruthier, a buzzard. Brutif, clownish, also rash, heedless. Parler brutif, to falter in his speech. Brutivement, clownishly, rudely; also rashly, heedlesly; also faul∣teringly. Bruy, as Brouy. Bruyement, as Bruiement. Bruyereux, full of heath. Bruyné, as Bruiné. Bryonie, as brionie. Buanderie, a Laundry. Bubailler, to gape, to yawn. Bubbe, a wheal, or blister. Bubelette, Bubette, a red pimple on the nose, &c. Buberiges, dogs leeks, or the herb that bears the purple starry Ja∣cint. Bubon, a great bunch, a plague-sore, or a pockie-sore. Buc, a busk. Bucail, Buccail, the course grain cal∣led French-wheat. Buccinateur, a Trumpetter. Buccine, a Cornet, or Trumpet for the Wars; also the horn of a Cow-herd or Swine-herd; also the shell-fish called Venus-shell. Bucheronner, to cleave, or cut down wood; to make faggots, &c. Bucine, as Buccine. Buclandere, a Billander. Bucolie, Herd-man-like. Bucoliquement, Hard-man-like. Bucquer, as Buquer; also to but, or jurr. Buée, a buck of cloaths. Buer, to wash a buck, to scowr with lie. Buffe, a cuff, or box on the ear. Buffelin, buff-like; of, or belonging to a buffle. Buffer, to puff, or blow hard; also to spout water on. Buffeté, wrought rough or shag like buff; buffeted, cuffed; deaded as wine that hath taken wind, or hath been mingled with water. Buffeter, to make rough or shag like buff; also to buffet, or cuff; also to marr a vessel of wine by often
tasting it before it is broached, or to fill it up with water after much wine hath been taken out of it. Buffeteurs de vin, such as steal wine out of the Vessels they have in charge, and afterwards fill them up with water. Buffetolt, the fish called a Lump, Padle, or Sea-owl. Buffler, to deceive. Buffroy, a beacon, or watch-tower. Bufon, a toad. Bugie, the bark of a barbary-tree. Bugle, middle Consound, or middle Comfrey. Buglement, a lowing, or bellow∣ing. Bugler, to lowe, or bellow. Bugleux, full of bellowing, often or much lowing. Buglesat, of bugloss, made of bugloss. Bugnets, for bignets, fritters. Bugrande, Bugrane, Bugrate, Bu∣grunde, Rest-harrow, Cammock. Buie, a water-pot, or pitcher. Buire, an oyl-glass, viol, or cruze. Buirette, a cruet, or little viol, or a cider-jugg. Buisart, Buissart, a buzzard. Buisine, Buissine, a little pipe, a water-pipe. Buissonnages, bushes, or bushy grounds. Buissonné, hid amongst bushes. Buissonner, to lye in wait for a∣mong bushes. Buissonnet, a little bush. Buissonneux, bushy, or full of bushes. Buissonnier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to bushes; frequenting or haunting bushes; living or lurking among bushes. Faire l'eschole buisson∣niere, to play the truant. Buissonniere, a bushy ground. Bule, a blister, or bubble. Buler, as Bugler; also to send a Bull, as Popes do; to execute or ex∣communicate by Bull. Buletin, as Bulletin. Buliste, of, or belonging to a bull; a writer, or maker of bulls. Bullage, the saling of cloth, the marking thereof with a seal of lead. Bullé, sealed with lead, as a Bull; also that hath obtained the Popes Bull for some particular advance∣ment or privilege to himself. Bulletean, a boulter, or boulting-cloth. Bulleter, to boult. Bulletin, a Tcket, a Cocket. Bulle∣tins are among the Gray-Friars such as have been reformed by the Pope's bulls. Bullette, as Bulletin. Bullettes, such bubbles or bobs of glass as women wear for pendants at their ears. Bulliste, as Buliste. Bullonner, to run, boyl, or burst out in great abundance. Bullot, a certain great, yellow, and sowr apple. Buon, the beak of an ewer or pot, the mouth of a cruet, viol, &c. also a little oyl-pot. Bupreste, the venemous black fly, called a long-leg, or wag-leg. Buquer, to knock, or to rap at a door. Bur, as Bureau in the N. D. Burail, Burat, silk-rash, or any kinde of stuff that's half silk and half woosted. Burate, that which remains in a Churh after the butter is taken out; also as Burail. Bureau, (Adj.) dark brown. Buretté, boulted. Burez, for Buret, the Burret-fish. Burgan, a snail-like shell-fish. Burgrave, the Captain or Governour of a Fortress. Burguespine, for Bourguepine, way-thorn. Burineur, a Graver. Buriot, a young duckling newly crept out of the shell. Burler, to howl; also to jest with. Burne, the solitary place or corner wherein an Owl sits in the day∣time. Burnie, as main burnie, ward, cu∣stody. Buron, a poor cottage. Burre, for beurre, butter. Burré, buttered. Burrer, to butter. Burrier, a seller of butter; also a great eater of butter, a butter-box. Bursauli, Cane-withy, with the yel∣lowish bark. Buschailles, small twigs or sprigs. Buschetter, to gather sticks for the fire. Buschettes, Buschilles, small twigs or sprigs. Buschoier, as Buschetter. Busine, the pipe of a Cistern or Con∣duit; also a bag-pipe. Busquer, chercher fortune, to seek his fortune. Busirt, a sort of Wine-vessel. Busse de raisins, a great Vessel, wherein raisins be put or trans∣ported. Bust, as Buste. Bustarin, a great Lubber. Buste, the whole bulk of a man from his face to his middle; also a Tomb, or Sepulchre. Bustofer, a great Loggerhead. Bustuaire, burnt as a dead body, or expecting the sacrifice of mens bo∣dies. Buteux, of, or belonging to a butt, full of butts. Butinement, a making spoyl of. Butineur, a preyer, a pillager. Butineux, full of prey, spoil, booty. Butoesne, for betoine, Betony. Butte, for Bute, a butt. Buttel, for Hotte, a sort of basket, called a Dosser. Buvable, fit to be drunk of. Buvage, liquor. Buveau, a bevel. Buvereau, a Sipper. Buveter, to sip. Buvetier, an Officer that gathers mo∣ney for the Judges Collations. Buvette, small houshold-wine. Buvettes, sippings, tipplings; and particularly the Judges Drinkings or Collations. Buvetter, as Buveter, to sip. Buvotter, for Beuvoter, the same. Buxolle, for Boussole, a Mariners Compass. Buydon, a Poulterers Cage or Coop, where he feeds his chickens and other fowl in. Buye, as Buie. Buyele, as Buxolle. Buyer, a Box-tree. Buyrette, as Burete under Bure in the N. D. Buys, for bouïs, Box. Buyser, to bore, or make holes in∣to. Buysé, bored, that hath holes made into it. Buysine, as Buisine. Buyronne, a furnace to melt and fine sn in. Buysart, Buzart, (for Buzard) a Buzzard. Buzine, as Busine. Byble, for bible, the Bible. Byrrasque, for Bourrasque, a storm. Byze, for bize, the North-wind.
C CAbab, the chucking of a Par∣tridge. Cababezancé, loaded with bags and wallets, also commented on. Cabacet, as Cabasset. Cabal, the money, or merchandise, which one takes of another, to yield him part of the gain that's made thereof. Cabalanizer, to drink like a horse. Cabalin, of, or belonging to a horse. Cabaliste, a Cabalist, a Professor of the Jewish Traditions. Cabalistique, of, or belonging to the Jewish Cabal or Traditions. Caban, a gabardine, or felt-cloak. Cabaretrer, to frequent ale-houses, or the like. Cabassé, put, or packed up in a frail. Cabasseau, as Cabeseau. Cabasser, to fill a frail with raisins. Cabasset, a sleight helmet. Cabasset de papier, a long hood or miter of paper. Cabasson, the name of a fish. Cabat, and Cabau, as Cabal. Cabeillau, fresh Cod. Cabeçon, as Cavesson in the N.D. Cabestant, the Capitane of a ship. Cabiland, for Cabillau, fresh Cod. Cabirotade, as Capirotade. Cabirots, the spawn of Sturgeons spread upon bread, and eaten with vinegar, oyl, and pepper. Cable, for abbatis, a wind-fall, a tree overthrown by winde or tem∣pestuous weather. Caboche, the head. Cabochard, Cabochenu, Cabo∣cheux, heady, or obstinate. Cabot, Cabote, the gull-fish, or mull-head. Cabre, a Goat. Cabril, a young Kid. Cabriole, for capriole, a caper in dancing. Cabrioter, to caper, to cut a caper. Cabrol, an issue made of a fistula. Cabrole, the name of a fish. Cabreé, headed like a Cabbidge. Caburlaut, as Cabot. Cabus, as laictue cabusse, headed-Lettice. Cabusser, to grow to a head, like a Cabbidge. Cacasangue, the bloudy flux. Cacassement de poule, the cackling of a hen. Cacasser, to ch as a Partridge. Cache, as Chasse in the N. D. also a hiding-hole or corner. Cachebugade, Aethiopian Hartwort, or Seseli. Cache-col, an ancient velvet attire, or ornament for the neck. Cachectique, in a Consumption, pining away. Cachelaid, Cachelet, a mask, or muffler. Cache-maille, a money-box. Cachement, a hiding, or concealing. Cachément, closely, privately. Cachemi-tula, a Play wherein one must keep a thing privately deli∣vered him, and another finde out the keeper among many others; which if he do, he is rewarded, otherwise punished. Cache-museau, a kinde of flawn; also a mufler, or mask, for the face. Cache-nez, a mask, or muffler. Cachercau, as Chartulaire. Cacheur, a hider, or concealer. Cachexie, an indisposition of the body. Cachile, Sea-rocket. Cachoire, as Chassoire. Cachotte, for Cachette, a secret place. Cachotté, laid in the hole of a pri∣son. Cachry, Rosemary-seed. Cacidoine, for calcedoine, Chalce∣dony, a kinde of Onyx-stone. Cacochymie, evil digestion. Cacoëthe, an incurable bile, or sore. Cacologie, evil speech, slander, de∣traction. Cacquetoire, as Caquetoire. Cad d'eau, a great fall, or shower of rain. Cadalice, a bedstead. Cadarce, the tow, or cosist part of silk. Cadavreux, carcass-like, rotten. Cade, the crimzon, or prickly cedar. Cadel, a castling, a starling, one that hath much need of pampering. Cadelé, pampered, made much of. Lettres cadelées, capital or -Letts. Cadeler, to pamper; also to write a Text-hand, or make great Let∣ters. Cadene, an iron-chain. Cadmie, Cadonia. Cadrilles, a Troop of Horsemen. Caducité, frailty, weakness. Cafard, an hypocrite. Cafarde, as a la cafarde, hypocriti∣cally. Cafarder, to pretend devotion, to play the hypocrite. Cafardie, Casardise, hypocrisie, out∣ward holiness. Cafas, a kinde of course Taffata. Cafetin, as suere cafetin, refined sugar. Cafezate, the name of a most vene∣mous and malignant Serpent. Caffard, as cafard, an hypocrite; also a beetle that flies by night. Caffardise, hypocrisie. Cagade, an idle boasting. Cagarel, Cagaret, the Cackerel-fish. Cagarole de Mer, a Periwinkle. Cagasangue, as Cacasangue. Cageois, a Country-clown, or Boor. Cagerotte, a Chesford, or Cheesfat (of wicker.) Cagnard, Cagnardier, &c. See Cai∣gnard, &c. Cagnasque, as parler cagnasque, to speak doggery. Cagnasse, a great Bitch. Cagne, a Bitch. Cagnole, the Mallet-fish. Cagnot, a little Dog; also a kind of little Dog-fish that hates men ex∣treamly. Cagot, for bigot, a superstitious man. Cagouille, a dew-Snail. Cagoulle, a Monks hood, or cowl. Caguemaille, Cagueraffe, a greedy wretch, a ravenous oppressor. Cahier, for Cayer, a sheet (or more) of a written book. Cahot, the jogg of a Coach in a rough and uneven way. Cahoter, to jog as a Coach. Cahuaille, a company of Owls. Cahuet, Cahuot, as Cahot. Cahutelle, a little Cottage. Caiche, a mans yard. Caignard, Caignardier, a lazie rogue. Caignarder, to play the lazie rogue. Caignardiere, a lazie quean. Caignart, as Caignard; also a nasty place or corner wherein Beggars lie in the Sun and lowse them∣selves. Caigne, a Bitch; also Gods me, or the like Interection of wonder. Caignon, the hinder part of the rk. Caignot, as Cagnot. Cailhete, a Corkacy. Caillat, Caillebotes, cdy of milk. Caillel oteux, full of . Licus cailleboteux, craggy, sto, or rockie places. Caillement, a crding.
Cailles, round Beads wherewith French-men play at Trou-ma∣dame. Cailleteau, a little flint-stone. Caillette, a fool, a natural; also a Rams cod; also the outward skin of the cods; also a small bead. Cailloëux, as Cailloreux. Caillon, a congealed lump of flegm, bloud, &c. Cailloré, curded, or cardled. Caillorer, to curd, or curdle. Caillorosat, a Lording-apple; also a green and great Pear of a plea∣sant taste. Cailloreux, as Caillouëux. Caillouët, the name of a very sweet Pear. Caillouëux, full of small, hard, and sharp stones. Caimand, a Beggar. Caimander, to beg from door to door. Caimanderie, Caimandise, beggar∣liness. Caïon, a young, or little Hog. Caique, a kind of ship. Caire, the look of ones face. Cairin, a Turkie-carpet, such as is brought from Caire in Egypt. Caisne, a Bitch. Caissans, the side-teeth, called the Grinders. Calage, the Caulking of a Ship; al∣so Oakam, or the Tow wherewith it is caulked. Calabasse, a bottle made of an em∣pty'd Gourd. Calamar, a Pennar; also the Cala∣mary, or Sleeve-fish. Calame, a Cane, or Reed; Wheaten, or Oaten-straw; Pipe, or Flute, &c. Calament, for calamente, Cala∣mint. Calaminaire, as Pierre calaminaire. See Calamine in the N. D. Calamistrer, to curl the hair. Calamite (Adp.) of, or belonging to Reeds, or kept in Reeds. Calamiteux, miserable, poor, unfor∣tunate. Calamiteusement, wretchedly, poor∣ly, miserably. Calande, a We, or Mite. Calandre, as Calendre in the N. D. Calangement, an accusation, or chre. Calanger, to accuse of, to charge with. Calar, as Caler; also to be silent,  talking, desist from bab∣bling. Calathe, a basket, or hamper; also a Vessel to bring milk or cheese to Market in; also a cup for sacri∣fice. Calcante, Vitriol. Calcinatoire, calcinatory, or calci∣nating. Calcioler, to stand much on a mat∣ter, or to urge a thing often. Calcite, as Chalcite. Calcitrer, to kick, or fling; to be stubborn, obstinate, disobedient. Calcul, for gravelle, the gravel. Calculateur, a reckoner. Calculatoire, calculatory. Calculement, a reckoning, or calcu∣lating. Calderon, a kind of long and round Whale. Cale, a sorry kind of cap. Calebasse, as Calabasse. Calendrine, a Sleek-stone. Calenge, a claim; also a challenge; also a charge, or accusation; also an arrest; also a seizure of, or complaint against beasts that are found damage sesant. Calengé, claimed; challenged; ac∣cused of, or charged with; ar∣rested; seized. Calenger, to claim; to challenge; to accuse of, or charge with; to arrest; to seize. Calengié, as Calengé. Calepinages, Dictionaries. Calepiner, to interpret, or translate exactly, or word by word. Calepinerie, a precise interpretation of every single word. Calesson, for Calçon, a pair of draw∣ers. Calfactif, apt to heat or warm. Calfat, an Officer in a Gally that looks to the caulking thereof. Calfater, to caulk a ship. Calfaterie, the caulking of a ship. Calfateur, as Calfat. Calfatin, the servant of a Caulker of a Galley. Calfourchons, à calfourchons, a∣straddie. Calfreter, for Calfutrer, to caulk a ship. Calibistris, the privy parts. se Calibrer à quelcun, to equal him∣self to one. Calicules, little cups or goblets; al∣so the rough shells of Chesnuts; also the parings of a corn or ker∣nel; also little skins upon any tender part of the body. Calidité, heat. Caliges, flockings; also an armour for the legs; also breeches. Faire caliges, ou caligas, to bewray his hose. Caligineux, dark. Caliginosité, darkness. Calimini, à calimini, hugger-mug∣ger, secretly. Calin, a beggarly rogue, or lazie vagabond. Calinaire, a Sweet-heart. Caliot, the name of a Pear. Callabasse, as Calabasse. Callafater, to caulk a ship. Calland, a Customer. Callate, a stoping piece of ground, the descent of a hill. Calle, for Cale, the hold of a ship. Callebasse, as Calabasse. Callebotes, Curds. Callebouté, curded. Calle-feutré, caulked. Caller, as Caler; also to kittle. Calles, Corns in the feet or toes. Calleux, thick-skinned. Callibordes, Crutches. Callifourchons, as Calfourchons. Calique, the name of a fish. Calmar, as Calamar. Calmement, calmly, quietly. Caloches, for galoches, Galoshes. Calomnieux, slandering. Caloniere, a Pot-gun made of a quill or elder-stick. Calosité, for callosité, callosity. Calquas, a Quiver. Calsons, for calçons, wearing-draw∣ers. Calvainier, Calvanier, a Hireling for the time of Harvest. Calvaire, for crane, the skull. Calvatré, laid all-along on his back. Calvan, pomme de calvan, a certain Apple that hath a blackish rind. Caly, a kind of herb. Calyce, for Calice, a Chalice. Camamine, the herb Cameline. Camar, for Camard, flat-nosed. Camarine, the name of a stinking herb that provokes vomit. Camarre, a Martingale for a horse. Cambouy, Camboy, the gome, the black and ovly grease of a wrought Cart-wheel. Cambre, or Cambré, arched. Cambrer, to arch. Cameau, for Chameau, Camel. Camelin, as alier le Camelin, to pace like a Camel. Sce Came∣line, a certain dainty Italian Sauce. se Cameloter, to become waved like Chamlet. Camerade, for Camarade, a Cama∣rad.
Cameraire, a Chamberlain, a Groom of the Chamber. Cameriste, a Chamber-fellow. Camessine, a kind of Pear. Camiete, the name of a certain sweet Apple. Camille, a Messenger. Camin, way. Caminée, chimney. Camion, the pin wherewith women pin in their ruffs, &c. also a kinde of little Cart; also a small muse-role for a horse. Camorre, a kind of cavesson. Camote, the name of an Indian root, which roasted is very good meat. Camouärd, an ugly flat-nosed fel∣low. Camoufflet, a smoakie paper held under the nose of a sleeper. Campal, of, or belonging to a Camp. Campane, a Bell; also the herb E∣licampane; also an Alembick, or the upper part thereof, which re∣sembles a Bell. Campanel, a Bell-bit. Campanette, Hedge-bells; also the Peach-bell, or Steeple-bell-floor. Campanotte jaulne, the yellow Daf∣fodil. Campart, as Champart. Campeger, Campiger, to incamp. Camphrer, to mingle with Cam∣phire. Campole, the name of a certain white grape. Campoles, the tendrels, or twining sprigs of plants. Campos, leave to play, or a vaca∣tion-time for Scholars. Camuser, to make flat-nosed. Camuserie, the being flat-nosed. Camuset, somewhat flat-nosed. Camusette, a little flat-nosed Elf. Canabasser, to canvas, to sift out. Canabasserie, Canabassement, a canvassing, or sifting out. Canabel, a kind of earth which (as Arabians report) falls with rain from the Skie. Canadelle, the smallest of Rock-fishes. Canaliere, the name of a pear. Canart, for canard, a Drake. Cancelaresque, Chancery-like, of, or belonging to Chancery. Cancelé, cancelled. Canceler, to cancel, blot, or put out. Cancelation, a cancelling. Cancelle, a kind of Cray-fish. Canceller, as Canceler. Candelabre, a great Candlestick. Candelette, a Suppository. Candide, white, fair; also prospe∣rous, happy; also courteous, fair-conditioned; also upright, sincere, innocent. Candidement, uprightly, sincerely. Canebasse, as Calabasse. Canellere, a Reed-plot. Canelle, for robinet, a cock, or tap. Canellé, of Cinnamon, of a Cinna∣mon-colour; also made of, or sea∣soned with Cinnamon. Canelline, a little hollow rod. Canepetiere, a kind of land-fowl resembling a Bustard. Il fait de la canepetiere, he cowardly hides himself in every hole. Canepin, the thin inner-rind of the bark of the Linden, and the out∣ward of the coat of a Birch∣tree, written on in old time in∣stead of Paper; also the outward thin and white pilling of a dres∣sed Sheeps-skin. Canepineuse, the bark of a Sugar∣cane. Caner, to squirt. Canet, a young Duck, or a wild Duck. Caneter, to waddle, or go like a Duck; also to breed young Ducks. Canetier, of a Duck, like a Duck, catching Ducks, feeding or prey∣ing on Ducks. Canetillé, purled. Caneton, Canette, a Duckling; also a little Can or Cruse; also the quill of a Spinning-wheel. Canjar, Caniard, a Sea-cob, a Sea-gull. Canichon, a Duckling. Canidé, the name of a bird. Canif, for ganif, a penknife. Canin, dogged, or dog-like. Con∣vulsion canine, the cramp of the mouth. Canisse, a little table or hurdle of reeds, whereon fruits are dri'd, or Silk-worms fed. Canivet, a little pen-knife. Cannamelle, the Sweet-cane, or Su∣gar-cane. Canneau du col, the nape of the neck. Cannelle, for canelle, Cinnamon. Canne-petiere, as Canepetiere. Cannetille, for Canetille, purl. Cannisade, a cage, or basket of reeds. Cannisse, as Canisse. Cannoniquement, canonically. Cannule, a little Cane, Reed, Pipe, or hollow straw. Cannulé, hollowed like a Reed, or Cane, also channelled. Canolle, a Hawks narel, one of the little holes whereat she draws in and lets out her breath. Canoniste, a Practicer in the Canon-Law. Canore, shrill, harmonious, melo∣dious. Canteau, for Chanteau, a corner-piece. Canthare, a duskie and muddy Sea-fish that never changes her mate; also a great jug, or as Cantharide, for Cantaride, a fly cal∣led Cantharides. Cantharidise, a Confection of Can∣tharides. Canthenot, a certain tawny and unsavoury Sea-fish. Canthonniere, Cantonniere, a com∣mon Whore. Canton, for coin de rue, a corner, or cross-way in a street. se Cantonner, se mettre en un coin, to go aside from the rest. Canule, a little Cane, reed, or Pipe. Canus, the name of a Sea-fish. Caparis, the Caper-tree, or shrub. Capdastre, a Subsidy-book. Cup-deseadre, a Corporal. Capdeul, a Gentlemans chief house, falling (almost every where) unto the share of the eldest Heir. Capeau, for chapeau, a hat. Capeau carnu, ou charnu, the Sea-net∣tle. Capeer, as Cappeer. Capel, a hat, a little hat. Capelan, a Chaplain; also a kind of Cod-fish. Capelettes, the heads of cloves. Capelin, as Capeline in the N. D. Capellan, as Capelan. Capeluchon, a capuch, or hood. Caperasson, as Caparasson in the N. D. Capesolde, Capesoulde, a Gentleman of good entertainment. Caphard, and its derivatives. See Casard, &c. Capheran, a kind of course Tassata; also a long cassock of the same. Capietrement, privily, closely. Capifou, a Play not much unlike Hide-man-blinde. Capilaire, Capillaire, hairy; or be∣longing to hair. Capilament, a hair, or flaw in a stone, &c. Capiscos, School-masters. Capitanerie, the Place of a Cap∣tain.
Capitainesse, as Capitanesse in the N. D. Capitalité, a capital offence. Capitation, Pole-money. Capitau, a Captain, or Comman∣der. Capite, a Cabbin in a ship; also a little Summer-house. Capitel, a strong compounded Lye, whereof Cauters and other violent remedies are made. se Capitonner de, to cover his head with. Capitoul. So they call in Tholouse twelve principal Magistrates, whereof the first is to be a Gentle∣man of that Province, the rest Lawyers and substantial Mer∣chants. Capitouls d' Orleans, the Sheriffs of Orleans. Capitulairement, capitally; also in Chapter, or with full consent of the Chapter. Capitulant, having a voice in Chap∣ters; also capitulating. Capituleur, he that capitulates. Capnomantie, divination by smoke rising from an Altar, whereon In∣cense or Poppy-seed is burnt. Capolie, the name of an Indian fruit much like a Cherry. Cappe, as Cape in the N. D. Cappé, hooded. Cappeer, a ship to lie a try; also to go very neer the wind. Cappet, a hat. Cappette, a little hood; or a cloak having a capuch instead of a cape. Cappitrement, as Capietrement. Cappot, a course Country-cloak. Cappres, for capres, Capers. Capprier, for caprier, a Caper-shrub. Capriere, a Caper-plot. Caprifice, a wild Fig-tree. Caprimulge, a Goat-milker, an un∣luckie Night-bird that sucks Goats, and mortifies their udders. Caprin, le caprin, the kind or na∣ture of Goats; also Goats flesh. Caprin (Adj.) of a Goat, or like a Goat. Capriot, a caper in dancing. Caprioter, to caper, to cut a caper. Capse, a case, box, or chest. Capsetin, a little case, box, or chest. Capsoos, the Rights and Royalties belonging to the Lord of a place. Capsule, as Capsetin. La Capsule du coeur, the Pericardium where∣in the heart lies. Captieusement, captiously. Capucinage, the order, profession, or life of a Capucin. Capulaire, a coffin for a corps. Caputions, Monks, or Capucine-Friars. Caqueduc, a miser, a penny-father. Caquerel, a sprat, a pickled herring, or as Cagarel. Caqueroles, the shells of Snails, Peri∣wincles, and such like. Caquerolerie, a shore full of little shells. Caquerotier, a catcher, or eater of shell-fish. Caquesangue, the bloudy flux. Caquetard, for caqueteur, a prattler. Caquetereau, a prattle-basket. Caquetiere, Caqueteuse, a prattling housewife. Caquetoire, a Mill, Oven, or the like, where women meet and prat∣tle together. Caquettement, a prattling. Ca-queuë, the herb horse-tail. Caquots, white Lepers. Car, for chariot, a cart. Carabasse, as Calabasse in the N. D. also a Girt, Grampel, Pungar-fish. Carabassé, much used or carried up and down as a Gourd-bottle is. Carabe, a Corracle, or little round Skiff made of Ozier-twigs woven together and covered with raw hides; also yellow amber. Carabin, for Carabine, a Carabine. Carabinage, an assault made by Ca∣rabines. Caracol, for limaçon, a snail. Caracteré, characterised, stamped with a peculiar mark. Caracterer, to make characters; al∣so to stamp with a peculiar mark. Caraffe, passage or toll-money paid to the Arabian Boothalers, by such as travel without a strong Cara∣van towards the Holy Land, &c. Caramot, Caramote, a prawn. Carance, want, or lack of. Carance de biens, a Testimonial under se∣veral mens hands, that such an one hath no Goods nor Chattels in such a place. Carasse, a great face. Carathement, a charming of a mans childgetter. Caravelle, a Carvel (the little Ship so called.) Caravellon, a small Carvel. Caravene, a little Boat made like a Trough, and most commonly of one piece. Caravirée, a wry-faced wench, or one that makes ill-favoured wry faces. Carbassat, Wet-sucket, made of the upper part of the long white Pom∣pion cut into slices. Carbasse, the Pungar-fish. Carbau, the Cabot-fish. Carboucle, a carbuncle. Carcaillon, a mite, or weevil. Carcamousse, the battering engine called a Ram. Carcant, for Carcan, a carknet, or collar of Gold. Carchiophe, an artichoke. Carcinome, a canker. Carcois, for Carquois, a Quiver. Cardaire, a kinde of Thornback. Cardamome, grain of Paradise, also Ethiopian pepper. Cardanalizé, as Cardinalisé. Cardier, a Card-maker. Cardinale, a kinde of Artillery for shipping, less than the Culverine, and devised at first by the Cardi∣nal of Lorrain. Cardons, the stalks of artichoke, or of the white thistle, buried in the ground, or otherwise used, to get them a whiteness. Caré, as Ableret. Care, a disease that benums the head, and makes the whole body more senseless than an Apoplexy; or a sleepiness joyned with weakness of the brain, senses, and motion. Also the look, countenance, or aspect of one. Carence, as Carance. Caret, fil de caret, pack-thread. Carfou, a peal of one bell, and about 8 or 9 a clock at night; also a place where two ways meet to∣gether. Cargade, Cargaison, the fraught, or lading of a ship. Cargue, a charge, or onset. Carguer, to charge; also to lade; also to lean all on one side. Cariage, carriage, baggage; all the necessary provision of an Army. Caribe, the most biting kinde of In∣dian pepper. Caribot, a lunchion, or big piece of bread, &c. Carie, rottenness, or putrefaction in wood, or any thing else; a worm in wood. se Carier, to rot, putrifie, corrupt. Carieux, rotten, putrified, worm-eaten. Carine, for carêne, the keel of a ship. Cariol, Cariole, the root of a horses
tail, or the bone thereof; the rump-bone. Cariophillate, herb Avens, Bennet, or blessed. Carisi, the name of a pear, also the perry made thereof. Carizé, Kersie. Carler, for Carreler, to pave with bricks. Carlin, the name of a Coin. Carlonne, as vivre à la carlonne, to deal plainly. Carlure, for Carrelure, a pavement with bricks. Carmaignole, for Cornoille, a cor∣nil. Carme, a verse, also a charm, also the horn-beam or yoke-tree; also a white Friar, as in the N. D. Carmelitain, an Order of white Fri∣ars. Carminatif, wind-dissolving; also flesh-taming, lust-abating. Carminificateur, a maker of Verses. Carnagier, for carnacier, a great flesh-eater. Carnallage, for carnage, slaughter; also flesh-time, the season wherein 'tis lawful to eat flesh. Carnaller, to kill, or slay, especially beasts found damage-feasant (which the party damaged in some places and cases may law∣fully do) and eat, or sell their flesh. Carnasseries, fleshy matters. Carnassier, for potelé, plump, fleshy. Carnavalée, a Carnaval Wench. Carne, an edge, or corner. Carne de testons, a quartern of Testons, consisting of four, or of forty. Carneau, (for creneau) a battle∣ment of a wall. Carnelé, having battlements. Carnelle, the stamp of a piece of coin. Carneller, to stamp a piece of coin. Carner, a piece of a written book. Carniforme, like flesh. Carnu, for charnu, fleshy. Carobe, as Carrobe. Carocher, a Coach-man. Carolle, a kinde of Dance; also a Carrol, or Christmas song. Caroller, to dance, to revel it, to sing carrols. Carooler, to inrol. Caroside, a branch of the great ar∣tery. Carous, as Carousse in the N. D. Carousser, to quass. Carozze for Carosse, a Coach. Carpase, the name of a plant, whose juice being drunk causeth sleep, and in sleeping strangleth. Carpe, for poignet, the wrist. Carpeau, a young Carp. Carpendu, for Capendu, a Short-start, the name of an apple. Carpie, the Yoke-elm. Carpion, Carpionne, a kinde of Trout. Carpir, as Charpir in the N. D. Carpobalsame, the fruit of the bal∣sam-tree. Carpot, part of the fruit or profit of a Vineyard, yielded as a Rent by the Tenant unto the Lord there∣of. Carquasse, a carcass. Carquois, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a Quiver. Carracon, Carraquon, a small (but strong) Carrick. Carrat de bois à bastir, a certain quantity of timber. Carre, edge, or corner. Carrobe, Carob-bean, St. Johns bread. Carroce, Carroche, a Coach. Carrocier, Carrochier, Carrossier, a Coachman. Carron, a brick. Carronner, to make a brick-floor. Carroube, as Carobe. Carroubier, the Carob-tree, or Bean-tree. Carrouselle, a little hollow reed. Carrozze, a Coach. Carrozzier, a Coachman. Carrube, as Carrobe; also a small weight (among Mintmen and Goldsmiths) making but the 24th part of an ounce. Cartable, a Paper-book. Cartame, bastard Saffron. Cartasonne, the Indian and black-horned Ʋnicorn. Cartée, for cartel, a challenge to fight, in writing. Cartaranche, a certain Salt-mea∣sure. Carthame, as Cartame. Carthellages, square pieces of free-stone. Cartibé, a square table of stone, but somewhat more long than broad. Cartisannier, a maker of playing cards. Cartoche, for Cartouche, a Car∣tridge. Cartophilaces, Law-books, ancient Records; also the room, chest, or press wherein such Writings are kept. Cartousle, a shrub bearing a mushrom-like fruit; also the fruit it self. Cartuche, for Cartouche, a Car∣tridge. Cartulaire, a Paper-book. Juges Cartulaires, Judges that give their Sentences in writing. Carvi, Carway-seed. Carymari carymara, a hurly-burley. Caryote, a Date. Cas, for cassé, hollow, or broken-sounded. Casal, a Mannor-house, a great house; also a Village, or Hamlet. Casard, one that never stirs out of doors. Cascaret, a furious tide, as some∣times there is between Bourdeaux and Rochel. Cascavelle, a Country-song. Caseiforme, made round and flat like a cheese. Casever, Casier, a cheese-fat. Casette, a little cottage. Casine, the same. Casois, a Countrey-clown. Casole, a posnet; also a narrow-mouthed pot, somewhat like a per∣fuming pot. Casquet, a little cask. Cassable, frail, brittle. Cassard, a chest-like cover; also a buzzard. Cassaudes, Daizies, or Bruise-wort. Casse, for caisse, a box, or case; also a coffin, a dripping pan, an open-mouthed pan or vessel of earth, &c. fit to boyl things, or set plants in; also the hollow part of the sole of a horses foot. Casse-loix, a breaker of Laws. Casse-moeurs, rude, savage, unci∣vil. Casse-pot, a kinde of sport in tossing of earthen pots. Casserie, a breaking, or quashing; a discharging, infringing, or can∣celling. Casserins, drawers in a press or ca∣binet. Cassidonie, for Cassidoine, Cassido∣ny. Cassier, the tree that bears the fruit Cassia. Cassignon, a pump, or thin-soled shoe. Cassoire, a whip. Cassole, Cassolle, a box for Per¦fumes, &c. Casson, a great chest. Cassure, for blessure, a bruise. Castadour, a Pioneer. Castagnole, a chesnut-colour'd Sea-fish.
Castagnon. See Roquan. Castaign (Adj.) of a chesnut-colour. Castaigne, a scallop-like piece of iron in the midst or mout of an old-fahioned bit. Castaloigne, a Spanish coverlet, or rug. Caste, for chaste, chast, honest. Castillan, a Spanish weight. Castillaniser, to imitate Spanish fa∣shions or humours. Castille, for querelle, jarr, conten∣tion. Castillier, the wild goosberry-shrub. Caston, the beail of a ring. Castoreum, as Castorée in the N. D. Castrametation, the pitching, or measuring out of a Camp. Castromantie, as Gastromantie. Catachrese, the abuse, or necessary use of one word for lack of ano∣ther more proper. Catachrestique, used (though im∣proper) for want of that which would be more proper. Catadoupes, Catadupes, the falls of Nilus. Cataglottiser, to kiss with the tongue. Cataglottisme, a kiss with the tongue. Catagmatique, of, or belonging to broken bones, or breaking of bones; also healing, or closing such brea∣ches. Catalepsie, a disease coming of the brain distempered with driness and cold. Catalongne, a white Spanish rug. Cataminy, womens flowers. Catapuce grande, the herb Kick, or Tick; Catapuce petite, garden-Spurge. Catapulte, a sling, or warlike en∣gine, whereout great arrows or darts were shot. Catarre, for Catherre, a catharr, or a rheum. Catarre, Catarreux, for Catherreux, rheumatick, troubled with a rheum. Catastre, as Cadastre. Cateclisme, a deluge, or inundati∣on. Catefique, sad, heavy, sorrowful. Categide, an airy inflammation. Catel, a chattel; or a thing which (though of it self it be immove∣able) is divided and held as moveable; or as Cateud. Catelongne, Catelonne, as Cata∣longne. Catepleure, a cross-sail. Caterolle, a rabbets nest. Caterve, a crue. Cateud, a chattel; or not only a moveable (which may follow a bo∣dy, and be removed from place to place) but also any immoveable that is no inheritance. Catel, as Catel. Cathartique, a purging Medicine. Cathechiser, for catechiser, to cate∣chise. Cathedrant, sitting as Judge or Moderator. Cathedratique, a certain see or duty belonging to a Bishop, when he is first invested into his See. Cathegorie, for categorie, category. Cathelane, the name of a plum. Cathene, a chain. Mat de cathene, a furious or inraged fool. Catheretique, eating, or gnawing away superfluous flesh or skin. Catherinaire, the herb tobacco. Catherine, the bramble-berry, black-berry. Catherinettes, certain pretty flowers less than pinks, growing in clu∣sters, or many together on one stalk. Cathet, perpendicular. Catheux, a kinde of moveables, al∣though they adhere to the soyl, or be fastened to a house. Catholicon, a Composition in Phy∣sick, so termed, because it purges all kinde of humours. Catholizer, to become a Catholick, to carry himself like one. Catholisation, the being, or becoming a Catholick. Catilinisme, conspiracy. Catinimi, in hugger-mugger. Catoblepe, a kinde of Basilisk, which with her sight kills a mile off. Catoire, a bee-hive. Catonien, grave, grim, or severe. Catopromantie, divination by a looking-glass. Catouiller, for chatouiller, to tickie. Cattel, as Catel. Cavailler, as Cavaller. Cavain, a hole, cave, or hollow place. Cavalcador, a horseman. Cavaler, as Cavaller. Cavalet, a long hollow stick through which they use in some places to blow the fire, instead of bellows. Cavalin, a little horse. Cavallé, ridden, travelled on, toy∣led; also staulked, or dogged. Cavaller, to ride; also to toyl, or use like a horse; also to staulk, or dog. Cavallet des planches, the highest or most raised part of Garden-beds. Cavallette, a kinde of locust. Cavallin, Cavalet, as Cavalin. Caubare, a sandy-coloured and very venomous Serpent. Caucheaux, Taxes paid towards the maintaining of common Banks or Causeys. Cauche-poulet, Cauche-vieille, as Cauchemar in the N. D. Caucher, to hatch, or sit on; to tread a hen; to put on stockings. Cauciage, as Caucheaux. Caudelée, a cawdle. Cauderet, a hot bath. Caudice, the stock, stump, or body of a tree. Cauë, a Chough, or Jack-daw. Cavé, made hollow. Caveau, a little cave. Cavechure, a halter. Cavedal, the principal sum lent out to use. Cavelade, a kinde of ray-fish of a very hard substance. Cavelot, a prop. Cavement, a making hollow. Cavenne de Berger, a Shepherds cottage. Caver, to make hollow. Cavereau, Caverneau, a little cave. Caverneux, full of caves; also dwel∣ling in caves. Cavesanne, a false rein to lead a horse by. Cavesche, the head. Cavesne, frowardly. Cavesot, a pole-head, or bull-head; the little black vermine whereof toads and frogs do come. Cavessanne, as Cavesanne. Cavessine, a martingal for a horse. Cavette, a little cellar, a little cave or hole under ground. Caüette, a Chough, or Jack-daw. Caveure, a hole, a making hollow. Cauhare, as Caubare. Cavier, Seigneur Cavier, a Lord having low Jurisdiction over his Tenants. Cavillateur, a caviller, a wrangler. Cavillation, a cavil, or cavilling. Cavillatoire, cavilling, wrangling. Caviller, to cavil, or to wrangle. Cavillon, a kinde of little mullet. Cavin, a hollow way, or dry brook. Cavine, the bottom of the mouth wherein the root of the tongue is. Caule, the stem of an herb; also the herb Colewort. Caulebasse, as Calabasse in the N. D.
Caulodis, Cabbidges. Cault, Caumas, hot. Cauné, the name of a kinde of Vine. Caune, a certain fish not much unlike a Perch. Cauny, out of countenance. Cauque, a tent for a wound. Cauqué, tented as a wound; trod∣den as a hen. Cauquemare, as Cauchemar in the N. D. Cauquer, to tent a wound; also to tread a hen, as a cock doth. Cauquier, as Cauquer. Causaïan, a litigious person. Causateur, a party in a Suit, or in Law. Causativement, litigiously; also cau∣satively, or for a cause. Causeresse, a pratling huswife; a scold. Causse d'un Aisement, the bottom of a Jakes. Caut, crafty, sly, cunning. Cautelle, craftiness. Cauteller, to over-reach, to cozen. Cautement, craftily, sily, cunning∣ly. Cautesse, craft. Cautionnage, bayling, suretiship. Cautionneur, a bail, or surety. Cauvette, a Chough, or Jack-daw. Cay, as Quay in the N. D. also a semicolon. Caymander, Caymanderie. See Cai∣mander, Caimanderie. Caymant, a beggar; also a certain great Lizard that lives in hot ri∣vers. Cayreux, worm-eaten, or moth-eaten. Caysieron, Casson, a wooden chst. Cazole, as Casole. Cazot, a cottage. Cebo, an ill-favoured starveling. Ceciliane, the water-chain of a bit. Cecilie, the soe-worm. Cecine, Martlemas beef. Cecité, blindness. Cedrelate, the great cedar. Cedriac, a kinde of Poe-citron. Cedride, the frit or berry of the low Cedar. Cedrie, the ozen or pitch that issues from the great cedar. Cedrin, a bird called Siskin. Cegue, for cigue, Hmlock. Cein, for ceinture, a girdle, a string. Ceinctes, the thick ledges that com∣pass the outsides of a ship. Ceincturé, girt. Ceincturer, to gird. Ceincturette, a little girdle. Ceisan, a Vassal. Celade, a Head-piece. Cele, a kind of Preserve. Celebrité, famousness, honour, glory. Celément, secretly, privily. Celerier, the Yeoman of a Cellar. Celerin, the name of a Sea-fish. Celerité, celerity. Celestiel, heavenly. Celeume, the shout or noise that Ma∣riners make when they weigh an∣chor, or do any Office in the ship with joyned strength. Celiac, flux celiac, a continual thin flux with pain in the belly. Celiaque, troubled with belly-ake and a continual flux. Celibe, single, unmarri'd. Celidoine, for Chelidoine, the herb Celandine. Celier, for Cellier, a Cellar. Celique, for celeste, heavenly. Celivage, bending towards Hea∣ven. Celle, the house, or mansion of, and a community of goods among Vil∣lains, or persons of a servile con∣dition. Celoce, a kind of swift brigantine. Celsitude, Highness. Cement, for Ciment, a kind of mor∣ter made of lime and sand. Cemiterre, for Cimeterre, a Simi∣tar. Cenacle, as Senacle. Cencer, as Censer. Cenchre, Cenchrite, Cenchryne, a gnish Snake, whose sting causes a Lthargy. Cencive, as Cens in the N. D. Al∣so an Inheritance hold by, or sub∣ject unto Cens; also the title of, or a tenure by Cens. Cendroyé, burnt into ashes. Cendroyer, to burn into ashes. Cenglade, a lash. Cenotaphe, a tomb. Censcable, as Censable in the N. D. Censer, to reckon, esteem, a t ang ; to , tell, or master; to tax, or to a∣lue. Cenve, as Ceneive. Censivement, by the title of Cens. Censivier, a Farmer, or Fee-far∣mer. Censorin, ceorious. Centarée, the herb Centry. Centesimer, to count, o euil ot by hundreds. Centidoine, for Centinodi, Knot-ga. Centine d'une rouë, the box (or bol) of the nave of a wheel. Centoire, as Centaurée. Centon, Rapsody. Centonifique, confusedly heaping, or hudling many things together. Cep, Stocks for Malefactors. Cepée, an herb like Brook-lime, or water-Pimpernel. Cephale, the Pollard-fish. Cephalée, a great head-ake. Cephalonomantie, divination by an Asses head broyled on coals. Cepier, a Gaoler; one that looks to the Stocks. Cepride, Balm. Ceramite, Potters earth; also a precious stone of the colour of a tile. Ceranvienne, a certain precious stone that's always very moist, and seems to sweat. Ceraste, the name of a most venomous serpent. Cerat, a plaister made of wax, gums, and certain oyls. Ceraunobule, thundering with bulls, as the Pope. Cerceau, a circle, ring, or hoop; a round, or a round compass; also the Sarcel-feather of a Hawks wing. Cercelé, compassed with a round, or circle. Cerceler, Cerceller, to compass with a round or circle. Cercerelle, for Crecerelle, a Rattle for children; also a sort of Hawk. Cerche, a search, or inquiry. Cer∣che ralongée, the Instrument wherewith Masons round and fa∣shion Pillars. Cerchesi, as Scrisi. Cerchement, a searching, or inqui∣ring after. Cerclé, compassed about. Cerclet, a little circle; also a small wreath of Ozier-twigs to set un∣der a dish on a table. Cerelet à feu, a Fire-work made like a wreath. Cercloure, a pair of weeding-tangs. Cercot, a safeguard. Cerebelle, for cervelle, the hinder part of the head wherein the me∣mory is loged. Cererin, eady, rash, gldy-brain∣ed. Cerelle, a kind of Perry. Ceremoniouement, as Cerimoni∣ousement. Cerfocite, as Serfoneto.
Cerfouïr, to dig the ground about the roots of trees; or as Sarfouïr. Cerimonie, for ceremonie, cere∣mony. Ceremonialement, ceremonially, re∣verently. Cerimonieux, for ceremonieux, ce∣remonious. Cerimonieusement, ceremoniously. Cerin, as Serin in the N. D. Cerin-perse, a bright sky-colour. Cerisee, the revenue that comes in, or profit that's made by cherries. Cerism, the bird called Siskin. Cerne, Cerneau, a circle, a round. Cerner, to compass with a circle, to make a round. Cernoir, a kinde of tool to pick out withal the kernels of walnuts be∣ing yet in the shale. Ceroesne, Ceroine, any oyntment or plaister whereof rozen or wax are the principal ingredients. Ceromantie, divination by wax put into water. Cerot, a searcloth, or plaister made of wax, gum, &c. Cerouënne, as Ceroesne. Cerquemage, Cerquemanage, an assignment of bounds between pri∣vate mens Lands, as also in Com∣mons, High-ways, Rivers, &c. Cerquemané, bounded, limited. Cerquemanement, as Cerquema∣nage. Cerquemaner, to lay out the bounds. Cerquemaneurs, certain sworn Offi∣cers who have authority to set or plack up meers and bounds be∣tween several mens possessions, and to examine and reform incroach∣ments made upon high-ways, com∣mons, rivers, &c. Cerresine, gum, or liquour becom∣ing like rozen or gum. Certain (a Subst.) certainty, or cer∣tain truth. Tesmoin de certain, a Witness that assures or says he knows all he says. Certaineté, certainty. Certeau à deux testes, the name of a sort of pear. Certificateur, a certifier, also an Informer, or notice-giver. Certification, a certification; also a certificate. Certioré, c rtified, informed. Cerve, a Hinde. Cervelin, hair-ited. Cervelliere, a ll, or sallet of iron. Cervical, belonging to the nape, or hinder part of the nk. Cervinesine, the shrub Way-thorn, Buck-thorn, Laxative-ram. Ceruseux, full of ceruse. Ces, (a Subst.) a stay, ceasing, or forbearing; also a putting to si∣lence, or forbidding to proceed. Cesolfié, sad, pensive, or perplexed. Cessement, ceasing. Cessible, yeeldable, resignable. Cessionaire, one that gives up his goods, thereby to be put out of the reach or danger of Creditors; and, though he loseth his credit there∣by, yet he is not held so base as a Bankrupt. Cessioner, to eat between meals. Cest, Ceste, as Cet, Cette, in the N. D. Ceston, a studded Girdle, which in old time the Bridegroom put about his Bride assoon as they were married, and took off when they went to bed together. Cestrin, a kinde of yellow stone, whereof Beads are made. Cestuy, he. Cestuy ci, this. Cestuy là, that. Cesue, for seve, the sap of trees. Cesure, a cutting, section, division. Cetacé, poisson cetacé, a fish of the kinde of Whales. Cete, for cette, the feminine of cet, this, or that. Cethin, a kinde of wood that cor∣rupts not. Cetier, as Setier in the N. D. Ceton, a rowel for a bruised or im∣postumed horse. Cetuy, as Cestuy. Ceucheter, to whisper in the ear. Ceve, a whet-stone. Ceves, Cevotes, chives, chibols. Chabins, the sheep of Berry, whose wooll is very thick, and as long as goats-hair. Chable, for cable, a cable. Chabre, the Pungar-fish. Chabrer, as Cabrer in the N. D. Chace, Chacer, Chaceur. See Chasse, Chasser, Chasseur in the N. D. Chacie, Chacicuseté, as Chassie in the N. D. Chacieux, as Chassieux in the N.D. Chacunerie, every ones own. Cha∣cun à sa chacunerie, every one to his own home, or about his own bu∣siness. Chaffauld, for Echafaud, a Scaf∣fold. Chaffaulder, to set up scaffolds; al∣so to set upon scaffolds. Chaffourré, disd, besard. Chaffourrer, to d are, to besmear. Chagrigner, for Chiner, to vex. Chagrineux, sad, in troubles. Chahuant, as Chathuant, under Chat in the N. D. Chair-bouillé, a sodden fellow, or one whose flesh doth look as if it had been sodden. Chaircuicterie, or Chaircuiterie, the Market or place where bacon or any kinde of hogs-flesh may be had ready boyled. Chaircuictier, a Cook that sells all kinde of hogs-flesh ready boyled; also a bungler. Chaircuté, cut, or hacked. Chaircuter à coups d'espées, to cut, or hack. Chaire, for chaise, a chair. Chaise, for chaire, a pulpit. Chaiz, low Ware-houses or Cellars to lay merchandise in. Chalamine, as Calamine in the N. D. Chalan, a wood-boat, or barge. Chalanger, as Calenger. Chalant, from Chaloir, caring for. Chalcide, a kinde of spotted Li∣zard. Chalcite, the recrement of brass, clea∣ving to the sides of the furnaces wherein 'tis purified. Chalemelle, Chalemie, a little pipe made of a reed, or of a wheaten or oaten straw. Chalemeller, to play on a little pipe. Chalenée, a boat full. Chalenger, as Calenger. Chalibé, steeled, done over with steel; wherein steel is quenched; belonging unto steel. Chaline, a little thunder in a mor∣ning; also drought. Chalissier, a maker of Bedsteds. Challer, a hare to breed young; also to shale, or unshl ts. se Chaloir de, to ae for. Chalon, as Chalan; also a kinde of fish-net. Chaloppes, the shalings of nuts. Chalu, a kind of Mat. Chalumeux, knotty as a reed. Chamille, Spug-time. Chamelleon, as Cameleon in the N. D. Chamara, Water-grnder. Chamarrier, the name of an Office. Chamellage, Chamellenage, a duty a fine paid or course unto a Lord upon ery change of T∣nant; also a V d unto the chief Ʋsher of the Chamber of Ac∣counts, upon every Homage made by one of the Kings Tenants.
Chambre, for chanvre, Hemp. Chambrée, a Chamber full of. Chambrerie, Chamberlainship. Chambreux, that keeps much in his chamber. Chambrier, a Chamberlain in an Abbey or Inne; also a Princes Chamberlain. Chambrillé, full of Chambers. Chambrillon, a little chamber; also a young Chamber-maid. Chame, a kinde of Cockle. Chamedrée, Germander. Chamelée, a shrub called Widow-wall. Chameleon, as Cameleon in the N. D. Chamelier, a Camel-keeper, or dri∣ver. Chamion, a little dray without wheels. Champaigne, for Campagne, fields. Champayage, a running, or grazing of cattle in the fields. Champayer, Champeyer, to reside, or continue among fields; also to wander in, or walk over the fields; to carry abroad into the fields; to feed in fields; to turn cattle into the fields. Champi, base born; also consening, cheating; also seeming, but not being honest. Champicerie, tour de champicerie, a cheating trick. Champleure, as Chantepleure. Champoyer, as Champayer. Chanci, musty. Chancisseure, a musty taste. Chandeleux, full of candles, be∣longing to candles. Chandelier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a candle or candlestick. Chanes, le grand Chanes, May∣weed. Chanfron, the name of an Italian Coyn. Chancinerie, for Chanoinie, Pre∣bend hip. Chansi Chansisseure. See Chanci, Chancissure. Chansonet, a Canary-bird. Chansonnur, Chansonier, always singing of Songs. Chanstié, as Chantier in the N. D. Chantepleure, a watering-pot; the cock of a distern; a device for the emptying of a water-vessel. Chantepout, the lesser Ctory. Chanterme, a great song, or hedge-toad. Chanterie, a singing; also a Chan∣tery; the place or office of a Chan∣ter. Chanterre, a paultry Poet. Chantillonné, sung merrily. Chantillonner, Chantonner, to sing merrily. Chantourné, turned in and out. Chantournement, a turning in and out. Chantourner, to turn in and out, like a small stream in a plain field. Chantrerie, as Chanterie. Chanvreux, full of hemp. Chanvrier, for cheneviere, a hemp-close. Chapel, a hat, a garland. Chapel de roses, a sleight portion. Chapelainie, Chaplainship; also the charge of a Chappel. Chapeler, for Chapler, to chip bread. Chapelier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to hats. Chapeline, as Capeline in the N.D. Chapelis, as Chapplis. Chapelures, for chaplures, chippings of bread. Chaperonner, Chaperonnier, to un∣cover his head before one; also to put a hood on. Chaperonniere, a poor Hat. Chapitreur de soin, a scar-crow, one that threatens much and does but little. Chaplis, bread-chippings; also rags of stones, that fly from them in the hewing. Chapoter, for Chipoter, to haggle. Chappel, as Chapel. Chappier, a Cope-maker. Chappins, a kinde of high slippers for low women. Chappler, as Chapler in the N. D. Chapplis, as Chaplis. Chappon, for Chapon, a Capon. Chappoter, for Chipoter, to hag∣gle. Chappron, for Chaperon, a hood. Chappronner, as Chaperonner. Chappronnier, as faulcon bon Chappronnier, a awk that takes the hood gently. Chappuis, as Chapuis. Chapron, for Chaperon, a hood. Chaptel, a least of a beast, and of the whole increase thereof, or a beast let out to the halves. Chaptels deniers, the principal sum and charges a Purchaser has paid and been at for land, which the next of Kin offers to redeem. Chapis, a Carpenter. Chapuiser, to work Carpenters-work. Characie, Garden-spurge. Charadrien, a Bird which earnestly beholding one that is sick of the Jaundice, or beheld by him, heals him. Charanson, Charanton, a Mite, or Weevil. Charansonné, eaten up by weevils. Charaveau, a Beetle. Charbonnée, a Carbonado. Charbonnerie, for Mine de charbon, a Coal-pit, or Mine. Charbonnesque, coal-like. Charbonneux, full of coals. Charbot, a Beetle. Charcuter, for gâter une besongne, to spoil a piece of work. Chardonnereau, the bar of a door. Chardonnette, for Chardonnerette, the thistly Artichoke; also a kinde of sawce for Kid. Formage à la chardonnette, cheese whose milk was curded with the juice of the wild Artichoke; or a Lenten cheese made of eggs and the spawn of fishes, and curded with the juice of the Thistle. Chardrier, a Gold-finch. Charée, as Charrée. Charesse, Charesser, as Caresse, Ca∣resser in the N. D. Chareti, Charetin, a Waggon-house, a hovel to set carts under. Charette, for Charrete, a Cart. Charevastre, a Buck-cloth. Chargais, the name of a bird. Chargeant, fàcheux, heavy, or trou∣blesome. Chargnure, for Charnure, fleshiness. Chariage, and Charier. See Char∣riage, and Charrier, under Char in the N. D. Chariotte, a small Chariot for chil∣dren; also a kinde of Litter. Charitatif, charitable. Charlaïde, stout, valiant, war∣like. Charlataner, Charlater, to play the Mountebank. Charlaterie, consening, or cheating. Charlot, a Curw. Charmean, a little yoak-tree. Charme-coeur, ravishing, heart-charming. Charme-pine, pain-charming. Charmeresse, an Inchanteress. Charme-soing, Charme-soucy, care-charming. Charmsement, charmingly. Charmoye, a grove of Yoaks, or of Horn-beam trees.
Charnage, flesh-time; also flesh, or flesh-meat. Charnalité, fleshliness, sensuality. Charnaut, flesh-time. Charnié, a prop, stay, or pole to sup∣port a Vine. Charnie, a Plain, Down, open, or uninclosed Ground. Charniere, a binge; also a knuckle, or turning joynt; also a certain device whereby a wooden-leg or arm is made to move. La char∣niere des genoux, the whirl-bone of the knees. Charongneux, full of Carrion. Charongnier, feeding on Carrion. Charopper, to boyl one sort of liquor nine or ten times over. Charpentailler, to cut, or hew, as a Carpenter doth timber. Charpentaire, the Sea-onion. Charpi, Charpie, Charpy, for Char∣pis, Lint, or Tinder. Charrau, a Cart-way. Charrée, Buck-ashes, the ashes where∣of Lye hath been made. Charreton, a little Chariot. Charriere, for Carriere, a carreer. Charroton, for Charretier, a Car∣man. Charroyer, for Charrier, to carry in a Cart. Charruage, the Plough-gears; also tilled, or plowed land. Charrué, ploughed. Charruer, to plough. Charte, for Carte, a Card. Charte, for Chartre, a Charter. Charté, having a Charter, holding, or held by Charter. Charté, for cherté, dearness. Chartée, for charretée, a Cart-load. Chartepartie, a bill of lading. Charterie, a Carters trick; also a Hovel to set Carts under. Chartil, Chartin, the frame of a Cart or Waggon without the wheels. Charton, a Carrier. Chartrier, a Gaoler; also a Prisoner. Chaseret, a Cheesefat. Chasereux, belonging to the Cheese∣fat. Chasier, a Cheese-press. Chasiere, a Cheese-eck. Chaslict, for chalit, a Trundle-bed. Chasmate, a Chasmate in fortifi∣cation. Chassable, chastable sit to be chased. Chasse-bosse, Herb-willow. Chasse-corneille, a kind of small Fowling-piece. Chasse-crainte, fear expelling. Chasse-diable, S. Johns grass. Chasse-erreur, errour expelling. Chasse-fievre, Germander. Chasse-mal, mischief expelling. Chasse-masse, a fire-lock, or horse-mans piece that goes off by a fire-lock. Chasse-monstre, Monster-pursuing. Chasse-mort, death expelling. Chasse-nue, Skie-clearing. Chasse-ordure, cleansing, purging. Chasse-pape, as Chasse-messe. Chasse-peine, pain-expelling. Chasse-peste, plague-expelling; also the Herb-willow. Chasse-poulx, Bears-foot. Chasse-rage, Dittany, Dittander, Pepper-wort. Chasse-rat, the name of a Serpent that commonly feeds on Rats. Chasseresse, a woman-unter. Chasseret, a little hunter. Chasserie, hunting, chasing. Chasserot, much given to hunting. Chasseroton, a small chest. Chasseton, a Scritch-owl; also a little chest of wood. Chassieuseté, blear-eyedness. Chassissé, as fenestre chassissée, a window covered with paper in∣stead of glass. Chassitier, a maker of paper-win∣dows, or of frames for paper or linnen-windows. Chassoire, a Carters whip. Chassot, the Bull-head-fish. Chastel, for Chateau, a Castle. Chastelenie, Chastellerie, as Cha∣telainie in the N. D. Chastenereie, a plot of ground full of Chesnut-trees. Chastiable, fit to be chastised. Chastieur, a chastiser. Chasti-villain, a whip, or cadgel for a knave; also a Castle, or Citta∣del, in or near a good Town. Chastrable, fit to be gelt. Chastrement, a Gelding. Chat-chasteil, ou chateil, a defen∣siue Engine of War, somewhat re∣sembling the Roman Testudo. Chatel, a Chattel, or moveable. Chatemiterie, hypocrisie. Chatemitiquement, hypocritically. Chatepeleuse, a Mite, or Weevil. Chat-fourré, a Lawyer, or Petti-fogger, who commonly wears a Gown lined with wilde Cats-skin. Chat-garanier, a Pole-cat, a kind of wild Cat that haunts Warrens. Chatillons, small fresh-water Lam∣preys. Chatonner, to kittle. Chatonnie, a waggish trick; a kna∣vish or unhappy prank; also the art of pilfering. Chatouille, a certain fish very full of small bones. Chatouilloir, any ticklish part of the body, especially the side. Chatrin, a Gaoler. Chat-rocher, a kind of Dog-fish. Chattement, a kiling, a breeding or bringing forth of young Cats. Chattemiterie, as Chatemiterie. Chatas, a kind of Vine. Chauans, little Owls. Chavassme, a certain measure or quantity of land, in length 120 foot, and in breadth 30. Chauce, for Chausses, breeches. Chauceaux, as Caucheaux. Chaucée, for Chaussée, a Causey. Chauchage, as Chaussage. Chauché, crowded in. Chaucher, to crowd a thing in. Chauche-mare, as Cauchemar in the N. D. Chaude (Subst.) a fierce onset, a vi∣olent assault. A la chaude, in an∣ger. Chaudeau, a Caudle, or warm broth. Chaude-colle, leacherousness. Chauderonnerie, flesh or fish that's ordinarily boyled in Cauldrons or Kettles. Chaudet, a warm place. Chaudot, a heat, or hot thing. Chauffe-dos, a kind of low chimney having but a hole instead of a fan∣nel for the voiding of soak. Chauffe-pied, a Foot-stove, a little and low Stove that serves to keep the feet warm. Chaufferette, Chauffette, a Chasing∣dih. Chauffour, as Chausour, under Chaux in the N. D. Chauffourer, as Chaffourrer. Chaufrain, as Chanfrein in the N.D. Chauguette, a Watch-tower. Chauliere, a plot or bed of Cab∣bidges in a Garden. Chaulmage, the cutting or mowing of straw or stubble. Chaulmer, to pick, or gather up straw; also to cut or mow stubble. Chaulmeur, a gatherer of straw; a cutter or mower of stubble. Chaulsepot, a certain little bird. Chaumeny, musty. Chaumer, as Chaulmer, and as Chommer. Chaumes, Lay-lands. Chaumier, of straw.
Chaumin, made of, or covered with stubble. Chaumine, a thatched house. Chaumouflet, Bumbast put into a cornet of paper, then kindled, and the smoak thereof put into the no∣strils of a sleeper. Chaussage, shoe-money, expence in shoes; also hosen, or shoes. Chaussepot, as Chaulsepot. Chaussetier, a Hose-maker. Chauver, to make bald. Chauver des oreilles, to clap down the ars. Chauvesourissier, the bat-wing-bone in the lower part of the head. Chauvir, Chauvisser, to grow bald. Chaziere, as Chasiere. Cheant, falling down. Cheau, a Whelp, or Cub. Chebule, the biggest kind of the Molan-plum. Chedins, the head-men of the Pa∣rih. Chef ciet, the Treasurer, or Keeper of the Vesry. Chef gros, Shoomakers thread. Ches mois, a chief Mannor-house. Cheintre, a baulk or swath of grass, a long de, or highway. Chg, as Chef gros. Chelldre, as Chelydre. Cheli, a R Chelsydre, Chelydre, a most veno∣mous and stinking Serpent. Chemage, the passage-toll that's paid at Sc. Chme, as ancient measure holding about t fls. Chmer, to dee, or be (as the M) in the wai; to pine, or fll away. Chem, to wr. Cheer, the  or chief Hir in a Dsnt, who is to do homage sor whole land that is discen∣ded. Chminux, a great walker; also  to a way, or to a chim∣y;  fall of  vs. Cemr,  or br ging to a . Chmit, whi . Ch  or gr. C  de clant,  cer∣  whereon Cals us . Ch  Saffron. Ch , a chain; also a  wrk. Ch  of a certain Chenei, H . Chenevilles, the broken stalks of Hemp. Chenevette, for Chenevote, a stalk of Hemp. Chenillaux, young Caterpillars. Chenillé, of, or belonging to Cater∣pillars; Caterpillar-like; full of, or wrought with Caterpillars. Taffetas chenillé, a kinde of stri∣ped Tassata. Chenillier, an Instrument wherewith Gardeners pull down Caterpillars. Chenin (Adj.) dog-like, of or belong∣ing to a dog. Chenu, gray-haired. Cheoir, to fall. Chepage, a Gaoler, or Gaolership. Chepier, a Gaoler. Chercée, a kinde of earth-alpick. Cherchage, a seeking for. Chercuictier, as Chaircuictier. Cherer, to cheer, to cherish. Chereté, for cherté, dearness. Cherseuil, for cerfeuil, Chervil. Chermaye, a wood of scarlet oaks; also as Charmoye. Cherme, the Scarlet-oak. Chermes, the Scarlet-brry. Chermine, the fruit or berry of the scarlet oak. Cherpi, for charpis, lint, tinder. Cherquemmage, as Cherquema∣nage. Cherrée, buck-ashes. Chersydre, the Land-adder. Chesaux, the rubbish of decayed houses; also mansions, houses. Chesmer, as Chemer. Chesneau, a water-snake, mortal enemy to oaks; also a young oak. Chesnereau, a little young oak. Chesnette, for Chainette, a little chain; also the hath Grmander. Chesneux, of Oak, or fll of Oaks. Chesnon, the Ch. Chesteté, misry, wretedss, poorns; also kry, shrwdn. Chestreux, poor, . Chestron, as Cheron. Chetdeux, g fllg. Chte, the height  of a Ship, from t  Dk to the . Chetiver, to bring to wa. Chetiveté, as Chestiveté. Chetivoison, poverty. Chetron,  till of a Ch. Cheu, fall. Chevage, a wr duty paid to the Kings ,  y Batard, &c. Chevalr, to ; also to ;  of caip to lap out g  anr. Chevaleresque, Knightly, of, or be∣longing to a Knight. Chevalereux, valiant, couragious. Chevalere usement, valiantly, coura∣giously. Chevalet, or petit cheval, a little horse. Chevaleter, as Chevaler. Chevaleureux, as Chevalereux. Chevalin, of, or belonging to a horse. Chevaline, the Herb called Horse∣tail, or Shave-grass. La Cheva∣line, horse-flesh, or the kinde of hoss. Chevalet, a little horse; also a tres∣sel of wood; also a sort of coyn. Chevance, wealth. Chevauchable, easie to be rid on. Chevauchée, a riding on horseback; also a Princes Progress; a Judges Cheuit, &c. also a furnishing of horses to ride on. Chevauchement, a riding. Chevaucher, for voyager à cheval, to ride a horse. Chevaucheur, for Cavalier, a horse∣man. Chevauchons, à chevauchons, a∣straddle. Chevecerie, as Chevecherie. Cheveche, an Owl, the rough-footed short-tailed Owl. Chevecher, Chevechier, Chevecier, a Sxton. Chevecherie, the Vstry, or Treasury of a Church. Chevedage, a dwelling-house. Cheveil, Chevel, chief, principal. Lieu chevel, a Mannor-house, or chief house; Fief chevel, a noble Inheritance held in capite, and capabl of Jrisdicti. Cheveler, to sprig, or spriggle; to put forth a small or hairy . Cheveliere, a hair-la; also a dressing of air. Chevelite, a Sker, a small imp of a plant sprnging from the root throf, or o it sly rooted. Chevesche, as Cheveche. Chevesne, the Chi, or Pllard-fi h. Chevestre, a , or alter for a cow, cal, &c. Chevestreux, blading, or sraini g the head. Cheveain, a Captain, a Comman∣der. Cheveier, as Chevecher. Che,  Chi  . D. Chevi,  with rid. Chevillage, a ggig.
Chevilleur, a pegger; also a Sor∣cerer that holding his finger in a hole, and muttering certain super∣stitious Words, will hinder a man from pissing until his finger be re∣moved. Cheviniau, a Chevin. Chevir, to compass, prevail with, reclaim. Ils ne pouvoyent tous chevir en la maison, there was not room enough for them all in the house. Chevissance, an agreement, or com∣position made. Chevolée, a sprig of a plant; also a fiber, or hair-like thread grow∣ing unto the root of a plant. Chevoler, to put forth sprigs. Chevre-pied, goat-footed. Chevrette, a little Goat; a wilde Goat; a great Prawn; a little and low andiron; a small piece of Ordnance. Chevrie, a Bag-pipe. Chevrier, a Goat-herd. Chevrin, Goat-like; of, or belong∣ing to a Goat. Cheurme, as Chiorme in the N. D. Chevron, for Chevreau, a Kid. Chevronde, as Severonde in the N. D. Chevronneau, Chevronnet, a small rafter. Chevrot, a Kid. Chevrotter, for Chevreter, to kid. Chevrottement, the breeding, or bringing forth of Kids. Cheusson, a Mite, or Weevil. Chezal, Chezeau, a chief Mansion, or Mannor-house. Chi, as Ci in the N. D. Chiabrena, a shitten-come-shite. Chiappon, a kinde of port in the mouth of a Bit. Chiard, a shitten fellow. Chiasse, dross. Chiasser, to shite; also to be too cu∣rious. Chic, de chic à chic, from little to little. Chicambault, the luff-block in a ship. Chicancus, Chicanous, for Chica∣neur, a wrangler. Chichard, for Chiche, a penny-fa∣ther. Chicharou, bastard Mackarel. Chiche-face, Chiche-maille, a penny-father. Chicheron, the Nipple of ones breast. Chichorée, for Chicorée, Succory. Chicot, a stub, or slump. Chicotin, Chicotrin, the herb Orpin. Chief, for chef, chief, principal. Chien-cerf, a Hart-hound. Chienesse, Dogs, the kinde or na∣ture of dogs, a breed of dogs. Chien-lict, a shite-a-bed. Chienner, to whelp. Chiennesse, as Chienesse. Chiennet, a little dog. Chieneter, as Chienner. Chienneterie, doggishness, the kinde or nature of dogs. Chiennetier, a Dog-keeper, one that looks unto Hounds. Chiennette, a young, or little bitch. Chien-rage, Dogs-bane. Chietins, as Theatins. Chisse, an old rag, an off-cast piece of stuff. Chiffetier, a seller of old stuff. Chifflement, a whistling. Chigros, as Chef gros. Chil, as Chyle in the N. D. Chilagogue, a Choler-purging Medi∣cine. Chilifier, to concoct, digest, or turn into a milky or white juice. Chiller, as Ciller in the N. D. Chilleure, a seeling, or sowing up of the eyes. Chilonique, à la Chilonique, briefly. Chimage, as Chemage. Chimagrée, as Cimagrée in the N. D. Chimerie, for Chimerique, chime∣rical. Chimolie, terre chimolie, a kinde of earth that is good against bur∣ning and hot Impostumes. Chinchille, the name of an Indian and Squirrel-like beast. Chine, a red and spungeous Indian root, good against the Gout. Chinfreneau, a knock, or thump. Chinon, as Chignon in the N. D. Chinquer, to quaff, or drink ex∣tremely. Chiolé, whelped. Chiot, a whelp, or little dog. Chipault, ragged. Chipouton, a penny-father. Chippe, a ship, or bark; also an old clout, rag, or patch. Chiquaner, for Chicaner, to wran∣gle. Chicanique, litigious, pettyfogger-like. Chiquanourris, Chiquanoris, crafty pleaders, or pettyfoggers. Chique, as Chiche. Chiquenaudé, fillipped. Chiquenauder, to fillip. Chiquenie, as Squenie. Chiqueté, cut, or hacked. Chiqueter, to cut, or hack. Chiqueteur, a cutter, or hacker. Chiqueture, a cutting, cut, or gash. Chiquot, a scale in the root or end of a nail; also a sprig, or shoot of a tree; also the stump of a tooth. Chiquoter, to sift, search, or seek out; also to hack with a knife, &c. Chiragre, the Gout in the hands. Chiroacte, nimble of hand. Chiroaine, as Ciroesne. Chirographaire, Creancier chiro∣graphaire, a Creditor that hath a Note under the Debtors hand. Chiron, for Ciron, a hand-worm. Chirurgial, belonging to Surgery. Chocailler, as Chocquailler. Chochepierre, a kind of Bull-finch. Chocquailler, to drink much. Choënes, the lines, or chains, and rods wherewith Surveyors mea∣sure Land. Choerin, a Barrow-pig. Choier, as Choyer. Choine, Choisne, a loaf of white bread. Choison, opportunity, occasion; also plenty. Cholagague, the thin or small gut wherein the Chylus thickening be∣gins to rest. Chole, Cholere, as Colere in the N. D. Choleré, Cholerique, and Chole∣reux. See Colerique in the N. D. Cholique, as Colique in the N. D. Choliqueux, troubled with the Col∣lick. Chomer, as Chommer in the N. D. Chommable, Jour chommable, a Play-day, a Holy-day. Chommage, a resting, or ceasing from work. Chondrille, Gum-succory. Choner, as Chommer, or Chopiner in the N. D. Chonquetage, a View taken of the Kings Woodsales. Chopinette, a small cup. Choquar, a Chough. Choriage, a keeper of Players Gar∣ments. Chore, a Company of Singers, or Dancers; any Company; the Cho∣rus between every Act in a Tra∣gedy. Choreal, frequenting, or belonging to a Quire. Chorer, a Barrow-pig, a young hog. Choriaux, Quirtsters. Chorion, the after-burden. Choriste, a Singing-man in a Quire.
Chorme, as Chiorme in the N. D. Chouän, a Pollard, or Chevin-finch. Chouärt, flying out. Chouchette, a Chough. Choüé, disappointed. Choul, for chou, Colewort. Chouquet, a block. Chouguette, a Chough. Chourme, as Chiorme in the N. D. Chouzer, to swive. Choyer, to have a great care of. Chraies, choak-pears. Chran, the name of a fish. Chras, as Chraies. Chresme, as Chreme in the N. D. Chresmer, to anoint with holy oyl. Chrestienné, christened. Chrestiennement, (Subst.) a chri∣stening. Chrestienner, to christen. Chrisocolle, Gold-sodder. Christe-marine, Crest-marine. Christianizé, made a Christian. Christodin, a new Christian. Chronique, (Adj.) temporal, or re∣turning at a certain time. Chroniste, Chronologiste, a Chro∣nicler. Chrysocolle, as Chrisocolle. Chrysocome, Gold-flower. Chrysogone, Gold-producing. Chrysolaine, Orache. Chrysopase, Chrysopatie, a green precious stone that hath a golden lustre. Chuat, a whelp. Chucheter, Chuchoter, to whisper. Chupper, to suck up. Churle, the white field-onion, or star of Bethlehem. Chur, fallen. Churquette, a mouse-trap. Chylose, a digestion of sap or . Chymique, for Chymiste, a Chy∣mist. Chymistique, Chymistical. Chyst, a membrane. Ciané, bright blue of colour. Ciathe, the name of a measure and weight. Ciboile, as Ciboire in the N. D. Cicatricé, Cicatricer, as Cicatrisé, Cicatriser in the N. D. Cicatrisatif, cicatrizing. Cices, Ciches, as Chiches in the N. D. Cicharou, as Chicharou. Cicle, as Sicle or Cycle in the N. D. Cic, or Cicoigne, for Cigogne, a Stork. Cicognau, Cicoigeau, a young Stork. Cicotrin, the herb Orpin; also a kinde of fine scarce. Cicotrine, or Cicrotiné, very finely searced. Cicutuaire, wild Chervil. Cidrage, Peachwort. Cie, for Sie, a Saw. Cielin, heavenly; also belonging to the firmament; or to a canopy, testern, or upper cieling. Cier, for sier, to sawe. Cieure, for sieure, saw-dust. Cigaler, to chirp. Cignean, Swan-like, of a Swan. Cil, for celui, he. Cilindre, as Cylindre in the N. D. Cillier, as Ciller in the N. D. Cimaise, as Cymaise in the N. D. Cimasulte, carving that resembleth rowling waves. Cimet, for Cime, the top of a tree or a hill. Cimettes, as Cymettes. Cimitiere, for Cimetiere, a Church-yard. Cimmerique, as Tenebres Cimme∣riques, Cymmerian (or continual) darkness. Terre Cimolée, Cimolie, or Cimo∣lienne, Fullers earth. Cin de bois, a knot in wood. Cinabre, for Cinnabre, Cinoper. Cinabrin, red, ruddy, as vermilion. Cincinatule, one that continually curls his hair. Cincture, or Cindre, for Cinture, a girdle. Cindré, girt, spotted. Cindrer, to gird, also to spot. Cinefaction, a burning unto ashes. Cinit, a Siskin. Cinnabrisé, mingled, or coloured with cinoper. Cinnamé, sweetned with cinnamon, or sweet as cinnamon. Cinnamome, as Cinname in the N. D. Cinquaine, the name of a certain Vie that thives not in a moist soil. Cinquener, to yield five for one. Cinturin, for Ceinturon, a waste-belt. Cion, a storm; also as Scion. Cipres, for Cypres, the Cyprus-tree. Cipsule, as Capsule. Circée, a kinde of Night-shads. Circombilivagination, a wheeling about. Circombilivaginer, to wheel about. Circongirer, the same. Circonjacent, lying about. Circuir, to incompass. Circuition, a circuition. Circuition de paroles, a circumlocution. Circularité, roundness. Circulateur, a Jugler. Circulatoire, circulatory. Circulé, circulated. Circuler, to circulate. Cirette, the name of a pear. Cireux, of wax, full of wax. Cirine, as Cyrine. Ciroesnes, as Ciroines in the N. D. Cironnier, as main cironniere, a hand troubled with worms. Cirre, a lock of curled hair. Cirsotomie, the cutting or opening of the corrupt veins called Vari∣ces. Cisaille, the clipping of coyn present∣ly after the stamp. Cisailles, Garden-sheers, any great sheers. Cisé, carved, wrought with a chi∣sel. Ciselet, a little chisel. Cisellage, a clipping with sheers or cizars. Cisteaux, for Citeaux, an Order of White Friars. Cisternin, of, or belonging to a ce∣stern. Cisternon, a little cestern. Cistophore, an antient coyn, worth about two pence farthing. Cistre, as Sistre in the N. D. Cisure, as Scissure. Citadin, a Citizen, or Freeman in a City. Cirouart, as Zedoare. Citoyennerie, Citizenship. Citrin, of a citron, citron-like, pale-yellow as a citron. Citrinité, pale-yellowness. Citronne, the herb Sweet-balm. Citronnelle, a kinde of small balm. Citronnier, (Adj.) as Citrin. Citrulle, for citrouille, a gourd. Civade, a shrimp; also oats, or pro∣vender for horses. Civadier, the fourth part of a Quarteron. Civadiere, the Sprit-sail of a ship. Civé, a kinde of blacke sauce for a Hare. Cive, a Scallion, or unset Leek. Civelle, a small Lamprey. Civets, a kinde of sauce. Civettien, perfumed with, or smel∣ling of civet. Civois, a bed of scallions, or of un∣set leeks. Civot, as Cive- Cizaille, as Cisaille. Cizailler, Cizaille, Cizeler, Cize∣leure.
See them with an s, in∣stead of z, in the N. D. Cizellage, as Cisellage. Clabaud, a came for a bound; also the harking of a Cur. Clabauderie, a barking, or baw∣ling. Clabosser, to hose, or tss up and down; also to be dash with dirt. Clac, any thing that makes a clack∣ing or clattering noise; the ac∣ket that frights away birds from fruit-trees, &c. Clache, a certain engine wherewith small birds are caught. Claguet, the name of an apple. Claigner, as Cligner in the N. D. Claim, a publick demand or claim; also a Bill of complaint put or pre∣ferred into a Court. Clain, as Claim; also an Arrest or Seizure of a Debtors Goods upon execution; also a fine of twenty pence due unto Justice for the seizure of beasts Damage sesant; also a penalty inflicted on the Party that yeelds by confession in Court, before the Suit come to contestation. Clair-coulant, running clear. Clairins, a certain Order of Corde∣liers, or Gray-Friars. Claironner, to sound a Clarion; al∣so to squeak, to speak shrill. Clamable, Claimable, challengea∣ble. Clamant, a claier, a challenger; also a Creditor that seizes b Debtors Goods upon Execution. Clamant, (Adj.) crying out; also claiming, or challenging. Clame, a Fine levied in some places upon such as dfer the payment of their debts; also the fine paid un∣to Justice, or a Lord having Ju∣risdiction, for the seizure of beasts found Damage-sesant. Clamme, a Pilgrims cloak. Clamporte, as Cloporte in the N.D. Clanche, the atch of a door. Clangueur, a shrill noise, or sak¦ing. Clangeux, shrill, seaking. Clanponniere, as Clapponiere. Clapoir, Clapoire, a clap. Claponice, Claponier, as Clappo∣niere. Clappeter, to clap one with his hand. Clappnie, te ckle-bone of a . Clare-r, a la ro, one that will ater stare with cold and longer, than work to get heat or . Claquer, Claqueter les dents, to kah the teeth. Claquettement, Claquetis, a clat∣tering. Claquette, for Cliquette, a Lazer's clicket or clapper. Claré, Claret, somewhat clear. Clas, a kell, or woful noise. Clavaller, to strengthen the young shoots or slips of a Vine against the fury of strong winds. Clavandier, a Key-bearer; also the chain whereon women use to wear their keys. Clavarins, an Order of black Friars which wore two great paper-keys upon their habits. Cladication, Claudition, a halting. Clavelade, a thornback. Clavelé, Clavellé, nailed, or fastned with nails; also usfied with the scab, as a sheep. Claveler, Claveller, to nail fast. Clavet, for Claveau, the scab amongst sheep. Clavette, the Craw-bone; also a Spring-pin; th little pice of iron wherewith Tradesmen keep in the iron-pins of their shop-win∣dows; also the forelock of the carriage of Cannon, or that which fastens it. Clavette du pied, the l, or hinder-bone of the foot. Claveure, a key-hole, or all that part of a lock wherein the key as or plays; also a chik. Clavicules, the channel-bones, neck-bones, or craw-bones. Claviere, a woman that hath charge of all the keys in a house. Clavin, a little grapple, or book like a claw. Claune, a Pool, or Pond. Claustier, for Claustral, of, or be∣longing to a Cloyster, living in a Cloyster. Claustile, a little clause. Claver, to shut up with hurdles. Clé, walled, hurdled. Cleigner, for Cligner, to wink. Clematide, Clematite, a kinde of the bth Hawort. Clepsdre, as hour-glass. Clepsdrie, a limited running of sand in an hour-glass. Cler, for Clair, Clercelier, a kind of  ribbon; also a string wherewith won ng their keys to their girdles. Cleré, a kind  d Hyra. Clerement, for clairement . Cleres-voyes, lattices, or secret holes to spy out at. Clergeau, Clergeon, a petty Clark, an under-Clark, or young Clark. Clergesse, a learred woman. Clergie, Clarkship, learning. Clerical, of, or belonging to the Cler∣gy. Clericalement, Priest-like. Clerté, for Clarté, clearness. Clesché, as Clissé. Clide, an antient warlike engine, whereby they used of old to hurl a great number of stones. Clie, for Claye, a hurdle. Clientelle, defence, protection; also a store of Clients. Clifoire, a Plaisterers Tray. Clignemusset, the play called Hide∣man-blind. Clignetter, Clignotter, to wink of∣ten. Clignottement, a frequent winking. Climactere, for Climacterique, Cli∣macterical. Climacterie de 63 ans, the climacte∣rical or dangerous year of 63. Climatere, as Climactere. Climée, brass-r. Clincaille, money, coyn. Cline-mucette, as Clignemusset. Clinique, one that is bedrid. Clinquaille, as Clincaille. Clinqueillerie, a ringing of much mo∣ney, or of many pans and skellets together; also coin. Clinquet, as Cliquet; also a cer∣tain trick in wrestling. Cliquaille, as Clinile. Cliquefoire, a spit. Cliquer, for Cliqueter, to clack. Cliquer, the knocker of a door; also a Lrs liket. Clise, a little wreath of wicker to set under a dish on the table; also a wattl, or hurdle. Treillis de clie, a grte o wickr. Clié, made of wicker. Clitie, or de clitie, a Marigold. Clitori, a wrna is privit. Cliver, to  otwad, as t . Clocheme, a altig. Clocherie, a rgi, or peal of ll. Clochetier, a Bell-. Clochier, for Clher, a , also a Pari,  and  a Bihpick,  Dis. Cler, as Cli. Cli, . Clx,
to mud-walls, hedges, or Inclo∣sures. Cloistral, for Claustral, Monastical. Clomassoles, the defence which a horse makes with his Nether-lip or gums against his bit. Clonisse, the Cockle called Pa∣lour. Cloper, Clopiner, Cloquer, for Clo∣cher, to hal. Closcuau, the nest-cockle, the last-hatched bird in a nest. Closerie, an Inclosure. Closier, a hedger, an incloser. Clostier, as Claustier. Clot, as jouër au clot, to play at hide and finde. Clouäge, a nailing. Clouelouquer, as Clousser. Clouë, a block. Clouëment, a nailing. Clouestre, a Cloister. Clouët, a little nail, a tack-nail. Clouëure, a nailing. Clouïr, to open and produce young ones, as eggs that have been sitten on their full time. Clouïsse, as Pelarde. Clouiser, for Closser, to cluck like a hen. Clousseuse, a clucking hen. Cloye, for Claye, a hurdle. Clucher, for Closser, to cluck. Clye, for Claye, a hurdle. Clypsedre, as Clepsydre, an hour∣glass. Clysterisé, applied as a Glister, or made into a Glister. Clysteriser, to apply a Glister, also to make or put a thing into a Gli∣ster. Clytoris, as Clitoris. Coäc, the croaking of frogs. Coäcervation, a heaping together. Coädunation, a joyning together. Coägulation, a coagulation. Coäguler, to coagulate. Coaïlle, course wool. Coaine, for Coenne, the skin of ba∣con. Coälescer, to grow together again. Coärcter, to restrain, or bring with∣in a narrow compass. Coärcté, restrained, or brought with∣in a narrow compass. Coät, the nest-cockle of birds. Coaugmenté, increased together. Coäxer, for Coasser, to croak as a frog. Cobbir, to bruise, or break into pie∣ces. Cobeter, or Cobter une cloche, to toll a bell. Cocard as Coquart. Cocarde, as Coquarde. Cocardean, as Coquardean. Coccoguide, the black Cameleon-thistle. Coché, notched. Cochelin, a kinde of Cake full of nothes. Cochepierre, a bird like a Bull-finch. Cochet, a Cockerel, or Cock-chick. Cochevis, the copped Lark. Cochier, for Cocher, a Coachman. Cochin, for Cochon, a pig. Cochonnet, a pretty big pig. Cochonniere, a Sow, a Sow-pig. Cocles, the wind-flower. Cocluchon, as Coqueluchon in the N. D. Cocodrille, for Crocodile, a Croco∣dile. Cocuage, cuckoldship. Cocue, Hemlock, Herb-bennet. Cocuye, as Cucuye. Cocytide, homme cocytide, a hel∣lish fellow, as cruel as the De∣vil. Codicile, a Cedicii, or bill annex∣ed. Codicilaire, or Codicillaire, one that is instituted into a Benefice, &c. by Codicil. Codignat, for Codignae, Marma∣lade. Coëgal, coequal. Coeliaque, as Celiaque. Coelibat, for Celibat, the state of a Batchelor. Coeneux, dirty. Coëpeller, to chip wood. Coëque, a copartner. Coërtion, or Coërction, coercion, restraint. Coeste, Coeston, a very thick and great Glove used by the ancient Grecians in their Theatre-Com∣bats. Coëtivé, cherished, or kept warm. Coëtivement, a cherishing, or kee∣ping warm. Coëtiver, to cherish, to keep warm. Coëval, coetaneous, or equal in age. Coeuret, a little heart. Coeur-sailli, faint-hearted. Coserruminer, to soder iron with o∣ther metals. Coffré, put into a chest or cosser; also laid up in prison. Coffrer, to put into a chest or coffer. Coffrer aulcun en prison, to lay one up in prison. Coffrier, for Coffretier, a Trunk∣maker. Cogitation, cogitation, thought. Cogiter, to cogitate, to think. Cognaciere, a Quince-tree. Cognation, cognation, affinity. Cognil, Cognoil, the bastard Tunny∣sh, or a fish like unto a Macke∣rel, but greater and thicker. Cognoscitive, the faculty of know∣ing, or discerning. Coheir, the female Oak. Coherence, coherency. Cohertion, as Coërtion. Cohibé, restrained, curbed, kept in. Cohiber, to restrain, curb, or keep in. Cohorte, a company of Souldiers. Cohourde, a Gourd. Cohue, a Hall to plead in, a Ses∣sions-house. Coi, for Coy, quiet, still. Coiaux, rafters (in building.) Coiche, the feathering of an arrow. Coignacier, the great Quince-tree. Coignasse, the greatest kind of Quince. Coignaufond, leachery, venery. Coigné, wedged, driven, or knocked in, stamped, coyned. Coigneau, privet, or primprint. Coigne-festu, an idle fellow; or one that will neither do good himself, nor suffer others to do any. Coigner, to wedge, or fasten with a wedge; to drive hard, or knock fast in; to stamp or coyn. Coig∣ner les larmes, to hold in his tears by force. Coignet, a little wedge; also a lit∣tle corner. Coigniaux, a kind of small and bright green vermine. Coignoir, a wedging tool, a wed∣ger. se Coincher, as se Conchier. Coine, the skin of bacon. Coingné, as Coigné. Coïnquination, a defiling. Coïnquiné, defiled. Coïnquiner, to defile. Coint, quaint. Coïntelligent, holding corresponden∣cy with. Cointement, quaintly. Cointise, quaintness. Coipeau, a chip. Coiraux, fat Oxen. Coisne, as Coine. Coissin, for coussin, a cushion; also a pillow. Coiti, Coitis, Coitte, for Coitre, a tick. Coitte-pointe, a quilted covering for a bed.
Colac, the Shad-fish. Colaphiser, to box. Colatoire du nez, the spungy bone through which the snivel passeth from the brain into the nostrils. Colature, a straining; also the thing strained. Cole, a stormy gale of wind. Cole, for colere, anger, choler. Colet, for Collet, a collar. Coliart, a kinde of Ray-fish. Coliaux, the name of a kinde of O∣lives. Colier, for Collier, a neck-lace. Colimbades, Colimbales, small pickled Olives. Colin, gros colin, bran, also dogs meat made of it. Coline, for Colline, a little hill. Colique, (Adj.) of, or belonging to the Chollick. Coliqueux, subject to the Chollick. Colitor, the name of a certain Vine. Collane, a Neck-lace. Collateralité, collaterality. Collaudation, a mutual commenda∣tion. Collaudé, commended with others. Collauder, to commend with others. Colle, for Colline, a little hill; also anger. Collectage, a collecting, or gathering together. Collectanes, a certain Order of Fran∣ciscan Friars. Collée, a taking (or imbracing) of one about the neck; also a thump, or blow in the neck. Collerage, a pecuniary Duty exacted in some places for the Collers worn by wine-drawing horses or men. Collerette de semme, a small neck-ruff. Colles, cross-walls of stone, &c. in some Vineyards. Colletages, Taxes and Subsidies le∣vi'd of the people. Colleter, as Coleter. Colletier, a Jerkin-maker. Colleure, a glewing. Colleux, glewy. Colligance, a binding together. Colligé, gathered, brought, united together. Colligence, a gathering, bringing, or uniting together; also as Colli∣gance. Colliger, to gather, bring, or unite together. Collin, a grey and long-beaked Ri∣ver-fowl; also as Colin. Colliquatif, subject to the Chollick. Colliquation, a melting, resolving, or dissg; a Consumption of the radical humour, or substance of the body. Collique passion, the Chollick. Colliqueux, sick of the Chollick. Collision, collision, a knocking, or beating together. Collitigant, wrangling, or going to law together. Collizée, as Colisée in the N. D. Collobe, a kind of sleeveless upper garment in fashion among the old Romans. Colloir, Colloire, a Cullander. Collyre, a liquid medicine for the eyes; also a kind of Samian earth, whereof among other things Eye-medicines are made. Colobe, as Collobe; also a furre∣hood or tippet worn by Graduate Priests. Colocasie, the Priests pintle; also the root of the Aegyptian bean. Colocinthe, for Coloquinthe, the plant called Coloquintida. Colom, the name of a great gut. Colomb, a dove, or pidgeon. Colombage, board-work on the out∣side of walls, &c. Colombain, Dove-like. Colombeau, Colombelle, a little young Pidgeon. Colombine, a whitish and spungy stone found in leaden mines; also a delicate Italian pear. Colomneux, full of pillars, or co∣lumns. Colonnation, a making of pillars. Colonnel, for Colonel, a Colonel. Colophone, the herb Scammony, also as Resine Colophonienne, clari∣fied, or hard rozen. Coloration, a colouring, a shadow∣ing. Colossal, Colossien, Colossus-like, huge, or mighty. Colostration, the indisposition of In∣fant-stomacks by the sucking of beest. Colporter, to carry upon the neck or shoulders. Columb, as Colomb. Columelle, the uvula, or a spungious flesh resembling a Cocks spur, and hanging down in the bottom of the¦reof of the mouth; also the swel∣ling thereof. Colure, for Encoulure, the neck of a horse. Colymbades, as Colimbades. Combateur, a fighter. Combe, a narrow Valley or Passage between two hills, wherein com∣monly Theeves do lurk. Combiberon, a fellow-drunkard. Combinage, a coupling, or joyning of pairs. Combleau, the breeching, a great cable used about the carriage of a piece of Ordnance. Comblette, the cleft or division of a red Deers foot. Combré, for Cambré, arched. Combrecelle, or Combresselle, a tumbling trick wherein the heels are cast over the head; also a re∣ciprocation of Venery. Comestible, eatable, sit to be eaten. Cometux, like unto a Comet, full of Comets. Comic, for Comique, comical. Comin, the herb Cummin. Command, command, power, autho∣rity; also a Mandamus, or an In∣junction for Possession, &c. also an Injoyner, Commander. Commande, as Commende in the N. D. also the main Cable of a Ship; also a thing left in trast with another. Droict de Com∣mande, a Duty taken yearly by some Lords of every one of their Widows (that holds by Villenage) in acknowledgement and preser∣vation of the right of their Autho∣rity over them. Commanderesse, a woman that commands; also Command, Rule, or Authority. Comme, for Gomme, Gum. Commedial, a merry discourse. Commemorable, memorable. Commemorer, to commemorate, to remember. Commendaces, Funeral-Orations. Commenderesse, as Commande∣resse. Commensalité, a constant eating to∣gether at one Table. Commensuration, a joynt-measu∣ring. Comment, for Commentaire, a Comment. Commenté, commented, expounded. Commenter, to comment, to expound. Commerage, gossipping. Commerer, to gossip. Commesurable, measurable together, or with one and the same mea∣sure. Commin, Cummin. Commination, commination. Comminé, threatned extreamly. Comminer, to threaten extreamly. Comminué, lstned; beaten, or broken  all plces.
Comminuer, to lessen; also to beat, or break into small pieces. Commise, a forfeiture. Droict de Commise, the right or power a Landlord hath to seize the Land held by his Vassal or Tenant who disadvows him, gives him the lie, or commits felony. Commissure, a seam in a bone, as in the scull; also any near closing, or joyning of things together. Commistion, a mixing, or mingling of several things together. Commodat, a loan, or lending. Commoderation du Corps, a good disposition of the whole body. Commoditer, to thrive, to grow rich. Commourans, dying together. Commourir, to die together. Commouvoir, to trouble, or to di∣sturb. Commué, exchanged. Commuer, to exchange. Communal, a Common. Commutatif, exchanging one for a∣nother. Compacté, compacted, well-set. Compacture, a substantial joyning of all the parts of a thing together. Compagn, for Compagnon, Com∣panion. Compagnable, sociable. Compagnonné, associated. Compagnonner, to associate. Compaing, for Compagnon, Com∣panion. Companage, all kind of food except bread and drink. Comparagé, compared. Comparager, to compare. Comparence, an appearing. Comparent, an appearer. Comparer, (Sub.) le comparer du Corps, the price of a mans life, or the buying of a thing with the loss thereof. Comparonnier, Compartisant, Co∣part. Comparuit, an Order or Testimonial, signifying the appearance of a par∣ty. Comparation, for Comparition, ap∣pearance. Compassionnaire, having compassi∣. Compassionner, to take compassion. Compatibilité, compatibility. Compensible, able to make amends for. Compe une cho par une a∣tre, to make up a thing by ano∣ther. Comperage, the being a Gossip; also a gossipping. Compermutant, a barterer. Compermutation, a truck, or ex∣change. Compermuté, exchanged. Competer, to be sufficient for; to belong to; also to sue for the same thing that another doth. Compilation, a compilation; also a rapsody. Compissé, all bepissed. Compisser, to piss every where, or to bepiss every place he comes in. Compite, a cross-way. Complaignant, a Complainer. Complanté, planted, or stored with young plants. Complanter, to plant a Vineyard; also to lay out, or deliver over, a Lords part or share in the fruits of a Vineyard, let by him unto parts or halves; or to let a Vine∣yard in a manner. Complanterie, a letting out of a Vineyard to halves, or for part of the fruit thereof; also the part or portion due unto the Land∣lord. Complication, a complication, or folding together. Compliqué, folded together. Comploteux, given to plots. Comportement, carriage, behavi∣our. Compossesseur, a Joynt-possessor. Composté, pickled. Composter, to pickle. Comprehension, a comprehension; al∣so an apprehension, or understanding of. Comprer, to buy. Comprins, for compris, comprehen∣ded, apprehended. Compromissaire, he unto whom a Controversie is compromitted. Comptable, accountable. Comptereau, a book of accounts. Compulsé, compelled. Compulser, to compel. Compulsoire, a compelling, or com∣sion; also an instrument or means of compulsion; also a Com∣mission inyning a Register, Nota∣ry, or Clerk, to deliver the Con∣tracts, Pleadings, Acts, Orders, or Judgement which a Suitor has ned . Compunction, for Componction, comnction. Compurgateur, a Compurgator, one that by ath stises the innocency, port, or at of another. Computiste, a Calculator, or Rec∣koner. Conare, a Kernel like a Pine-apple, that sticks to the outside of the Brain. Concasse, bruised in pieces. Concasser, to bruise in pieces. Concathenation, Concathenature, concatenation. Concathené, concatenated. Concathener, to concatenate, to link or chain together. Concavé, made concave or hollow. Concentrique, having one and the same center. Concept, for Conception, concepti∣on. Conceptacle, any hollow thing apt to receive, hold, or contain. Concerner, to concern. Conchambrier, a Chamber-fellow. Conche, a shell; also a kinde of open vessel like a bason; also order, equipage, or furniture. Conches, certain receptacles for Sea∣water. Conchier, to beshite. Conchylion, as Conchyle in the N. D. Conciliabule, a Conventicle. Conciliateur, a reconciler. Conciliation, a reconcilement. Concilipete, one that is going to∣wards a general Councel. Concion, a Congregation; also the speech delivered unto them. Concitateur, a raiser, or inciter. Concitation, a raising, or incitati∣on. Concité, raised, incited. Conciter, to raise, to incite. Concombriere, a bed of cucum∣bers. Concomitance, concomitancy, fellow∣ship. Concorder, to pacifie; also to live in concord. Concreé, created together; also con∣gealed, or thickened. Concreer, to create together. Se concreer, to thicken. Concret, a conjunction. Also (Ad∣jtively) concrete, thickened, or compared together. Concretion, a compaction. Concubin, a man unlawfully kept and used by a woman. Conculcation, a treading under foot. Conculqué, trodden under foot. Conculquer, to tread under foot. Concusieur, an Extorsioner. Concusierer, to u extsio.
Conde, a Butler, or a Yeoman of the Larder. Condemnade, a kinde of Card-play, like unto Lansquenet. Condemner, and its Derivatives. See Condamner, &c. in the N.D. Condensity, condensity, thickness. Condignac, for Codignac, Marma∣lade of Quinces. Condigne, condign, well-worthy. Condignement, worthily. Condile, as Condyle. Condisciple, a fellow-disciple. Conditionaire, conditional. Condol, a ridge, or raising of earth. Condoloir, as Condouloir. Condonné, forgiven. Condonner, to forgive. Condore, the name of a great and ravenous Indian bird. Condot, as Condol. Condouloir, to condole. Conduiseur, a Conducter. Condyle, the out-swelling or knots of the thigh, anckle, elbow, and knuckle-bones; also a blow with the fist. Condylome, an excrescence of flesh in the fundament, or in a womans privity's. Conestablie, as Connêtablie in the N. D. Confanon, as Gonsanon in the N.D. Confanonier, a Standard-bearer. Confanons, the wild Poppy. Confermer, for Confirmer, to con∣firm. Confessionaire, of, or belonging to auricular Confession. Confessionat, an act of Confession tending to Absolution. Confez, confessed. Confidentiaire, Confidentionnaire, treacherous, faith-breaking. Confiez de Cour, as Plairs de la Cour. Configuration, a likeness, or resem∣blance of figures. Confin, (Adj.) Consinant, near neigh∣bour, confining, or adjoyning to. Confis, for Confit, pickled, preserved. Confise, Confiscation. Confissable, fit to be preserved. Confler, as Gonfler. Confluer, to run or flow together. Conformateur, a Conformer. Conformation, a conforming. Confort, comfort. Confortatif, comfortable. Conforté, comforted. Conforte-main, a helping hand; also the strengthening and confir∣mation of an inferiour person. Conforter, to comfort. Confuté, confuted. Confuter, to confute. Congeable, dismissable, dischargeable. Domaine congeable, a Demesne held at will. Congemination, an often repeating. Congeneré, ingendred together. Congiaire, a dole, or liberal gift of money, or victuals to the people. Congie, a Vessel among the antient Romans, containing very near a Gallon. Conglutination, a conglutination. Conglutiné, conglutinated. Conglutiner, to conglutinate. Congnoistre, for Conoitre, to know. Congreé, congealed, or thickned. Congréement, a congealing, or thickening. se Congreer, to congeal, or to thicken. Congregable, that may be congrega∣ted, or congealed. Congregé, congregated, congealed. Congreger, to congregate. Il se con∣grege en pierre precieuse, it grows or congeals into a precious stone. Congression, company, assembly, mee∣ting. Conjectural, which may be guessed at by conjecture. Conjecturalement, by guess, or con∣jecture. Coniguer, to scratch, or claw. Conil, a Rabbet. Conillart, a certain very tender and delicate pear. Coniller, to lurk in corners. Conilliere, a Coney-hole. Conjouissance, Conjouïssement, a rejoycing with. se Conjoyr, to rejoyce with one. Conjoyssement, as Conjouïssance. Conise, Flea-bane. Conjuger, to play the part of a husband. Conjunction, for Conjonction, con∣junction. Conjuncture, for Conjoncture, a con∣juncture. Conjurateur, a Conspirator. Conjure, for Conjuration, Conspiracy. Connaturel, connatural. Connexé, knit, or joyned together. Connil, as Conil, a Rabbit. Connille, a Doe-coney. Conniller, as Coniller. Connilleur, a Coward. Connin, as Connil. Conniniere, a Warren of Coneys. Connoistre, Connoissance, as Co∣noìtre, Conoissance in the N. D. Connon, a long Dray or Cart, ha∣ving at the fore-end a pulley for the drawing up of a loading. Conoeïdal, Cone-like, broad and round at the bottom, and sharp at the top. Conopée, a Canopy. Conquasser, as Concasser. Conque, as Conclie. Conquerable, subduable. Conquereur, for Conquerant, a Con∣querour. Conquerre, for Conquerir, to con∣quer. Conquest, an Estate or Purchase compassed by a mans own indu∣stry; also a thing got wherein another is to have a share. Conquesté, conquered. Conquester, to conquer. Conroy, stuff through tawed or cur∣ry'd. Consalme de Mer, the great horse-muscle. Consanguin, consanguineous. Consaul, for Conseil, counsel. Consçachance, a full knowledge or notice of. Consçachant, fully acquainted with, or privy unto. Conscinomantie, Divination by a sieve and a pair of sheers. Consecution, a consequence. Conseigneur, a fellow Lord. Conseillerie, Counsellorship. Consemblable, very like unto. Ses Consemblables, his fellows. Consequemment, consequently. Consequentieux, most important, or of great consequence. Consequutif, for Consecutif, conse∣cutive. Conserte, a Conference. Conserté, ordained. Consertion, a joyning, or intermin∣gling. Conservatoire, the Office of a Con∣servator, his Court, or the Room wherein he useth to keep it. Conserve-santé, health-preserving. Consideratif, considerate. Consierge, as Concierge, in the N. D. Consilles, two conduits or pipes in the throat. Consimilitude, likeness. Consin, a mite, or weevel. Consistorié, censured, or determined of in Consistory. Consistorier, to censure, or determine of in Consistory. Consonance, harmony. Consonant, harmonious.
Consoner, to agree, or sound alike. Consorte, wife, bed-fellow. Consoulde, & Consourde, for Con∣solde, the herb Consound. Conspection, a conspection. Il Conste, it is clear, plain, or cer∣tain. Constitueur, he that constitutes or appoints. Constupré, constuprated, ravished, or deflowred. Constuprer, to constuprate, ravish, or deflowr a Virgin. Consubstantial, of the same sub∣stance. Consubstantialité, consubstantiality. Consuivre, as Consuyvre. Consultatif, consulting. Qui a voix consultative, that hath power to give his advice, but not to deter∣mine. Consulteur, an adviser. Consumption, for Consomption, consumption. Consuyvre, to overtake, to get, or obtain. Consyre, for Consire, the herb Com∣frey. Contadin, a Country-man, a Clown. Conte, for Comte, an Earl. Conté, for Comté, an Earldom. Contemné, contemned, scorned, de∣spised. Contemnement, a contemning, scor∣ning, despising. Contemner, to contemn, scorn, or despise. Contemneur, a contemner, scorner, despiser. Contemperé, tempered, qualified. Contemperer, to temper, to qualifie. Contemplatiss, certain Friars of St. Mary Maudlins Order, who seed on all sorts of flesh, and wear black upper-habits, and white under-ones. Contemplement, a contemplating. Contempleur, for Contemplateur, a Contemplator. Contempt, contempt, scorn, despight. Contenancer, to countenance. Contendre, to contend, or to strive. Contenue, capacity. Contereau, as Comptereau. Conterolle, as Contre-rolle, in the N. D. Contesse, for Comtesse, a Countess. Contestablement, by way of con∣testation. Contexte, a context; the form or stile of a Process, Book, or Dis∣course. Contigué, contiguous unto. Contin, mon Contin, my Countrey-man. Continemment, continently, soberly, chastly; also sparingly, abstemi∣ously. Continue, continuance. Continuité, continuation, intire∣ness. Contractation, a contracting. Contracte, a Contract, or bargain. Contracture, contraction, or shrink∣ing. Contrahant, contracting, or making a contract. Contraignable, constrainable. Contraigneur, a constrainer. Contrainctement, forcibly. Contrasté, contended against. Contraster, to contend against. Contradveu, Contre-adveu, an An∣swer or Opposition to a Bill of Com∣plaint for possession of Moveables. Contre-advoüé, owned, or claimed by several Parties. Contr'amour, a holy and honest love Contr'animé, animated, or incou∣raged against. Contr'antidote, a counter-antidote. Contr'applegement, an Answer to a Bill of complaint for the possession of an Immoveable. Contre-bas, downward. Contrebase, a counter-base, the lower part of a basis. Contrebondir, to rebound. Contre-boutant, as Contrefort in the N. D. Contre-bouté, supported, born up. Contre-bouter, to support, or bear up. Contre-carre, a resistance, or oppo∣sition; an arguing against; also comparison, or equality. Contre-changer, to counterchange. Contre-chanter, to answer in the same note or tune. Contre-charger, to interchange bur∣dens or accusations. Contrechifre, a countercypher, a note explanatory of particular cyphers, or as le chifre d'un Prince. Contrechifrer, to answer cyphers with cyphers; also to expound cyphers; also to requite private affection in private fashion. Contrecourber, to bend one from another, as Wrestlers do their backs. Contre-cueur, as Contrecoeur in the N. D. Contredigué, fortified against banks and ditches. Contrediguer, to set up banks against banks. Contredise, and Contredite, for Contradiction, contradiction. Contr'effort, a counter-effort. Contr'elider, to counter-strike. Contr'eschanger, as Contrechan∣ger. Contr'escrire, to confute, or write against; also to copy, or write out. Contr'escript, confuted, or written against; also copied, or writ out. Contr'escript, (a Subst.) a confu∣tation; a copy. Contr'essay, a second essay. Contr'estang, a Pool-dam, a back-pool, or counter-pond; a great ditch, or hollow-ground, whereinto the water of a Pond that's to be fished is let. Contr'estre, to be against. Contre-sente, the bruize or craze of a bone, in another or opposite part to the place where the blow that caused it was given; which hap∣pens especially in the Scull. Contreferme, an affirmation of that whereof another affirms the con∣trary. Contrefermé, the contrary whereof is affirmed or avouched. Contrefermer, to oppose an affirma∣tion unto an affirmation. Contreseu, an iron-back or plate for the back of a chimney. Contreflaté, whose flattery is an∣swered with flattery. Contreflater, to flatter as fast as another. Contrefortuner, to arm against the injuries of fortune. Contrefrontail, the brow-piece, or upmost post of a door. Contre-gage, a counter-gage, or counter-pawn. Contrehastier, a Rack to turn spits on. Contrehaulte, as Hautecontre in the N. D. Contrejouëur, a counter-player. Contre-lettre, a counter-letter, or counter-ward; a private release in discharge of a bond passed; or a private discharge of a duty or service acknowledged before a publick Notary. Contrelouër, to return praise with praise. Contrelutté, wrestled, or contended against. Contrelutter, to wrestle, or contend against.
Contremanche, a false-sleeve, half-sleeve. Contremand, Contremandement, a countermand, or counterman∣ding. Contremarque, a countermark. Contremejane, the second (or after) mizen of a ship. Contrementir, to set one lie against another. Contremettre, to oppose, or set a∣gainst. Contremonté, got up against. Contremonter, to go up against. Contremunir, to fortifie against. Contre-offrir, to change his offer. Contre-ouvrier, one that works a∣gainst another. Contrepan, a pawn, especially of an immovable. Contrepané, pawned, engaged. Contrepaner, to pawn an immo∣vable. Contrepensé, thought otherwise of than before; disliked, or distru∣sted. Contrepenser, to think otherwise than he hath done; to dislike, or distrust. Contrepenseur, one that is of ano∣ther minde than before. Contrepeter, to answer one crack with another. Contrepicqué, counter-nipped. Contrepicquer, to give one prick for another, to return gird for gird. Contre-pleige, a Counter-surety, one that's bound to save a Surety harmless. Contre-pleigement, a counter-bond. Contre-pleiger, to save a Surety harmless by counter-bond, &c. Contreplié, bent, bowed, or folded back. Contreplier, to bend, bow, or fold back. Contrepoinct, back-stitch; or as Contre pointe in the N. D. A contrepoinct, crossly. Contrepoinctier, for Contrepoin∣teur, a Quilter, or Counterpoint-maker. Contrepois, for Contrepoids, coun∣terpoise. Contreporteur, a paultry Pedlar that carries his shop before him. Contrequarre, as Contrecarre. Contrequerant, a Rival, or Compe∣titor. Contre-quictance, a Counter-acquit∣tance. Contre-repliqué, reply'd against. Contre-repliquer, to reply against. Contrerolleur, for Controleur, a Controuler. Contre-sanglot, a girth-leather. Contrescedule, as Contrecedule in the N. D. Contreschanger, as Contrechan∣ger. Contreseel, for Contreseau, a Coun∣ter-seal. Contresign, for Contreseing, a sub∣scription joyned to another. Contresommer, to revoke a Sum∣mons. Contresonner, to sound contrary. Contresouflé, blown two contrary ways. Contretaluer, to oppose bank to bank, or causey to causey. Contre-temperament, a contrary temper. Faire un contre-tem∣perament à la nature, to alter nature. Contre-teneur, the countertenor-part in Musick. Contretenir, to hold against, or to debate for a thing against ano∣ther. Contretenon, a stop in a Watch, or Clock. Contretenu, held against; also claimed, challenged. Contreteste, as faire contreteste, to make head against. Contre-trahison, a treason against treason. Contretrancher, to fortifie against an Enemy intrenched. Contre-traversant, counter-crossing. Contreval, downward; also down. Contrevengé, full revenged. Contrevenger, to revenge one blow, or injury with another. Contreventer, to hold against the wind. Contrevention, for Contravention, the breaking of his agreement. Contre-vitre, a counter-window. Contreuve, a tale invented. Contribuable, liable to contribu∣tion. Contributeur, a Contributer. Contr'imiter, to imitate, or coun∣terfeit. Contr'invective, an answer to an invective. Contristé, grieved, afflicted. Contrister, to make sorrowful. Controlle, as Contre-rolle in the N. D. Contr'ongle, the water-claw of dogs, &c. Contr'ouverture, a counter-open∣ing. Contr'ouvrir, to open against. Contumacer, to be rebellious; also to proceed against one for con∣tempt or rebellion. Contumax, refractory, rebellious, contemptuous. Contumelie, contumely, slander, or scandalous rebuke. Contumelieusement, contumeliously, reproachfully, in despightful terms. Contumelieux, contumelious, out∣ragious, or injurious in words. Contundre, to braise, or stamp in pieces. Contuteur, a joynt Tutor, or Guar∣dian. Convalidé, restored unto health. Convalider, to restore unto health. Convassal, a fellow-Vassal. Convenancé, covenanted. Convenancer, to covenant. Convenant, a Covenant. Convenant, for convenable, conve∣nient, fit. Conventioné, for Conventionel, done by agreement. Conventrels, an Order of Friars. Convereau, a fih somewhat resem∣bling, but lesser than the Alose. Converse, a Nun that formerly hath been of loose behaviour. Convert, a Proselyte. Convertissement, a converting, tur∣ning, or changing. Convertoir, part of the head, or chapter of a Ionian pillar. Convexion, for Convexité, conve∣xity. Convi, a feast. Convice, a reproach, or railing word. Conviement, an inviting, or bid∣ding unto a feast. Il Convient, it behoves. Convitieux, railing, reproachful, re∣viling. Convoitement, for Convoitise, lust. Convoyé, convoyed. Convoyer, to convoy. Conyle, great Chervil. Conyse, Flea-bane, or Flea-wort. Copeaux, chipt. Copelle, for Coupelle, a Goldsmiths Coppel. Copellé, tested, melted, or fined, as silver in a Test, or Coppel. Copet, as Couperet. Cophin, a basket. Copieusement, copiously, abundant∣ly, plentifully. Copieux, copious, abundant, plen∣tiful; also a well-spoken per∣son.
Copiosité, copiousness, abundance, plenty. Coppe, a measure, the half of a Bur∣gundian bushel. Coppeau, for Coupeau, chip. Copper, for couper, to cut. Coppeter, to ring all in, to ring the last peal. Coppier, to rouse and stretch out himself. Coppon, a peck. Cops, a certain fish like unto a Stur∣gon. Copté, tolled. Copter, to toll a bell. Copuland, a coupling, or joyning to∣gether. Copulasse, an Exercise in Schools, when Scholars dispute, and he that hath done best is placed high∣est. Copule, a conjunction, a joyning, or coupling together. Coqu, for Cocu, a Cuckold. Coquage, Cuckoldry. Coquar, an egg, or egg-shell; or as Coquard, a proud Coxcomb. Coquarde, bonnet à la coquarde, a Spanish Cap used by the best sort of men; also any Cap, or Bonnet worn proudly or pertly on the one side. Coquardeau, a proud ass, one that hath more wealth than wit. Coquardise, fond pride. Coquart (Adj.) foolishly proud. Coquasse, a Kettle, or Chaser. Coquassier, a seller of Egg-shells; also a maker or seller of Kettles, or Chasers. Coquatris, a Kockatrice. Coquefredouille, a Milk-sop. Coquelicon; Cock-crowing. Coqueliné, dandled, made a wanton of. Coquelinement, a dandling, or coc∣kering. Coqueliner un enfant, to dandle a childe, to make a wanton of it. Coqueluchonné, that wears a hood, or a Spanish Capuch. Coquemare, the Night-mare. Coqueplumer, a proud Coxcomb, a Skare-crow. Coquer, to play the cock, to tread hens like a cock. Se coquer con∣tre, to run his head against. Coquerelles, Coquerettes, Coquerez, for Coquerets, the herb Alcaken∣gy. Coqueret, the name of an apple. Coques, Cockles. Coqueté, cackled, or clucked; also swaggered. Coqueter, a Cock to call his hens, or to cluck as a Cock among hens; also to swagger like a Cock on his hung-hill. Coquetier, a seller of Eggs. Coquillade, a little fish living a∣mong rocks. Coquillard, as Coquardeau; also a small Vessel whereon they serve rear-eggs unto the table. Coquillard (Adj.) full of shells. Coquillé, set thick with shells; also made like a shell. Coquiller, to set thick with shells; or to fashion a thing like a shell. Coquilleux, full of shells. Coquillier, having, or bearing a shell; of, or belonging to a shell. Coquilliere, a woman that makes biggins and caps. Coquillon, a little shell; also a lit∣tle hood; also a fools hood; or a hooded fool. Coquin, (Adj.) beggarly; also ro∣guish. Coquineau, a beggarly rascal. Coquiner, to beg. Coquiol, for Coquiole, degenerate barley. Coquu, for Cocu, a cuckold. Coralin, of corral, like to corral. Corapei, a Princes Cloth of State. Corbat pescheret, a Cormorant. Corbature, as Courbature. Corbeilleux, full of baskets. Corbieu, Gogs heart. Corbigeau, a Cormorant. Corbillat, a young Raven. Corbillon, for Corbeillon, a little basket. Corbinerie, a stealing. Corbinet, the croaking of Ravens or Crows. Corcalihat, the cry of quails. Corcesque, a kinde of broad-headed javelin, or dart. Corchiere, the battlement of a wall; also as Coursie. Cordace, a kinde of Country-dance. Cordaille de Navire, tackling. Cordée, a string full of; also a rank or file. Cordeleux, full of cords. Cordeliere, a Gray-Friars Girdle. Cordeur de Terres, a Surveyor of lands. Cordiale, the herb Mother-wor. Cordialeusé, hearty. Cordiaque, cordial. Cordilles, the young sy of Tunny. Cordonné, twisted; made as, or into a cord. Cordonner, to twist; also to make as, or into, a cord. Cordouan, Cordwan leather. Cordouannier, for Cordonnier, a Shoomaker. Cordouannerie, a Shoomakers trade; also a Shoomakers row or street. Cordueil, hearts grief. Cordule, a small kinde of Lizard. Core, the broad piece that's between the Cross-bars of the Hilt of a Sword. Corgeal, choaking. Corial, a Quirister. Corias, as hard as leather. Corions de souliers, the latchets of shoots. Corman, for Cormorant, a Cormo∣rant. Cornabon, a musical cornet. Cornage, hornage; also a yearly Duty of Corn exacted by the Lord Chastelain of Berri, in the Juris∣diction of Bourges, upon every Ox that labours in the winter-corn-ground, which is within his Ter∣ritory. Cornalique, Cuckold-like. Cornardise, cuckoldry. Corné, horny, having horns. Corne-boeuf, the herb senugreek. Cornée de l'oeil, the horny tunicle, wherein the apple of the eye is placed. Cornelle, as Corneole. Cornemuseur, a bag-piper. Corneole, willow-herb, water-wil∣low. Corne-pied, horn-sooted. Corneteux, used in cupping. Corneur, a winder of a horn. Cornice, for Corniche, cornish. Cornichet, the Sleeve, or Calamary fish. Cornier, as Cornillier; also a hor∣ner. Cornier, (Adj.) angular. Cornillat, a little young Crow. Cornillé, jurred, or butted with horns. Corniller, to jurr, or butt with the horns. Cornillier, for Cornoiller, the Cor∣nil-tree. Corniole, part of a Stags throat, or as Gargatre. Cornoalle, for Cornoille, the Cornil-fruit. Cornoallier, the Cornil-tree. Cornuchet, a little Cornet. Coronal, of, or belonging to a Crown, or Crown-like.
Coronne, for Couronne, a Crown. Corp, a blackish Sea-fish. Corpaut, a pot. Corporail, as Corporal, in the N.D. Corporance, Corporence, a mans presence, or constitution of body. Corporu, corpulent, big-bodied. Corpset, a little body; also a pair of womens bodies. Corratage, Corraterie, as Courra∣tage. Corratier, as Courratier. Corraye, for Courroie, a thong. Corregiose, as Corrigiole. Correlaire, for Corollaire, a Corol∣lary. Corrente, a Strait of the Sea where commonly it runs violently. Corret, an agnail, or little corn up∣on a toe. Corriasse, as Corias. Corrigiole, Swines-grass, Birds-tongue. Corrion, a strap. Corroboré, corroborated. Corroborer, to corroborate. Corrodé, worn, or fretted away. Corroder, to wear, or fret away. Corrompable, corruptible. Corrompeur, a corrupter. Corromperesse, a woman that cor∣rupts. Corrompure, a corrupting, or cor∣ruption. Corrosé, corroded, fretted away. Corrosion, corrosion, or fretting a∣way. Corrosiveté, corrosiveness. Corroye, for Courroie, a thong. Corrude, mountain-sparagrass. Corrugation, a frowning, or wrin∣kling of the skin. Corruptelle, corruption, deprava∣tion. Corruptement, corruptly. Corser, to imbrace, take, or hold by the body; to catch, take, or lay hold of the body. Corsesque, a kinde of broad-headed Javelin. Corsu, corpalent, big-bodied. Corsyre, a kinde of herb. Cortine, for Courtine, a Curtain, (in Fortcation.) Corveable, liable unto base and per∣sonal serices; of whom a Land∣lord may exact certain days work in the year. Corybanter, madly to run up and down, playing on a Cymbal; also to slp with  eyes. Cormi e, an I-brry. Coscosions, Cocoton, Curds. Coscoté, spotted, or pounced. Cosmovague, a wanderer, or tra∣veller throughout the world. Cossats de febves, pois, &c. the husks, or cods of beans, &c. Cossi, the warbling note of a Swal∣low. Cossonnerie, a Market for Fowl or Venison. Cossot, for Cosson, a mite, or weevil. Cossu, codded, husked. Cost, Costamer, Costmary. Costal, belonging to the sides or ribs. Costau, for còteau, a little hill. Costereauls, a nickname given unto certain footmen that served the Kings of England in their French Wars; or as Cotereaux. Costié, on a side, of the one side; also tainted, or bruised (being ap∣plyed unto fruit.) Costier, sideling, of, or on a side; à costiere, aside, sideways. Costin, huile costin, an Oyl made of Costus, a medicinable root. Coston, the stalk of an herb; also the root Costus. Cosée, a Coot, or Moor-hen. Coter, to quote. Cotereaux, as Costerauls; Or a certain Crue of peasantly Out∣laws, who in old time did much mischief to the Nobility and Cler∣gy. Coterie, company, society; or as Cotterie. Cothurné, shod with high-soled buskins. Cotice, as Cottice in the N. D. Cotignac, for Codignac, Marma∣lade. Cotile, as Cotyle. Cotine, Venice-Sumach. Cotis, spar-ribs of Pork. Cotivet, the upper part of a hens or capons neck. Coton, as Coston. Cotouere, as Cottoire. Cotte (for Cote) de maille, a coat of mail. Cotté, coated. Cotte-maillé, armed with a coat of mail. Cotté, underpropped. Cotter, for appuyer, to underprop. Cottereux, as Cotereaux. Cotterie, a servile Tenure, not held in Fee, and yielding only Rent. Cottier, as Roturier in the N. D. Cottierement, ignobly, s rvilely. Cottir, to knock heads together, to crush, or bruise. Cottité, a particular mans rate, part, or portion of an Assessment. Cottizer, Cottization, as Cotiser, Cotisation, in the N. D. Cottoire de Perles, a chain of Pearls. Cotton, for Coton, cotton. Cottonneux, full of cotton, soft as cotton. Cotonniere, the herb Chass-weed, or Cotton-weed. Cottonere, as Cottoire. Coturniqué, in buskins. Cotyle, an ancient measure, contain∣ing about 24 spoonfuls. Cotyledons, the mouths or ends of the menstrual veins, whereby the superfluous bloud of all the body falls into the Womb, and gives nourishment unto the Child there, if there be any. Cou, a Whetstone. Couäne, all foamy, or frothy. Couänne, the skin of bacon. Couarder, to play the coward. Couät, the underling, or starveling of any beast or bird. Couble, as Chevaux de couble, pairs, or couples of horses. Coubte, for coude, the elbow. Couchable, sit to be lien on. Couchement, a lying, or laying down. Couche-m'-icy, the weed called Dodder. Coucheur, a layer down; also a bed∣fellow. Couchille, the Scarlet-oak. Couchine, the name of a certain apple. Coucon, the little bottom or clue of silk spun by the Silk-worm. Coucourbe, Coucourde, a round Gourd; also a kind of large Stil∣latory; or as Courge. Coucourelle, the name of a certain fig. Coudé, standing elbow-wise. Coudeer, to jog with the elbow. Coudepied, the instep. Coudiere, any thing to lean upon with his elbows. Coudoyer, as Coudeer. Coudraye, as Couldraye. Coudre, a Filherd, Hasel, or Small∣nut-tree; also their fruit. Coudré, tanned. Coudrer, to tan. Coudroir, a Tan-pit. Couë, for queuë, a tail. Couë, tail d, having a tail. Couët, the name of a certain ap∣ple. Couëts, two ropes belongig to the
mizzen-sail of a ship. Couëtte, a tick to lie or sit on. Coufler, to swell, or be puffed up. Cougourde, Congourle, Couhourde, a bottle-gourd, the round-gourd whereof bottles are made. Couillage, a Tribute paid in times past by Priests for Licenses to keep Wenches. Couillards, as Clide; or certain round and ringing pieces of iron, which in old time they used to shoot out of ships. Couillatris, well-hanged between the legs. Couillebarbe, the name of a cidar-apple. Couilleu, stoned, or that wants not his stones. Couinne, the skin of bacon. Couïonnade, as Coyonnade. Coulac, the shad-fish. Coulagion, the running of a sore, &c. Coulans d'un Jardinier, a Gar∣diner's lines, wherewith he mea∣sures out his beds and plots. Coulant de riviere, the stream of a river. Couldier, a dwarf. Couldoye, à couldoye, made with an nut-neck like an elbow- Couldrasse, a hedge-toad, a land-toad. Couldray, Couldraye, a plot of small nut-trees. Couldré, as Coudré. Couldrer, as Coudrer. Couldroir, as Coudroir. Coulée, a running of liquor. Coule-sang, a certain Viper by whom a man being bitten, he bleeds to death. Coulet, for Collet, a collar. Couletage, Droict de Couletage, a penny, or half-penny-toll collected and taken of all Wares, or Mer∣chandise bought and sold. Couleurée, the Herb Briony. Coulevriner, as Couleuvriner. Couleuvré, Couleuvrin, made after the fashion of an Adder. Couleuvreau, a young Adder. Couleuvriner, to squat, lurk, or lie close; also to glide along. Coulier, for Collier, chollar. Coullebobes, the herb Alcakengy. Coullon, as Coulon. Couloir (Adj.) Callander-like. Coulomb, as Coulon. Coulombier, a Pigeo-hos . Coulomne, for Colomne, a pillar. Coulon, a Do, a Pigeon. Coulonëre, a Cullader; aso a channel, gutter, or any such hol∣low along which melted things are to run. Coulouöir, a sliding blow. Coulouré, coloured. Coulourer, for Colorer, to colour. Coulpe, misdeed, fault, offence. Coulper, to blame, to tax, or finde fault with. Coultel, a knife. Coulure, a gentle running, or sliding along; a leaking; a straining. Counil, a Coney, or Rabbet. Counille, a Doe-coney. Counilleau, a young Rabbet. Counin, as Counil. Coupant, a spade, or such another earth-cutting Instument of hus∣bandry. Coupau, a Cuckold; also a green Goose. Coupe-bourse, a Cut-purse. Coupement, a cutting. Coupe-oreille, a knife wherewith the ears of Rogues and petty Thieves are cut off. Coupe-queuë, as deux mots à cou∣pe-queuë, two words and there's an end. Couperet, a Butchers knife, or clea∣ver. Coupet, top, or crest. Coupeuse, a woman that reaps, or cuts Grapes in the time of Vin∣tage. Coupeux, cutting, sit to cut. Denis coupeuses, the fore-teeth. Coupier, a Cup-bearer. Couplot de bois, the foot of a serve, &c. Coupon, a great cup, or bowl; also a tray of wood; also a cut of. Coup-orbe, red pimples on the face. Couppe, for Coupe, a cup. Couppebourse, as Coupebourse. Couppelettes de gland, Acorn-cups. Coupperer, as Couperet. Couppier, as Coupier. Couppon, as Coupon. Courance, a squirt. Courans, as Coulans. Courbassé, crook-shouldered. Cour-baston, a short cadgel. Courbatu, worn out, or grown croo∣ked with toyling and moyling; also foundered. Courbature, the foundering of a horse. Courbe, a crooked, or bowing piece of timber. Courbes d'une Voul∣te, the arching of a Vault. Courbée, as Corvée in the N. D. Courbe-espine, the name of an apple. Courcaillée de cailles, the calling of Quails. Courcie, the Coursey, part of a Galley. Courde, a Gourd. Courdier, a Gourd-plant. Courement, a running. Courin, for Cousin, Cosen. Courle, a Pumpkin. Courlis, a Curlew. Courmaran, a Cormorant. Couroye, for Conroye, a thong. Couroyer, to tan leather. Courpendu, as Capendu in the N. D. Courquaillet, a Quail-pipe. Courracteur, as Courratier. Courran, as Courreau. Courratage, Courraterie, brokage; horse-coursing; busie dealing, or intermeddling between party and party. Courratier, a Broker; also a Mes∣senger, or Foot-post. Courratier de chevaux, a Horse-courser. Courreau d'une huisserie, the bolt, or bar of a door. Courretage, as Courratage. Courretier, as Courratier. Courroucément, Courrouceusement, angrily. Courroyer, for Conroyer, to dress leather. Coursable, current. Coursaire, for Corsaire, a Corsair. Courserot, a little Corsair; also a little Courser, or horse of service. Coursey, as Courson. Coursie, as Coureie. Coursier (Adj.) belonging, or like unto a Courser. Coursiere, the Grating in a Man of War. Coursis, swist. Courson, a young Vine-branch, or shoot reserved for store. Coursouër, as Escoursouër. Court, for Cour, Court. Cour, for Court, short. Court-baston, as Cour-baston. Court-d'aleaume, the name of a bitter-sweet apple. Courtes-feses, a short-arse. Court-festu, drawing of cats. Courtil, a back-yard, or garden. Courtilliere, a kinde of palmer. Courtinages, curtains. Courtineau, a little curtain. Courtisanie, Courtship. Courtisanne, for Courtisane, a Lady. Courtisanneau, a petty Courtier. Courtisanner, to play the Courtier. Courvé, for Courbé, bent, or bowed. Courver, to bend, or bow.
Couse, a jest. Cousiner, to claim kindred for ad∣vantage. Cousinette, the name of an Apple. Coussegail, meslin, corn mingled. Cousser, to butt, or jurr, as Rams do. Cousseur, a butter, a jurrer. Coussi, the name of a small black grape. Coussineux, stored with cushions; soft as a cushion. Cousson, the gusset of a shirt or smock; also a mite, or weevil. Coust, Coustange, cost, charge, ex∣pence. Coustangueux, costly, chargeable. Coustau, as Côtau, a little hill. Coustelet, a little knife. Cousteleux, full of knives. Coustement, costs, and charges. Couste-pointe, for Courte-pointe, a counterpoint. Cousteux, costly. Coustier, wide; also as Cottier. Coustil, as Coutil. Coustilier, Coustillier, an Armour-bearer unto a Knight; also a Groom of a stable. Coustre, as Coultre. Coustumerie, a Custome-levying or taking; also a place where Cu∣stome is due. Coustumier, a customary Tenant, a Copy-holder. Coustumier (Adj.) customary, usual. Bourse coustumiere, a purchase of lana made, or price given for a purchase by a Yeoman or Rotu∣rier. Païs Coustumier, a Coun∣try governed by particular Cu∣stoms. Quint Coustumier, the Portion of younger Brethren left by their father, being (by the cu∣stome of divers places) a fifth part only divided among them. Coustumierement, customarily, usu∣ally. Coustumiers, old and experienced Lawyers, able to inform the Court what the Law and local Customs are in any case. Cousturiere, for Lingere, a Seam∣ster. Cousturiers, certain long Muscles in the outward part of the thigh, which they make pliable to cross one leg over another. Cousyre, Comfrey. Coutau, for Côtau, a little hill. Coute. See Coutes. Coutelasse sur le visage, a flesh over the face with a cuttelas. Coutelassé, slashed, or cut with a cuttelas. Coutelasser, to slash, or cut with a cuttelas. Couteleu, the Pyrot, or hag-fish. Coutes, the seams, or distances that are between plank and plank in a ship. Coutil, a flock-bed. Coutillade, a cut made by an edge-tool. Couton, a faggot-stick, or the thick stalk of cabbage, &c. Coutonner, to cudgel, to bast. Coutre, for Coteret, a faggot made of great sticks. Coutrepoincter, as Contrepointer, in the N. D. Couvade, as ouvée, in the N. D. Couvaison, a brooding. Couve-cendre, a lazy houswife. Couveleque, the lid of a pot. Couveresse, a sitting hen. Couvertoir, a trick, or engine wherewith water-fowl is caught. Couvi, oeuf couvi, an addle egg. Couvine, the canning carriage of a business. Couvoir, a hens nest, also the top of a bed in a garden. Couvoiter, for Convoiter, to covet. Couvrailles, gossymear. Couvre-coeur, the Pericardium. Couvrement, the act of covering. Couvre-ordure, gold; also a wo∣mans mask. Couvre-rive, covering the bank. Couyol, as Coyon. Coy, a sink. Coyau, a returned (or hip) rafter. Coyed, as Cayer, in the N. D. Coyement, quietly. Coymeux, a kinde of Cherries. Coyon, a coward. Coyonnade, Coyonnerie, a coward∣ly trick. Coypellé, chipped, cut as a stick. Coypeller, to chip, to cut a stick. Coyraul, as Coiraux. Coyté, . Coytes. ta, great ropes used about the Main-sail of a ship. Coytis, ti k, be-ti k. Coyts, as Coites. Crabbat, comely. Crabron, a . Crac, a crack, or thing that cracks. Crachard, for crac it, spittle. Crache-en-ruelle,  spawling fel∣low. Crache-sil, -pinning, as a pier. Crage, chalk. Craies, choak-pears. Crailler, as Croailler. Craine, for crane, the scull. Crainser, to shrink, also to crackle. Cramaillere, for Cremaliere, a pot-hook. Cramas, stones torn from rocks by tempest, &c. Crampelle, the name of a fish. Cramponnet, a little cramp-iron. Cranequin, the gaffle of a cross-bow; also as Crennequin. Cranequinier, a cross-bow-man; or as Crennequinier; also an infe∣riour Officer, that had of old the care of warlike Engines. Crannequin, as Crancquin. Crapaudaille, a pack of rogues. Crapaudeau, Crapaudon, a little toad. Crappe, the crab-fish called a Pun∣gar. Crapule, drunken surfeiting. Craquant, Craquetant, cracking. Craquetis, an often cracking. Cras, chalk, Crasseusement, slovenly, greasily. Crassi, a certain Indian coyn. Crassitie, crassitude, grosness. Cravant, a kinde of goose. Cravanté, overwhelmed. Cravanter, to overwhelm. Crayé, chalked. Crayement, a chalking. Crayer, to chalk. Creable, for croyable, credible. Creac, Creal, a Sturgeon. Creac de buse, a Scate-fish. Creancer, to promise; also to taste another mans meat or drink. Credence, for creance, faith, be∣lief. Credible, for croyable, credible. Crediteur, for Creancier, a Credi∣tor. Credos, as qui fait credos charge son dos, he that lendeth often looth. Cree, chalk. Creiche, for Creche, a rack, a ager. Cremaillée,  Cremaliere) a pot-ange. Cret, earing, dreading. Cremacres, o inews o Muscles, wher by t cods . Cremeau, as Cresmeau. Cremeu, . Cremillée, Cremillere, a pot hang r. Cremer, to pear, to drad. Cren, Crené, a snip in a knife, tool, &c. also a  th nib of a pe.
Crené, snipped, notched, indented. Creneau, for recoin, a nook, or cor∣ner. Creneleure, a making into Battle∣ments. Crenequin, as Cranequin, or Cren∣nequin. Creneure, a nicking, notching, in∣denting. Crenne, as Cren. Crennequin, as Cranequin; also a kinde of horse-mans head-piece like a Helmet. Crennequinier, as Cranequinier. Crenquinier, a Serjeant, or Officer that can serve Executions. Crenure, as Creneure, and as Cren. Crepature, a cracking asunder. Crepelu, as Crespelu. Crepets, or Crepez, Fritters, also Wafers. Crepillé, frizzed, curled. Crepiller, to frizzle, or curl. Crepissage, a pargetting. Crepitation, a ratling noise. Creppe, for crepe, crape. Crepusculin, of the twi-light. Crescent, an half-moon. Creseau, Kersie. Creseul, a Crucible. Cresme, as Chresme in the N. D. Cresmeau, as Chrêmeau in the N. D. Cresnette, a Pen-knife. Crespe, Cipres, also Cobweb-lawn. Crespe de chaperon, the crepine of a French hood. Crespé, crisped, crisp. Crespelet, a little crisp. Crespelure, a cling, o rufling. Crespément, cripingly. Cresper, to crack, or screek; also to crash between the teeth; to crisp; to sleek. Crespiller, Crespillonner, to crisp. Crespillé, Crespillonné, crisped. Crespinette, a kind of Knot-grass. Crespon, a curled lock. Cresserelle, as Crecerelle in the N. D. Cressiner, to crack. Cressonadiere, Cressonnerie, a bed of Cresses. Cresteaux, Battlements. Crestelé, having Battlements. Crete, gay, spruce, or neat. Cretisme, a lying. Cretonart, the drug termed Zedoa∣ry. Cretons, crispy pieces or mammocks of Lard. Crevacé, for crevassé, chinked. Crevailles, bursting. Crevellé, imbattled. Crevette, a Shrimp, or Prawn. Creveure, a chink. Crezion, a Crucible. Criage, a crying, the Cryers Office, or his fee. Criaillement, a bawling. Criblage, a sifting. Cribleux, full of holes as a sive. Cride, a publick Cryer. Cridons, certain thick hairs of a pins length. Crie, a cry, a Cryers fee, a Cryer. Crignon, a field-Cricket, or Grass∣hopper. Criminalité, a criminal action. Crimination, a charging with a crime. Criminatoire, criminal. Crimineux, full of crimes. Crineux, hairy. Criniere, a hair-cloth; a hood for a horse; an armour for the neck or mane of a horse; a lock of hair. Crinon, Cricket. Cripaulme, Motherwort. Criquebilles, the privy parts. Criquemelette, a hussing wench. Criquer, for Criqueter, to give a crack. Criquement, a rattling, or bustling. Crissant, crahing. Cristalin, of, or belonging to Chry∣stal, or Chrystal-like. Critiqueur, a Critick. Croac, the croaking of Ravens, Frogs, or Toads. Croaceux, croaking as a Raven, &c. Croailler, Croaillement, and Cro∣aillerie. See Croasser, and Cro∣assement in the N. D. Croailleur, a croaker. Croailleux, often croaking. Croaquer, to croak as a Raven. Croasseur, one that croaks like a Raven, or Toad. Croce, for Crosse, a Crosier. Crocer, to play at Cricket. Crocette, a Vine-slip. Croceux, as Croaceux. Croché, hooked. Crochement des dents, the outward bending of the teeth. Crocheterie, a picking of locks. Crocheton, a silver coin so called. Crochue, a Quaver in Musick. Crochuement, as Crochement. Crociteur a pick-lock. Crocodilée, a M dicine made of some parts of a Crocodile. Crocomagnie, an Oyntment made of Saffron, also the dregs of Saffron-oyl. Crocquer, as Croquer. Crocqueter, as Croqueter. Crocute, a kind of Monster. Croie, for craie, Chalk. Croier, as Croyer. Croisadeur, that makes the signe of the cross. Croiseau, a stock-dove. Croiset, for Creuset, a Crucible. Croisette, a little cross. Croiseur, one that sets or marks a cross on any thing. Croisi, as Croiseau. Croisie, a cross, a crossing, or mar∣king with a cross. Croissance, growth, increase. Croisset, a green frog. Croissette, as Crocette. Croissir, to crack. Croist, growth, increase. Croizer, for Croiser, to cross. Crolant, as bois crolant d'un La∣dre, a Lazers-clack, or clicket. Cronique, as Chronique in the N. D. Crope, Croppe, the top of a hill. Croppiere, for croupiere, a crup∣per. Croqué, cracked, snatched. Croque-jarret, one that goes in with his hams. Croque-lardon, a smell-feast. Croque-mouche, a fly-catcher. Croque-noisette, a nut-cracker. Croque-notaire, a Protonotary. Croque-quenouille, he that is beaten by his wife with a distaff. Croquer, to crack; to catch, or snatch. Croqueter, to pick out the best bits; also to feed greedily. Croqueterie, gormandizing. Croqueteur, a gormandizer, a gree∣dy feeder. Cros, deep holes digged into the earth to preserve corn in. Crosilles, the shells which Pilgrims near about their hats. Croslé, shaken. Crosler, to shake, or quake. Croslier, shaking, quaking. Crosliere, a quagire. Croslir, to gnash. Crosser, to play at Cricket. Crossette, as Crocette. Crostes, as crottes. Crot, a grot. Crotaphiques, the two muscles of the Temples. Crotenotaire, as Croquenotaire.
Crotes, as Crottes. Crotesque, as Grotesque in the N. D. Croton, as Crotton. Crotpescheret, a kind of black Os∣prey. Crotton, a deep hole, a filthy dun∣geon. Crouäcement, Crouäs, the croaking of Ravens. Crouë d'un Pressoir, the uppermost board of a Press, and the hole there∣of whereinto the Vice-pin enters. Crouillet, the latch of a door. Croule-Univers, all shaking. Croulier, as prez crousier, quag∣mire-like, shaking under ones feet. Crouliere, a quagmire. Croupant, creoching. Eau crou∣pante, puddle-water. Crousille, the shell-fish called a Scal∣lop. Crousiller entre les dents, to crash between the teeth. Crousteau, a great crust, or great scab. Crouslelevé, bescabbed, full of the pox. Crousteleveure, scabbiness, pocki∣ness. Croustelles, Croustellettes, little crusts, or scabs. Crouster, to crust, or scab. Crousteux, crusty. Croustons, sharp flinty stones. Croutelevé, as Croustelevé. Croyé, chalked. Croyer, to chalk. Croyeux, chalkie. Crucher, to crouch; also to make hollow like a pitcher. Crucheter, to whisper. Cruchette, a little pitcher. Crucial, cross-like. Crucié, tortured, tormented. Crucier, to torture, to torment. Crucifiement, a crucifying. Crucifix, for Crucifié, crucifi'd. Crucigeres, Cross-bearers. Cruelisé, cruelly used. Cruente, le flux cruente, the bloudy flux. Crujon, Cruon, any round thing, as a mans scull. Crural, of, or belonging to the thigh. Cruzol, Cruzeul, a Founders mould. Crytoportique, a secret walk, or vault under ground. Crysolyte, for Crysolite, a Chryso∣lite. Crystalin, for crystal, Crystal. Cubaseau, the little Sea-nettle. Cubebes, Cubebs, an Aromatical and Indian fruit. Cubiculaire, a Groom of the Cham∣ber. Cubiculaire (Adj.) of, or belonging to the Chamber. Cubital, of, or belonging to a cubit. Cucube, night-shade. Cucurbite, a Gourd. Cucurbitin, of, or belonging to Gourds. Cucuye, the name of a bird. Cueillement, Cueilleure, a gather∣ing. Cuens, an Earl. Cueur, for coeur, the heart. Cueurs, the heart-resembling cher∣ries. Cueut, a whetstone. Cueux de plomb, a sow of lead. Cuferin, a horses running at the nose. Cuidé, thought. Cuider, to think. Cuidance, Cuider, thinking. Cuidereau, a Braggadochio. Cuideur, a thinker. Cuidrelles, as Cuydrelles. Cuigner, to hold open with wed∣ges. Cuignet, a little corner; also a lit∣tle wedge. Cuilier, for cueiller, a spoon. Cuiliere, a ladle. Cuin, a wedge. Cuirace, for Cuirasse, armour. Cuirain, leathern-stuff. Cuirasseux, thick and stiff as a hide. Cuirassine, a slight armour. Cuirie, a leathern Jerkin. Cuissant, for cuisant, smarting. Cuisinal, of, or belonging to a kit∣chin. Cuisinement, a dressing of meat. Cuisineux, fit for Cookery, belong∣ing to the kitchin. Cuissal, for Cuissar, an armour for the thigh. Cuissedame, the name of a kind of pear. Cuisselette, Cuissette, a little thigh. Cuisse-né, thigh-born. Cuissier, of, or belonging to the thigh. Cuissinet, for coussinet, a little cu∣shion. Cuissots, tasses, armour for the thighs. Cuite, a seething, or baking. Cuivreux, full of copper. Culace, Culason, for Culasse, the breech of a gun. Culant, setting on his tail. Culassé, foiled, thrown down. Culasseur, one that foils, or sets ano∣ther on his tail. Culeron, the hinder part of the but∣tocks of a horse. Culetage, Culetis, a leacherous mo∣tion of the back-side. Culeter, to stir the buttocks up and down. Culette, for Culasse, the breech of a gun. Culier, of, or belonging to the arse. Culiere, a crupper for a horse. Culinaire, of, or belonging to a kit∣chin. Cul-levé, level-coyl. Cullot, as Culot; also a cushion made to ride post on. Culpe d'un artichau, the pulp or substance of an Artichoke. Cul-pelé, bald-arst. Culrage, as curage. Culte (Adj.) elaborate. Cultellaire, of a knife, like a knife. Cultivage, Cultivation, Cultivement, tillage. Cultiveur, a labourer. Cume (for cuve) de pressoir, the trough which receives the liquor expressed. Cumulativement, abundantly, by heaps. Cumulé, heaped up. Cumuler, to heap up. Cunctation, delay. Cuneiforme, wedge-like. Cuniculeux, full of inward holes, or by-corners. Cunilage, Winter-savoury. Cunoet, a Kennet-apple. Cupide, desirous, greedy. Cupule, the cup of an acorn. Curage, the herb Arsesmart. Curailles de maison, the sweepings of a house. Curarion, cure. Cure, for soin, care, heed, or re∣gard. Curestable, a Groom. Curette, a Surgeons Probe. Cureures, as Curailles. Curial, of, or belonging to a Court. Curialiste, a Courtier. Curialité, courtship. Curie, a Tribe, or Ward in a Ci∣ty. Curin, a thin (or small) skin. Curoir, as Curette. Curtille, a kind of Vermine. Curtin, the name of an apple.
Cuscoamy, Cuscouil, well hanged, well stoned. Cuscute, a kind of worm; also the weed Dodder. Cusins, Win-berries. Cussonné, worm-eaten. Custode (for Gardien) a Guardi∣an. Custode de lit, a bed-cur∣tain. Cutané, skinny, or of the skin. Cuticulaire, full of Pores for sweat to come out at. Cuvée, a tub full of. Cuvelier, a Tub-maker. Cuviel, Cuvier, a Bathing-tub; al∣so a Dying-fat, or lead. Cuviere, a Cestern to cool drinking-pots in Summer. Cuyderolles, Cuydrelles, Crow-flow∣ers. Cuyrassine, as Cuirassine. Cuyvre, for cuivre, copper. Cuyvreux, full of copper. Cyané, Azure. Cyathe, a kind of measure. Cyboïde, Os Cyboïde, a certain bone in the instep. Cyclamine, the herb Hogs-bread; the wilde Vine; Wood-night∣shade. Cyclopique, one-eyed. Cycogne, for Cigogne, a Stork. Cycogneau, a young Stork. Cyerce, the North-wind. Cygnean, like a Swan, of, or be∣longing to a Swan. Cygneur, a Swan-keeper. Cymace, Cymas, as Cymaise in the N. D. Cymacion, Cymat, a small Ogee in building. Cymettes. See Cyme in the N. D. Cymier, as Cimier in the N. D. Cymitire, for Cimetiere, a Church∣yard. Cynabre, for Cinnabre, Cinoper. Cynamolge, an Arabian bird that used to suck bitches. Cynanthropie, a sort of Frensie. Cynie, for Cynique, a Cynick. Cyniphe, a Gnat, or Dog-fly. Cyniphé, dogged. Cynocephale, a Baboon. Cyntre, as Cintre in the N. D. Cyon, a Whirlwind. Cypere, a kind of Reed. Cypressier, of, or belonging to a Cy∣pras-tree- Cyre, as Sire in the N. D. Cyron, for ciron, a had-worm. Cyronne, a Sear-cloth. Cysmbre, water-mint. Cystique, the name of a vin. Cythariser, to sing, or whizze as the wind. Cyvade, a Shrimp, or Prawn. D DAbblée, as Dablée. Dabbordée, at first sight. Dablée, a crop of corn, corn-grow∣ing. Daces, tolls. Dacier, a Toll-gatherer. Dacque, the name of a weed. Dacte, for datte, a Date. Dactier, for datier, the Palm, or Date-tree. Dactilaire, of, or belonging to a Date; also Date-like. Dactilomantie, singer-magick. Dactylogie, speech made with the fingers. Dadée, childish toy. Daemon, for Demon, a Devil. Dagard, a young male Deer. Dagasse, a great dagger. Dagobert, the name of a pear. Dagorie, the name of an apple. Dagorne, decrepit. Dague, for epée, a sword, Daguenet, Daguette, a little dag∣ger. Daguer, to stab with a dagger. Dail, a sithe to mow with. Daille, the name of a Shell-fish. Dain, for Daim, a Deer. Dain (Adj.) dainty. Dainceau, as Dainteau. Daine, Daing, the name of a Sea-fish. Dainteau, a young Fallow-deer. Daintiers, the doucets of a Deer. Daissellé, made of, or covered with boards. Dalader, a kind of fruitless pri∣vet. Daldre, Dale, the name of a Fle∣mish Coin. Dalle, a sink. Damage, damage, hurt. Damaisine, a Damsn. Damasceure, Damasquinage, Da∣mask-work. Damastic, a kind of Varnish. Dameret, as Damoiseau in the N. D. Damoisel, a young Gentleman. Damoiselet, Gentlewoman-like. Damoiselette, a little Gentlewoman. Damoiselle, for Demoiselle, a Gen∣tlewoman. Damon, the name of an apple. Dadin, a Macck. Dandiner, to gape and look like an Ass. Dandrilles. See Dendrille. Dansement, Danserie, a dancing. Danseresse, a woman-dancer. Danspied, the hollow part of the sole of the foot. Dante, the name of an Indian beast. Daphnomantie, divination by a Laurel or Bay-tree. Dapifer, the great Master or Stew∣ard of the Kings house. Darceau, as Derceau. Dardanaire, Dardanier, an Ingros∣ser of any Commodity. Darde, the name of a boyish play. Darderesse, a woman that casteth a dart. Darde-tonnerre, thunder-shooting. Dardeur, a thrower of a dart. Dardiller, to shake like a dart cast with violence. Dare, a huge big belly. Darioles, a kind of small Pasties. Dariolette, a Bawd, or carrier of Love-messages. Darne, a slice. Dassez, fully, enough. Date, piss, urine. Datil, a Date. Dation, a gift, or giving. Dauber, as Dober, to beat. Davesnes, Horse-plums. Davier, a pinser to draw out teeth withal; also a kind of pick-lock. Davoines, as Davesnes. Daurade, for Dorade, the Guilt∣head. Daurée, as Dorée. Dausse d'ail, a clove of Garlick. se Dausser, to be divided into seve∣ral parts or cloves, like a head of Garlick. Daymon, for Demon, a Devil. Day, as Ders. Dealbatoire, whitening. Deambulatif, and Deambulatoire, as Ambulatif. Debaccher, Debaquer, to take on like a drunken man. Debagouler, to utter madly. Debail, a Guardian. Debardeur, a Lighter-man. Debatable, subject to opposition. Debatement, a debating. Debateur, a debater, contender. Debatis, the unquiet flattering of a Hawk. Debauchement, as Desbauchement. Debellé, conqed, sabd. Debeller, to conqr, o subdue. Deendade, for Debandade. cs∣sion, want of order.
Debexiller, to break into pieces. Debiffé, razed, or scraped out; split asunder. Debiffer, to raze, or scrape out. Se debiffer, to split asunder. Debilitation, a weakning. Debiller, to unlose the rope of a boat, &c. Debitage, retailage. Debite, Debitement, for Debit, sale. Deblée, as Desblée. Debleure, corn-standing. Deboire, an after-tast, which an unsavoury thing leaves behinde in the mouth. Deboité, for Deboëté, put out of joynt. Debonnairement, graciously. Debonnaireté, graciousness. Debosquer, to rush out of a wood. Debourrer, as Desbourrer. Debouté, rejected. Deboutement, a rejecting. Debouter, to reject. Debradé, unarmed. Debraguetter, to unty the Codpiece. Debranchi, lopped. Debranchir, to lop a tree. Debrigandé, stript naked. Debrisé, split asunder; also nimbly footed in dancing. Debrisement, Debrissure, for De∣bris, wrack. Debriser, to split asunder. Debteur, for Debiteur, a debtor. Decadenasser, to undo a padlock; also to resolve a riddle. Decal d'argent, want of allay in silver. Decaller, to slacken, or grow soft. Decaptivé, set at liberty. Decaptiver, to set at liberty. Decartelé, quartered. Decempedal, ten foot long. Decence, decency. Decentement, decently. Deceptif, deceitful. Deception, deceit. Decerclé, uncircled. Decercler, to uncircle. Decevable, deceivable, also deceit∣ful. Decevance, deceit. Decevant, Deceveur, a deceiver. Dechassement, a driving away. Decheant, decaying. Decidu, fallen off. Decimable, tythable. Decimal, of, or belonging to tythes. Decimesire, of ten months. Decisre, at to decide. Declaveté, unpegged. Declaveter, to unpeg. Declinement, for Declin, a decli∣ning. Decliquer, to rap out. Declive, steep. Declos, wide open. Decognoistre, not to know. Decompter, for déconter, to dis∣count. Decore, handsome, comely. Decorement, decoration. Decoucher, as Descoucher. Decoulourement, a discolouring. Decoulourer, for decolorer, to dis∣colour. Decourir, to run down; also to purge downwards. Decouronné, uncrowned. Decouronner, to uncrown. Decouru, run down; also purged downwards. Decoustemens, costs and charges. Decramponné, unhooked. Decramponner, to unhook. Decrasse, scowred. Decrasser, to scower. Decrepité, for decrepit, decrepite, very old. Decrepiteux, the same. Decretaliarche, an absolute Com∣mander. Decretant, the Creditor, at whose suit the Debtors goods are de∣creed to be sold. Decretation, an Order passed in Court for the sale of a Debtors goods, or a proceeding thereby. Decroire, not to believe. Decrustation, a paring off of the crust. Decrusté, bared of crust. Decruster, to pare off the crust. Decuisant, boyling or seething very much. Decuit, boyled or sodden very much; also unsodden, made raw again. Deculpé, discharged of blame. Deculper, to discharge of blame. Decumane, as big as ten. Decuple, ten times as much. Decurie, a band of ten Senators, or Souldiers. Dedalé, intricate, or maze-like. Dedens, for Dedans, in, within. Dedicasse, and Dedication, for Dedicace, a Dedication. Deduite, a deduction. Defaillancé, fainted. Defaille, Defaillement, a default, defect, or sailing; a pining a∣way. Defaitte, as Defaite, in the N. D. Defané, unwithered. Defardé, whose painting is wiped off. Defarder, to wipe off painting. Defascher, to appease. Defaucillé, put out of joynt. Defauciller, to put out of joynt. Defaux, the ground or pasture wherein a beast should not be. Defection, defection, or revolt. Defectuosité, defect. Defedation, a defiling. Defence, for Defense, defence. Defendo, the name of a Play. Defensable, Defensible, defensible. Defensif, a kind of medicine. Defensoire, defensory. Defequé, purifi'd. Defequer, to purifie. Defermer, to open. Deferrure, an unshooing of an horse. Defeublé, unmuffled. Defeubler, to unmufflle. Deffaicte, as Defaite in the N. D. Deffaire, and Deffait, as Defaire, and Defait in the N. D. Deffalquer, for Defalquer, to de∣faulk. Deffascher, to appease. Deffaveur, Deffavoriser, as Defa∣veur and Defavoriser in the N. D. Deffectueux, for Defectueux, de∣fective. Deffené, hay-fed. Deffensatrice, a defendress. Deffermé, open. Deffermer, to open. Defferrer, as Deferrer in the N. D. Deffier, Deffiance, as Defier, Defi∣ance in the N. D. Deffiamment, diffidently. Deffiler, Deffilé. See them with a single f in the N. D. Deffileure, an untwisting. Deffleurer, as Defleurer in the N. D. Defformité, for difformité, diffor∣mity. Deffortune, misfortune. Deffortuné, infortunate. Deffouïr, to dig up. Deffrayer, for Defrayer, to defray. Deffriché, as Defriché in the N. D. Deffroncer, as Defronser in the N. D. Deffrongner, to unwrinkle. Deffroqué, as Defroqué in the N. D. Deffuler, as Defubler. Defiché, unfastened. Deficher, to unfasten. Defiement, a challenging to fight. Defilocher, Defiloter, to ravel.
Definé, pined, or wasted away. Definement, a pining, or wasting a∣way. Le definement du monde, the latter end of the world. Definer, to pine, or waste away. Deflamé, quenched. Deflamer, to quench. se Deflicher, to pluck arrows out of his body. Defloration, the change from a flou∣rishing colour to the contrary. se Deflorer, to shed or let fall its flowers. Defluer, to flow. Deforcer, to dispossess, to disseise. Deforcé, dispossessed, disseised. Deformé, defaced, disfigured. Deformation, a defacing, a disfi∣guring. Deformer, to deface, or disfigure. Defortifié, razed, unfortifi'd. Defortifier, to raze a fortification. Defoulé, trampled on. Defoulement, a trampling on. Defouler, to trample on. Defraudateur, a defrauder. Defraudé, defrauded. Defraudement, a defrauding. Defrauder, to defraud. Defreloqué, tattered. Defreloquer, to make tatters of. Defrichage, as Defrichement in the N. D. Defrichis, grubbings. se Defriper, to scrub with the shoul∣ders. Defroissé, crushed in pieces. Defroisser, to crush in pieces. Defroque, spoil, booty. Defroy, a defraying. Defueiller, as Defeuiller in the N. D. Defunctoirement, by descent, or suc∣cession after the decease of ano∣ther. Degaerie, the Office or Circuit of an Ʋnder-Bayliff. Degalico, waxen poor, gone down the wind. Degan, a kind of Ʋnder-Bayliff. Degasouiller, to sing or warble fast and confusedly. Degasté, destroy'd, ruined, rava∣ged. Degastement, a destroying, ruining, or ravaging. Degaster, to destroy, ruine, or ra∣vage. Deglouti, devoured. Degloutir, to devour. Deglution, a devouring. Degodalie, skittish. Degondé, lift off the hinges. Degonder, to lift, or heave off the hinges. Degourt, jocund, merry. Degracié, out of favour. Degradement, a degrading. Degravé, ungravelled. Degraver, to ungravel. Degresseur, for Degraisseur, a scow∣rer of greasie things. Degroumelé, unclotted. Degroumeler, to unclot a thing that's cluttered. Deguener, for Degainer, to draw his sword. Deguerpi, abandoned. Deguerpir, to abandon. Deguerpissement, an abandoning. Deguerpisseur, that abandons any thing. Deguestré, sloven. Degun, any one. Dehaché, hacked. Dehacher, to hack. Dehait, merry, pleasant. Dehaité, as Dehayté. Dehalé, lean, ill-favoured. Dehayté, loathed as meat, also out of tune. Dehayter, to loath meat, to be out of tune. Dehinch, away hence. Dehonté, shameless. Dehotté, drawn out of the mire. Dehotter, to draw out of the mire. Dehousé, dispatched, rid out of the way; also unbooted. Dehoussé, uncovered; also unrug∣ged. Deject, Dejecté, dejected, or cast down. Dejecter, to deject. Se dejecter, to stand on terms. Dejectement, a dejecting; also a contemptible repulse. Deillavier, to starve, to bereave of life. Delâcher, to let go. Delateur, an Informer. Delation, an Information. Delavé, washed away. Delayement, a delaying. Delection, delight. Delecter, to delight. Delez, hard by. Delicateté, delicacy. se Delicter, to cleave asunder. Delineature, delineation. Deliniment, a smoothing. Delinquer, to commit a fault. Deliot, sodden pot-herbs. Delirement, a doting, or raving. Delirer, to dote, to rave. Delitescence, a lurking, or abscon∣ding. Delivre, after-birth. A delivre, loosely, freely. Delivreur, a deliverer. Deloché, put out of joynt. Delocher, to put out of joynt. Deloisir, à deloisir, at leisure. Delouër, as Deslouër. Deltoïde, the name of a muscle. Delugé, overslowing. Delurer, to pick. Deluter, to take the dirt off. Demachoiré, unjawed. Demachoirer, to tear a jaw from. Demacqué, spit out of the mouth. Demacquer, to spit out of the mouth. Demainier, an Owner of a Demain. Demaisonné, turned out of a house. Demaisonner, to turn out of a house. Demanché, unhafted. Demange-chair, setting an itch on the flesh. Demangement, Demangerie, an itching. Demangéson, Demangeure (for de∣mangeaison) itch. Demantibulé, unjawed. Demaquer, as Demacquer. Demence, madness. Demené (Subst.) a practice. Demenée, a stir, or jog. Demenement, a stirring, or jog∣ging. Demener deuil, to lament, or to mourn. Demener joye, to re∣joyce. Demener marchandise, to trade. Demener un proces, to follow a suit. se Dementer, to bewail himself. Se dementer de, to medd with. Demeriter, to deserve punishment. Demeurance, a staying, mansion, or dwelling. Demi-ceinct, Demicinct, a half-girdle. Demi-ceinctier, Demicinctier, a maker of half-girdles. Demi-espineux, the name of a muscle. Demi-frere, a half-brother. Demigraine, mgram. Demi-lict, brotherhood, or sisterhood on the one side onely. Demi-membraneux, half-skinny. Demincé, minced, cut small. Demi-nerveux, half-swy. Demi-saut, a half-leap. Demi-sur, a half-si ter. Demisphere, an Hemisphere.
Democratiquement, popularly; also scoffingly. Demonachation, an abandoning, or depriving of Monkish profes∣sion. Demoniaque (Adj.) devilish, hel∣lish. Demonstrance, demonstration. Demoulé, unmoulded. Demouler, to unmould. Demoure, and Demourer, as De∣meure, and Demeurer in the N. D. Demourance, as Demeurance. Demoussé, rid (or bared) of moss. Demousser, to rid (or bare) of moss. Demusser, to uncover the eyes. Demy-ceinct, as Demi-ceinct. Demyon, the quarter of a French pint. Demy-teste, a steel-cap. Denaire, the number of ten, or a tenth. Dendrille, the rag wherewith a leaking tub is stopped; also a mans privities. Deneanti, abased. Deneantir, to abase. Deneantise, extream baseness, or vil∣ness. Denegation, a denying. Denerée, Ware, Merchandise. Denerver, to weaken. Deniement, a denial. Denommé, denominated. Denommer, to denominate. Denouncement, a denouncing. Dense, thick. Dentade, a bit of the teeth. Dentaire, a kind of Sanicle. Dental, for Denté, toothed. Dentateur, a Tooth-drawer. Dentée, as Dentade. Dentelé (Surt.) a kind of mischie∣vous Dog-fish. Dentelet, a little tooth; also a meal. Denteliz, teeth, or a tooth-like not∣ching in Imagery. &c. Dentier, the part of an Helmet that covers the teeth. Dentir, to breed young teeth. Denudation, a ving bar. Deoppila, pening. Depaisre, to ed. Deparr, to agree. Deparler, to diprai. Deparqué, broke out of a Park, got away. se Deparquer. to ak out of a Park, to . Departeur, a divid. Depare. for depart . Departiment, Departissement, as Departement in the N. D. Depassionner, to be angry. Depellé, flea'd. Depenaillé, as Despenaillé. Deperdition, utter ruine. Deperi, undone. Deperir, to be undone, to perish. Deperissant, perishing. Depié de fief, an aliening part of an Inheritance. Depilé, bald. Depitonné, as Despitonné. Deplayé, extreamly wounded. Deplayer, to wound extreamly. Deplicer, for Deplisser, to undo the plaits. Deplumation, an unfeathering; al∣so an inflamed and hard thickness of the eye-lids. Depoché, pulled out of a pocket. Depocher, to pull out of a pocket. Depopuler, Depopulé. See Depeu∣pler, Depeuple in the N. D. Depourprer, to unpurple, or make pale. Deppié, as Depié. Depredation, depredation. Depredé, ravaged. Depreder, to ravage. Depri, as Depry. Depriant (a Subst.) a purchaser that upon request agrees with the Lord Censuel for his Lods and Ventes. Deprier, to pray earnestly. Depry, such an agreement. Deps, a kind of Royalty. Depuration, a clarifying. Depuré, clarifi'd. Depurer, to clarifie. Depurgatoire, purging. Derbro, the name of a Sea-fish. Derceau, a little Dace, or Dare-fish. Dereté, disintangled. Deris, for derision, derision. Derme, the skin which covers the extream parts of the body. Derne, a slice. Dernieram, lateward, backward. Deroche, sala from a rock. Derogant, Derogeant, derogating fo. Deroguer, for deroger, to derogate. Derompenient, a breaking in pieces. Derompre, to break in pieces. Derompu, broke in pieces. Derrain, Derrainer, Derrenier, for dernier, last. Derrée, for denrée, war. Derrider, as Derider in the N. D. Ders, a Cloth of State, a Cano∣y. Derselet, a little Canopy, or Cloth of State. Dertre, for Dartre, a Tetter, or Ring-worm. Desabiller, Desabillé. See Desha∣biller, Deshabillé in the N. D. Desaccointé, grown a stranger to one. Desaccointer, to break acquain∣tance. Desaccommodé, disaccommodated. Desaccommoder, to disaccommo∣date. Desaccordance, a discording. Desaccostable, unaccostable. Desaccroché, unhooked. Desaccrocher, to unhook. Desacré, unhallowed. Desacrer, to unhallow. Desadjusté, disordered. Desadjuster, to disorder. Desadmonnesté, disswaded. Desadmonnester, to disswade. Desadvenant, a portion of an Inhe∣ritance left a Vassal, but not suf∣ficient for the Homage due unto the Lord. Desadventageusement, disadvan∣tageously. Desadventure, misfortune. Desadvest, a dispossession. Desadvestir, to dispossess. Desadvisé, inconsiderate. Desaffamé, whose hunger is satisfi'd. Desaffamer, to satisfie hunger. Desaffleuré, whose flourishing is hin∣dred. Desaffleurer, to pluck the flowers from, to hinder the flourishing of. Desaffublé, unmuffled. Desaffubler, to unmuffle. Desagé, under age. Desagencé, disordered. Desageneement, a disordering. Desageneer, to disorder. Desagenouillé, got up from knee∣ling. se Desagenouiller, to get up from kneeling. Desajancer, as Desageneer. Desaiguilleter, to undo points. Desaimé, fallen into the dislike of. Desaimer, to dest from ling. Desairer, to spoil and destroy an Ay of Hawks. Desaise, a being ill at as, a disease. Desaise, ill at ease, di eased. Desaisme, as Dessisme. Desalier, to . Desamassé, . Desamasser. t fall down a ap. Desanger, to extirpate, or destroy t a. of.
Desangé, extirpated. Desanimé, deprived of life. Desanimer, to deprive of life. Desantourat, deflowred as a Virgin. Desapareillé, disordered. Desapareiller, to disorder. Desapareilleur, a disorderer. Desaparié, uncoupled. Desaparier, to uncouple. Desapetissance, a distast, or loathing of meats. Desapetisser, to take away the ap∣petite. Desapetissé, loathed as meat. Desapointer, as Desappointer in the N. D. Desappetit, want of appetite. Desarester, to take the bones out of fish. Desarnacher, as Desharnacher in the N. D. Desarranger, to disorder. Desarrengement, a disordering. Desarresser, to cool ones courage. Desarroyé, routed. Desarroyer, to rout. Desassemblé, separated. Desassembler, to separate. Desasseuré, put in fear. Desasseurer, to put in fear. Desassiegé, delivered from siege. Desassieger, to raise a siege. Desassocié, parted from the company of. Desassocier, to dissolve society. Desastré, unfortunate. Desastreusement, fatally. Desastreux, ominous, fatal. Desattisé, put out, as a kindled fire∣brand. Desattiser, to put out a firebrand. Desavancé, hindred. Desavancer, to hinder. Desavantagé, indamaged. Desavantager, to indamage. Desaubé, off the hinges. Desaventureux, unhappy, unfortu∣nate. Desaugmenter, to decrease. Desavié, bereft of life. Desavier, to bereave of life. Desbandage, a disbanding. Desbandée, à la desbandée, out of their ranks. Desbaraté, disordered. Desbarbouillé, rid of spots. Desbarbouiller, to make clear from spots. Desbardeur, a Lighter-man. Desbasti, pulled down. Desbastiment, a pulling down of buildings. Desbastir, to pull down a building. Desbastonné, disarmed. Desbastonner, to disarm. Desbauchement, a deboshing. Desbaudi, made sad, or ashamed. Desbaudir, to make sad, or ashamed. Desbauger, to rowse a wild Boar from the place he lies in. Desbellé, subdued. Desbeller, to subdue. Desbendade, an unbending. Desbender, for débander, to un∣bend. Desbiffer, as Debiffer. Desblaver, to reap corn. Desblayé, rid from. Desblayer, to rid from. Desblée, hinderance, damage; also corn. Desbleer, Desbleyer, as Desblayer. Desbleure, hay, or stubble. Desblouqué, unblocked. Desblouquer, to unblock. Desboëture, a putting out of joynt. Desboire, as Deboire. Desboisté, Desboité, unboxed; put out of joynt. Desboistement, the being out of joynt. Desboister, Desboiter, to unbox; to put out of joynt. Desbord, an overflowing. Desborné, whose bounds are laid open. Desbornement, a laying open of bounds. Desborner, to lay open the bounds. Desbort, as Desbord. Desbossué, made flat. Desbossuer, to make flat. Desbourbé, drawn out of the mire. Desbourber, to draw out of the mire. Desbourgeonner, to pluck, or nip off young buds. Desbourrer, to flie out. Desbours, a disbursement. Desboutonnement, an unbuttoning. Desbraguetter, as Debraguetter. Desbranchir, as Debranchir. Desbraquer, to dismount artillery. Desbride, an ear-wire. Desbrigandiner, to deprive of a bri∣gandine. Desbriser, as Debriser. Desbrodequiné, whose buskins are drawn off. Desbrodequiner, to draw buskins off. Desbuissonné, driven out of a thicket. Desbuissonner, to drive out of a thicket. Descaché, disclosed. Descacher, to disclose. Descaillé, uncurded. Descailler, to uncurd. Descalengé, unapprehended; also discharged. Descapuchonné, uncovered. Descapuchonner, to uncover. Descendement, a descending. Descendue, race, progeny. Descensoire, apt to descend. Desceptré, deprived of a Scepter. Desceptrer, to deprive of a Scepter. Desceu, as Insceu in the N. D. Deschambré, separated. Deschambrer, to separate people that lived in a chamber. Deschampé, got out of the fold. Deschamper, to get out of the fold. Deschant, descant. Deschanté, descanted. Deschanter, to descant. Deschargement, a discharging, or unloading. Deschargeoir, a sluce, or water∣passage. Descharges, costs and charges in a Suit. Descharongné, torn in pieces. Descharongnement, a tearing in pieces. Descharongner, to tear flesh in pieces. Descharpi, got rid of. Descharper, Descharpir, to take off the nap of cloth. Je ne me puis descharpir de luy, I cannot rid my self of him. Deschaud, & Deschault, as De∣chaux, in the N. D. Deschaussoir, a Surgeons tool. Descheance, decay, waste. Deschevalé, unhorsed. Deschevaler, to unhorse. Deschevancé, pillaged. Deschevancer, to pillage. Deschevauché, unhorsed. Deschevaucher, to unhorse. Deschevestré, loosed. Deschevestrer, to take off the halter. Deschiquetement, a cutting, or slitting. Deschiqueter, as Eschiqueter. Deschute, a lapse, or fall. Descigler, as Deciller in the N. D. Descimenter, to lose its morter. Descirer, Desciré, as Déchirer, Dechiré in the N. D. Desclaveté, dismounted. Desclaveter un Canon, to dismount a Cannon. Descliquer, to rap out. Desclos, unclosed. Descogneu, not known. Descognoissance, a not knowing. Descognoistre, not to know. Descollé, beheaded. Descoller, to behead.
se Descombatre de, to rid his hands of. Descombré, leared of incumbrances; also warranted. Descombrement, a clearing of in∣cumbrances; also a warranting (in Law.) Descombrer, to clear of incumbran∣ces; also to warrant (in Law.) Descompt, for déconte, a discount. Descompter, to discount. Desconfiture, an overthrow. Desconfiz, defeated, discomfited. Desconsort, discomfort. Desconseilleur, an adviser to the contrary. Desconsolé, discomforted. Desconsoler, to discomfort. Desconvenue, sorrow, trouble. Descordelé, untwisted. Descordeler, Descorder, to untwist. Descouché, put out of his lodging; also got up. Descoucher, to put one out of his lodging. Se descoucher, to get up. Descoulourer, Descoulouré, Descou∣lourement. See Décolorer, &c. in the N. D. Descoulper, to discharge. Descoulpé, discharged. Descourable, slippery, slitting. Descourtoisie, discourtesy. Descouseur, an unsower. Descousu, for décousu, unsowed. Descousure, an unsowing, Descouvrement, a discovering. Descouvreur, a discoverer. Descri, Descrier, Descrié. See them without s in the N. D. Descriement, a crying down. Descrit de monoie, the calling in of money. Descroire, to give no credit to. Descroisé, uncrossed. Descroier, to uncross. Descroulé, shaked asunder. Descrouler, to shake asunder. Descrovant, distrusting. Descuire, to leave off ething. Descuvé, tak n out of  tab. Descuver, to take out of a tub. Desdaignable, contemptible. Desdaignement, a disdaining. Desdaigneur, a disdainer. Desdamer, to deprive a Lady of her title; also to take a Queen at Draughts. Desdetté, rid out of debt. Desdetter, to rid out of debt. Desdict, recanted. Desdommage, or Dedommage∣ment in the N. D. Desdormi, awaked. Desdormir, to awake. Desdormissement, an awaking. Desdouble, unlined. Desdoubler, to unlive. Desdouloir, to leave off sorrow. Desduite, a discourse. Desembarassé, disintangled. Desembarrasser, to disintangle. Desembellir, to disfigure. Desembroché, unspitted. Desembrocher, to pull off the spit. Desembusché, got out from among bushes. Desembucher, (Subst.) that part of a thicket, whereout wilde beasts use to go into the Plains. se Desembuscher, to rush up from among bushes. Desemmuré, taken out of a wall; unwalled. Desemmurer, to take a thing out of a wall; also to unwal. Desempacquete, unpacked. Desempacqueter, to unpack. Desemparable, abandonable. Desempartement, a separation. Desempenné, unfeathered. Desempenner, to unfeather. Desempesché, cleared. Desempescher, to make a clear riddance. Desempestré, disintangled. Desempestrer, to disintangle. Desempli, emptied. Desemplir, to empty. Desemplumé, plumed. Desemplumer, to pluck the feathers off. Desemprisonné, set at liberty, Desemprisonner, to set at liberty. Desenchainé, unchained. Desenchainer, to unchain. Desencloüé, unnailed. Desencloüer, to unnail. Desencordé, unstrung. Desencoulpé, discharged from blame. Desencoulper, to discharge from blame. Desendetté, rid out of debt. Desendetter, to bring out of debt. Desendormi, awaked. Desendormir, to awake. Desendormissement, an awaking. Desenduire, to undawb. Desenforgé, disinforged. Desenfourné, drawn out of an oven. Desenfourner, to draw out of an oven. se Desenfrongner, to leave frown∣ing. Desengeance, the race whereof is extinguihed. Desengeancer, to extinguish the race of. Desenger, to pluck up by the root. Desengigné, disinchanted. Desengourdi, unbenummed. Desengrosser, to miscarry (meant of a woman with child.) Desenhorté, dehorted, or disswaded. Desenhorter, to dehort, to disswade. Desenhorteur, a dehorter, disswader. Desennuyance, pastime. Desenroulé, unrolled. Desenrouler, to unrol. Desentassé, unheaped. Desentasser, to unheap. Desenterré, unburied. Desenterrer, to unbury. Desentortillé, untwislen. Desentourner, to turn, or wind off. Desentraillé, bowelled. Desentrailler, to bowel. Desenveloper, to unsold. Desequipper un Navire, to unrig a ship. Deserte, for merite, merit. Deservice, an ill office. Deservi, deserved. Deservir, to deserve. Desesperable, despairable. Desesperade, a kind of mournful Song. Jouer à la desesperade, to throw at all. Desesperance, despair. Desesperément, desperately. Desestime, disesteemed. Desestimer, to disesteem. Desestoussé, unstuffed. Desestousser, to unstuff. Desfacer, for Effacer, to blot out. Desfacher, to appease. Desfacilé, put out of joynt. Desfaire, Desfaict, Desfaicte, as Defaire, Defait, Defaite in the N. D. Desfaroucher, to tame. Desfasché, appeased, quieted. Desfascher, to appease, to quiet. Desfermer, as Deformer. Desferre, cast cloaths; also an in∣tangl d business. Ces gens sont de fascheuse desferre, these men are hard to be pleased. Desferre-cheval, the small Pulse cal∣led Horse-shooe. Desfiché, unfastened. Desficher, to unfasten. Desfiement, a defying, also a distru∣sting. Desfinancé, drained of treasure. Desflammé, quenched, put out. Desflammer, to put out the flame. Desfoncer, Desfoncé. See Defonser in the N. D.
Desfortune, misfortune. Desfortuné, unfortunate. Desfouï, digged out. Desfouïr, to dig out. Desfrais, defraying. Desfroissé, crushed in pieces. Desfrongner, as Desenfrongner. Desfroy, a defraying, or bearing of charges. Desfuite, an excuse, an evasion. Desfulé, uncapped. se Desfuler, to put off his cap. Desgageur, a disengager, or redee∣mer. Desgaine, Desgainade, a drawing out of a weapon. Il y marcha bien d'une autre desgaine, he went about it with another man∣ner of resolution. Desgainée, and Desgainement, as Desgaine. Desgaroté, unfettered. Desgasté, made havock of. Desgaster, to make havock of. Desgaste-pares, Park-wasting. Desgester un lievre, to put a Hare off her form. Desglacé, thawed. Desglacer, to thaw. Desglouti, swallowed down. Desgloutir, to swallow down. Desgofiller, to rob. Desgonder, as Dégonder. Desgouler, to spue. Desgoustement, a distasting. Desgouziller, to swallow down. Dsgozillé, whose troat is cut. Desgrapher, as Desagraser in the N. D. Desgravir, to fetch, or throw down a climbing thing. Desgresser, Desgressé. See Dégrais∣ser in the N. D. Desgrosser, Desgrossé. See Degros∣sir, Degrossi in the N. D. Desguerper, to quit. Desguerpissement, a quitting. Desguerpisseur, that quits. Desguerpy, quit, left, abandon∣ed. Desguilleter, to unty, or undo points; also to take points from. Desguilleté, untrussed. Desguindé, let down. Desguinder, to let down. Desguiseure, as Déguisement in the N. D. Deshabité, disinhabited. Deshabiter, to disinhabit. Deshaict, or Deshait, sadness. Deshaité, sad; also crazy. Deshaitement, sadness; also crasi∣ness. Deshalé de famine, worn away through hunger. Deshanché, whose hips are out of joynt. Deshancher, to put the hips out of joynt. Deshanté, disused, or not haunted. Deshanter, to leave the company of. Desheaulmé, bereaved of his helmet. Desheaulmer, to take a helmet off. Desheritance, a disseisin. Deshingandé, lift off the hinges. Deshingander, to lift off the hinges. Deshonoration, Deshonorement, a dishonouring. Deshonté, shameless. Deshontément, shamelesly. Deshousé, whose boots are pulled off. Deshouser, to pull off boots. Deshoussé, whose horse-cloth is taken off. Desiccation, a drying up. Desidence, idleness. Desidieux, idle. Designatif, designative. Desinence, an end, or close. Desinfecter, to take off the in∣fection. Desing, for Dessein, design. Desinteresser, to save harmless, to rid from all interest in. se Desjouer, for quitter le jeu, to leave off playing. Desjoussé, unbusked. Deslaché, let go. Deslacher, to let go. Deslaicté, milked; also weaned. Deslaicter, to milk; also to wean. Deslainé, fleeced. Deslainer, to fleece. Deslaitter, as Deslaicter. Deslascher, as Deslacher. Deslaté, unlathed. Deslater, to unlath. Deslavé, washed away. Deslavement, a washing away. Deslaver, to wash away. Deslayé, softened, soaked. Deslayer, Desleer, to soften, to soak. Desleement, a softning, a soaking. Desloqueté, ragged, torn, tatter'd. Desloqueter, to tear unto rags. Desloüé, dispraised. Deslouër, to dispraise. Deslouëure, the putting of a thing out of its place. Desloyal, unfaithful. Desloyalement, unfaithfully. Desloyauté, disloyalty. Desmaché, unchawed. Desmacher, to unchaw. Desmaçonné, pulled down. Desmaçonner, to pull down stone∣work. Desmaillé, cut in pieces as a coat of mail. Desmailler, to cut in pieces a coat of mail. Desmaillure, a cutting of mail in pieces. Desmaisonné, turned out of the house. Desmaisonner, to turn out of the house. Desmanchement, an unhasting. Desmandibuler, to break the jaws of. Desmandibulé, unjawed. Desmarché, stepped back. Desmarcher, to step, or go back. Desmelancolié, cheered up. Desmelancolier, to cheer up. Desmenacer, to revoke a threat. Desmenter, as Dementer. Desmenture, a shrinking. Desmeslement, an opening, or clear∣ing. Desmesurement, exceeding great∣ness. Desmeu, removed. Desmoëllé, deprived of marrow, weakened. Desmoëller, to take away the mar∣row; also to weaken. Desmorché, without pouder in the touch-hole. Desmouvoir, to remove. Desmuni, unfurnished. Desmunir, to unfurnish. Desnaturer, to make unnatural; to weaken nature; to renounce his natural Prince or Country. Desnervé, weakened. Desnerver, to weaken. Desniaiseur, a cheater. Desnigrement, Desnigration, a dis∣crediting. Desnouëure, as Dénouëment in the N. D. Desolement, a desolating. Desolément, desolately. Desordonnance, disorder, confusi∣on. Desordonner, to bring disorder. Desores, from henceforth. Desourat, deflowred before her time. Desourdi, unwoven. Desourdir, to unweave. Despaisement, the driving one out of his Country; also a leaving of rude Country-fashions. Despaistre, to feed, to graze. Despampé, bared as a Vine of leaves. Despamper, Despamprer, to pull the leaes off a Vine.
Desparagé, disparaged. Desparager, to disparage. Despecé, cut in pieces. Despecement, a cutting in pieces. Despecer, to cut in pieces. Despenaillé, tattered. Despence, &c. See Dépense in the N. D. Despencerie, a Larder. Despendeur, a lavisher. Despendeux, wastful. Despendre, (a Subst.) spending. Despendre, (a Verb.) to spend. Despendu, spent. Despensaire, as Depensaire. Desperché, unpearched. Despercher, to throw off a perch. Desperonné, deprived of spurs. Desperonner, to deprive of spurs. Despersuadé, disswaded. Despersuader, to disswade. Despié, as Depié. Despieça, long ago. Despiecé, torn in pieces. Despiecement, a tearing in pieces. Despiecer, to tear in pieces. Despiteusement, despitefully. Despitonné, coy, squeamish. Desplaisance, grief; also a displea∣sure, or ill-turn. Desplanché, unfloored. Desplancher, to unfloor. Desplisser, for déplisser, to un∣plait. Desplisseure, an unplaiting. Desplumé, plumed. Desplumer, to pull off the feathers. Despluvié, high-ridged. Despocher, as Depocher. Despoissé, unpitched. Despoisser, to unpitch. Despote, a Soveraign Lord. Despoulser, to thrust out. Despourpré, whose purple hue is lost. se Despourprer, to lose its purple hue. Desprier, to desire to the contrary. Despris, disesteem, contempt. Desprisable, contemptible. Desprisé, disesteemed. Desprisement, a disesteeming. Despriser, to disesteem. Despriseresse, a disdainful wo∣man. Despriseur, a disesteemer. Desprisonné, got out of prison. Desprisonner, to get out of prison. Desprouveu, unprovided. Despuelage, Lespucellement, a de∣flowring of a Virgin. Despumé, skimmed. Despumer, to skim. Desracher, to pluck off, or tear a∣way. Desraison, unreasonableness. Desraisonné, bereft of reason. Desramé, without boughs. Desramer, to bare of boughs. Destrayé, disordered. Desrene, a proof of the denial of a fact. Desrener, to make good the denial of a fact. Desreté, unsnared. Desreter, to unsnare. Desreumé, whose rheum is dried up. Desreumer, to dry up the rheum. Desridant, smoothing, slackening. Desrivement, an unrivetting. Desrobbement, stealth. Desroché, beaten out of a rock; also thrown down a rock. Desrocher, to beat out of a rock; also to throw down a rock. Desroller, to open a roul. Desrondir, to bring out of round∣ness. Desroqué, overthrown in wrestling. Desroquer, to overthrow in wrest∣ling. Desroté, unty'd, unbound. Desrougi, decay'd in redness. Desrougir, to lose his redness. Desroulé, laid open, unfolded. Desrouler, to lay open, to unfold. Desroute, for deroute, a rout. Desrouté, routed. Desroutéement, clean awry. Desrouter, to put by, to rout. Desroy, disorder, disarray. Desroyé, disordered. Desroyer, to disorder. Desruer, to mistake one street for another. Desrumer, as Desreumer. Desruné, disordered. Desruner, to disorder. Dessacré, prophaned, unhallowed. Dessacrer, to prophane, to unhallow. Dessaisine, a disseisin, or dispossessi∣on. Dessaisonné, unkindly. Dessarrier, a woman to cast her childe. Dessauvagé, tamed. Dessauvager, to tame. Desseigné, designed. Desseigner, to design. Desseiller, as Desiller in the N. D. Desseing, for dessein, design. Dessemble, disjoyned. Dessembler, to disjoyn. Dessengler, as Decengler in the N. D. Dessente, the gout proceeding from a rheum. Desserpilleur, a high-way man. Desserre, a sudden opening; a re∣leasing. Desserte, as Dessert in the N. D. Desservice, disservice. Desserviteur, a table-attendant. Desseveli, unburied. Dessevelir, to unbury. Dessevré, parted. Dessevrer, to part. Dessiccatif, for Desiccatif, desicca∣tive. Dessiegé, freed from a siege. Dessieger, to raise a siege. Dessing, for Dessein, a design. Dessoivé, whose thirst is quenched. se Dessoiver, to quench his thirst. Dessolé, unsoled. Dessoler, to unsole. Dessonger, to awake out of a dream starting. Dessorcelé, unbewitched. Dessorceler, to unbewitch. Dessoté, unbesotted. Dessoter, to unbesot. Dessoulde, en dessoulde, straggling. Dessouldé, unsodered. Dessoulder, to unsoder. Dessous-mis, the name of a Muscle. Dessuetude, disuse. Dessus-mis, put over, set above. Déstacher, for ôter une tache, to take off a spot. Destaillé, hacked; also retailed. Destailler, to hack; also to sell by retail. Destaindre, as Desteindre. Destampé, unpropped. Destamper, to unprop. Desteinct, stained; also put out. Desteindre, to slain; also to put out a light. Desteler, as Desatteler in the N. D. Destenture, a letting, or taking down. Destiltre, Destistre, to unweave. Destituable, destituable. Destombi, unbenummed. Destombir, to unbenum. Destonnement, a jar in sound. Destonner, to change a tune. Destordement, a wringing. Destortillé, unwrapped. Destortiller, to unwrap. Destortoire, as Destournoire. Destoupé, unstopped. Destouper, to unstop. Destourbé, disturbed. Destourbement, disturbance. Destourber, to disturb. Destourbeur, a Disturber.
Destourbier, a disturbance. Destournoire, Destourtoire, a hun∣ting pole. Destrabord, starboard, the right side of a ship. Destrainct, strained; also straitned. Destraincte, a distress; a restraint. Destraincte d'amour, an extremi∣ty of passion in love. Destraindre, to strain, also to straiten. Destranché, hacked asunder. Destranchement, a hacking asunder. Destrancher, to hack asunder. Destrapé, stamped with the feet; also rid from intanglements. Destraper, to slamp with the feet; also to clear the feet from the things intangling them. Destravé, unshackled. Destraver, to unshackle. Destrempis, as Destrempement, a sleeping in water. Destrencher, as Destrancher. Destriar, a steed, a great horse. Destroquer, to untruck. Destrousse, spoil, booty. Destroussément, flatly, plainly. Destrousseur de gens, a robber. Destruiseur, a destroyer. Desvalizé, robbed. Desvalizement, a robbing. Dezvalizer, to rob one of his Cloak∣hag. Desveiné, bereft of all his veins, or bloud. Desveiner, to deprive one of his veins. Desvely, changed through sickness. Desverdiat, defloured as a Virgin. Desvesti, uncloathed; dispossessed. Desvestir, to uncloath; to dispossess. Desvié, misled; also dead. Desvier, to mislead; also to die. Desvisagé, deformed. Desvisager, to deform. Desultoire, Chevaux desultoires, two horses from the one whereof an active rider leaps upon the other in a full career; also led horses kept fresh for Souldiers use. Desumbré, unshaded. Desumbrer, to unshade. Desusage, disuse. Desusitation, a disusing. Desusité, disused. Desusiter, to disuse. Desyvré, unsuddled. Desyvrer, to unsuddle. Det, a Die (to play with). Detaillé, cut into pieces; also sold by retail. Detailler, to cut into pieces; also to sell by retail. Detailleur, a retailer. Detalenté, unwilling. Detapper, to unbung. Detenue, for detention, detention. Detergent, cleansing, scowring. Deterioration, a making worse. Deterioré, made worse. Deteriorer, to make worse. Determinance, an Order, a Decree; a determination of a matter al∣ready debated. Detersif, cleansing, scowring. Detiré, stretched out hard. Detirer, to stretch out hard. Detomber, to take out of a tomb. Detouillé disintricated. Detouiller, to disintricate. Detracteur, a slanderer. Detraction, slander. Detraquer quelcun, le débaucher, to take one off from his work. Detravé, out of order. Detrencher, as Destrancher. Detrichouëre, as Dextrochere; also the fold of leather wherewith Yarn-winders preserve their fin∣gers from scars; also the sharp iron wherein the quill or spindle of a wheel doth twirl. Detrimenteux, hurtful. Detristé, comforted, cheared up. Detrister, to drive away sadness. Deturper, to defile. Devallant, tumbling down. Devallée, a low ground. Devallement, a tumbling down. Devancier (Adj.) fore-running, pre∣ceding. Devanteau, Devantel, Devantier, an apron. Deuës à vetando, Priviledges of forbidding others to fish or gather sticks in his waters or woods. Deveiner, as Desveiner. Devely, changed, or altered. Devergondé, shameless. Devertaper, to open, or unbung. Devest, a disadvesture, or as Dessai∣sine. Devestir, to put himself out of posses∣sion of. Devestu, put out of possession of. Devexité, a bending downwards. Devideau, a little pair of Yarn-windles. Devideresse, a woman that winds Yarn. Devidet, as Devideau. Devidoire, for devidoir, a pair of Yarn-windles. Devier, as Desvier. Devinailles, Devinaises, Divina∣tions Devinance, Devinement, a divi∣ning. Devineresse, a woman that foretels things to come. Devineur, a Diviner, Southsayer. Devis, talk, discourse. Devisager, as Desvisager. Devisé, talked, discoursed, devised. Deviser, to talk, to discourse; also to devise. Deument, for deuëment, duly. Devolut, as Devolutaire in the N. D. Devolutif, devolutive, ready, or like to devolve. Devolution, a devolution, or falling into lapse. Devotionné, devoted, affected un∣to. Devouté, unvaulted. Devouter, to unvault. Deusdet, as Masse d'armes in the N. D. Deuvet, for duvet, soft down. Dextre (Adj.) dexterous. Dextrier, as Destrier. Dextrochere, the right arm (from the elbow to the wrist) whereon there hangs a Maniple fringed at the bottom, and charged all over with Ermines. Dez en dez, by and by. Diabete, a continual and immode∣rate voiding of urine, accompa∣nied with extreme thirst. Diablerie, devilishness; also a de∣vilish Crue. Diableteau, a little (or young) de∣vil. Diableusement, devilishly. Diacartami, a kind of purging com∣position. Diacatholicon, a composition pur∣ging all kind of humours. Diaciminon, a composition made of Simples fit to dissolve windiness in the stomack. Diaconal, of, or belonging to a Dea∣con. Diaconie, Deaconry, the place of a Deacon. Diagalange, a Salve made of Ga∣lingale. Diagonal, extending from one corner to another. Diagonalement, from corner to cor∣ner. Diagoné, as Diagonal. Diagredé, an ointment made of the gum Diagredi. Diagredi, a strong purging gu de∣stilled from the root of the  Sammony.
Diagredié, mixt with Scammony prepared. Diaire, a Journal. Diaire, (Adj.) of one day. Diale, the devil. Diallement, devilishly. Dialthée, the name of an Oyntment. Diamantin, of a Diamond, as hard as a Diamond. Diamargariton, an Electuary made of Pearls. Diambre, a confection of Amber, &c. Diamerdis, a confection of Turds, Pilgrims salve; also a shitten fellow. Diametraler, to answer diametral∣ly. Diammour, the devil. Diamouron, syrrup of Mulberries. Diamoschum, a kind of cordial powder. Dianier, consecrated to Diana, or that hath vowed chastity. Dianisum, an Electuary made of Anniseeds and other things good to break wind. Diantre, the Devil, the God of dark∣ness. Diapason, a Diapason in Musick; a Gage to measure Casks with. Diapente, a Powder or Composition wherein there are five Simples e∣qually incorporated. Diaphaner, to make transparent. Diaphenicum, a kind of purging Electuary. Diapré, diapered, diversifi'd with sundry figures. Diaprer, to diaper, to diversifie with flourishes. Diaprerie, Diapreure, flourishing in work, or flourisht work. Diarrhoëtique, that has got a task. Diarrodon, a kind of pain-abating Syrrup. Diarthrose, a connexion of bones that evidently move together. Diasené, Diasenné, a purging Com∣position made of Sene, or Triso∣ly. Diaspertisant, Diaspermatisant, sow∣ing of seed. Diastolé, the dilatation of the heart. Diatipose, a double description, or figuring. Diatolique, continual, without in∣termission. Diaule, a measure containing two furlongs. Dicaster, the Judges of the antient Thelans. Dictam, Dictamon, for dictame, Dittander. Diesble, devil. Diesé, a sharp in Musick. Dietique, of, or belonging to Diet; prescribing a diet. Dieutelet, a little God. Diffame, infamy, reproach. Differanté, differed, or disagreed from; at variance with; also di∣versified. Differanter, to differ, or disagree from; to be at variance with. Differenter, as Differanter. Difficulter, to make difficult; also to make bones of. Difficulteux, difficult, full of diffi∣culties. Diffinitivement, definitively. Difflation, a blowing, or breathing. Diffusement, diffusedly. Digame, one that hath two Wives together; also one that hath had two Wives. Digastrique, having two bellies. Digitation, the form of the fingers of both hands joyned together; or the manner of their so joyning. Digitte, a numeral figure. Digonner, to dig. Dilaceration, a tearing asunder. Dilaceré, torn asunder. Dilacerer, to tear asunder. Dilapidé, dilapidated, ruined. Dilapider, to dilapidate; also to rid of stones. Dilatable, dilatable. Dilayement, delay. Diligenté, hastened, forwarded. Diligenter, to hasten, to forward. Dille, the quill or faucet of a hogs∣head, &c. Dillon, a quinsel, for a horse. Dilucide, clear, bright. Dilucidé, dilucidated, cleared. Dilucider, to dilucidate, to clear. Dimenche, for dimanche, Sunday. Dimencheret, a holy-day-servant. Dinanderie, broken ware, Tinkers work; also the place where such stuff is sold or made. Dinandier, a Copper-smith, or Bra∣sier. Dinarchie, the joynt Government of two Princes. Dindar, Dindon, a Turky-Cock. Dintiers, the dowcets or cods of a Deer. Diole, the Devil. Dipsade, a Snake, whose biting brings with it a mortal dryness. Dipsode, a thirsty fellow. Diptam, Diptame, the herb Dittany. Dique, for digue, a bank. Directer, to direct; also to acknow∣ledge from whence a good cometh. Direption, rapine. Disceptateur, a contender, a stic∣kler. Disceptatrice, a woman that de∣bates a matter. Discepté, disputed, debated. Discepter, to dispute, to debate. Discole, unruly. Discommodation, damage, hurt, hinderance. Discommodé, discommodated, hurt, indamaged, hindered. Discommoder, to discommodate, hurt, indamage, or hinder. Disconcerté, disordered, confused. Discontinuément, by stops. Disconvenance, a disagreeing with. Disconvenir, to disagree with. Discord, for discorde, discord. Discordamment, jarringly. Discorder, to jarr, to disagree. Discoste, distant, remote. se Discoster de, to rid himself of. Discourtois, uncourteous. Discourtoisement, uncourteously. Discourtoisie, discourtesy. Discrasié, pulled, haled; of an ill complexion. Discrepance, difference. Discrepant, different. Discrucié, extreamly afflicted. Discrucier, to vex, or afflict ex∣tremely. Discuteur, a discusser, examiner, debater; also a valuer or praiser of goods. Discution, for discussion, discussion. Diseaux de gerbes, sheafs of corn set ten and ten in a heap. Disenier, as Dixainier in the N. D. Disentourner, to turn off. Disferre, an horse-shooe of two pieces joyned together at the top with an iron pin. Disgregation, a dispersing. Disgregé, dispersed, scattered. Disgreger, to disperse, to scatter. Disjoinctif, disjunctive. Disjoinction, disjunction. Disjoindre, to disjoyn. Dislayer, for delayer, to delay. Dismages, Tythings, or matters be∣longing to Tythes. Dismier, a Tyther. Disparagement, disparagement. Disparate, errour; also a senseless and uncivil thing. Disparer, Disparoir, to disappear. Disparoissance, a disappearing. Disparution, a disparition.
Dispathie, an antipathy. Dispensaire, a Book that teacheth how to make all Physical Compo∣sitions. Dispositeur, a disposer. Disposte, sound, healthful. Dispostement, lustily. Disputaillé, idly debated. Disputailler, to debate idly. Disputation, a disputation. Disquisition, inquiry. Disruption, a bursting, or breaking asunder. Disseiché, dried up. Disseicher, to dry up. Disseillonner, to open the eyes. Dissemelé, unsoled. Dissemeler, to unsole, or put the soles off a shoe. Dissentiment, dissent, disagreement, Dissention, for dissension, dissen∣tion. Dissimulateur, a dissembler. Dissimulatrice, a woman-dissembler. Dissimulément, dissemblingly. Dissipendre, to dissipate. Dissociable, unsociable. Dissociation, a dissociation, or sepa∣ration of fellowship. Dissocié, dissociated. Dissoluement, for dissolument, dis∣solutely. Dissonant, dissonant, discording, disagreeing. Dissuetude, disuse. Distillable, distillable. Distillement, distillation. Distract, any distraction, or division of a Contract, Right, or Act. District, a District, the Liberties or Precincts of a place. Distroict, as District. Distroict de Moulin, as Banlieuë de Moulin. Ditateur, an inricher. Dite, à sa dite, at his nod, after his will and pleasure. Ditellet, a small Treatise. Divague, straying, wandering. Divagué, strayed, wandered about. Divaguer, to stray, or wander a∣bout. Divinance, a divining, or foretel∣ling. Divisement, separately, distinctly. Diurne, diurnal, daily. Diuturne, of long continuance. Divulgateur, a divulger. Divulsion, divulsion. Dixain, as Dizain. Dixenier, as Dixainier in the N. D. Dixme, Dixmer, as Díme, Dimer in the N. D. Dixneusiesme, as Dixneuviéme, nineteenth. Dizain, a tenth; also a Stanza of ten Verses; a pair of beads con∣taining ten pieces; a French penny. Dizaine, as Dixaine in the N. D. Dizeaux, as Diseaux. Doanne, for Douäne, a Custome-house. Dobbe, a tub. Docilisé, made tractable. Dociliser, to make tractable. Doctorande, Doctors Commence∣ment. Doctorie, a Doctors degree, Doctor∣ship. Doctrinable, apt to learn. Document, document, precept. Dodacaëdre, a Geometrical figure of 12 faces. Dodechedron, a twelve-corner'd figure. Dodeliné, rocked, dandled, lolled. Dodelinement, a rocking, dandling, or lolling. Dodeliner, to rock, dandle, or loll. Dodeliner de la teste, to carry his head unsteadily. Dodelineur, the rocker of a cradle. Dodelineux, a rocker; also one that nods much; also a fawning com∣panion. Dodentral, as Dodrental. Dodine, as Dodelinement. Canards à la dodine, Ducks with French onion-sauce. Dodiner, as Dodeliner. Dodineux, as Dodelineux. Dodo; as apres bu dodo, after drink sleep. Dodrental, nine ounces heavy; nine inches, or a full span long. Dodu, a fat-chops, or chuff. Dodu, (Adj.) fat, plump. Doët, a brook, or spring. Dogguin, a filthy great old Cur. Dogmatiste, a forger of new Sects or Opinions. Doigtier, a thimble. Doil, a Pipe-staff; also any Vessel or Cask of a reasonable big size. Doile, & Doille, as Douille. Doire, for Douaire, a dowry. Dol, deceit, guile. Dolé, planed, or hewed smooth. Doleance, moaning, lamentation. Dolent, sorrowful, heavy. Dolentement, sorrowfully, heavily. Doler, to plane, or hew smooth. Doleur, for douleur, sorrow, grief. Doleux, deceitful. Doliman, as Dolyman. Doloir, to grieve, to moan. Dolouëre, as Doloire in the N. D. Doloureusement, heavily, sorrow∣fully; also grievously, till it ake again. Doloureux, woful, sorrowful; also painful. Parties doloureuses, ten∣der parts that cannot endure to be touched. Dolousant, lamenting, moaning. Dolouser, to lament, to moan. Dolyman, a Turkish gown. Domanial, of, or belonging to a Lordship. Domestiquement, domestically, pri∣vately. Domestiqué, tamed, civilized. Domestiquer, to tame, to civilize. Domicilié, dwelling in a place. Domicilier, a House-keeper. se Domicilier, to go to keep house. Dominatrice, a Commanderess. Domineur, as Dominateur, a Ruler, or Governour. Domino, a kind of hood worn by Ca∣nons; a fashion of Vail used by some women that mourn. Dominorié, domineered over. Dominorier, to domineer. Dominotier, a maker of the hood called Domino. Dommageablement, hurtfully, with damage. Dommas, the Priest, or Canon, who by turn is to wear a Cope for a week together. Dompte-venin, Tetter-wort. Dompte-villain, a good cudgel. Dompture, a taming, reclaiming. Donaison, a free gift, or deed of gift. Dondaine, the name of a warlike Engine whereout great round stones were shot; also the burden of a Song. Dondon, a short and fat woman. Dongeon, as Donjon, a Dungeon. Donnée, a gift. Donne-iardon, a jearer. Donnement, a giving, or bestow∣ing. Donq, Donques, for Donc, then, therefore. Dontement, a taming. Donte-mer, Sea-taming. Donte-orgueil, pride-taming. Donteresse, she that tames or sub∣dues. Donteur, a tamer. Donzelle, an Eel-powt. Dorcade, a Rot-buck. Dorée, the Dorce, or St. Peters fish. Dorelle, bitter Vetch.
Dorelot, a darling. Doreloté, for Dorloté, cockered, dandled. Doreloter, for Dorloter, to cocker, to dandle. Doreloteur, for Dorloteur, a Coc∣kerer, a Dandler. Doverin, gilt-work; also a gil∣ding. Doriphage, a devourer of gifts, or bribes. Dorlot, a Jewel. Dormailler, to slumber. Dormart, a slug-a-bed. Dormeveille, a being between asleep and awake; or a counterfeiting of sleep. Dormilieuse, as Dormilleuse. Dormille, the sickness of Silk-worms, during which they sleep; also a kind of small Lamprey. Dormilleuse, the Cramp-fish. Dormilleux, sluggish, sleepy. un Dormir, a nap, a sleep. Dormitoire, a sleep-procuring medi∣cine. Dorque, a kind of great and round earthen Vessel; also a great fish that's enemy to the Whale. Dorsal, of, or belonging to the back. Dortuit, sleepy, drousie. Dosse d'ail, a clove of Garlick. Dossé, indorsed. Dosserasse, a buttress, or supporter to bear up the great beam of a wall. Dost, for Dot, dowry. Dotal, given in dowry; of, or be∣longing to dowry. Dotateur, an indower. Dotter, for radoter, to dote. Douanne, for Douane, a Custom-house. Douannier, an Officer of the Custom-house. Doubé, rigged, or trimmed up, as a ship. Douber, to rig, or trim a ship. Doublage, a relief. Doubleau, a semi-circle; also a dou∣ble quarter of timber. Doubleau (Adj.) somewhat double, almost twofold. Double-marcheur, the little, spot∣ted, and worm-like Serpent Am∣phisbana, supposed by some Au∣thors to have a head at both ends, and so to go both ways. Doublement (a Subst.) a doubling, a making twofold, or twice as much. Double-testu, as Double-marcheur. Double-vaisseau, a cauldron, or kit∣tle full of boyling water. Doublier, a stately table-cloth of da∣mask, diaper, &c. hanging to the ground on both sides of the board. Doubtable, dreadful; also uncer∣tain. Doubtance, fear; also doubt, suspi∣cion. Doubtement, a doubting, suspecting, fearing. Doucelet, a little sweet. Doucente, the name of a thick, rud∣dy, and sappy apple. Doucereux, full of sweetness. Doucettement, sweetly. Doucin, as Doussin. Dove, a Castle-ditch, or Town-ditch (with water in it). Douëlle, a Pipe-staff; also the stric∣kle used in measuring of Corn. Douen d'antan, hence over a year. Douës, as Douves. Douët, a Brook, or Spring. Douëtte, à longues douëttes, in long rows, files, ranks. Dougé, small, fine, little, slender. Douger, to trip, as a horse that stumbleth not outright. Douillettement, daintily, tenderly, delicately. Douït, as Douët, a Brook. Doulcin, as Doussin. Douleine, for doucine, a kind of plain. Doulouëre, a plaining-ax. Douloureusement, painfully. se Doulouser, to lament. Dour, a hands breadth. Dourdé, knocked, mawled, thum∣ped. Dourder, to knock, mawl, or thump. Dourdier, a slouch. Dousil, a spigot. Doussaine, a certain musical Instru∣ment. Doussé, indorsed. Dousser, to indorse. Dousseresse, as Dosserasse. Doussier, an indorsement. Doussin, the Sea-urchin. Doutance, as Doubtance. Douvelle, a Citer. Doux-amer, bitter-sweet. Doux-auvesque, Doux-balon, Doux-bellieur three sorts of apples. Doux-glissant, gently gliding. Doux de la Lande, Doux-martin, Doux-veret, three sorts of ap∣ples. Douzain, a french penny; also a do∣zen. Douze-doigtier, the name of a small gut, or entral. Douzil, a spiggot. Doyenné, a Deanry, or Deanship. Doygé, as Dougé. Drache, the little stalk whereby a Grape cleaves to the bunch. Dragacanth, Dragagant, Gum-dra∣gagant. Drageon, a Vine-branch, twig, or sprig. Drageries, Comfets, Sweet-meats. Dragme, for drachme, a dram. Dragoir, for drageoir, a Comset-box. Dragonceau, a young (or little) Dragon. Dragoncelle, as Dragontée. Dragonné, Dragony. Dragonneau, a young, or little Dra∣gon. Dragontée, Dragon-wort. Draguinage, a kind of gibridge. Dramant, a miser. Drame, as drachme, a dram. Dramé, pinched, miserably used. Dramer, to pinch. Drapelet, a little linnen clout. Drappeux, full of cloth, or fit to make cloth. Drappier (Adj.) of, or belonging to cloth; also fit to make cloth. Drave, Spanish (or Babylonian) cresses. Dravée, all kind of Pulse. Draule, as Drole, a wag. Draulerie, as Drolerie, waggery. Drege, a kind of Fish-net. Dreloter, as Dorloter, to cocker. Dresseur, a raiser, or erecter. Dressiere, a direct way. Dressouïr, a Setting-iron, or Poa∣king-stick for Ruff-bands; a standing thing. Dridiller, to gingle, as a Hawks bells. Drillant, twinkling, sparkling. Driller, to twinkle, or sparkle. Drilles, rags, tatters. Drilleux, ragged, tattered. Drogué, mingled with drugs. Drogueman, an Interpreter. Droguement, a drenching, or mini∣string of Drugs. Droguer, to drug, or mingle with Drugs. Droguerie, the season of fishing for Herrings, and other such fish, to be salted and barrelled up. Drogueries, Drugs; also trash. Drogueur, as Droguiste, a Drug∣gist. Droicture, Right, Reason, Justice. Droicturé, that hath paid his re∣lief, and all other the Duties of Tenancy.
Droicturer, a new Tenant or Vassal to do his Lord all right, and pay him all the rights belonging to him. Droicturier, just, upright; also severe, strict, according to the letter of the Law; also direct, or next. Droicturier Seigneur, a mans true, right, or lawful Lord. Droicturierement, justly, uprightly. Droisser, as Dresser, to direct; e∣rect, instruct. Droitier, right-handed; also as Droicturier. Drolatique, waggish, roguish. Droler, to play the wag; also to beat soundly. Dromant, a small and swift Vessel used by Pirats. Droman, as Dromant. Droninae, a spade. Drones, knocks, thumps. Dropace, a depilatory, an ointment to take away hair. Druement, thick, many together. Druge, Swines-bread. Drugé, wet, thoroughly moistened. Drugeon, a little branch, twig, or sprig. Drugeonnement, a putting forth of small branches or twigs. Drugeonner, to put forth twigs. Drugeonneux, full of small branches or twigs. Druger, to wet throughly. Druguement, an Interpreter. Drulle, as Drylle. Dryinade, as Chelydre. Drylle, the maste, or acorn of the female oak. Dubitation, doubtfulness. Ducat, for Duché, a Dukedom, a Dutchy, Ducteur, a leader. Ductile, easie to be hammered, or beaten into thin plates. Duelle, the third part of an ounce. Duisable, Duisant, Duisible, sit, con∣venient. Duisson, an accustoming, using, or inuring; a making fit for. Duit, accustomed, used, inured; also convenient, fitting. Duiter, to make fit for his purpose. Dumetté, downy, of down, soft as (or stuffed with) down. Dun, a hill, or rock. Duner, to plain, as a horse that nei∣ther halteth outright, nor sets his foot hard on the ground. Dunne, for Dune, a Down. Dunette, a thrush; also a little Down, or sandy hill. Duodene, as Douze-doigtier. Duplication, as Duplique in the N. D. Duplicité, a double mind. Duppe, for Dupe, a coxcomb, sot, or fool. Durable, durable, lasting. Duracines, Peaches, Plums, or Cher∣ries, whose pulp cleaves fast unto their stones; also such as are of a hard or firm pulp, and thereby long-lasting. Duraines, Dureines, as Duracines. Duresse, for Dureté, hardness. Duret, somewhat hard; sturdy. Dure-teste, a kind of spotted and hard-headed Spider. Duvetté, as Dumetté. Duyere, a Cony-hole. Dyafane, as Diafane, transparent. Dynanderie, brazen ware. Dynarchie, the joynt rule of two Princes. Dyscole, wayward, froward. Dyscrasié, as Discrasié. Dysopie, vicious, or excessive shame∣facedness. Dysurie, difficulty of voiding urine. E EAge, for âge, age. Eagé, aged, old. Eale, the name of a blackish E∣thiopian beast. Eard, the black Poplar-tree. Eaue, for eau, water. Eavier, for evier, a sink, or gutter, for voiding of soul water. Eaulice, the herb Helicampane. Eaurolle, a wheal, or blister. Eauvier, as Eavier. Ebe, the bbing of water. Ebesté, beastly, blockish. Ebouiller, as Esbouiller. Ebouller, to throw, or tumble down. Eboulu, as Esboulu. Ebreché, that hath lost divers teeth. Ebrieté, drunkenness. Ebriosité, continual drunkenness. Ebulition, as Ebullition, ebullition. Eburnin, of, or belonging to ivory. Ecamoter, to change, or alter. Ecarboté, stirred, or scattered, as the fire; also bruised, as an ap∣ple. Ecarboter le feu, to stir up, or scat∣ter the fire. Ecarboter une pomme, to bruise an apple. Ecardan, nice, dainty. Ecclise, for Eglise, a Church. Ecclisse, as Eclisse, a cheese-fat. Ecclisser, as Esclisser. Ecentrique, without center, out of the center; also without measure, whereof no measure can be taken. s'Echauder, to grow too hot, to be scalded. Echelette, a little ladder. Echevement, as Eschevement. Echidne, a viper, or hydra; any kinde of Serpent. Eclipsement, an eclipsing, or lessen∣ing. Ecloe, lant, piss, urine. Eclyptique, as Ecliptique in the N. D. Ecolleté, as Escouleté. Ecoüé, curtailed. Ecouër, to curtail. Ecphrase, a plain declaration, or exposition. Ecreté, uncrested. Ecrioches, crutches. Ecstatique, in an extasie. Eculée, a dish-full. Edent, groveling on his face, or on his teeth. Edificateur, an edifier. Eduction, eduction. Esaisté, topped. Esaister, to top (or cut off the top of) a plant. Esemeridiaire, continuing but one day. Effable, which may be uttered in words. Effacement, a razing, or blotting out. Effaré, scared, amazed. Effarer, to scare, or amaze. Effassure, for Effaceure, a razing, or blotting out. Effemination, effeminacy. Effeminément, effeminately. Efferé, wild; also proud. Effiancé, betrothed. Efficacieusement, efficaciously. Efficacieux, effectual, forcible. Effigial, representing, resembling; also belonging to an Image. Effilé, unwound, loosened. Effiler, to unwind, to loosen. Efflanché, swayed in the back. Efflanqué, as Esflanqué. Efflorescence, the outward skin or rind of any thing. Effoncé, whose bottom is beaten out. Effoncer, to beat out the bottom of a vessel. Effondément, profusely, exceeding∣ly. Effondré, howelled; burst open. Che∣min effondré, a way full of holes. Effondrer, to draw the guts or garbage out of. Effondrerun
cheval, to strike a horse through the belly. Effondrer un huis, to burst open a door. Effondrer un vaisseau, to beat out the bottome of a vessel. Effondrisse, the grounds of any li∣quor. Efforcement, indeavour. Efforcément, earnestly, with tooth and nail. Efforcillons, a disease in a Hawks tongue. Effray, as Effroi, fright, terrour. Effrayable, fearful, dreadful. Effrayablement, in a fearful and terrible manner. Effreinte, a default of hounds. Effrenation, unruliness, rashness. Effrenément, rashly. Effrener, to unbridle, to turn loose. Effrité, frighted. Effriter, to fright. Effroidi, cooled. Effroidir, to cool. Effrondille, the grounds of any li∣quor. Effrontement, impudency. Effroüé, crummed. Effrouër, to crum. Effroyant, hideous, terrible. Effroyé, frighted. Effroyer, to fright. Effruicté, whose fruit is gathered. Effruicter, to take or gather the fruit of. Effueillé, for efeuillé, bared of leaves. Effueillement, a baring of leaves. Effueiller, to bare of leaves. Effueilleur, a pruner of trees, a pul∣ler of leaves from trees. Effusément, profusely, out of mea∣sure. Efielé, without spleen or gall. Egale-nuicts, nights equalling. Egalizement, as Equalizement. Egalizer, as Equalizer. Egaronné, trodden, as a shooe, down at the heels. Egaronner un soulier, to tread a shooe down at the heels. Egasse, set an edge, as a tooth. Egau, the less kinde of the bastard-Mackarel. Egelfin, the Haddock. Egener le labeur, to run through their work. Egestion, a casting out of excre∣ments. Egipanes, Satyrs. Egiptiaque, l'Onguent Eg. a cer∣tain Salve, or Oyntment, of a cleansing faculty. Egosse, husk. s'Egouffrer, to sink down. Egousser, to shale. Egozillé, whose throat is cut; also vomited, or spued out. Egoziller, to cut the throat of; to vomit, or spue out. Egrefin, a kinde of Haddock. Egrege, excellent. Egromé, uncreamed, fleeted as milk. Egrette, a fowl that resembles an Heron. Egrugé, crummed. Egruger, to crum. Egrumer, to pluck from the cluster. Egrun, any thing that exasperates a disease or sore. Egual, for Egal, equal. Egualle, equalled, matched. Egualement, equally, alike. Egualer, to equal, to make like. Egualizé, equalled, made even with. Egualizement, an equalling, or a making even. Egualizer, to equal, to make even. Eguillat, a kinde of dog-fish. Eguillon, for aiguillon, a sting. Eguilloner, to sting. Eguiser, for aiguiser, to sharpen. Egyptelle, a kinde of white stone with black and red veins. Egyptiac, a kind of salve. Ehancé, as Ehanché. Ehanché, whose hip is out of joynt. Ehancher, to put the bip out of joynt. Ejaculation, ejaculation. Ejaculatoire, ejaculatory. Ejarté, cut off by the hams; also without garters. Ejarter, to cut off at the hams. Eine, the groin. Elaboratoire, a Work-house. Elaboré, as Elabouré. Elabouration, elaboration. Elabouré, elaborated. Elabourer, to elaborate. Elambiqué, distilled. Elambiquer, to distil. Elangoré, languishing. Elarmé, that can weep no more. Elatine, the herb Speedwell. Elation, loftiness; also a raising up. Elebore, for ellebore, Hellebore. Electre, Amber whereof beads and bracelets are made; also a mix∣ture of Gold, Copper, and a fifth part of Silver. Elegiaque, belonging to an Elegy, mournful. Elemi, Elemmy, a kind of Gum, or Rosin. Elenchie, Union elenchie, a Pen∣dant-pearl of the fashion of an egg. Eleomeli, a sweet and fat liquor is∣suing from the old trunks of cer∣tain trees in Syria. Elephangines, certain Pills good to strengthen the stomack, and to help digestion. Elephanteau, a young Elephant. Elephantin, of, or belonging to an Elephant. Elephantique, infected with a Le∣prosie. Elevatoire, the Instrument where∣with Surgeons lift up the broken parts of the Scull, and draw out bullets, &c. Eleveur, a raiser, or lifter up. Elice, the Signe in Heaven called Charles wain. Elicie, a firy vapour drawn from the Clouds. Eligible, eligible. Eliminé, put out of doors; also di∣vulged, published. Eliminer, to put out of doors; also to divulge, to publish. Elingue, a Sling. Eliser la monnoye, to clip money. Elixe, quintessence. Elleborine, wild white Ellebore. Ellée, as bailler les ellées à un che∣val, to give a horse the head. Ellend, as Eland, an Elk. Elocher, to loosen, or make loose. Elocquer, to shake off. Eloise, a lightning; also a little space of time. Elope, a kind of Sea-fish. Elopien, a kind of harmless Ser∣pent. Elourdé, dulled, amazed, astoni∣shed. Elourder, to dull, amaze, or asto∣nish. Eloyse, as Eloise. Elucidation, elucidation, or cleer exposition. Elucidé, cleared, or made clear. Elucider, to clear, or to make clear. Elue, the wild Pine-tree. Emaceration, Emaciation, an ema∣ceration, or falling away in flesh. Emacie, leanness. Emacié, made, or grown lean. Emané, proceeded, issued; also pub∣lished, spread abroad. Emaner, to proceed; also to publish, or to spread abroad. Emant, as aimant, the Loadstone. Emantellement, a mantle; also a covering with a mantle.
Emanuer, to manumit. Emargé, noted, or quoted in the margine. Ematite, the Bloud-stone. Embabillé, well-spoken, that hath his tongue at command. Embabionné, as Embabouiné, gul∣led, deceived. s'Embadurnoser, to anoint himself. Embagué, inriched with Jewels. Embaguer, to inrich with Jewels. Embaillonné, gagged. Embaillonner, to gag. Embarbouillé, besmeared. Embarbouiller, to besmear. Embarrassement, a cumber. Embarasseur, a cumbersome fellow. Embarré, beaten in, bruised. Embarrer, to beat inward, to bruise; also to rail, or set bars on. Em∣barrer son espée en un arbre, to fasten his sword in a tree. Embarrure, a bruising, or beating inward. Embas, below. Embaser, to give a basis, or bottom unto. Embasmé, imbalmed. Embasmer, to imbalm. Embassade, Embassadeur. See Am∣bassade, Ambassadeur in the N. D. Embassement, as Soubassement in the N. D. Embastonné, armed with weapons; also cudgelled. Embastonner, to arm with weapons; to cudgel. Embatage, the laying of streaks a∣bout a wheel. Embatonner, as Embastonner. Embattage, as Embatage. Embattes, the Easterly winds which commonly raign about the Dog-days. Embaveté, ou Embavieté, that hath a bib on. Embaumement, an imbalming. Embecqué, instructed before-hand. Embecquer, to instruct one before∣hand. Embellissage, an imbellishing. Emberni, clad in rug. Embernir, to cover with, or to clad in rug. Embesongné, busi'd, employed. Embesongnement, a busying, or em∣ploying; also a business, or busie work. Embesongner, to busie, employ, set on work. Embeurré, buttered. Embeurrer, to butter. Embezars, Ambesas. Emblavé, sown with corn; also whose corn is got up a pretty height above ground. Emblavence de bled, corn sprung a pretty height above ground; or the springing up of corn. Emblaver, to sow the ground with corn. Emblaveures, corn, whether growing, or in sheaves. Emblayement, a cumber. Emblé, stoln. Je me suis emblé de la troupe, I flunk out of the com∣pany. Emble-coeur, heart-stealing. Emblemature, a making of Em∣blems. Embler, to steal. Emblesne, a Cataplasm, or Poul∣tis. Embleures, corn standing. Emblic, a kind of round Mirabo∣lan. Emblocquer, to swive. Embobeliné, botched; also begui∣led. Embobeliner, to botch; to beguile. Emboëtture, a putting in a box. Emboir, to soke, or drink up; also to imbue, to moisten. Emboistement, as Emboëtement in the N. D. Emboister, as Emboëter in the N. D. Emboisture, as Emboëtement in the N. D. also the ring or plate of iron, &c. that keeps the box of a wheel from wearing. Emboité, Emboitement, Emboiter. See Emboëter, &c. in the N.D. Emboiture, as Emboëtement in the N. D. Embolismal, added as a day unto a year; or increased as the year by so many days. Embolisme, an addition as of a day or more unto a year. Embosqué, wooded. Embosquer une terre, to plant, or set wood. S'embosquer, to shrowd himself in a wood. Embosser, to swell, or rise in bun∣ches. Embottelé, made in bundles, or bot∣tles. Embotteler, to make up in bundles, or bottles. Embouchoir, a Boot-last, or Boot-tree; also a horn to drench a horse with, or any thing serving to convey a thing into the mouth. Embouchonné, stopt with a stopple; also having a bush (as a Tavern) hanging before it. Embouchouër, as Embouchoir. Embouqueté, trimmed with Nose-gaies. Embourbement, Embourbeure, a bemudding; a beraying with, or sticking fast, in mud. Embouscher en la Mer, to run into the Sea. Embousé, bedunged, berayed with Cows ordure. Embouté, plated, stiffened; or as Embouti, stretched out; also raised, imbossed. Emboutir, to stretch out; also to raise, or imboss. Emboutissement, a stretching out; a raising or imbossing. Embou∣tissements de soye, Silk-thrums. Emboutoir, as Boutoir. Embouzé, as Embousé. Emboysture, as Emboiture. Embrabilé, broad-headed. Embraceler, to furnish with brace∣lets. Embrase, as Braise in the N. D. Embrasée, an arm full, or fadom. Embrasselé, furnished with a Brace∣let. Embrasse-tout, all imbracing. Embrazé, for Embrasé, burned. Embreuvé, moistened. Embreuver, to moisten. Embridé, bridled, kept in. Embrider, to bridle, to keep in. Embrocation, a gentle bathing of the head, or any other part, with a liquor falling from aloft upon it in the manner of rain. Embrocheure, a spitting, or broach∣ing. Embronché, amazed with a blow, whose head hangs down after a blow received. Embroncher, to hold down the head; also to hide the face. Embroqué, gently bathed. Embroquer, gently to bathe. Embroüé, dirty'd, soyled. Embrouillasser, as Embrouiller in the N. D. Embrouillement, a pestering, or in∣tangling. Embrouilleur, a pesterer or intangler. s'Embruer, to bedabble himself. Embrunché, wainscoted, seeled. Embruncher, to wainscot. Embruni, made (or grown) brown. Embrunir, to make (or to grow) brown. Embu, for imbu, imbued. Embufflé, deceived, led by the nose.
Embuffler, to deceive, to lead by the nose. Emburelucoqué, pestered. Emburelucoquer, to pester. Embut, a funnet; also a pipe to suck with. Emedullé, whereout the marrow is taken. Emeduller, to take out the marrow. Emembré, dismembred. Emendateur, a mender, an amender. Emendation, a mending, or amend∣ing. Emendartice, a woman that mends or reforms any thing. Emende, for Amende, fine, penalty. Emendé, mended, amended. Emender, to mend, or amend. Emerillonné, narrowly watched. Emerillonner, to watch narrowly. Emerillonner à feu & à sang, to prosecute with fire and sword. Emute, (for Mute) de Chiens, a cry of hounds. Emicycle, for hemicycle, a semi∣circle. Emine, a kind of measure. Emissole, a kind of Dog-fish. Emmaigri, made lean, faln away. Emmaigrir, to make lean. S'em∣maigrir, to fall away, to grow lean. Emmaigrissant, making lean. Emmaisonné, furnished with a house. Emmaisonner, to house, to put into (or furnish with) a house. Emmaistrisé, made Master. Emmaladi, made, or grown sick. Emmaladir, to make sick. Emmalicé, spiteful. Emmalissant, growing malicious. Emmancheure, a setting on of a hast, or handle; also the upper part of a sleeve. Emmanchoir, the hole of a hatchet whereinto the handle is put. Emmanné. full of manna. Emmanoté, manacled. Emmanoter, to manacle. Emmantelé, covered with a cloak. Emmaroté, wearing a fools bable. Emmarré, cast into the Sea. Emmarrer, to cast into the Sea. Emmartelé, put into a jealousie. Emmarteler, to put into a jealousie. Emmassé, heaped up. Emmati, allayed, mortify'd. Emmatir, to allay, to mortify. Emmatrelé, hoarse. Emmatricolé, matriculated. Emmayé, decked with May-flowers. Emmayer, to deck with May-flowers. Emmeché, furnished with match; also snuffed. Emmecher, to furnish with match; also to snuff. Emmelie, a quiet kind of Dance. Emmelioré, bettered, improved. Emmeliorer, to better, to improve. Emmentelé, as Emmantelé. Emmenteler, to cover with a cloak. Emmenuisé, made small. Emmenuiser, to make small. Emmerdé, berayd with ordure. Emmerder, to beray with ordure. S'Emmesler, to meddle with. Emmesnager, to set a house in good order. Emmeublé, furnished with movea∣bles. Emmeublement, furniture, or a furnishing with moveables. Emmeubler sa maison, to furnish his house. Emmeurer, as Emmurer. Emmi, through, in the midst of. Emmiellement, an inducement. Emmielleure, a sweetning with honey. Emminer, to put into a mine. Emmitouflé, muffled. S'Emmitoufler, to muffle. Emmitré, Crowned with a Miter. Emmitrer, to Crown with a Miter. Emmoeller, as Esmoeller. Emmoncelé, heaped up. Emmonceler, to heap up. Emmont, upward. Emmorionné, covered with a mur∣rion or head-piece. Emmorisque, Moorish, or Moor-like. Emmortaisé, joyned, or closed by mortaise. Emmortaiser, to joyn or close by mortaise. Emmouflé, wrapt up warm. Emmoufler, to wrap up warm. Emmuré, walled about. Emmurer, to wall about. Emmusqué, perfumed with Musk. Emmusquer, to perfume with Musk. Emolli, mollify'd, softned. Emollient, mollifying, softning. Emollir, to mollify, to soften. Emorcer, Emorcher, for amorcer, to bait. Emoucé, Emoucer. see Emoussé, Emousser in the N. D. Emouchail, a fly-flap. Emoucher, as Esmoucher. Emouchon, a holy-water sprinkle. Emouvant, moving, stirring up. Empacqué, wilful, obstinate. Empacté, compacted, close together. Empacter, to compact. Empaillé, filled with straw. Empaindre, violently to set upon. Empaint, violently set on. Empainte, a violent onset. Empaletoqué, muffled up. Empalin, a span. Empalmé, struck with the palm of the hand. Empalmer, to strike with the palm of the hand. Empampré, decked with vine-bran∣ches. Empanage, as Appanage in the N.D. Empaneré, put into wicker-baskets. Empanerer, to put into wicker-baskets. Empanné, feathered. Empantouflé, wearing slippers. Li∣vre empantouflé, a Book with a thick cover. Emparagé, that hath his due part, or portion. Emparché, put into a pound. Emparement, a seising, or laying hold on. Emparence, defence. Emparenter, to joyn in Kinred. Emparfumé, perfumed. Emparfumer, to perfume. Emparlé, homme bien emparlé, a well spoken man. Emparle-silence, a speaking by signes. Emparlier, a Counsellor, Barrester. Empas, shackles. Empasté, crusted, or baked hard; made into past. Empastelé, crammed with rolls of past. Empastement, a pasting, a making of dough into paste. Empaster, to knead. Empatement, as Empiettement. Empatenostré, loaden with Beads. Empatronné, seized on. S'Empatronner de, to seize on. Empatté, as Espaté. Empattement, as Espatement. Empaulmé, taken hold of. Empaulmer, to lay hold on. Empavoisé, shielded. S'Empavoiser, to cover himself with a shield. Empayser, to grow natural to; to thrive. Empeigné, fastned with the teeth of a comb; also scratched with a comb. Empeigner, to comb, or to scratch with a comb. Empeigner le bout d'une douve, to pin the bar of a piece of cask. Empeinte, de cette empeinte, at this push.
Empannaché, as Empanaché, set out with feathers. Empennon, the feather of an arrow. Emperier, Imperial. Emperiere, an Empress. Emperlé, set thick with pearls. Emperler, to set thick with Pearls. Emperruqué, that wears a Perwig. Empesche-maison, a trouble-house. Empesté, infected with the plague. Empester, to infect with the plague. Empestre, an incumbrance. Empestré, pestered. Empestrement, a pestering. Empestrer, to pester. Empetuosité, impetuosity. Emphyteosien, as Emphyteote in the N. D. Emphyteuse, as Emphyteose, in the N. D. Emphyteutique, Seigneur Emphy∣teutique, a Lord that raises or improves his rents. Empiece, not of a great while. Empiegé, insnared. Empieme, as Empyeme. Empienne, as Empeigne, the up∣per leather of a shooe. Empierré, turned into stone. Empierrement, a turning into stone. Empierrer, to turn into stone. Empietement, an usurpation of ano∣ther mans right. Empietement d'une montagne, the foot of a hill. Empietté, as Empieté in the N. D. Empiettement, Empieture, as Em∣pietement. Empillé, heaped on. Empiller, to heap on. Empiné, turned into a pine-tree. Empirance, an impairing; also al∣lay in coin. D'Empire, à l'empire, worse and worse. Empireume, a mark of fire, or burning. Empistolé, armed with a pistol. Empistoler, to arm with pistols. Emplacé, placed, setled. Emplacement d'une Ville, the seat of a Town. Emplacer, to place, to settle. Emplage, a filling. Emplaidé, sued. Emplaider, to sue. Emplastration, a laying of plaister; a grafting by inoculation; the applying of a salve or plaister. Emplastrure, a plaistering. Emplastreux, full of plaisters, also belonging to, or serving for a plaister. Emplatement, a flatting; also a flat, or broad part of. Emplier, as Employer, to imploy. Emploicte, for Employ, an Imploy; also trade or traffick. Marchan∣dise d'emploicte, ware that sells well. Emploicter, to trade. Emploite, as Emploicte. Emplomber, to lead. Emplotonné, made into a bottom, conglomerated. Emplotonner, to make into bot∣toms. Employement, an imploying. Emplumassé, set out with feathers. Emply, for Emploi, an Employ. Empoché, put into a pocket. Empocher, to put into a pocket. Empoignure, a handle. Empoinctant, pointing on. Empoincter, as Empointer. Empoint, as bien empoint de faire, likely to do. Mal empoint, in ill plight. Empointer, to point on. Empoin∣ter les doigts sur le Luth, to sin∣ger a Lute. Empoisonneresse, a she-poysoner. Empoissonné, filled, served, or fur∣nished with fish. Empoissonnement, a storing of a pond with fish. Empoissonner, to store with fish. Empor, a Mart-town. Empoudré, filled with dust. Empoudrer, to fill with dust. Empoule, as ampoule, a blister. Empoulé, blistered. Empoulément, swellingly. Empoulure, a blistered part of the body. Empouppant, blowing as wind in the poop of a ship. Empouppé, blown forward by a wind in the poop; also hit in the poop. Empoupper, to blow in the poop of a ship, to set forward as a full wind doth a ship; also to hit the poop. Empraignant, imprinting. Emprainte, for Empreinte, an im∣printing. Empreé, turned into a Meadow. Empreer, to make a Meadow of. Empreignée, with child. Empreinct, the Palsie. Empreincte (Adj.) full, with young. Emprendre, to undertake. Empres, hard by. Empreut, one. Empis, undertaken. Emprise, an undertaking. Emprunelé, belonging to the apple of an eye. Emption, a buying, a purchasing. Empunaisi, filled with stench. Empunaisir, to fill with stench. Emputé, accused, complained of. Emputement, an imputation, asper∣sion. Emputer, to accuse, or complain of. Emputeur, a secret accuser, an in∣former. Empyeme, an inward collection of corrupt matter in any part of the body, but especially between the breast and lungs. Empyreume, a dry and accidental heat. Emuctoire, as Emonctoire. Emulgeant, milking; or as Emul∣gent. Emulgence, a milking, or stroaking. Emulgent, as Veine emulgente, one of the two main branches of the hollow Vein. Emut, as Esmeut. Emutissement, the muting, or drop∣pings of birds. Emyne, a kind of measure. Enacquer, to pick a bone. Enaigri, sharpned, exasperated. Enaigrir, to make, or grow sharp; to anger, to exasperate. Enameré, made bitter. Enamerer, to make bitter. Enamouré, inamoured. s'Enamourer de, to fall in love with. s'Enarbrer, a horse to rise so high that he is like to fall backward. Enarché, arched, covered with an arch. Enarcher, to arch, or cover with an arch. Enarmée, the handles of a shield. Enarthrose, a full and perfect uni∣ting of bones. Enasé, nose-less. Enaser, to cut off ones nose. Enaspri, sharpened, exasperated. Enasprir, to sharpen, to exasperate. Encacqué, put into a cag. Encacquer, to put into a cag, or little barrel. Encadené, chained. Encadener, to chain, or to lie in a chain. Encagé, put into a cage, or prison. Encager, to put into a cage, or prison. s'Encaillouïr, to become as bard as a flint. Encaissé, put into a case, or chest. Encaisser, to put into a case, or chest.
Encaloché, that wears high wooden shoes. Encaly, hardened, as the skin of a toyling hand. Encant, as Encan in the N. D. Encapé, covered with a hood, or cloak. Encapeliné, wearing a little, flat, narrow-brimmed hat; or armed with a scull of iron. Encapeluchonné, wearing a Cowl, as a Monk. Encaper, to cover with a hood or cloak. Encapitonner, to hood, or cover the head. Encapuchonné, as Encapeluchon∣né. Encapuchonner, to hood with a ca∣puch. Encarené, laid on the side as a ship. Encarener une Nef, to carry in a ship, to lay her on her side. Encarné, incarnated, made fleshy, or fat. Encarner, to incarnate, to make fleshy, or fat. Encarré, gravelled, or as Encarené. Encarrer, to level at, or as Acarer. Encassé, put into a case, or chest. Encasser, to put into a case, or chest. Encastellé, narrow-heeled, as a horse. s'Encasteller, to grow narrow-heeled. Encastelure, a vicious or painful narrowness in a horses heel; a growing narrow-heeled. Encastillement, an inchacement. Encauché, intangled. Encauste, enamel, or varnish. Encaustique, enamelled, varnished, wrought with fire. Encellé, as Ensellé. Encensier, a star in heaven placed under the sting of the Scorpion. Encensier, (Adj.) perfuming with incense. Encentrer, to graft. Encepé, set in the stocks; also laden with irons. Enceper, to set in the stocks. Encerclé, incircled, incompassed, bound about with hoops. Encercler, to incircle, to incompass, to binde about with hoops. Encernant, invironing, incompas∣sing. Encerné, invironed, incompassed. Enchafouiné, out of tune. Enchagriné, vexed. Enchagriner, to vex. Enchainement, a binding with chains. Enchalassé, propped, as a vine. Enchalasser une vigne, to prop, or underset a vine. Enchambré, lodged in a chamber; also mortaised, inclosed within. Enchampre, a chizel; a cutting, carving, or graving tool. Enchancré, cankered. Enchancrer, to canker. Enchante-coeur, heart-charming. Enchanteries, inchantments. Enchanteusement, inchantingly. Enchapelé, crowned with Garlands; also covered with a hat. Enchapeler, to crown with Gar∣lands; also to set a hat on the head. Enchapement d'une cheminée, the broad top of a chimney. Enchaperonnement, a covering with a hood; also the out-jutting of a Roof. Enchappé, wearing a Cope. Enchappeler, as Enchapeler. Encharacteré, written, or printed in Characters. Encharacterer, to write, or print in Characters. Encharbouté, rumpled, confused. Enchardonné, weeded, rid of thi∣stles. Enchardonner, to weed out thi∣stles. Enchargé, charged, injoyned; also over-charged. Encharger, to charge, or give in charge. Encharger l'estomac, to cloy his stomack. Femme qui encharge, a woman that grows big on't. Encharné, whereon flesh is bred. Encharné au coeur, rooted in the heart. Encharnelé, propped, as a Vine. Encharneler une Vigne, to prop, or underset a Vine. Encharner, to flesh, to breed flesh on. Enchassillé de Menuiserie, set in a Wainscot-frame. Presse enchassil∣lée, a Printers Press with a Tym∣pan. Enchassiller, to set in. Enchatonner, to inchace. Enchaucié, chased, pursued. Enchaulmé, thatched. Enchaulmer, to thatch. Enchausseure, a shooing; also the measure of a foot taken to make a shooe by. Enche, as Anche. Encheinure, as Enchainure in the N. D. Encheminer, to set in the way. Enchemisé, covered with a shirt, or smock. Enchenard, part of a womans &c. Enchepé, set in the stocks. Encheper, to set in the stocks. Encheriment, a raising of a price, a raising in price. Encherner, to flesh. Encherre, as Encherir in the N. D. Enchesneure, a chaining; also a course of things linked together. Enchet, a falling, or dropping in. Enchevallé, set with one foot over another. Enchevaller, to set one foot over a∣nother. Enchevestré, ty'd in a halter; also intangled. Enchevestrement, a tying in a halter; also a being intangled. Enchevestrer, to tye in a halter; also to intangle. Enchevestrure, as Enchevestrement. Enchevestrure de cheminée, the mantle-tree of a chimney. Encheux, as Ainçois. Enchiffré, set down in Cyphers. Enchiffrené, whose nose is stopt with a cold. Enchiffrer, to cypher. Enciré, waxed, made of wax. Encirer, to wax, to make of wax. Encis, the murthering of a great-belly'd woman, or of the Infant within her belly. Encisé, cut up, or into. Enciser, to make an incision. Enclaveure, as Enclavement in the N. D. Enclin, for Inclination, inclina∣tion. Encliner, to incline; also to decline. S'encliner, to bow down. Enclostré, shut up in a Cloyster. Enclostrer, to shut up in a Cloyster. Enclosture, an inclosure, a Close. Enclotir, to drive a Fox or Coney into an earth, or berry. Encloucher, to tell one what he shall say. Encloyer, to cloy. Enclumeau, a little Anvil. Encoche, a notch. Encocheure, a notching. Encoeur, as Encueur. Encoigné, thrust into a corner; made corner-wise; also wedged in. Encoigneure, as Encongnure in the N. D.
Encoleure, as Encoulure in the N. D. Encollé, having a fair, stiff, and big neck; also put about the neck. Long encollé, necked like a Crane. Encoller, to put about the neck. Encollure, as Encoulure in the N. D. Encoloré, coloured all over. Encombre, as Encombrier; also rubbih. Encombré, incumbred, pestered. Encombrement, an incumbring, or pestering; also an annoyance, or incumbrance. Encombrer, to incumber, to pester. Encombrer le mariage de sa femme, to alien his Wives land. Encombrier, a cumber, an incum∣brance; a mischief, or misfortune. Encomiastique, praising, commen∣ding. Encommencé, begun. Encommencer, to begin. Encommenceur, a beginner. Enconché, trimmed, drest. Encontenancé, that hath put a good face on the matter. Encontenancer, to put a good face on the matter. Encontré, incountred, or met with. Encontrer, to incounter. Enconvenancé, covenanted. Enconvenancer, to covenant. Encoqueluché, hooded; also sick of the disease called Coqueluchoe. Encoqueluchonné, wearing a hood, or Spanish Capuch. Encoquillé, as Poisson encoquillé, a Shell-fish. Encorbellement, a shouldering or supporting by Corbels, or Brac∣kets. Encordé, bound with cords. Encordelé, corded, made up with cords; also intangled therewith. Encordeler, to cord, to make up with cords; also to intangle with cords. Encordonné, twisted of many strings. Encordonner, to twist of many strings. Encoremes, the signes of urine (e∣specially those that swim on the top thereof). Encornal, the hounds of a Mast. Encorné, horned; also put into a horn. Encorner, to trim with horns; al∣so to put into a horn. Encorneté, put into a horn, or cornet. Encorneter, to put into a horn, or cornet. Encornure, a trimming with horn; also the horns of a beast. Encorny, hard and smooth as horn. Encoronné, crowned. Encoronner, to crown. Encotonné, stuffed with Cotton. Encotonner, to stuff with Cotton. Encouärdé, made cowardly. Encouarder, to make a coward. Encouärdi, grown cowardly. Encouärdir, to grow cowardly. Encoulpé, accused. Encoulper, to accuse. Encoulpeur, an accuser. Encoultré, furnished with a culter. Encoultrer, to furnish with a culter. Encourement, a punishment, a pe∣nalty incurred. Encourrayé, bound (or furnished) with leathern thongs. Encourayer, to binde (or furnish) with leathern thongs. Encourtiné, covered with (or sha∣dowed by) a curtain, hid behinde a curtain. Encourtiner, to draw a curtain o∣ver, to cover with (to shadow by) a curtain, to hide behinde a cur∣tain. Encoutelassé, armed with a cutte∣las. Encoutelasser, to arm (or furnish) with a cuttelas. Encrassé, grown thick with filth and ordure. Encrasser, to make thick with filth and ordure. Encrené, notched, indented. Encresmé, full of cream, made of cream. Encresmer, to fill, or furnish with cream. Encreté, bitterness, also blackness. Encreusé, hollowed; also laid up in holes. Encreuser, to hollow; also to lay up in holes. Encrier, an Ink-maker. Encrier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to Ink. Encrou, as Escrou. Encroüé, lodged, as a cudgel in a tree, hanging on, or ledged in. Encrouër, to lodge as a cudgel in a tree, to hang on, or ledge in. Encrousté, pargetted; becrusted, or whereon a scab is set. Encroustement, a pargetting, a bringing of a scab on. Encrouster, to parget; to bring a scab on. Encruché, put into an earthen pot, also as Encroüé. Encrucher, to put into an earthen pot. Encrudi, made, or become raw. Encrudir, to make, or become raw. Encueur, the Scithy (a disease of horses and other cattel.) Encuict, raw, undigested; also hardned through heat. Encuirassé, grown hard, or stiff; al∣so bound hard. Encuirasser, to harden, or stiffen; also to binde hard. Enculé, set upon the tail; also set a∣slope, or with an imbowed bot∣tom. Encusé, accused, detected. Encusement, an accusation, or de∣tection. Encuser, to accuse, to detect. Encuseur, an accuser, a detecter. Encuvé, put into a fat, or tub. Encuver, to put into a fat, or tub. Encyliglotte, the tongue-string. Encyrer, as Inciser in the N. D. Enda, in faith, in truth. Endaims, as Andaims. Endamoisellé, effeminated; also at∣tired in a Gentlewomans apparel. Endare, he went his way. Endazé, earnest in a business. Endebtement, a being indebted; a bringing into debt. Endelechie, assiduity. Endemené, wanton, waggish, lasci∣vious. Endementiers, in the mean while. Endenté, indented. Endenter, to indent. Endernier, the last, or the latter-end. Endesvé, mad. Endesver, to rage, to be mad. Endiabler, to possess with a devil. Endiamenté, set with Diamonds. Endicté, indicted, accused. Endictement, an indictment, or ac∣cusation. Endicter, to indict, or accuse. Endicteur, an indicter, accuser, in∣former. Endimanché, attired for Holy∣days. Endité, as Endicté; also demon∣strated, pointed at with a fin∣ger. Endizeler les gerbes, to shock up sheaves of corn, to make them up in (ten-sheaved) half-thraves. Endoctrinable, fit to be taught. Endoctriné, taught, instructed. Endoctrinement, an instruction.
Endoctriner, to teach, to instruct. Endoille, as Andouille in the N. D. Endoré, gilt all over; beset, or adorned with gold. Endorer, to gild all over; to beset or adorn with gold. Endormant, the Serpent Cenchris, whose stinging breeds a continual sleeping. Endormie, the herb henbane or poppy. Endormisson de membres, num∣ness. Endos, for Endossement, an in∣dorsing. Endosé, that hath his share or por∣tion of; whose part is limited or prescribed unto him. Endosseure, the back-part of any thing; also an indorsement. Endoüairé, indowed, indued with. Endoüairer, to indow, to indue with. Endoulouri, grieved, pained. Endouté, doubtful Endroict, (Adj.) direct. Endue, skilful. Enduisement, a plaistering, dawb∣ing. Enduiseur, a plaisterer, a dawber. Enduit, (Subst.) or Enduite, plai∣ster; a bed or lay of plaister. Endurable, sufferable, indurable. Endurant, suffering, induring. Endurement, an induring; also last∣ing. Enduvetter, to fill, or stuff with down. Eneaüé, watered; seasoned with, or turned into water. Eneaüer, to turn into water; to mingle, or season with water. Enenda, in faith, in truth. Enervation, enervation. Enervé, enervated, weakened. Enerver, to enervate, to weaken. Enfaissé, made up into a bundle. Enfaisser, to make up into a bun∣dle. Enfaistau, a Ridge-tile. Enfaisté, roofed. Enfaisture, a ridge, or ridging. Enfanchonnets, grand-children. Enfançon, a little infant. Enfangé, bemired. Enfangement, a bemiring. Enfanger, to bemire. Enfanson, a little infant. Enfantiere, femme enfantiere, a childe-bearing woman. Enfantil, childish. Enfantilement, childishly. Enfantillage, childishness. Enfantiller, to play like a childe. Enfantinément, childishly. Enfardelé, made up into a bundle. Enfardeler, to make up into a bun∣dle. Enfeconder, to make fruitful. Enfelonni, grown cruel. s'Enfelonnir, to grow cruel. Enferger, to fetter. Enferges, Shackles, Fetters. Enferme, infirm, weak. Enfermement, a shutting, or locking up. Enfermerie, an Hospital; a Cloy∣ster. Enfermier, an Overseer of the Sick in Hospitals; also the Porter of a Cloyster. Enfestau, a Ridge-tile. Enfesté, kept Holy-day. Maison enfestée, a house with a roof ti∣led. Enfester, to keep Holy-day. Enfe∣ster un edifice, to tile a house. Enfeuillé, covered with leaves. s'Enfeuiller, to cover himself with leaves. Enfiellé, made bitter as gall; filled, or mingled with gall. Enfieller, to make bitter; to fill, or mingle with gall. Enfieri, grown proud. s'Enfierir, to grow proud. Enfievré, put into an ague. Enfievrer, to put into an ague. Enfinceux, wanton, lascivious. Enfistulé, that hath a fistula. Enflambant, inflaming. Enflambé, inflamed. Enflambement, an inflaming. Enflamber, to inflame. S'enflamber de courroux, to chafe. Enfle-boeuf, the Ox-fly, or long-legged beetle. Enflecheures, the ratlings, the cor∣dy steps whereby Mariners climb up to the top of a Mast. Enflement, a swelling. Enflément, swellingly. Enflescher, to pierce with arrows. Enfleure, as Enflure, a swelling. Enfleurer, Enfleurir, Enfleuronnier, to spread with flowers. Enfoiri, beshit. Enfoirir, to beshit. Enfolastré, doting on. Enfondrant, sinking, overwhelm∣ing; also yielding as a soft thing to the violence of a hard. Enfondré, sunk, overwhelmed; also extreamly dinted, or beaten far in. Enfondrer, to sink, to overwhelm. Enfondrer un chemin, to make a deep way. Enfondrer un harnois, to make a great dint in an armor. Enfondu, wringing-wet. Enforcé, strengthened. s'Enforcer, as alors s'enforça la feste, then did the feast increase. Enforci, inforced, strengthened. Enforcir, to inforce, to strengthen. S'enforcir, to grow strong, to pick up his crums. Enforme, formed, fashioned. Enformer, to form, to fashion. Enforti, strengthened, fastened; al∣so thickned as cloth is by fulling. Enfoué, turned into fire. Enfouër, to turn into fire. Enfourché, forked. Enfourchir, to besork; also to be∣stride. Enfourchure, as Fourchure in the N. D. Enfractueux, intricate, perplexed. Enfractuosité, intricacy. Enfrainct, infringed, violated, bro∣ken. Enfrangé, edged with fringe. Enfranger, to edge (or set) with fringe. Enfriché, overgrown with weeds, &c. s'Enfricher, to be overgrown with weeds, &c. s'Enfroidurer, to take cold. Enfroqué, covered with a Monks hood or cowl. Enfroquer, to cover with a cowl; to make, or institute a Monk. Enfruité, stored with fruit. Enfruiter, to store with fruit. Enfueillé, stuck with leaves. Enfueiller, to stick with leaves. S'enfueiller, to hide himself among leaves. Enfumé, smoaked; smoaky-colou∣red. Enfumé, (Subst.) a dusky Sea-fish, that lives upon slime and ordure. Enfumement, a smoaking. Enfumer, to smoak. Enfurié, inraged, stark mad. Enfusté, put into a cask. Engage, a pawn, a pledge, an in∣gagement. Engageur, a pawner, an ingager. Engageure, a pawning, an ingage∣ing. Engaigne, a sleight, or craft. Engaigné, as Engigné; also egged, urged, provoked. Engaigner to cozen, gull, or deceive; to charm; to egg, or to set on. Engain, anger; also a cousening trick.
Engane-pastre, a water-wagtail. Enganer, to deceive; a nurse to con∣ceal her being with child. Enganté, furnished with gloves. Mittaines engantées, mittains like gloves. Engarber, as Encontenancer; also to cover. Engardé, kept from, hindered. Engarder, to keep from, to hinder. Engarder la hardiesse de, to curb the boldness of. Engastrimyte, that speaks out of the belly, as one that is possessed seems to do. Engauché, as Encauché. Enge, as Engeance. Engé, stored with the kind of; also increased. Engeance, a breed, or generation. Engeancement, a breeding, increa∣sing. Engeancer, to breed, to increase. Engelé, frozen, congealed. Engeler, to freeze, to congeal. Engeleure, a Chilblain. Engendreure, Engendrure, beget∣ting, procreation. Enger, to produce, or make to grow; to store or fill with the increase or kind of; also to increase. Engerbé, bound up together in a sheaf. Engerber, to bind up in a sheaf. Engeronné, dandled on (or hugged in) the lap. Engeronner, to dandle upon the lap. Engigné, charmed, bewitched; also cousened. Engigner, to charm, to bewitch; also to cousen. Engigneur, a charmer; also a cheat. Enginé, as Engigné. Enginer, as Engigner. Enginier, a maker of Engins. Engiponné, muffled up; also rag∣ged, or in rags. Englacé, grown cold as ice. s'Englacer, to wax as cold as ice. Englantine, an eglantine. Engle, for angle, an angle. Englentier, a sweet-briar tree. Engler, to shut up in a corner. Englet, as Anglet. Englobé, contained within the com∣pass of. Englober, to contain or to compre∣hend within the circumference of. Englobure, an inglobing; also a globe-like circumference or com∣pass. Englume, for Enclume, an anvil. Engolsé, swallowed up in a gulf. Engolfer, to swallow up. Engoncé, set fast in; straitned, wanting liberty. Engorgement, a pouring down the throat, a swallowing up, as of a River by the Sea; also a choaking. Engorgeur, a glutton. Engorgeux, greedy. Engoüé, choaked, stifled. Engouër, to choak, or stifle. Engouleur, a glutton. Engoulphe, as Engolfé. Engourmelé, curdled thick. Engousté, put in tast, brought unto a stomack; also inchased. Engraississant, for engraissant, fat∣tening. Engraiz, as Engrais, in the N. D. Engrand, longing much. Engrangé, put into a barn. Engrangement, an inning of corn, a putting on't up in a barn. Engranger, to inn corn. Engraveur, an Ingraver. Engravcure, an ingraving. s'Engreger, to grow worse, to be∣come sover. Engreigné, as pore engreigné, a measeld hog. Engressé, ingrailed, or invecked, (in Heraldy.) Engressure, an ingrailling, or in∣vecking, a kind of small indent∣ing in a Coat of Arms. Engressement, for Engraissement, a fattening of cattel. Engriner, to grow greater. Engroigné, sullen, frowning. Engroin, sallenness. Engroissi, made, or grown big. Engrommelé, curdled thick, gathe∣red into knobs or knots. Engroüé, choaked up, as the course of a water-mill, by weeds. Enguiné, deceived. Enguiner, to deceive. Enguiponné, as Engiponne. Enguerlandé, wearing a garland. Enguerlander, to crown with a gar∣land. Engyronner, to inviron, or to in∣compass. Engys, for aupres, near, hard by. Enhaillonné, tattered, ragged. Enhair, to hate. Enhanné, toyled hard. Enhanner, to toys hard. Enhanté, having a staff or handle put to it. Enhanter une pique, to put the staff into the head of a pike. Enharnaché, harnassed. Enharnachement, harnass; also the harnassing of a horse. Enharnacher un cheval, to harnass a horse, to put on all his furni∣ture. Enharnichement, as Enharnache∣ment. Enhasté, put upon a spit. Enhaster, to put on the spit. Enhault, for en haut, above. Enhazé, very busy. Il est tout enha∣zé à pluvoir, it is set to rain. Enherbé, bewitched, or poysoned with herbs. Enherbement, a bewitching, or poysoning with herbs. Enherber, to bewitch, or poyson with herbs. Enheriter, to make one his heir. Enheudé, fettered. Enheuder, to fetter. Enhorner, to tip with horn. Enhort, exhortation. Enhorté, exhorted. Enhortement, an exhorting. Enhorter, to exhort. Enhorteur, an exhorter. Enhui, to day. Enhuilé, oyled, anointed. Enhuiler, to oyl, to anoint. En∣huiler un homme qui meurt, to minister the extream Ʋnction to a dying man. Enhydrer, to breed many mischiefs by the cutting off of one. Enhydride, an Adder, or water-Snake. Enjablé, whose head is fitted for the Crows. Enjabler, to make the head of a cask fit for the Crows. s'Enjalouser, to grow jealous. Enjambé, strid over; also incroa∣ched on. Enjambée, a stride, or as much ground as one can stride over. Enjambement, a striding over; an incroaching upon. Enjambeure, Enjambure, a stride. Enjaveliner, to arm, or strike, with a Javeline. Enjauler, Enjauleur. See Enjoler, Enjoleur in the N. D. Enjauleuse, an inticing huswife. s'Enjaunir, to wax yellow. Enjeoller, for enjoler, to deceive one with fair words. En-ju, a stake at play. Enig, with. Enigmatique, enigmatical, ob∣ure. Enjobeliné, fooled, abused. Enjobeliner, to fool, to abuse. Enjoinct, for Enjoint, injoyned.
Enjoincté, bas enjoincté, low-joyn∣ted. Enjoliveure, an attiring, an at∣tire. Enjonché, strewed, or set out with green Rushes, fresh Herbs, &c. Enjoncher, to strew, or set out with green Rushes, fresh Herbs, &c. Enjoyallier, to deck, or adorn with Jewels. Enjuvencé, made young, or youth∣ful. Enjuvencer, to make youthful. Enixe, earnest, endeavouring, or la∣bouring hard. Enlacé, Enlacer, as Enlassé, Enla∣cer in the N. D. Enlaidi, grown ugly. Enlaidir, to make ugly. Enlaidissement, a disfiguring, or making ugly. Enlanguagé, bien enlanguagé, a well-spoken man. Enlié, bound together. Enlier, to binde together. Enlignagé, bien enlignagé, of good kinred. Enlissé, smoothed, sleeked. Enlisser, to smooth, to sleek. Enlisseure, a smoothing, or slee∣king. Enlourdi, grown dull, sottish. Ennasin, belonging to the nose. Ennassé, caught, as fish in a wheel. s'Ennasser, to be caught, as fish in a wheel. Ennazé, put on the nose. Ennazer, to put on the nose. Enneigé, full of snow. Ennelé, as Jambes ennelées, Baker-legs. Ennicroche, an intricacy. Ennicroché, perplexed. Enniellé, blasted, as Corn, &c. s'Ennieller, Corn, Vines, or Fruits to be blasted. Ennoirci, blacked, grown (or made) black. Ennoircir, to black, or make black; to grow black. Ennombré, number out, enumerated; told (counted) over. Ennombrer, to enumerate, or num∣ber out; to tell (or count) over. Ennossé, almost choaked with a bone. Ennoüé, ty'd up, or on a knot. Ennouër, to tye on a knot. Ennoye, the name of a venomous worm. Ennuagé, overclouded. Ennuager, to overcloud. s'Ennuer, to grow cloudy. Ennuicté, benighted, turned into night. Ennuicter, to benight, to turn into night. Ennuicti, benighted. Enny, as Ennoye. Enombragé, overshadowed. Enombrager, to overshadow. Enombré, as Enombragé. Enombrer, as Enombrager. Enondé, waved, wrought like waves. Enordi, defiled, polluted. Enordir, to defile, to pollute. Enormissime, most enormous, or hai∣nous. Enortié, netled, stung with nettles. Enortier, to nettle, or sting with nettles. Enossé, e'en choaked with a bone; also settled in the bones. Enoyselé, fleshed upon birds, as a Hawk. Enperruqué, as Emperruqué. Enquaissé, put up into a chest. Enquaisser, to put up into a chest. Enquant, as Inquant. Enquantellé, well piked. Enquenouiller de filace, to draw a Distaff. Enquerquenner, to yoke Swine. s'Enguester, for s'Enquerir, to in∣quire. Enracinable, sit to take root. Enracinement, a rooting, or taking root. Enragément, madly. Enrailler, to stare. Enramé, set thick with boughs; al∣so got upon a bough. Enramement, a laying, or sprea∣ding of boughs; a climbing on boughs. Enramer, to spread boughs. S'en∣ramer, to climb upon boughs. Enranci, grown musty. Enrancir, to grow musty. Enraqué, bemired. Enrassé, stark mad. Enrayé, stayd, or held back, as a wheel by a trigger. Enrayer une rouë, to stay, or hold a wheel back with a trigger. Enrayoir, the wheel-gate, or beam that stops the course of a Water-mill; also a trigger for a wheel. Enregistrable, fit to be registred. Enrencé, grown musty. Enrethé, caught in a net. Enrether, to catch in a net. Enrichisseure, an inriching. Enrimé, as Enrheumé, hoarse. Enrimer, to get the rheum. Enroché, made rockie. Enrocher, to make rockie. Enrocheur, a Wine-porter. Enroidi, grown stiff, become obsti∣nate. s'Enroidir, to grow stiff, to become obstinate. Enrollement, for Enrolement, an inrolling, or listing. Enrotulé, inrolled. Enrotuler, to inrol. Enroüément, hoarsely. Enrouëure, hoarseness. Enroulé, for enrolé, inrolled, listed. Enrouler, to inrol, to list. Enrouiller les yeux, to stare, to gaze. Enroupié, snotty. Enrousé, watered. Enrouser, to water. Enruché, put into hives. Enrucher, to put into a hive. s'Enruisseler, to divide it self into little streams. Ens, in, within. Ensablé, filled, or covered with sand; run on the sands. Ensabler, to fill, or to cover with sand; also to run on the sands. Ensablonner, to fill with gravel. Ensaché, put into a bag. Ensacher, to put into a bag. Ensafrané, seasoned with Saffron. Ensafraner, to season with Saffron; or to paint over with Saffron. Ensagi, grown wise. Ensagir, to grow wise. Ensaisiné, fully seized, put into full possession of. Ensaisinement, an inseisining, a put∣ting into possession. Ensaisiner, to give seisin, to put into full possession. Ensali, fouled, defiled. Ensalir, to foul, to defile. Ensalissement, a fouling, a defi∣ling. Ensaqué, put into a sack. Ensaquer, to put into a sack. Ensavonné, washed with soap. Ensavonner, to wash with soap. Ensceptré, wearing a Scepter. Enscophionné, wearing a Coif. Enseigneurié, made Lord. Ensel, Sword-like, of a Sword. Ensellé, saddled. Enseller un cheval, to saddle a horse. Ensemblement, together. Ensemencement, a sowing. Ensement, likewise. Ensepulturé, buri'd. Ensepulturer, to bury.
Enserpenté, covered with serpents. Enserrement, a shutting fast up. Ensoigne, an Essoin, a lawful ex∣cuse for an absent or impotent per∣son. Ensoigner, to essoin, to excuse an ab∣sent, or discharge an impotent person. Ensoing, as Ensoigne. Ensoitte, hogs bristles. Ensoitter, to dress or furnish with hogs bristles. Ensongnie, Ensonie, as Ensoigne. Ensorcelerie, witchcraft. Ensorceleur, a witch. Ensouffié, blown; also blowing. Ensoulfré, Eusoulfrer. See Ensouf∣fré, Ensouffrer in the N. D. Ensouple a Weavers Yarn-beam. Ensoupleau, a Weavers Cloth-beam. Enstocatté, a field inclosed with pikes, and appointed for a single Combat. Ensuairé, wound up in a sheet. Ensuairer, to winde a coarse in a sheet; also to wipe with a hand∣kerchief. Ensuble, as Ensouple. Ensuceré, sugared. Ensucerer, to season with sugar. Ensué, sowed up. Ensuer, to sow up, or as Ensuerer, to winde a coarse in a sheet. Ensuyvant, following. Entablature, as Entablement in the N. D. Entablé, boarded. Entaché, spotted, stained, tainted. Entacher, to spot, stain, or taint. Entacher une besongne, to under∣take a piece of work. Entacheure, a spot; also a spotting, staining, or tainting. Entail, a mortaise, or incutting. Entailleur, a graver. Entalenté, longing after. Mal en∣talenté envers, ill affected to. Entalenter, to breed a longing. Entelechie, absolute perfection, or efficacy; perfect motion, or essence; force moving of it self; also as Endelechie. Entellectual, for Intellectuel, intel∣lectual. Entendeur, an understander. Entendible, intelligible. Entendiblement, intelligibly; plain∣ly; also learnedly. Entendoire, understanding. Entend-trois, an equivocation of doubtful or double meaning. Il fait de l'entend-trois, be answers of purpose from the purpose. Entendu que, seeing, or considering that. Entenne, for antenne, a sail-yard. Ententif, attentive, diligent. Ententivement, attentively, care∣fully. Entenu, beholden. Enteprinse, for Entreprise, an enter∣prise. Enterrage, an interring, or burying. Enterreur, a burier. Entesteure, a breeding, or bringing of the head-ach. Enteyser son are jusques à l'oreille, to draw his bow up to the ear. Enthroné, placed in a throne. Enthroner, to place in a throne. Enthusiasme, as Entousiasme in the N. D. Enthyrsé, decked with ivy. Entiché, tainted, corrupted. Entiercé, sequestred into a third hand. Entiercement, a sequestring, or se∣questration. Entiercer, to sequester, or put into a third hand. Entiereté, intireness; also constancy, or obstinacy in an opinion. Entimbraillé, Entimbré, that bears a flourish hanging from the top of his helmet. Entiquer, to cleave, or stick fast like a tick. Entoilé, made of, or furnished with linnen or canvas; also intangled, or caught in toyls. Entoiler, to make of, or furnish with linnen; also to intangle, or catch in toyls; to compass or hem in with toyls. Entoisé, bent, as a bow; lift up, as a sword ready to strike. Entoiser un are, to bend a bow. Entoiser une espée, to lift up a sword with an intention to strike. Entombé, interred. Entomber, to interr. Entombi, henummed. Entommeure, as Entoumeure; al∣so a funnel. Enton, a little graft. Entonnage, tunnage. Entonnelé, tunned, put into a cask. Entonnelement, a tunning, or put∣ting of liquour into a cask. Entonneler, to tun by a funnel. Entorce, for Entorse, a strain. Entorce, as Jambe entorce, a croo∣ked leg. Entorecure, as Entorseure. Entorné, rounded; compassed about with. Entors, for entorse, a strain. Entorsé, strained. Entorser, to strain. Entorseure, a straining. Entortillonné, Entortillonner, as Entortillé, Entortiller in the N. D. Entouillé, bewrayed, or defiled; al∣so pestered, incumbered, hindered. Entouillement, a filthy incumbrance. Entouiller, to bewray, or defile; also to pester, to incumber. Entoumeure, a gobbet, a great bit. Entourellé, begirt with turrets. Entourement, Entoureure, a sur∣rounding. Entourné, invironed; also wound a∣bout. Entourner, to inviron; also to winde about. s'Entourner, to turn round. Entournoy, a funnel. Entournure, a round, a circle. Entourtillant, wreathing, rowling a∣bout with. Entourtillé, as Entortillé in the N. D. Entourtillon, a wreath, a roll. Entourtillure, a wreathing, a rowl∣ing about with. Entourure, a Compass, any thing that compasseth and incloseth a∣nother. Entracassé, half broken. Entract, the greenish salve called Trait. Entrage, for Entrée, a fee or custom due at the entering of Merchan∣dise into a place; also a fine paid for a Lease. Entrait, a short piece of timber in∣dented within another place, thereby to hold it the faster. Entrange, as Entrage. Entrape, any thing that catches or hinders a man as he goes. Entrapé, pestered, troubled. Entraper, to pester, to trouble. Entraverser, to cross over. Entravestissement, an intervesting, or intervesture; a mutual posses∣sion, or joynt possessing of. En∣travestissement de sang, is be∣tween such as are joyned by mar∣riage, where the survivor hath all, or the most prt of that which was joyntly possessed. Entraveur, a setterer, a shackler. s'Entr'accointer, to grow aquain∣ted together. s'Entr'accoller, to embrace each o∣ther.
s'Entr'accompagner, to keep com∣pany together. s'Entr'accrocher, to lay fast hold one of another. s'Entr'accuser, to accuse one ano∣ther. s'Entr'advertir, to hold intelligence together. s'Entr'affoler, to hurt one another. s'Entr'aguiser, to sharpen each the other. s'Entr'aimans, mutual friends, lo∣ving one another. s'Entr'appeler, to call one another. s'Entr'approcher, to draw near one another. Entr'arraché, plucked up here and there, rooted out from between. Entr'arracher, to pluck up here and there, to root out from between. s'Entr'assener des espées, to strike (or hit) one another with their Swords. Entr'attacher, to tye fast together. Entr'avoir, to have, or possess one a∣nother. Entrebaall, a chink, or cleft. Entrebasti, built betwixt. Entrebastir, to build betwixt. Entrebayement, a chink, or cleft. Entrebecqueter, to peck at one ano∣ther. Entrebeu, half drunk. s'Entreblesser, to hurt, or wound each other. Entreboyau, a thick and fat skin that fastens Bowels to the back, and each of them to the other. s'Entrebrecher, to break, or make breaches into one another. Entrebrisé, half broken; also di∣stinct, distinguished; also uneven, as a thing that is half burst. s'Entrebrouiller, to trouble one a∣nother. Entrebruire, to make a humming noise. s'Entrebrusler, to burn each other. s'Entrecaresser, to interchange kindnesses. Entrecassé, half broken. Entrecasser, almost to break. s'En∣trecassier les dents, to bruise the teeth by gnashing them hard one against another. s'Entreceder, to yield one to the o∣ther. s'Entreceler, to hide, or conceal one another. Entre-cep, the distance between stock and stock. s'Entrecercher, to look for one ano∣ther. Entrecesse, intermission, ceasing. s'Entrechamailler, to slash one ano∣ther. Entrechangé, interchanged. s'Entrechanger, to interchange; almost to change. Maveuë m'en∣trechange, my sight grows dim. s'Entrecharger, to charge one ano∣ther. Entrechasse, a cross caper. Entrechaucher, to tread upon, to trample amongst. s'Entrecherir, as s'Entrecaresser. Entrechevaucher, to ride betwixt. s'Entrechoisir, to chuse out one ano∣ther. Entrecler, somewhat light. Entrecolomne, the space between pil∣lars. Entrecolomnement, a leaving of space between pillar and pillar. s'Entrecommuniquer, to communi∣cate one with another. s'Entreconvier, to invite one another. s'Entrecosser, to jut or but toge∣ther, as Rams. s'Entrecoudoyer, to justle one ano∣ther with the elbow. Entrecoulé, run in between. Entrecouler, to glide, or run be∣tween. Entrecoupeure, an half cutting, a cutting off in the midst. Entrecourir, to run on both sides, joyntly to run. s'Entrecourir, to incounter, to run one upon ano∣ther. s'Entrecraindre, to stand in fear of one another. Entrecroisé, crossed over. Entrecroisement, a crossing over. s'Entrecroiser, to lie cross one ano∣ther. Entrecroisure, a double cross, or in∣tercrossing. Entrecueilli, gathered from among. Entrecueillir, to gather from a∣mong. Entrecuisses, the cods of a wilde Boar. s'Entredebuoir, to owe one ano∣ther. s'Entredefendre, to defend one a∣nother. s'Entredemander, to ask one ano∣ther. Entredent, the space that is be∣tween two teeth. s'Entredepecer, to pull one another in pieces. s'Entredesfaire, to undo one ano∣ther. Entredeu, interchangeably due. s'Entrediffamer, to disgrace one a∣nother. s'Entredire injures, to revile one a∣nother. Entrediscerner, to know one from another. s'Entredommager, to wrong each other. Entredonné, exchanged. s'Entredonner, to exchange. s'En∣tredonner courage, to encourage one another. Entredormir, to slumber. Entredoubté, somewhat doubted of. Entredoubter, somewhat to doubt of. s'Entr'embrasser, to hug one ano∣ther. s'Entr'empoigner, to catch hold of one another. s'Entr'encourager, to incourage one another. s'Entr'entendre, to play booty to∣gether. Entr'eselos, half hatched. Entr'escrire, to interline. Entr'escrit, interlined. s'Entr'essayer, to try one another. s'Entrefaire grandefeste, to make very much of one another. s'Entrefascher, to fall out one with the other. Entrefendre, to part in halves. Entrefendu, parted in halves. Entreferir, to strike at one ano∣ther; also to interfere, as a Horse Entrefessier, the space between the Buttocks. Entrefesson, the space between the Privities and the Fundament. Entrefileures de drap, the space be∣tween thread and thread. s'Entreflatter, to sooth each o∣ther. s'Entrefondre, to run over head and cars into. Entrefossé, the space that is between ditch and ditch. s'Entrefouetter, to whip each other. Entrefouïr, to dig between. Entrefouler, to trample in the midst of. s'Entrefrapper, to strike each o∣ther. Entrefrizé, curled one within ano∣ther. Entrefrizer, to curl the Hair, &c. s'Entrefroisser, to crush one another in pieces. s'Entrefrotter, to rub one against another; to interfere. Entrefrotture, a rubbing one a∣gainst
another; a horses interfe∣ring. s'Entregaller, to scratch one ano∣ther. Entregenté, that carries himself handsomely. s'Entregenter, to know well how to carry himself in all companies. s'Entregratter, to scratch each o∣ther. s'Entregronder, to grumble one at another. s'Entreguerroyer, to make wars one upon another. s'Entrehanter, to converse much to∣gether. s'Entrehapper, to catch hold of one another. s'Entreharceler, to harry one ano∣ther. Entreheurt, Entreheurtis, an inter∣shock. s'Entrehucher, to whoop at one a∣nother. Entreiamber, to cross legs. Entreject, a casting, or putting be∣tween. Entrejectant, thrusting, or casting between. Entreillizé, cross barred. Entrejoindre, to joyn together. S'en∣trejoindre, to embrace each o∣ther. s'Entrejouër, to play (or sport) one with another. Entrelaissé, left off, discontinued. Entrelaisser, to leave off, to discon∣tinue. Entrelardement, an interlading. Entrelas, a knot hard to be loosed, an intricate business; also an in∣terlacing. Entrelasseure, an interlacing. Toicts ornez d'entrelasseures, Roofs decked with interlaced frets. Entrelassis, an interlacing. Entrelié, ty'd together, hound be∣tween. Entrelier, to tie together, to binde between. Entreligne, an interline, or inter∣lining. Entreligné, interlined. Entreligner, to interline. Entrelire, to read together. s'Entrelouër, to commend one ano∣ther. Entreluicter, to wrestle one with another. Entroluire, to give a glimpse, to shine between. Entrelunaires, as Jours entrelu∣naires, the days wherein neither the old nor new Moon is seen. Entremander, to send between par∣ty and party. Entrement, an entring, or entrance. s'Entremeurir, to wax half ripe. s'Entremignarder, to cocker one a∣nother. s'Entremocquer, to deride one a∣nother. s'Entremouiller, to wet one ano∣ther. Entremoyen, a distance, an inter∣medium. s'Entr'empescher, to hinder one a∣nother. Entremutiner, to set together by the ears. Entremuye de moulin, a Mill-hop∣per. Entremy, par entremy, amongst, or in the midst of. Entrenaistre, to be born between, or among. s'Entrenavrer, to wound each o∣ther. Entrenoüé, knotted between; also swum between. Entrenouër, to tie knots between; also to swim between. s'Entrenuire, to prejudice one ano∣ther. s'Entr'injurier, to revile one ano∣ther. s'Entr'obliger, to binde themselves one to the other. s'Entr'occir, to kill each other. Entr'oeil, the space between the Eyes. Entr'oublié, forgotten in the mean while. Entr'oublier, to forget in the mean while. S'entr'oublier, to forget each other. s'Entrepardonner, to forgive one another. Entreparlement, an interrupting. Entreparler, to interrupt one that speaks. Entrepas, a fast walk, a rack. Entrepend, part of a womans &c. s'Entrepigner, to go together by the ears. Entreplanter, to plant or set be∣tween. Entreplié, folded between. Entriplier, to fold between. s'Entrepoindre, to prick one ano∣ther. Entrepos, an interposition. Entreposer, to interpose. Entreposition, interposition. Entrepressé, crowded in another. Entrepresser, to crowd in another. S'entrepresser, to thrust hard one another. s'Entrepresser, to lend one to ano∣ther. Entreprins, Entreprinse, as Entre∣pris, Entreprise in the N. D. s'Entrepromettre une chose, to promise a thing on to another. s'Entreprouver, to try one another. s'Entrequerir, to seek each other. Entrer, (Subst.) an entry, or going into. Entreraclé, scraped about. Entreracler, to scrape about. s'Entreregretter, passionately to wish for one another. s'Entrerencontrer, to meet one ano∣ther. Entrerompant, interrupting, stop∣ping. Entrerompre, to interrupt, to stop. Entrerougir, to blush a little. Entreroulé, rowled between, rowled now and then. Entrerouler, to rowl between. s'Entreruer de pierres, to pelt one another with Stones. s'Entresaisir bras à bras, to seize one another by the Arms. Entrescieures, frequent (but di∣stant) cuts or entries made by a Saw. s'Entresecourir, to assist one ano∣ther. s'Entresembler, to resemble one ano∣ther. Entresemé, sowed between. Entresemer, to sow here and there. Entreserré, closed in, or between. Entreserrer, to close in, or between. Entresolive, a space between two Rasters. s'Entresouffrir, to endure each o∣ther. s'Entresouvenir de, to remember one another of; also half to remem∣ber. Entrespace, a space between. s'Entrespier, to spie one anothers doings. s'Entresuir, as s'Entresuivre in the N. D. s'Entresurprendre, to surprize one another. Entresuytte, s'Entresuyvre. See Entresuite, Entresuivre in the N. D. Entretaché, spatted here and there. s'Entretaster, to feel one another. Entretenement, coherency; also wages, or entertainment. Entre∣tenement de voix san; respirer, the holding of a note.
Entretisseure, the woof of cloth. Entretistre, to weave between. Entretoise, a cross quarter of timber. Entretortillé, intangled. Entretortiller, to intangle. Entretouillé, intangled. Entretouiller, to intangle. s'Entretrouver, to find each other. Entreveché, intangled, intricated. Entrevecher, to intangle, to intricate. Entreveillé, half awake. Entreveiller, to be waking now and then. Entrever, to understand. Entreverdir, Entreverdoyer, to be greenish. s'Entreverser, to overturn (or over∣throw) one another. Entrevesché, Entrevescher, as En∣treveché, Entrevecher. Entrevisé, viewed now and then. Entreviser, to view now and then. Entrevisité, visited now and then. Entrevisiter, to visit now and then. Entrevomi, vomited now and then. Entrevomir, to vomit now and then. Entroupelé, flocked together. Entroupeler, Entrouper, to flock together. Entuilé, tiled. Entuiler, to tile. Envahie, an invasion. Envain, as Envent. Envaisselé, put into a vessel. Un bel esprit envaisselé, a good pot∣wit. Envasé, as Envaisselé. Envaser, to put into a vessel. Envasquiné, in a long Spanish, or old-fashioned Vardingale. Enucleation, an explanation. Envelopément, obscurely, intricately. Envelopoir, any thing that serves to wrap another in. Envelouté, cloathed with Velvet. Envent, a short blinde Serpent which is thought to sleep all Win∣ter. Envergongné, put out of counte∣nance. Envermé, grown full of worms. Envermer, to fill with, or grow full of worms. Enverré, displeased with. Enversé, inverted, turned upside-downward, or the inside out∣ward; also turned in and out. Enverser, to invert; to turn upside downward, or the inside out∣ward; also to turn in and out. Envictailler, Envictuailler, to vi∣ctual. Envieillir, to grow old. Envieillissement, a growing old. Envier (au jeu) to vie. Envieusement, enviously, spitefully. Envieux (Subst.) a Sloe-worm. Envinaigré, seasoned with Vinegar. Envinaigrer, to season with Vinegar. Enviné, stored, or seasoned with Wine. Envirollé, whose top, end, or tip is bound about with a ring or hoop of iron, &c. Envis, unwillingly. Envitaillement, a providing of vi∣ctuals. Enule-campane, the herb called He∣licampany. Enunciation, enunciation. Envoismé, full of neighbours. Envoulté, charmed in his chief mem∣ber. Envouté, vaulted, arched. Envoutement, a distasting. Envoye, as Ennoye. Envoyriner, to glaze a window. Envoyseure, mockery. Eolipyles, a kind of hollow brasen bowls. Epaigneul, for Epagneu, a Spaniel. Epalouïr, to melt, or swelter with extream heat. Epanalepse, the name of a Rhetori∣cal figure. Epanode, a several rehearsal of two things which at first were spoken of joyntly. Epanons d'un dard, the feathers of a Dart. Enanter, for épouvanter, to dismay. Epatique, for hepatique, the herb Trinity, or noble Agrimony. Epaular, an Ok, a great Sea-fish mortal enemy to the Whale. Epe, instead of. Epeiche, a Speight. Epelan, a Smelt. Eperge, a Brush. Ephebe, a marriageable youth. Ephectique, one that after long stu∣dy is more doubtful than he was at first. Ephemerique, that lasts but a day. Ephimeris, a Journal. Epicaie, equity. Epicaizer, to judge according to equity. Epiche, a Speight. Epidimial, for Epidemique, epide∣mical. Epiecé, rent in pieces. Epiecer, to pull in pieces. Epigastre, all the outward part of the belly from the bulk to the pri∣vities. Epigastrique, belonging to that part of the belly. Epiglottide, the cover-weesel, or stop of the throat. Epigrammatiste, a writer of Epi∣grams. Epigrer, as Escacher. Epilemie, a Song of the Superscri∣ption of a thing. Epilence, a kind of falling-evil in a Hawk. Epinarde, a little fish. Epinices, Songs of Triumph after a Victory. Epinoche, as Espinoche. Epinyctide, a wheal that rises on the skin by night. Epiphore, a rheumatick-dropping of the eyes; also violent impression. Epiphyse, an addition (or appen∣dix) to a bone. Episemaisie, a signification of the mind by the countenance or ge∣sture. Epistemon, a Teacher. Epistrophe, the ending of two verses with one word. Epistyle, a little pillar set upon a greater; also an Architrave. Epitasse d'une Tragedie, the busiest part of a Tragedy. Epitheme, a liquid and outward Medicine. Epithemé, batbed, moistened. Epithemer, or Epithimer, to bathe, or to moisten. Epithin, the weed Dodder. Epitoge, a long Cloak, or Cassock worn loose over other apparel; also a Graduats hood. Epitome, an Epitomy, or Abridg∣ment. Epizeuxe, the name of a Rhetorical figure. Epotique, drunken. Eprenas, a kind of bloudy flux. Eptasyllable, of seven syllables. Epulotique, skin-breeding. Equable, even, alike. Equalisé, equalled, matched, compared. Equaliser, to equal, to match, to compare. Equalité, equality, comparison. Equalizer, as Equaliser. Equanimité, equanimity. Equarri, Equarrir. See Equarré, Equarrer in the N. D. Equarrissement, a measuring, or squaring out by a Squire. Equestre, of, or belonging to horse∣men, Knights, or Gentlemen. Equibiens, the Halses, or two holes in the prow of a Ship, through
which the Anchor-cables pass. Equidiametral, equidiametral. Equidistamment, of equal distance asunder. Equidistance, an even distance asun∣der. Equidistant, equally distant one from the other. Equilance, the hole wherein the tongue of a Ballance playeth. Equilibré, weighed in equal balan∣ces. Equilibrer, to weigh in equal balan∣ces. Equinancie, the Squinsie. Equiparable, fit to be compared, or equalled unto. Equiparaison, likeness, resemblance, comparison. Equiparé, matched, equalled, resem∣bled, likened. Equiparer, to match, or make equal, to compare, to liken. Equipolence, equality in value. Equipoler, to be of equal value. Equipollé, countervailed. Equipoller, to countervail, to be of equal value. Equippée, equipage; also a sudden prank, a digression. Les equip∣pées d'un Lievre, the outright course of a Hare. Equitation, a riding on horseback. Eraige, an Airy of Hawks, or as Herage. Eraigne, as Eraige. Eraillé, Erailler. See Esraillé, Es∣railler. Erain, for airain, brass. Eramme, a Fine set on a parties head for want of due appea∣rance. Eraser, as Ecraser in the N. D. Erater, to take the Milt out. Erchat, yellow wyre. Erculisse, Liquorice. Erectif, erective, setting bolt-up∣right. Eremodicié, forsaken, given over. Ereole, a small weight of two grains. Ergalie, the framing of Vessels and Furnaces for Extractions, &c. Ergastule, a Bridewel. Ergate, a Windbeam, or drawbeam; also a rack for a Cross-bow. Ergoteure, as Ergoture. Ergotique, sophistical, full of quid∣dity's. Ergotisme, Sophistry. Ergotiste, a cavilling Sophister. Ergoture, as Ergot in the N. D. al∣so an arming, or furnishing with spurs or dew-claws; also Sophi∣stry. Erigoteures, the spurs of a Cock. Ermaire, as Armoire, a Cup∣board. Erme, as Terres ermes, Land that lies waste and untill'd. Erminé, surred with Ermines. Erminer, to sur with Ermines. Erminette, a little plaining ax. Ermitage, Ermite, as Hermitage, Hermite in the N. D. Erné, as Esrené. Erner, to break, or bruise the reins; to crush, or weaken the back. Erodé, gnawn off, or about. Eroder, to gnaw off, or about; to eat into; also to drive from field to field, from hill to hill. Erogene, the name of a love-procu∣ring herb. Eron, a Heron. Erosion, a gnawing or eating in∣to. Erraillé, spread wide open, set far asunder. Oeil erraillé, a staring eye. Errailler, to spread wide open; to stare with the eyes; to straddle with the legs or thighs. Erramme, as Eramme. Erramment, out of hand; also at random. Errandonner, to flie away at ran∣dom. Erraté, unlimited; nimble, or light. Errater, to take out a mans milt, thereby to make him the nim∣bler. Erratique, as fiebvres erratiques, Agues whose fits hold no certain time of return. Errement, as Arrement; also a patch, tract, or way. Errhine, a tent-like medicine put into the nose. Erronnée, the herb Centory. Erronnéement, erroneously. Erubescence, blushing. Eruce, the herb Rocket; also the Canker-worm. Erucé, nibbled finely. Eructation, a belching, or breaking of wind. Erugineux, of the colour of Verdi∣grease, rusty, canker'd, corrup∣ted. Eruité, weakened. Erysimon, Winter-cresses. Erysipele, a painful and hot swel∣ling or impostumation. Es vous, for voici, behold. Esbaaillé, cloven, riven, set wide a∣sunder. Esbahi, amazed. A l'esbahi, a∣mazedly. s'Esbahir, to wonder. Esbahissement, a marvelling. Esbahy, as Esbahi. Esbailleure, a gaping. Esbalançon, a horses disordered leap out of time and measure. Esbannoy, Esbanoy, pastime, sport, recreation. Esbanoie, Esbanoye, the same. s'Esbanoyer, to recreate himself. Esbarbement, a barbing. Esbarber, as Ebarber in the N. D. Esbarluer, as Esberluer. Esbasé, driven out of his basis. Esbaser, to drive out of its basis. S'esbaser, to slip from its basis, or foundation. Esbatement, a sporting. Esbaudi, cheerful, merry. Esbaudir, to cheer up, to make mer∣ry; also to rouse up from sleep. Esberge, a lodging, an Inn. Esbergé, lodged, harboured. Esbergement, as Esberge. Esberger, to lodge, to harbour. Es∣berger en soy une faute, to be guilty of a fault; also to take a fault upon himself. Esberlué, dazzled. Esberluer, to dazzle. Esblaré, gastly, or pale of counte∣nance. Esblouïsson, a mist cast before the eyes. Esblouisson de la tête, gid∣diness of the brain. Esboché, Esbocher, as Ebauché, Ebaucher in the N. D. Esboire, to soak in, to drink up. Esboitement, a lameness, or laming. Esbouffer, to burst out into laughter. S'esbouffer à parler, to burst out in speech. Esbouflé, spouted upon. Esboufler, to spout upon. Esbouilli, throughly boyled; over∣boyled, decay'd in boyling, almost dried up with boyling. Esbouillir, to boyl throughly, to o∣verboyl, to boyl almost dry; also to work as new beer, &c. Esbouillue, stuff over-boyled. Esbouli, Esboulu, as Esbouilli. Esbourjonnage, a pruning of Vines. Esbourjonner, &c. See Ebourgeon∣ner in the N. D. Esbourré, cleansed, winnowed. Esbourrer, to cleanse, to winnow. Esbouiy, dazzled. Esbraillé, unbraced, loosely dressed.
Esbranche, as Esbranchement. Esbrandi, st violently upon. Quand le feu est esbrandi en plusieurs maisons, when fire hath violently seized on many horses. Esbranlement, a shaking, or jog∣ging. Esbranle-rocher, rock-shaking. Esbreché, broken, or whereinto a breach is made. Esbrecher, to break, or make a breach into. Esbrillade, a jerk given a horse with the bit or bridle. Esbroüé, hard rubbed (in the wash∣ing.) Esbrouëment, a rubbing hard. Esbrouër, to rub hard. Esbrouer des narines, to short. Esbrouëure, as Esbrouëment. Esbruché, scattered, dispersed. Esbrucher, to scatter, to disperse. Esbu, soaked in, drunk up. Esbucheter, to gather up sticks. Esburré, unbuttered, or from which batter hath been taken. Laict esburré, butter-milk. Esburrer, to take butter from, to make butter-milk of. Escabreux, rough, rugged. Escache, as Ecache, a scatch. Escaché, crushed, or squeezed hard together. Escachement, a crushing, or squeez∣ing hard together. Escacher, to crush, or squeez hard together. Escacheur, a crusher, or squeezer of things hard together. Escachure, a crushing, or squeezing of things hard together. Escaffette, a kinde of great and long muscled shell wherewith some women skin their milk. Escaffignon, a Sock; also a pump, or a close and single-sol'd shoo of thin leather. Escaigne de fil, ou de soye, a skain of thread, &c. Escaillement, a scaling, or shaling. Escailleur, a scaler, or shaler. Escailleure, a scaling, or shaling. Escailleures de pierres, shards. Escailleux, full of scales. Escaillon, an Horses tush, or tusk. Escalbotté, pilled, unhusked. Escalbotter, to pill, as pease do in boyling. Escalé, as Ecaillé, scaled. Escalle, for Scalle. Escallé, scaled, or taken by scala∣do. Escaller, to scale the walls of a town. Escalonnier, as dents escalonnieres, a horses tusks, or tushes. Escalque, an Ʋsher, or Sewer. Escalventré, whose guts are squashed out. Escalventrer, to tread out the guts. Escamme, Escamne, a form, or bench; also a step to get up high∣er. Escamoté, disguised. Escamoter, to disguise. Escampe, a scaping, or flying a∣way. Escandal, a sounding-plummet. Escandillé, scantled, made according to a pattern or scantling. Escanné, stifled. Escantuole, the Pump of a ship; also a sounding-plummet. Escaper, for échaper, to escape. Escapelin, a remnant of a piece of stuff. Escappe, a small square-edged cir∣cle or fillet in a pillar, &c. also the body of a pillar. Escarade, the opening of the nether part of the branch of a Horses hit. Escaras, as Echalas in the N. D. Escarbelotte, a small beetle. Escarbillat, lively, sprightly; also hair-braind, fantastical. Escarboter le feu, to stir up the fire. Esçarbotte, as Escarbot, a Beetle. Escarbouele, as Ecarboucle, a car∣buncle. Escarbouillé, crushed, squeezed. Escarbouiller, to crush, to squeeze. Escarbouiller la cervelle, to beat out the brains. Escardé, carded. Escarder, to card, as wool. Escardes, cards for wool. Escardeur, a carder. Escardeure, a carding. Escare, a fish that chews his meat; also a scar. Escarlatin, of scarlet, or of a scar∣let hu. Rose escarlatine, a damask Rose. Escarotique, Scar-breeding. Escarouflé, scratched, torn. Escaroufler, to scratch off, to tear. Escarpoulette, a kinde of swing. Escarque, as Escalque. Escarquiller, to set wide open. Escarrabillade, as Escarbillat. Escarre, a Scar. Escarure, a womans square. Escas, the tenth penny of the value of Moveables, wherein a For∣reiner succeeds a Freeman. Escassable, as Meubles escassables, Moveables subject unto Escas. Escavessade, a jerk with the cord of a cavesson. Esceer, to cut, or slive; also to pill. Escelles, the arm-holes. Escerveler, to take the brains out of; also to dash the brains out. Escervellement, a braining. Eschabouillé, scorched, over-heated. Eschafaudé, made into a scaffold; also presented on a scaffold; car∣ry'd from scaffold to scaffold; set on the pillory. Eschafauder, Eschafaulder, to build scaffolds; to present on a scaffold; to set on the pillory; also to de∣vise or practise villany. Eschafaudis, Eschafaut, as Escha∣faud, a scaffold; also a pillory. Eschaffaudage, for échafaudage, a setting up of scaffolds. Eschalasseau, a short stake. Eschalassier (Adj.) bearing store of props or stakes, of, or belonging thereto. Eschalier, for Escalier, a stair-case. Eschallat, for Echalas, a stake. Eschalle, a little ringing-bell. Eschallier, a stair-case. Eschallon, a great ladder. Eschalon, for échelon, a ladder-step. Eschalote, for échalote, shalot. Eschambouillure, as Eschaubouil∣lure. Eschampé, Eschamper. See Escam∣pé, Escamper in the N. D. Eschampre, as Enchampre. Eschandille, a pattern. Eschandillé, as Eschantillé. Eschandillon, for échantillon, a pattern. Eschangé, exchanged, trucked. Eschanger, to exchange, to truck. Eschansonner, to do as the Cup-bearer. Eschanteler, to break into cantles; to cut off the corners or edges of. Eschantillé, curtailed, cut or broken into corners, or cantles. Eschantillonner, to take (or cut) off a pattern. Eschapeler, to chip. Eschappé (a Subst.) an escape, an evasion. Eschaque, scurf, scales, or dandriff in the head. Eschar, as Eschars. Escharalle, a dead and stinking flesh which breeds about wounds. Escharas, for Echalas, a stake. Escharaveau, as Charaveau.
Escharbot, for Escarbot, a beetle. Escharboter, as Escarboter. Escharcement, niggardly, miserably. Escharceté, niggardliness; also base∣ness, or want of due alloy in Coyn. Escharcette, as Escharceté in the last sense. Escharde, a splinter; also a scrag∣gy girl that looks as if she were starved. Eschardonner, to weed, or pluck up thistles. Eschardonneur, a weeder of thi∣stles. Eschardonneuse, a woman that weeds, or plucks up thistles. Eschare, a scar. Escharfaud, or Escharfaut, a scaffold. Escharfaudé, as Eschafaudé. Eschargotté, pruned as a tree, pic∣ked round about. Eschargotter, to prune a tree, to pick any thing round about. Escharné, fleshless, deprived of flesh. Escharotique, breeding scars or scabs. Escharpe, for Echarpe, a scarf. Escarpeux, flaunting it with many scarfs about him. Escharre, a scar. Eschars, saving, sparing, hard. Escharsement, as Escharcement. Escharseté, as Escharceté. Eschat, Droicts des Eschats & Ta∣vernes, a certain Duty or Imposi∣tion upon Wine sold by retail and in Taverns. Eschasses, for Echasses, stilts. Eschasseur, Eschassier, one that goes upon stilts. Eschaubouillant, scalding hot. Eschaubouillé, blistered; or having the Shingles. Eschaubouillure, a blister; an In∣flammation called the Shingles. Eschauboulé, as Eschaubouillé. Eschauboulure, as Eschauboulure. Eschaubourré, troubled, in an agony. Eschauder, to scald. Eschaudure, a scalding. Eschaufaison, a warming, or ma∣king hot; also an heat; or a disease that comes of immoderate heat. Eschaufeture, as Eschaufaison. Eschauffadasse, a burnt Whore. Eschauffader, as Eschafauder. Eschauffaison, as Eschaufaison. Eschaufferette, Eschauffette, a Cha∣sing-dish. Eschauffeture, Eschauffure, a cha∣sing. Eschauguette, a Watch-tower, or Beacon. Eschauguetté, watched in a Beacon, or high Tower; beheld from high, or afar off. Eschauguetter, to watch at a Bea∣con, or in a high Tower; to see far about; to stand Sentry. Eschauguetteur, a Sentinel in a high Tower or Beacon; also a Scout. Eschays, aller eschays, to straddle. Escheable, escheatable. Escheance, an Escheat. Eschec, for Echee, Chess. Eschef, a fall, wasting, or diminu∣tion. Escheler, for Echeler, to scale. Eschelette, for Squelette, a Skele∣ton; also a Wall-pecker; also the little stalk of a Grape. Eschellage, as Eschellement. Eschellé, scaled. Eschellement, a scaling, or getting upon by a ladder. Escheller, for Echeler, to scale, to climb up a ladder. Eschellette, a little ladder. Eschelleur, a climbing by a ladder. Eschemeau, the bed of a Vine, the ridge wherein it stands. Eschemer, to swarm, or breed young, as Bees. Eschenal, a gutter, or channel. Eschenillé, rid from Caterpillars. Escheniller, to rid of Caterpillars. Eschequé, checkered. Escheque-mat, for Echee & mat, a Checkmate, at Chess. Eschequier, for Echiquier, a Chess-board. Escherpillerie, robbing on the High∣way. Eschervi, the Skirret-root. Eschet, an Escheat, or thing fallen to. Eschevé, eschewed, shunned. Eschevement, an eschewing, or shun∣ning. Eschever, to shun, to eschew. Eschevissement, as Eschevement. Escheute, as Echeute, an Escheat. Eschez, as Echees, Chess. Eschif, greedy, ravenous. Eschiffeur, a Cutter, or Pinker. Eschifflé, split, riven. Eschiffler une branche d'arbre, to split, or half break off a branch. Eschimeau, as Eschemeau. Eschinal, the head of a sink covered with a grate. Eschine, for Echine, the chine, the back-bone. Eschiné, broken-backed. Eschinée de pore, a chine of Pork. Eschiner, to break the back of. Eschineux, of a great and strong back. Eschinon, the chine, or upper part of the back between the shoulders. Eschiquetté, checkie. Eschiquoté, pruned. Eschiquoter, to prune a tree. Eschoette, an Escheat. Eschoite, an Escheat. Eschoitter, to succeed another. Escholage, as Escolage. Escholastre, as Escolastre. Eschope, Eschoppe, a little and low shop. Faire essay à l'eschop∣pe, to lay a small and thin piece of silver, &c. upon a hot burning coal, thereby to try the value and alloy of it. Esciemment, wittingly, of set pur∣pose. Escimé, topped. Escimer, to top, to cut off the tops or heads of. Esclaboché, bespotted, besprinkled with water or dirt. Esclabocher, Esclaboter, to bespot with water or dirt. Esclaffer de rire, to burst out into laughter. Esclaire-tout, all-seeing, all-lighting, all-observing. Esclaireur, an observer, or overseer of others; also an assistant unto a Plaintiff or Accuser. Esclame, lank. Esclandreux, scandalous. Esclandrir, to slander. Esclappe, corpulency, fatness. Esclate, a Sling; also a kind of disease among children. Esclature, a flashing, or glittering; also a Splitting, or bursting into splinters. Esclau, for Esclave, a slave. Esclaver, to bring unto slavery. Esclavine, lank-body'd; also a Sea-gown. Esclayer, to make way through hur∣dles. Escleche, a dismembring, or separa∣tion; also a part or piece dismem∣bred, or separated from. Escleché, dismembred. Escler, for Eclair, a lightning. Esclerci, Esclercir, Esclercissement. See Eclairci, Eclaircir, Eclair∣cissement. Esclere, or Esclerre, the herb Celan∣dine. Esclerement, clearly, plainly. Esclesche, as Escleche. Esclichoir, a squirt, or stringe.
Esclische, as Escleche. Esclisché, as Escleché, dismembred. Esclischement, a dismembring, or dividing of an intire thing. Esclisse, as Eclisse, a Cheese-fat; also a hurdle. Esclisse, squirted; also made up of ozier, or wicker-twigs; also bound up in splents. Esclisser, to squirt; to make up with ozier, or wicker twigs; also to bind up in splents. Esclistre, lightning. Esclopé, Escloppé, maimed, lame. Esclopper, to maim, to lame. Esclot, a wooden shooe; also a reed, or cane to suck with; a rest in Musick; a Galley-slave. Esclotouëre, a Clap-net. Esclou, the print of a horses foot. Escloy, piss, lant, urine. Escluine, as Esclamme. Esclusant, stopping, as by a sluce. Escodilles, the bulbed roots of Daf∣fodils. Escoffier, a Shoomaker. Escoffraye, Escoffrer, a Shoomakers stall. Escofion, a Coyf, or Cawl. Escofraye, as Escoffraye. Escogriffe, a lusk, a great slouch. Escoinson, a scunch, the back-part of the jaumb of a window. Escolage, School-hire. Escolastre, the Rector, or Overseer of a School; also an unlearned, or mean Scholar. Escolastrerie, a Rectorship, or Go∣vernment of a School; also mean Scholarship. Escolleté, whose collar is taken off. Escolleter, to take off the collar from a garment. Escolté, as Escouleté. Escome, the blade, or broad end of an Oar. Escomé, the Pit-fish, or Sea-pike. Esconduire, to send away with a denial. Esconduit, sent away with a denial. Esconjuré, driven away by intreaty, or by conjuring. Esconjurer, to drie away by in∣treaty, or conjuring. Esconsé, hidden, concealed. Esconsement, a concealing. Es∣consement de Soleil, the Sun-setting. Esconser, to hide, to conceal. Escopetade, the shot of a small piece. Escopetin, as Squiopetin. Escorcé, barked, pilled, pared. Escorcée, Escorcement, a barking, pilling, or paring; also the pilled, or unrinded part of a plant. Escorcer, to bark, pill, or pare. Escorcesque, as Corcesque. Escorceur, a Barker of trees. Escorche-cul, flaying of the but∣tocks. Escorcheter, to flay. Escorchouër, a flaying of beasts. Escorçu, having a bark. Escorgée, for Ecourgée, a whip. Escorne, shame, disgrace, scorn. Escorné, that hath lost his horns; out of countenance; also whose corners are broken, or cut off; de∣faced, ruined, scorned, disgraced. Arbre escorné, a tree whose branches are lopt off. Dez escor∣nez, ground dice, blunt cornered dice. Escornement, depriving of horns; a disgracing. Escorner, to deprive of horns; to take from one a thing which is (or he thinks is) an ornament and grace unto him; to break off the corners of a square thing; to lop trees; to ruine, deface, or disgrace any thing. Escornicher, as Escorner, Escor∣cher. Escornizer, as Escorner. Escort, discreet, wary. Escosse, for gousse, the husk of a Bean, or the like. Escossé, unhusked, shaled. Escosser, to unhusk, to shale. Escotté, that is within a shot, or hath paid a shot. Escotter, every one to pay his shot, or to contribute something towards it. Escouärde, as Escouäde, a parcel of Souldiers. Un Cap d'Escou∣ärde, a Corporal. Escoube, a Brush; also a maukin for an oven. Escoudé, deprived of his support, of the stay whereon he leaned, of the means whereon he relied. Escoüé, curtailed; also wagged, or shaken up and down. Escouër, to curtail; also to wag, or shake up and down. Escouëtte, a Plaisterers whiting brush. Escouëttes, sheats. Look Escoutes. Escouille, gelt. Escouillement, a gelding. Escouiller, to geld. Escouillon, a wisp, or dish-clout; a mankin, or drag, to cleanse and sweep an oven. Escouillure, a Gelding. Escouisson, as Escoinson. Escoluable, drainable, easie to be dried or consumed; soon gone. Escoulant, as Escoulement, a drain, or strainer; also a sloping place, down which a thing easily glides, or is apt to run. Escoulure, a strainer. Escoullement, Escouller, as Escou∣lement, Escouler in the N. D. Escoupellé, topped, or whose top is cut off. Escoupeller, to top, or cut off the top of a tree. Escourgeon, Starch-corn, a kinde of base wheat, which being ground yields very white meal, but light, and little nourishing. Escourre, to thrash; also to beat or shake dusty clothes, &c. Escoursouër, the dale of a ships pump, whereby the water is pas∣sed out. Escourté, curtailed, shortened, cut, or chopped off. Escourter, to curtail, shorten, cut, or chop off. Escousse, a shaking, or jogging; al∣so a swing. It is also the Femi∣nine of Escoux. Escoutement, a hearkening, or li∣stening. Escouteur, an hearer, hearkener, or li∣stener. Escoutillon, a Scuttle. Escouvelle, a Brush. Escouvillon, as Escouillon. Escouvillonner, to spunge a Piece, to cleanse her before and after she is discharged. Escoux, shaken, jogged, swinged. Paille escousse, wherein no Corn is lest. Escrageant, crushing, or squeezing out. Escragé, crushed, or squeezed out. Escrager, to crush, or squeez out of. Escraigne, a little hovel made of poles set round with their ends meeting at the top, and covered thick with turves, sods, dung, &c. Escrain, as Ecrin, a casket, or lit∣tle box. s'Escravanter, to burst, or split him∣self. Escriere, pie escriere, a shrike. Escrazé, for écrasé, crushed. Ecrein, for écran, screen. Escreté, unchalked, or deprived of chalkie whiteness. Escrevé, split asunder.
l'Escrever du jour ou de la nuict, the dawning of the day, the twi∣light. s'Escrever, to split asunder. Escrevisser, to go backward. Escri, Escriement, an outcry, or ac∣clamation. Escrimerie, as Escrime, fencing. Escrin, as Ecrin, a casket. Escriner, to pull off the hair. Escrinier, a Joyner, a Cabinet-ma∣ker. Escrivaillé, scribled. Escrivaillerie, scribling. Escrivailleur, a scribler. Escrivainerie, Scrivenership. Escrivisse, for Ecrevisse, a Cray-fish. Escrober, to jog, as a Cart in an uneven way. Escroë, as Ecrouë, a scrowl. Escrotter, to gnaw. Escrou, as Ecrouë in the N. D. Escrouellé, troubled with the Kings evil. Escroupionné, whose crupper is bro∣ken, rumpless. Escroustement, an uncrusting. Escru, drap escru, undressed cloth. Escudes, Escudettes, Penny-grass. Escuellette, a little dish. Escueuil, as Ecueil in the N. D. Escuisant, smarting, itching. Escuisse, whose hip or thigh is out of joynt. Escuisser, to put the hip or thigh out of joynt. Esculé, whose tail is burst, heel trod∣den down. Esculée, a dish full of. Esculer, to burst the tail off. Escu∣ler une aiguille, to break a needles eye. Esculer ses fouliers, to tread his shooes down at the heels. Escumement, a foaming; a skim∣ming; a scowring of the Seas. Escumeux, frothy, foamy. Escumier, of foam, or froth. Escurage, a scowring. Escuré, scowred. Escurer, to scower. Escureur, a Scowrer; also a Squir∣rel. Escurs, cives, or chives. Escussonnable, fit to be grafted en écusion. Escussonné, defended or covered with a Scutcheon, or Shield. Escussonner, to defend, or cover with a Scutcheon, or Shield; al∣so as Enter en écusson. Escuyere, a woman-Esuire; a Gen∣tlewoman that attends on a Knight as his Esquire. Escuyrie, as Ecurie in the N. D. Esfarouché, Esfarouchement, Esfa∣roucher. See them with an f, instead of s, in the N. D. Esfilé, as Effilé. Esflanqué, swayed in the back; al∣so lean, shrunk in the flank, that hath no belly at all. Esflanqué en cheval de postillon, as lean as a Post-horse. Esflanquer, to sway in the back; to make lean, thin-flanked, or small-belly'd. Esflorer, to deprive of flowers. Esfoiré, berayed. Esfrontément, as Effrontément, impudently. Esgail, a fine morning-frost, that shines like glass. Esgargaté de crier, whose throat is almost burst with crying. Esgaronné, trodden down, as a shooe at the heel. Esgaronner un soulier, to tread a shooe down at the heel. Esgarouillé, as yeux esgarouillez, wide-staring, or gloring eyes. s'Esgaudir, to rejoyce, to be merry. Esgeré, ploughed, or broken up, as land for fallows. Esgerer, to plough, or break up land for fallows. Esgommé, ungummed, whose gum is taken away. Esgommer, to ungum, to take away the gum. Esgorgeté, whose throat is cut; also bare-neckt. Esgorgeter, to cut ones throat; also to go bare-necked, or to fold down the collar of a Garment, thereby to bare or discover the neck or bosom. Esgosillé, whose throat is cut. Esgosillement, a throat-cutting. Esgosiller, to cut the throat of. Esgosse, a husk. Esgoüe, cloy'd, over-fall. Esgouër, to cloy. Esgousser, to hale. Esgoutement, a draining by drop∣ping. Esgouteur, a drainer, or drier up by drops. Esgoutille, a little hole or gullet through which water can do little more than drop. Esgoutoir, a drain, channel, or sink. Esgrailler, to straddle with the feet or legs. Esgrainer, as Egrener, to shake corn out of its ear. Esgraphé, loosed, pulled asunder. Esgrapher, to loose, to pull asun∣der. Esgratignement, a scratching. Esgrette, as Aigrette in the N. D. Esgrugé, grated small; also crum∣med, or broken into small pie∣ces. Esgrugeoir, a little grater. Esgruger, to grate small; also to break unto crums. Esgrumé, Esgrumelé, unclustered, taken from its cluster. Esgrumeler, to uncluster; to take asunder things that hang loose to∣gether. Esgrumé, to pluck grapes from their cluster. Esgruné, crumbled, broken small. Esgruner, to crumble, to break small. Esgual, for Egal, equal. Esgualation, an equalling, levelling, or making like. Esgualé, Esgualer. See Egualé, Egualer. Esgue, an ill-favoured mare. Esgueré, Esguerer, as Egaré, Ega∣rer in the N. D. Esgueuler, to cut the throat. Esgueulé, for Egorgé, whose throat is cut. Esguillé, of a needle, full of needles, wrought with the needle, prickt with needles. Eshanché, whose hip or haunch is out of joynt. Eshancher, to put a haunch or hip out of joynt. Eshancheure, a putting of the hip or haunch out of joynt. Esherbé, weeded. Esherbement, a weeding. Esherber, to weed. Eshonté, shameless, brazen-faced. Eshontement, shamelesness. Eshontément, shamelesly, impudent∣ly. s'Eshonter, to be shameless, or bra∣en-faced. Esjetté, ejected, cast out, or lanched forth. Esjetter, to eject, cast out, or lanch forth. Esjuné, kept fasting, starved. Esjuner, to keep fasting, to starve. s'Esjouïr, to rejoyce. Esjouïssance, joy, or mirth. s'Esjourner, for Sejourner, to so∣journ. Eslagué, pruned, as a tree. Eslaguer, to prune. mslaguoir, a pruning-tool.
Eslainde, an engine wherewith great stones are lifted up. Eslangouré, Eslangui, languishing, fallen into languishment. Eslavé, washed away, washed o∣ver. Eslaver, to wash away, or over. Eslay, a career, or course o hors∣back. Esle, for aile, a wing. Eslevable, fit to be elevated, raised, advanced; fit to be bred, or brought up. Eslevement, a lifting up; an ad∣vancing, or promoting; a swel∣ling, or puffing up; a breeding, or bringing up. Esleveur, a lifter up, a advancer, a bringer up. Esleveure, a lifting up, a rising, or swelling up in height, an imbos∣sing, a bunch, a thing risen, swoln, or puffed up. Esligible, eligible, fit to be ele∣cted. Eslingé, slender, lank. Esloché, shaken, jogged. Eslochement, a shaking, or jog∣ging. Eslocher, to shake, or jog. Esloingné, Esloingnement, Esloin∣gner, as Eloigné, Eloignement, Eloigner in the N. D. Eslourdement, a dulness, an amaze∣ment. Esmané, Esmaner, as Emané, E∣maner. Esmarmelé, crushed in pieces. Esmarmeler, to crush in pieces. Esmay, trouble, cark, or care. s'Esmayer, to be careful, sad, pen∣sive. Esme, an aim, or level taken; also a purpose, or intention. Esmenuisé, made, or broken small. Esmenuiser, to make, or break small. Esmer, to aim, or level at; to make an offer to strike; to purpose, or intend. Esmerauldin, like, or belonging to an emrald. Esmerillonner, as Emerillonner. Esmerveillable, marvellous, or won∣derful. Esmerveillement, a marvelling, or wondering. Esmery, for Emeri, an emeril-stone. Esmesche, snuffed. Esmescher, to snuff. Esmiable, apt to be crumbled. Esmiettement, Esmieure, a crum∣bling. Esminage, a measure containing a∣bout half a bushel. Esminal, another measure, being the half of the bichot. Esminotte, a measure of about two bushels. Esmoignonné, cut off at the stump, made a stump of. Esmoignonner, to cut off at the stump, to make a stump of. Esmonde real, osmond royal, male fern. Esmondement, a picking, purging, or pruning. Esmont, for Emcut, the mute, or dropping of a bird. Esmorce, touch-powder; also a tick∣ling; also the ordure that cleaves to an unwiped or ill-wiped arse. Esmorcellé, piecemealed. Esmorceller, to piecemeal. Esmotellé, whose clods are broken; also consumed, or eaten. Esmoteler, to break clods; also to consume, or eat. Esmoucé, Esmoucer, as Emoussé, Emousser in the N. D. Esmouchail, as Esmouchoir. Esmouché, rid of flies. Esmouche-lourdaut, a deceiver of simple people. Esmoucher, to rid of flies, to drive them away. Esmoucheté, fly-blown; also pinked, or set with little tufts. Esmouchette, the round tuft or head of herbs, wherein their seed is contained. Esmouchettes, for Mouchettes, Snuffers. Esmouchoir, a fly-flap. Esmouellé, for émoellé, deprived of marrow. Esmoulage, a grinding, whetting, sharpening. Esmoulendier, a sheer-grinder. Esmouvement, a moving or stirring up; an agitation, wagging, or shaking up and down. Esmouveur, a mover, or stirrer up. Esmoy, cark, care, or trouble. s'Esmoyer de, earnestly to ask, or enquire of. Esmundé, Esmunder, Esmundeur, as Emondé, Emonder, Emon∣deur in the N. D. Esmutir, Esmutissement, as Emu∣tir, Emeut in the N. D. Esmyne, a kinde of measure. Esor, as Oyseaux esors, wilde, un∣made, or ill-manned Hawks. Espade, a broad short Sword. Espagnolade, a Spanish trick, blow, bob. Espagnolé, made Spanish, or Spa∣niard-like. Espagnollette, a band-supporter of wyre in works done over with silk. Espagnoliser, to play the Spaniard. Espagnotter, to woo, to court. Espaillier, as Espalier in the N. D. Espaix, for Espaisseur, thickness, grosness. Espalé, scattered abroad with a shovel. Espaler, Espaller, to scatter (or to spread) abroad with a shovel. Espalmé, pitched over as a ship. Espame, the cramp. Espamé, troubled with a cramp, or convulsion, faln into a swoon; also weakned, or made lean with fasting. Espamer, to cause the cramp, or a convulsion-sit; to weaken, or make lean. Espampé, as roses espampées, ro∣ses fully blown. Espamprement, the pruning of a Vine. Espan, for empan, a span. Espandable, which may be shed, spilled, or poured out. Espandement, a shedding, spilling, or pouring out; also a spread∣ing. Espani, blown, spread abroad. Espanir, to blow, or spread, as a blooming flower. Espanité, as Espavité. Espapillotté, bespangled; bespot∣ted. Espapillotter, to bespangle; to be∣spot. Esparcet, a kind of thick grass, or pulse. Esparcete, Pellitory of the wall. Esparcetiere, a plot, or close sowed with Esparcet. Espardement, a scattering, or dis∣persing. Espardre, to scatter, to disperse. Esparer, to sting with the heels. Le ciel commence à s'esparer, the skie begins to break. Esparges, for asperges, Sparragrass. Esparre, the bar of iron that is nai∣led on a door, and turns at the end on the hinge. Esparsément, scatteringly, here and there. Espartant, scattering, dispersing. Espartillé, dispersed, divided by par∣titions, infused by small parcels.
Espartir, to scatter, disperse, part, or divide. Esparvain, a spavin in the leg of a horse, &c. Esparvier, as Epervier, a Spar-hawk. Espase, a sword. Espasé, broad-footed, well under∣laid, well spread, or well groun∣ded. Esparement, the broad foot, or foo∣ting; the groundwork or foun∣dation of. s'Espater, to be broad-footed, or well underlaid; to spread, or bear a good breadth at the bot∣tom, and thereby to be well-groun∣ded or fixed. Espatté, as Espaté. Espattement, as Espatement. Espave, a stray, a beast unowned; any thing whose original or own∣er is not known; a Stranger born in a far Country. Espave & effreinte des Chiens, a foul de∣fault of dogs, having utterly lost both sight and scent of the Game which they hunted. Espave, (Adj.) masterless, or with∣out owner; also forrein, far-born, of unknown birth or beginning. Espavent, a spavin in a horse. Espavité, the right a soverain Lord hath to the Lands or Goods of Strangers dying within his Domi∣nions; or the being a stranger, as Espave. Espaulart, a Sea-monster, enemy to Whales. Espaulée, as par espaulées, by fits, now and then. Espauletée, as Espaulée. Refaire une muraille par espauletées, to repair a Wall by parcels, without taking any of it down. Espaulette, a little shoulder; also the wing of a gown, doublet, &c. also a buttress, or shouldering-piece. Massonnerie à espaulet∣tes, uneven work in walls, &c. Espaulier, belonging to, or serving for the Shoulder. Espaulu, broad-shouldered. Espaulure, a bursting, or unjoynting of the shoulder. Espausmer, to swoon. Espausmure, a swooning, or falling into a trance. Espautré, beaten, thrashed. Espautrer, to beat, to thrash. Espe, as Empan, a span. Especial, as par especial, especial∣ly. Espectative, as estre à l'especta∣tive, to stand waiting. Espelement, a spelling. Espeller, as Epeler, to spell. Espeluche, Plush. Espenaillé, torn, all to tatters. Espendre, as Epandre in the N. D. Espeoir, for Esperance, hope. Esperable, fit to be hoped for, hope∣ful. Esperit, as Esprit in the N. D. Esperlucat, a lock, or bush of cur∣led hair; also a neat or spruce companion. Esperonnade, Esperonnement, a spurring, a prick with a Spar. Esperruqué, that wears long locks, or curled hair. Espervain, a splint in a horses leg. Espessement, thickly, close toge∣ther. Espesseur, Espessi, Espessir, Espes∣sissement. See Epaisseur, E∣paissi, Epaississement in the N. D. Espessissiure, for Epaisseur, thick∣ness. Espeuré, frightened. Espeurer, to frighten. Espez, for Epais, thick. Espicenaire, of both Sexes. Espiceur, a taker, or taxer of fees. Espie, for Espion, a spy. Espies, ambushes, way-layings. Espiecé, piece-mealed, cut (broken, or torn) in pieces. Espiecer, to cut, break, or tear in pieces. Espiement, a spying. Espierrement, a ridding from stones. Espierreur, a stone-picker, a stone-gatherer. Espieur, a spier, marker, observer. Espieur des chemins, a high∣way-robber. Espinal, a thorny grove, or plot. Espinarde, a Stickle-back. Espinaye, a thorny plot, bramble-bush. Espince, a pinching, nipping, or pricking. Espincetres, a pair of pincers. Espiné, pricked with a thorn. Espinée, the chine, or back-bone of a Pork. Espinelle, a kind of Ruby. Espiner, to prick, as a thorn. s'Es∣piner, to prick himself; to intan∣gle himself amongst briars and thorns. Espinees, splints in a horses legs. Espingarderie, the Harquebuzery, or a Troop of Harquebusiers. Espingardier, an Harquebuzier. Espingardine, a small piece. Espinglé, pinned, or furnished with pins. Espingler, to pin, or furnish with pins. Espingleur, a pin-maker. Espinglon, a little pin. Espinguer, to spring, or leap sprightly. Espinoche, a Stickle-back or Shaft∣ling. Espinoye, a thicket, or ground full of thorns. Espinse, as Espince. Espionné, spy'd, watched. Espionnement, a spying, or watch∣ing. Espionner, to spy, or watch. Espionneur, a spy. Espis, the two utmost and fattest pieces of a side of Pork. Esplan, for Eperlan, a Smelt. Esplanade, a levelling of ways. Esplanadé, levelled. Esplanader, to level. Esplanaderaye, a plain way, or strand. Esplané, made plane, levelled. Esplaner, to make plane, to level. Espleuré, full of tears. Espleurer, to weep bitterly, to weep his eyes dry. Esplingue, for Epingle, a pin. Esplinguette, a small pin. Esploucher, as Eplucher in the N.D. Esplouré, Esplourer, as Espleuré, Espleurer. Esployé, displayed. Aigle esployée, a spread Eagle. Esplugebant, a kind of River-fowl. Esplumé, bared of feathers. Espluquer, as Eplucher in the N. D. Espluyé, sprinkled, or spattered upon. Espluyer, to sprinkle, or spatter upon. Espoictriné, as Espoitriné. Espoinçonner, as Espoindre. Espoinct, pricked, spurred, urged. Espoincté, unpointed, blunted. Espoincter, to unpoint, or blunt. Espoindre, to prick, or spur; to urge. Espointement, an unpointing, a blunting, a breaking the point of. Espointement de questions, a pa∣cifying of quarrels, a resolution of questions. Espointer, as Espoincter. Espoir, hope. Espois d'un Cerf, the top of a red Dears head; of a fallow the spel∣lers. Espois, for Espais, thick. Espoisser, to thicken.
Espoitriné, open-breasted. Espoitrinement, a going open breast∣ed. Esponce d'heritage, a quitting an Estate in land. Esponcé, quitted, given over. Esponcer, to quit, or give over. Esponcion, as Esponce. Espongieux, for Spongieux, spongy. Esporle, a Vassals acknowledgment of the Services and Duty's which he ows unto his Lord. Esporler, a Vassal to acknowledge the Duty's and Services he ows to his Lord. Esporte, a hand-basket. Espoudré, dusted; cleansed of dust. Espoudrer, to dust; to wipe the dust off. Espoventable, Espoventablement, Espoventail. See Epouvantable, Epouvantablement, Epouvantail in the N. D. Espoventaire, for Epouvantail, a scare-crow. Espovente, Espoventé, Espoven∣ter. See Epouvante, Epouvanté, Epouvanter in the N. D. Espoventement, for Epouvante, fright. Espouillé, loused, rid of lice. Espouiller, to louse, or rid of lice. Espouilleresse, a woman that kills lice. Espouse, a disease in a horse. Espoys, as Espois. Espremason, the bloody flux, with a painful wringing of the bowels. Espreu, tout à espreu, expresly, of set purpose. Esprevains, a splint, or spavin in a horses leg. Espringalle, an ancient Engine of war whereout stones, pieces of iron, and great arrows were shot at the walls of a besieged town. Espringeller, to leap, spring, bound, or spurt. Espringarde, as Espringalle. Espronnade, as Esperonnade. Espucé, flead, rid of fleas. Espucer, Espuceter, to flea, or to kill fleas. Espuisoir, any thing that serves to drain or empty a thing of moisture; the hollow shovel wherewith wa∣ter-men lade their leakie boats. Espulcer, as Espucer. Espuration, the running of a sore; also a cleansing, or clarifying; also a straining of liquor from. Espurgé, purged out, cleansed; also pruned. Espurger, to purge, clean, or cleanse; also to prune trees. Esquadre, Esquadron, as Escadre, Escadron in the N. D. Esquaille, Esquailler, as Ecaille, Ecailler in the N. D. Esqualié, levelled, or made even. Esqualier, to level, or make even. Esqualle, Esqualler, as Ecaille, E∣cailler in the N. D. Esquarcelle, a leathern pouch. Esquarre, a square, or squareness. Esquarrir, as Esquarrer, to square. Esquarrisscur, a squarer of stones, or timber. Esquarrisscure, Esquarrure, a squa∣ring; also squareness. Esquartelé, Esquarteler, as Ecartelé, Ecarteler in the N. D. Esquartelement, Esquarteleure, Esquartellement, a quartering, dismembering, or tearing in pie∣ces. Esquarter, for Ecarter, to scatter; also to empty quart-pots. Esquené, broken-backed. Esquener, to break the back of. Esqueüé, curtailed, or without tail. Esqueuilles, dregs, oven-sweep∣ings. Esqueuillon, as Escouillon, or a spunge, or scowrer for a piece of Ordnance. Esqucuré, out of heart, much fallen away. Esquiavine, a beating of a stubborn and untoward ade. Esquiche, the first rude or slight draught of a model of Platform for a building. Esquiché, imbossed; rudely done, or slightly drawn. Esquicher, to imboss; to make a slight draught of a Model or Plat∣form. Esquiffon, a little Skiff. Esquignon, a sescue. Esquignonné, cut, or broke off as a lump; also cut, or broke into lumps. Esquignonner, to cut, or break off a lump; also to cut, or break into lumps. Esquilleux, splinty, full of little splints or scales. Esquine, bois d'esquine, the knotty and medicinal root of an Indian Bull-rush. Esquirener, to break the back. Esquoüé, as Escoüé. Esraciné, rooted up, or plucked up by the root. Esraciner, to root up, or pluck up by the root. Esrafflade, a scratch, or scratch∣ing. Esrafflé, scraped, scratched. Esraffler, to scrape, or scratch. Esraillé, spread, or set wide open; staring, stradling; also frayed. Oeil esraillé, an eye whose lower lid is reversed. Esraillement, a spreading abroad, or setting wide open; a staring, stradling, fraying. Esrailler, to spread, or set wide o∣pen; to stare, to straddle, to fray as in starching. Esrené, broken-backed, unfit for Ve∣nerious acts. Esrener, to break, or crush the reins. Essaimer, to swarm as bees. Essais de fourrage, scatterings, or leavings of sodder. Essangé, wet, as linnen before it be laid in the bucking-tub. Essanger, to wet linnen before it be laid in the bucking-tub. Essardé, dry, thirsty. Soif essar∣dée, an extream thirst. Essargeter, as Essarter. Essart, a glade in a wood; also a piece of untilled ground. Essaur, as Essor in the N. D. Essayerie, a trying house. Essedaires, a kinde of Warriers in old time, who marched in wag∣gons, but fought on foot, and hard laid to retir'd again to their waggons. Esseillé, wasted, consumed. Esseiller, to waste, or consume. Essein, as Essaim, a swarm. Esseiner, to swarm, as Bees. Essemé, insamed, unfattened; al∣so swarmed. Essemement, an inseaming, or un∣fattening; also a swarming. Essemer, to inseam, to unfatten; also to swarm. Essencié, made, or become of one es∣sence with. Essencier, to make, or become of one essence with. Essende, a shingle of wood. Essentié, as Essencié. Essentier, as Essencier. Esseppé, whose stock is cut. Essepper, to cut the stock of. Essette, a Coopers chipping-ax. Esseulé, left all alone, abandoned, forsaken. Essenoücre, a common sink, or sew∣er. Essil, a shingle, or thin boord of
wood, such as we cover houses with. Essiller, to lavish, or spend wastfully. Essilliere, the clout that's laid be∣tween the legs of an Infant. Essoin, as Essaim, a swarm of bees. Essoine, as Exoine; also want of ability in Souldiers to defend or besiege a place. Essoiner, to swarm, as bees. Essois, axel-trees of carts, &c. Essongne, Droict d'Essongne, a Duty or Fine payable (in Brit∣tany) by the Heir or Successor of a deceased Tenant unto the Lord, under whose Censive he held, and injoyed land at the time of his death. Essonier, to essoin, to excuse, or discharge an absent or impotent person, &c. Essorbé, supped up. Essorber, to sup up. Essort, as Essor, the open air. Essoyné, weakened, disabled, made impotent; also essoined, whose absence is excused by reason of his impotency. Essoyner, to weaken, to disable; also to essoin, or excuse. Essuccé, drawn dry, soaked, drained. Essuccer, to suck up, to draw dry, to drain. Essué, as Essuit. Essueil, the threshold of a door. Essuiau, or Essuyau, a dish-clout. Essuit, wiped clean. Essuler, to exile, or banish. Establage, stabling for horses; also a fee due for their standing in an Inne, &c. also as Estallage, stal∣lage. Establement, stabling, or standing for horses. Estagues, the tyes, two ropes serving to hose up the sail. Establi, Establir, and Establier, a stall. Establies, Companies, Squadrons, or Battalions of Souldiers. Establisseur, an establisher. Estacher, to fasten, to tye. Estacquer, to mark for his own, to set his mark upon. Estaffillade, as Estafilade in the N. D. Estager, Estagier, a Vassal, Sub∣ject, or Inhabitant; one that hath a house or dwelling under a Lord. Estagné, guelt, or lopped, as a tree. Estagner, to gueld trees, to lop or cut off their branches. Estagues, the tyes, two ropes serving to hoise up the sail. Estaie, Estaier, as Etaie, Etaier in the N. D. Estail, as Etal, a stall. Il leur tient estail, he holds them tack. Estaillé, handsomely clipt, or shorn; so cut as he looks as a Lion. Estailleures de pierres, shards of stones. Estaillier, a Stall-man, he that looks to the stall, and there exposes his ware to shew and sale. Estails, tyes; the strings or ropes of sails. Estaimmé, as Etamé, tinned. Estaimmer, for Etamer, to tin. Estain, for Etaim, tin. Estainct, for Ereint, extinguished, quenched, put out; spent, con∣sumed. Estaignier, a Pewterer, a Tinner. Estainier, of, or belonging to tin or pewter. Estalier, as Estaillier. Estallage, as Etalage, the laying out of Wares upon a stall. Estallé, Estaller, as Etalé, Etaler in the N. D. Estallement, the stall of a shop; also as Estallage. Estallier, as Estaillier. Estallon, Estallonné, Estallonne∣ment, Estallonner, as Etalon, Etalonné, Etalonnement, Eta∣lonner in the N. D. Estallonnage, or Estalonage, as E∣talonnement in the N. D. Estambor, the stern-post in a ship. Estambres, the partnours in a ship. Estamé, woosted, or as Estamet. Estamé, (an Adj.) tinned, or done over with tin; glazed, made smooth, and stick, as an earthen vessel. Estamet, cloth-rash. Estameure, a tinning. Estamier, a Tinner, a Pewterer. Estaminé, strained. Estaminer, to train. Estamineux, using a strainer; also fit to make a strainer of. Estampé, supported with trestles. Estampeau, a trestle. Estamper, to support with trestles; also to brui apples. Estamperche, a great upright beam in buiding; a principal post. Estancer, as Etançonner, to prop, to underprop. Estanceure, an underpropping. Estanche, a stanching. Pierre d'e∣stanche, a bloud-stone. Estanson, Estansonné, & Estan∣sonner, as Etançon, Etançonné, & Etançonner in the N. D. Estanterol, part of a ship near unto the stern. Estaphe, a stirrup for a saddle. Estaphisagrie, louse-wort. Estappe, as Etape in the N. D. Estaques, Olive-plants, or suckers. Estarneur, for Eterneur, to sneeze. Estase, for Extase, extasis. Estasques, as Estaques. Estaudeau, as Hestoudeau. Estaudi, sheltered under a stall. Estaudir, to shelter under a stall. Estaudy, a scaffold, in building; also a stall before a shop; also a defence of boards used in approa∣ches, or  the entring of a breach. Estay, the stay, a rope fastened to the top of the main-mast, and holding it steady when the main∣sail is hoised up. Esteindement, for Eteignement, an extinguishing, quenching, or put∣ting out. Esteindible, extinguishable. Esteinte, an extinguishment. Gam∣badans à esteinte de chandelle, till the candle went out. Estel, for Etal, a stall. Estelé, for Eroilé, starry, or full of stars; also having (as an horse) a star in the forehead. Esteler, to set thick with stars. Esteler les chevaux. See Atteler in the N. D. Estelin, for Estellin. Estellage, stallage; also as Attelage in the N. D. Estelle, a rod, or stick; also a lit∣tle star, and the vowel of a spur. Esteller, as Etaler in the N. D. Estellin, a Goldsmiths weight, con∣taining 28 grains or the 20th part of an ounce. Estellon, or Estelon, as Etalon in the N. D. Estelloner, as Estalonner in the N. D. Estenche, as Estanche. Estencher, for Etancher, to stanch, or to stop lood. Estendement, Estendure, an ex∣tending, or stretching out. Ester, to stand, or continue in, to stick unto. Esterdre le bestiail, to litter cat∣tle. Esterlin, as Estellin, or a penny sterling. Esterni, strewed, spread, laid along.
Esternir, to strew, spread, lay a∣long. Esternissement, a strewing, spread∣ing, or laying along. Estesté, Estester, as Etesté, Etester. Estcule, for Eteuil, stubble. Estier, as Setier in the N. D. Estincellement, a sparkling, or twinkling. Estincelletre, a little sparkle, a small twinkling. Estiomene, S. Anthony's fire (a painful swelling full of heat and redness.) Estiomener, to cut off the member so inflamed, or infected. Estire, the iron tool wherewith a Currier drains the skins he re∣ceives from the Tanpit; some call it a Sleker. Estiré, stretched, set on the tenter-hooks. Estirement, a stretching, or setting on the tenter-hooks. Estirer, to stretch, to set on the tenter-hooks. Estival, of, or belonging to summer. Estivalet, a buskin, or summer-boot. Estive, the loading of a ship; also the hold wherein most of the la∣ding is contained. Estivé, loaden, or laden (as a ship.) Estiveler, as Etiveler. Estiver, to summer, to pass the sum∣mer in. Estivet, a little summer. L'estivet de S. Martin, the latter end of autumn. Estocage, a linage, or the chief stem of a linage. Estoccader, to give the stoccado, to thrust through. Estoccage, 4 d. upon the sale of an Inheritance, due in some places unto the Landlord, and to be paid him in lieu of a Relief the same day it is sold. Estocquer, as Estoccader, or as Estoquer. Estoeuf, for Eteuf, a ball. Estoeuvier, of or belonging to a Ten∣nis-ball. Estofferie, the art of ingraving. Estoffeur, a graver. Estoillé, the lizard Stellio, whose neck is full of star-like spots. Estoille, for Etoile, a Star. Estoillée, the herb Lions-foot, La∣dies-mantle, great Sanil. Estoiller, to set with stars. Estoilleux, starry, full of stars. Estoillette, a kinde of rich sur. Estoillins, an Order of Friars that wear stars on the breasts of their gowns. Estole, a stole (for the neck of a Priest.) Estomaqué, angry at. s'Estomaquer, to take pet, to be an∣gry with. Estomisseur, as un vieil estomis∣seur de sacre, an old bangling or buzzing Saker. Estommi, benummed. Estophe, for Etoffe, stuff. Estoquant, giving the stockado un∣to; also reviling, railing at. Estocqué, thrust, stabbed into; also reviled, or railed at. Estoquer, to thrust, or give the stoc∣kado unto; to revile, or rail at. Estorce, for Entorse, a strain; al∣so a bad part, an unhappy turn played. Estorcir, Estordre, to wring, wrest, or pull out by force. Estoré, built, erected; also furnish∣ed, stored. Tenir à Cour feste haute & estorée, to keep at Court a plentiful feast. Estorer, to build, or raise up; also to store, or furnish. Estorse, as Estorce. Estorsement, a wringing, or extor∣ting. Estouble, stubble, or straw grow∣ing. Estoubles, stubble-ground. Estouffement, a stifling, smothering, choaking. Estouillon, a fan to gather wind withal. Estoupade, stoppage, or stopping. Estoupade des reins, a kernel a∣bout the reins. Estoupé, stopped. Estoupement, a stopping. Estouper, to stop, to make up. Estoupeux, full of tow. Estoupillon, a stopple. Estouppade, as Estoupade; or a tent, or stopple of tow. Estour, a sight, shock, or incounter. Estourbillon, a Whirlwind. Estourdie, for Etourdissement, diz∣ziness. Estrace, raw silk. Estradiot, a light horse. Estradiote, as chevaucher à l'estra∣diote, to ride long, or with long stirrups. Estragon, the herb Tarragon. Estraigné, wrung. Estraigner, to wring, or gripe with the fist. Trop embrasser & peu estraigner, to have too many irons in the fire at once. Estrain, Straw, Litter, fodder of Straw or Stubble. De grand train sur l'estrain, from keeping a great train into the straw, that is unto beggary. Estraincte, as Estreinte. Estraindre, as Etreindre, to binde hard. Estraine, for Etrene, a new-years-gift; a handsel. Estrainte, as Estreinte; also a kinde of close buckle or clasp for Cloaks, &c. Estraieres, as Estrayeres, or as Es∣paves. Estraïure, an Escheat, or Perqui∣site. Estrancher, for Trancher, to cut. Estrangé, estranged, alienated, grown out of acquaintance. Estrangement, an estranging, or alienating; a shunning of com∣pany; a quitting of all usual fa∣shions. Estranger, (a Verb) to estrange, to alienate, to separate from. S'e∣stranger de, to shun, or to avoid, to withdraw his minde from. Estrangeté, strangeness; a strange act or accident; also rudeness, frowardness. Estrangier, for Etranger, a stran∣ger. Estrangle-leopard, Libbards bane. Estrangle-loup, Wolves bane. Estranguillon, as poire d'estran∣guillon, a choak-pear. Estrapassé, harried, over-toil∣ed. Estrapasser, to harry, to over∣toil. Estraper, as Estrapper. Estrapoire, as Estrappoire. Estrappade, as Estrapade, the stra∣pado. Estrappé, mowed, or cut down, as stubble. Estrapper, as Etrapper, to mow, or cut down stubble. Estrappoire, as Etrape, a kinde of little and long handled Cickle, wherewith stubble is cut down. Estrasse, as Estrace. Estrassier, one that cards or spins ruffled silk. Estrave, the stem, or stem-post of a ship. Estravé, unshackled. Estraver, to unshackle, to free or de∣liver from shackles. Estrayer, as Espave.
Estrayeres, Escheats, the goods of strangers dead without French∣born issue, and of bastards dead intestate, or without issue. Estrecisson, a straightness, a con∣traction. Estrée, a house, or place of abode. Estreignement, a straining, wring∣ing, or squeezing. Estreiller, for Etriller, to carry. Estreinte,, a straining; a strain; a silver girdle for women; or as Estrainte. Estreintif, a restringent and bind∣ing medicine or plaister. Estrelin, an Easterling, one of the east parts, or of the Hanse-towns of Germany; also a drunken swaggerer. Estrelin, for Sterlin, Sterling. Li∣vre estrelin, a pound sterling. Estrelures, as Estrayers. Estrette, a wring, or pinch; a vio∣lent onset on an enemy; also a kinde of punishment. Estrez, a cross of Gles in Heral∣dry. Estribort, the star-board, or the right side of a ship. Estricqué, pranked up, spruce. Estricquoyes, iron-pincers. Estrié, a kinde of bread or paste of fine flower kneaded with water, white-wine, the yolk of eggs, salt, and sugar. Estrié, as un homme bien estrié, a man well soaked, or drawn dry by wenching. Estrief, one of the three little bones that be seated far within the ear, and serve as instruments of hear∣ing. Estrier, for Etrieu, a stirrup. Estrier, (a Verb) to drain, or draw dry. Estrif, strife, debate. Estrilloir, that which is wrapped a∣bout thread in winding, to keep the fingers from being cut there∣with. Estrindore, a kind of brittish dance. Estripé, unripped, unbowelled. Estriqué, pulled on as a boot, &c. also as Estricqué. Estriquer, to pull on boots, or boot-hose; also to force a wilde beast into the plain. S'estriquer, to prank up himself. Estriver, to be contentious, to strive, to contend; also to put his foot in∣to the stirrup. Il estrive trop, he puts his foot too far into the stirrup. Estriveur, a contentions person. Estriveux, contentious. Estroicissement, for Etrecissement, a straitness. Estroisseur, straitness. Estroissi, as étreci, straitned. Estroissir, as étrecir, to straiten. Estron, a turd. Estronçonné, cut off by the trunk. Estronçonner, to cut off by the trunk. Estropiat, lame, cripple. Estrouble, as Estouble, stubble. Estudie, for Etude, a Study. Esturgeon, for Etourgeon, a Stur∣geon. Estuvier, (Adj.) of or belonging to a stews. Estuyé, put into a case. Estuyer, to put into a case. Estyrole, the loosness, or pilling of the skin about the root of the nails. Esvachir, to flag, to slackn, or grow loose. Esvanide, weak, or faint. Esvasé, Esvaser, as Evasé, Evasér. Esvasement, Esvasure, as Evase∣ment. Esveilleur, a waker. Esvent, the vent of a wine-vessel. Esventelles, the sails of a windmil. Esventeur, a fanner, or winnower of corn; also a vent-giver. Esventilé, fanned, winnowed. Esventiler, to fan, to winnow. Esventoir, Esventoire, a fan, a fly∣flap. Esventoise, a vent in a cask, &c. Esveré, wormed, as a dog. Esverer, to worm a dog. Esveux, waterish, full of water. Esvisagé, pulled by, or scratched on the face. Esvisager, to pull by, or scratch on the face. Esule, the herb Esula. Esvolé, braen-faced; also shallow-brained, or hair-brained. Esvolément, impudently; also light∣ly, rashly. Esurial, fasting, meat forbearing. Eterni, thrown, or stuck down, laid stat along. Eternizé, Eternizer, as Eternisé, Eterniser in the N. D. Etesies, the East-winds which com∣monly blow in the Dog-days. Etestement, an heading, or lopping of trees. Etheré, airy, of air. Ethologie, a moral, an interlude of a moral subject. Etiquet, as Etiquete in the N. D. Etiqueté, noted, titled; also lodged by ticket. Etiqueter, to note, to title; also to lodge by ticket. Etiqueter les Tesmoings, to deliver a Breviate concerning the Witnesses names, and the points whereon they are to be examined. Etiquetier, an Harbinger. Etirement, as Estirement. Etiveler, to whistle, or whoop, as an hunter. Etmoide, Os etmoïde, the bone whereof the top of the nose is made. Etrichoir, as Estrilloir. Etriquet, & Ettiqueter, as Etiquet, Etiqueter. Etymologiser, to interpret words truely. Evacuatif, evacuative, purgative. Evadé, evaded, escaped. Evader, to escape, to give the slip. Evagation, a wandering, or stray∣ing abroad. Evaguer, to wander, stray, or rove. Evanide, as Esvanide, weak, faint. Evaporall, an hole, pipe, or place to breath out at. Evaré, frightened, scared. Evarer, to frighten, to scare. Evasé, wide open, wide spread. Evasement, a wide opening, or wide spreading; also the wide, open, and hollow circumference of a thing. Evaser, to widen, to gape, to set wide open; also as Esbaser. Eucharistique, belonging to the Eucharist. Eudemon, ones good Angel. Eve, wall-wort. Euë, for eau, water. Evé, watered, moistened, or mingled with water. Evendiqué, claimed, or challenged; recovered by claim or challenge. Event, as Esvent, vent. Poulce & e∣vent, a thumbs breadth given be∣tween every ill in the measuring of cloath. Eventation, eventing; also the o∣pening of a vein. Euër, to water, to moisten, or mingle with water. Everdumé, whose fresh taste (and sharpness) is decayed; also drain∣ed of juice. Everdumer, to wring or squeez the green juice out of herbs, to take off their greeness, freshness, or sharpness. Evergongne, impudent, shameless. Everseur, a subverter, in overthrower. Eversion, a sbverting, or overthrow∣ing.
Everti, subverted, overthrown. Evertir, to subvert, to overthrow. Evertisseur, as Everseur. Evertuément, lastily, effectually, with all ones endeavour. Evessé, marred, spoyled, ruined, un∣done. Eveux, waterish, full of water. Euf, for oeuf, an egg. Eviere, an ower, or laver. Evieux, as Eveux. Terre evieuse, soil full of springs. Evig, without. Eviré, without strength, force, or igour. Evisceré, bowelled. Eviscerer, to bowel, to draw out the bowels or guts of. Evitation, Evitement, an eschw∣ing, hunning, or avoiding. Euloge, a praise, or benediction; also a testimonial given of ones praise; an Epitaph; a last Will. Evohe, the cry of mad men; or the ordinary acclamation of Bacchus his mad Priests. Evonyme, spindle-tree, prick-tim∣ber-tree. Eupatoire, Liver-wort. Euphorbe, the poysonous gummy thistle Euphorbium; also the causlick and congealed sap or juice thereof. Euphraise, Eye-bright. Euphrosine, the same; also bugloss. Eur, & Eureux, as Heur, Heureux, in the N. D. Eustagues, Ropes in a ship called the Ties. Evulsion, an evulsion, pulling up, or drawing out. Euvre, for oeuvre, work. Exacerbation, an exasperating. Exacerbé, exasperated. s'Exacerber, to be exasperated, or very angry. Exacté, exacted, extorted. Exacter, to exact, to extort. Exagitation, a stirring up, a tos∣sing. Exagité, tossed, vexed, molested; also debated, or discussed through∣ly. Exagiter, to toss, x or molst; to debate, or discuss throughly. Exagon, xod. Exaluminux, as pls exalumi∣n, bright, shining, orient P. Exaation, for Examen, exami∣nation,  after. Exangue, blodles; timoros, fear∣ful; pale. Exanthemes, the small pox; also wheals on the skin. Exarcat, the chief place or dignity under the Emperour, the Lieute∣nancy of the Empire. Exarche, a Vice-Emperour, or Lieu∣tenant of the Empire. Exasperation, exasperation, provo∣cation. Exasperé, exasperated, provoked. Exasperer, to exasperate, to provoke. Exaulcé, exalted, extolled; also per∣fectly heard and to the purpose. Exaulcement, an exalting, or ex∣tolling; also a perfect and effe∣ctual hearing. Exaulcer, to exalt, or extol; also to hear perfectly and effectually. Exauthoration, a degradation. Exauthoré, exauthorissd, put from authority. Exauthorer, to exauthorise. Excalfactif, heating, warming. Excandescence, an inclination or promptness unto anger; an anger soon taken, soon come and gone. Excavation, a making hollow. Excedé, exceeded. Exceder, to exceed. Excentriqué, disclosed, laid open. Excentriquer, to disclose, or lay open. Excessiveté, excessiveness. Exciper, for Excepter, to except. Excision, a razing down. Excluse, for Ecluse, a sluce. Excogité, excogitated, earnestly considered of. Excogiter, to excogitate, or ear∣nestly to consider of. Excolé, trimmed up. Excommange, excommunication. Excoriation, an excoriation, or flea∣ing. Excorié, excoriated, or fleaed. Excorier, to excoriate, to flea. Excortiquer, as Excorcer, to pill, or take off the rind from. Excrementeux, full of excrements. Excrescence, excrescency, (as a wart, wen, &c.) Excretion, the voiding of the su∣perfluities and excrements of the body. Excroissance, as Excrescence. Excrucié, excruciated, tormented. Excrucier, to excruciate, to tor∣ment. Excusation, an excusing. Excré, execrated, abhorred. Execrer, to execrate, to abhor. Exemptible, free, quit; also that may be removed with ease. Exenteré, bowelled. Exenterer, to bowel, to take out the entrails. Exequant, finishing, performing, ex∣ecuting; also prosecuting, pur∣suing; also expressing, declaring. Exeques, funerals, or funeral so∣lemnities. Exerceur, an exerciser, a practiser. s'Exercitant, practising, exercising. Exercitation, a practising, or exer∣cising. Exercité, practised, exercised, of good experience in. s'Exerciter, to practice, to exer∣cise. Exfoliatif, as trepane exfoliatif, that go's no farther than the su∣perficies of the scull. Exfoliation d'os,, an opening or taking up of the only superficies of a bone. Exhalation, for Exhalaison, exha∣lation. Exhaulsé, exalted, raised. Exhaulser, to exalt, to raise. Exherbé, clean-weeded, bared of grass. Exherber, to weed out herbs, grass, or weeds. Exheredation, a disinheriting. Exhilaré, exhilarated, rejoyced. Exhilarer, to exhilarate, to rejoyce. Exiber, for Exhiber, to exhibit. Exiguer, to give up a beast kept unto halves; to part the profit that hath been made or increase that hath come thereof. Exile, thin, slender, small. Eximé, lean, drained, drawn dry; also exempted, freed, discharged from. Eximer, as Essimer; also to ex∣empt, free, or discharge from. Exinané, emptyed, evacuated. Exinanition, emptiness, evacuation. Existimé, as estimé, esteemed. Exitial, deadly. Exiture, an egress; also a ripe im∣postume. Exoine, an essoin, or excuse. Exoiné, essoined, excused for his asence by reason of sickness, or other lawful impediment, alledged and deposed by another. Exoineur, an Essoiner, or as Exo∣niateur, Exoinié, as Exoiné. Exolution, a faintness, or loosness in all the parts of the body. Exoniateur, an Essoiner, an Attor∣ney, &c. who slk tly excuses the absence of another by swearing
or affirming that he is sick, or not able to appear. Exonié, essoyned, or excused; saved harmless. Exonier, to essoyn, to excuse one from appearing in Court, or going to Wars, by oath that he is impo∣tent, &c. also, to save harmless. Exorable, easie to be intreated. Exostose, a swelling of the bones. Exotique, forrein, outlandish. Expatriation, a banishment, or being out of his own Country. Expatrié, banished, or absent from his own Country. Expectatif, expecting. Expectation, expectation. Experiment, experiment, trial. Expertise, expertness, skilfulness. Expilé, fleeced, robbed. Explanade, a plain passage, an easie way. Explanadé, levelled. Explanader, to level. Explaner, to explain. Explaudé, exploded. Explauder, to explode. Expletif, filling, making up; ful∣filling, perfecting. Expletivement, compleatly, perfectly. Expliqueur, an explainer, expoun∣der. Exploder, to explode. Exploictable, seisable, liable unto an execution or seisure. Exploictation de biens, an executi∣on of goods, or a seisure of them by the King, a Court, or Landlord. Exploicteur, a doer of an exploit. Sergent Exploicteur, the ordina∣ry Serjeant for Seisures, Execu∣tions, &c. Exploitable, as Exploictable. Exploration, a search. Exploré, searched. Explorer, to search. Expoliateur, a robber. Expolié, robbed. Expolier, to rob. Expoly, polished polite, neat. Exponce, Exponction, as Esponse. Exposeur, an exposer; also an ex∣positor. Exprobation, an upbraiding, or twitting in the teeth. Exproprié, deprived of all propriety in. Expugnable, which may be got by force. Expugnateur, a subduer of Towns, &c. Expugnation, a subduing of Towns, &c. Expugné, won by assault, overcome with violence. Expugner, to conquer, or over∣come. Expulsé, expelled, thrust out by force. Expulser, to expel, or thrust out. Expulseur, an expeller. Exquisement, exquisitely, exactly, curiously. Exsiccatif, exsiccative, of a drying property. Exficcation, a driness, or drying up of. Extenseur, an extender. Extensible, extensible, which may be extended, or drawn out in length. Extention, for Extension, exten∣sion. Exterieureté, Exteriorité, outward∣ness. Extinction, an extinction, or abo∣lishing. Extipiscine, southsaying by the in∣spection of the entrals of beasts. Extiture, a shew, or standing forth. Extorqué, extorted. Extorquer, to extort, to exact. Extorqueur, an extorter; an ex∣acter. Extrajudiciaire, extrajudicial, done out of Court. Extraïures, as Estrayeres. Extraneïser, to drive, or banish into a forreign Country. Extravagation, extravagancy. Extrayeur de proces, an abridger of Cases, a breviate-maker. Extrinseque, extrinsecal, outward. Extrinsequement, extrinsecally, out∣wardly. Extumescence, a swelling. Exture, as Extiture. Exuberance, exuberancy, abundance, great store, or plenty. Exuberant, exuberant, plentiful. Exuberer, to abound, to be plenti∣ful. Exulceration, an exalceration. Exulceratoire, exulcerating, eating into the flesh. Exuler, to banish, or to be banish∣ed. Exuperance, as Exuberance. Exustion, exustion, parching, or burning. F FAbagine, Judas-tree, the Tree wherein 'tis thought he hanged himself. Fabal, the shalings of Beans. Fabloyer, to tell tales. Fabre, a forge. Fabregue, a kind of herb. Fabrie, as fabrice. Fabrice, fabrick; the reparation, or maintenance of a Parish-Church; also the state, or the estate of the Parish it self. Fabricier, a Church-warden. Fabril, of stone or timber, of or be∣longing to the craft of a Smith, Mason, or Carpenter. Fabriqueur, as Fabricier. Fabuliste, a tale-teller. Fabulosité, tale-telling. Façadé, of a beautiful front. Facecie, as facetie. Facendes, businesses. Facet, a Primmer, or Grammar for a young Scholar. Facetie, merry conceit. Facetieusement, merrily and witti∣ly. Facetieux, facetious, wittily plea∣sant. Faciate, a forepart, or forefront. Faciendaire, one that's employ'd in a business for another. Faciendes, as facendes, businesses. Facond, eloquent, well-spoken. Faconde, eloquence. Facondement, eloquently. Façonnement, a fashioning, or sha∣ping. Façonnier, a Cloth-worker. Facque, a little pocket; also as Faquin. Factionnaire, factious, mutinous. Factiste, a Play-maker. Facturerie, for factorerie, a facto∣ry. Facultez, wealth, riches. Fadas, sottish, foolish. Fadeseries, Fadeurs, for fadaises, trifles, silly things. Fadoche, the name of a certain pear. Fadrin, the Masters Mate in a Ship, the Officer that hath the command of slaves in a Galley. Fafelu, Faffelu, puffed up, fat-chee∣ked. Fafiloches, ravellings of linnen or cloth. Fagotage, faggot-making, an heap∣ing together. Fagoteur, a faggot-maker. Fagouë, a certain kernel under the Kannel-bone; also the fag-piece, or kernelly part next unto the neck of a Boar. Fagoule, a Grampel, a Purgar.
Faguenat, a filthy rammish smell. Fagule, as fagoule. Faictis, made according to; also neat, or well-made. Faictissement, neatly, handsomly. Faicture, facture. Faillance, a defection, failing, de∣caying. Faille, fail; Sans faille, without fail. Also a round and oat-bea∣ring Vail worn by Nuns and Wi∣dows of the better sort. Faillite, a failing, or want; a de∣ceiving, or disappointing; wa∣sting; fainting. Payer ses Cre∣anciers en faillites, to pay his Creditors in Papers. Fainct, for seint, feigned, counter∣feited. Faindre, for feindre, to feign. Faine, a Beech-tree; also a Beech-mast, or Buck-mast; the fruit of the Beech-tree. Faineance, for faineantise, idle∣ness. Fainin, a kind of Coyn. Faintement, feignedly. Faintise, for feintise, a feigning, or dissembling. Fais, a bundle, a burden, or load. Faisances, as Corvées, in the N. D. Faisanne, a Pheasant-hen. Faisanneau, for faisandeau, a young Pheasant. Faisannier, a keeper, or breeder of Pheasants. Faisant, for faisan, a Pheasant. Faisible, for faisable, feasible. Faisseau, for faisceau, a bundle. Faisselle, a Cheese-fat. Faisser, as Enfaisser. Faissine, a bundle, or faggot. Faist, for faîte, top, ridge, or roof. Faitard, lazie, idle, cowardly, faint-hearted. Faitardement, lazily; also faint-heartedly. Faitardise, sloth, laziness; also faint-heartedness. Faitifs, Faitis, and Faitissé, as Fai∣ctis. Faitneantise, for faineantise, idle∣ness. Faizander, as faisander in the N. D. or else to dress a Pullet or Capon like a Pheasant. Fal, a Player, or Playing-ring, in a bit. Faldes, a pair of Bases to ride with. Fallacieux, false, deceitful. Falleré, trapped. Fallevuches, the sparkles arising from Furnaces wherein metals are melted. Fallope, as Faloppe. Faloise, for falaise, a bank, down, or hill by the Sea-side. Faloppe, the Chit, Meadow-lark, or Hath-lark. Falotement, good fellow like. Falotier, of, or belonging to a Cres∣set-light. Falouidin, as Falourdin. Falourde, a great faggot. Falourdin, a heavy sot. Falouze, Harts fodder, or Harts eye. Falsifiable, which may be falsi∣fied. Falvise, a kind of Serpent. Fame, fame, renown. Famé, of good report, or reputa∣tion. Fameilleusement, greedily, hungrily. Fameilleux, hungry, starved. Famelie, Famelique, pinched with hunger. Famfreluches, as fanfreluches. Familiarement, for familierement, familiarly. Familiarizer aucun, to grow fa∣miliar with one. Famuse, as Cenchre. Fam, a Fawn, or Hind-calf. Fandesteuf, as Faudeteul. Fangue, a measure that contains about as much as the French bu∣shel. Fánessant, withering, fading. Fanfrelucher, to swive; also to tri∣fle it. Fanfreluches, loose threads in rags and torn clothes; any such trash; or as finfreluches. Fanfreluches antidotées, sopperies. Fangas, a heap of mud, or dirt. Fangeas, Fangeat, a dirty, or mud∣dy slough on the highway. se Fanir, to wither, to fade. Fanne, as faine, Beech-mast. Fanner, for faonner, to fawn. Fantasiant, fancying, imagining; feigning. Fantasie, as fantaisie in the N. D. Fantasé, fanci'd, imagined, feigned; also affected. Fantasier, to fancy, to imagine, to think of; to affect. Fantasine, for fantôme, a Vision, an Apparition. Fantasquement, fantastically. Fantassin (Adj.) of, or blonging to a Foot-souldier. Fantastiquer, to conceive, imagine, or devise; to affect fantastically; to fill with (or feed on) idle fan∣cies. Fantastiqueries, fantastical tricks. Fantosmeries, strange fancies, extra∣vagant conceits, castles in the air. Fanuise, as Cenchre. Faonnement, a fawning. Faque, a pocket, a fatchel. Faquinage, portage, the fee or fur∣niture belonging to the Porter. Far, an high Tower, or Beacon at the mouth of an Haven, wherein continual lights are kept a nights for the direction of Sea-faring people; a Lanthorn on a Watch-tower by the Sea-side. Farain, pain farain, a kind of great and very yellow houshold-bread of the better sort. Faras, a great confused heap; also a mixture of sundry Grains toge∣ther, called Bolymong. Farasse, a Cresset, also course Tow. se Farcer de, to deride at. Farcereau, a maker of Plays; a de∣viser of Jests; an inventer of Lyes. Farcerie, a playing, or jesting; an acting, or making of Plays; a counterfeiting. Farcesque, counterfit, Player-like. Farci (Subst.) an Haggas-pud∣ding. Farciere, one of the three skins that wrap an Infant in the womb. Farcineux, bescabbed. Farcisscure, a stuffing, or cramming. Fardeler, to pack up into bundles. Fardelet, a little bundle. Fardement, a painting with paint. Fare, as far. Farfadet, a little spirit, a young hobgoblin. Farfanterie, as Forsanterie. Farfelu, short and thick, as thick as long. Farfonte, a Wren. Fariboles, idle discourses, tales of a tub. Farigoulier, the Lote-tree. Farineux, done over with meal; also dry as meal. Farline, an Irish rag. Farne, a kind of Oak. Faron, the week of a Link, or Torch. Faroucheté, bcome wild and cru∣el. Farrage, a mixture of Grains and Seeds sowed together for Winter-forrage, or dder.
Farragiere, a piece of ground sowed with the winnowings of Corn, or with course Corn and Pulse min∣gled all together. Farre, as foarre. Fascheusement, unpleasingly; an∣grily. Fascinateur, a charmer, an inchanter. Fascination, a charm, or inchant∣ment. Fasciné, charmed, bewitched; dis∣figured, or transformed by in∣chantments. Fasciner, to charm, to bewitch, to disfigure, or transform by in∣chantments. Fasqué, loaden. Fassade, for façade, the front of a building. Fasse, a Weel, or a Bow-net. Fassine, for fascine, a faggot. Fastide, tedious, loathsome. Fastidiosité, a loathing, or abhorring. Fatalizer, to destinate, appoint, or designe to an inevitable issue. Fatidio, Fatidique, prsaging, fore-telling. Fatidiquement, prophetically. Fatigable, fatigable, also tire∣some. Fatigation, a wearying, or tiring. Fatraille, tra h, trumpery. Fatrassé, patched, botched; confu∣sedly put together; also vain, idle; made, or consisting of trash. Fatrassier, trifling, vain; confused, huddled together. Fatrer, to botch, patch, or bungle up a thing. Fatrin, as fatraille. Fatrouiller, to play the fop, to bu∣sie hims lf about idle things; al∣so as fatrer, to botch. Fatrouilleur, a trifler; also a bun∣gler. Fatuité, foolishness, ttihne s. Favade, bean-straw, or a bean-stalk. Faval, the lings of beans. Favas, as faval; also a bean-l, a b-raw. Fauce-soy, a ith-bak r. Faucel, a lit . Faucer, to std, as a crookd blade. Fauhae, a mowing, or the ire of a Fau, . Faucho a owig, or a god  t w i. Fau a  to to mow with. Fauhon, a hagr. Faueillon, a  sk. Faudesteul, and Faudeteul, as Fauldetueil. Faudiere, the skirt-piece of an ar∣mour. Faudrinier, as Fourdrinier. Faverots, a kinde of small beans, or as Faverottes, earth-nuts. Faviere, a bean-plot. Faulce, for fauce, a sithe. Faulcé, as faussé in the N. D. Faulde, lap. Fauldetueil, for fauteuil, a great el∣bow-chair. Fauldiere, as faudiere. Fauls, for faux, false. Faulsaire, faulé, faulse-braye. See them with a s insad of  t N. D. Faulsée, a breach; also a striking, or charging through and through. Faulse-foy, a faith-breaker. Faulsement, for faulsement, false∣ly. Faulser, faulser, and faulse, as faus∣ser, fausset, fausse, uder faux in the N. D. Faulseteux, most false, full of lies. Faultif, faulty, apt to do amiss. Faultrage, as Fautrage. Faulveret, as Fauvete in the N. D. Favorit, for favori, a Favorite. Favorite, a She-favorite, a Princes Mistriss. Favot de sebves, a bean-stalk. Fauperdrieux, a kinde of Hawk. Fauquet, a shaling wry-legged-fel∣low. Fausonnerie, a forging, or falsifying of evidences, a false counter∣fting of another mans hand. Faussée, as faulsée. Fausterne, the round Birthwort. Fauteur, a favorer, frtherer, hel∣per; a ptaker, a companion. Fautier, faulty, blame-worthy. Fautrace, as Droict de fautrage, a certain unaliena fee due up∣on ea hea of att that ras  Madws or Pa∣stur of a Mor. I  where∣of a  itined to kp  g d order, ad to lo k  ba s at fir put i  after anged. Fauveau, a dn or; also a P∣n, or fork-fih; also () dark, yellow, d, somewhat fallow. Faux-rcher, , or go awry: to sip, or bl. Faux-marcr, a  got by a ship, or . Faux oiseau, as fouperdrieux; or any hawk in general. Fauxperdriau, as fauperdrieux. Fayant, a Beech-tree. Fayerie, as férie; also a fany, illusion, or vision of Fairies. Fayfort, a warranting of the goodness, and sufficienty of sale-ware. Faymidroict, base or low Juris∣diction. Fays, as fais. Fayse, a swath-band for a childe. Faziols, french-beans. Fé, for soi, Faith. Fé Dieu, Gods me. Feable, as feal. Feablement, as fealement. Feage, Fee-simple; or an Inheri∣tance or house held in Fee-sim∣ple. Feal, trusty, loyal. Fealement, trustily, loyally. Feaulté, fealty, loyalty. Feauté, the sam. Febé, a secret story, a thing hid∣den. Feble, for foible, weak. Febriitant, sick of an ague, or fea∣ver. Febrifique, aguish, feaverish. Febril, of, or belonging to an agu, or er. Febveux, full of (or yielding) beans. Febvre, a black-smith. Fecal, dreggy, nsettled. Fece, lees, dregs, or grounds. Feconder, to make fertile, or fruit∣ful. Fecot, the youngling of an ew (or of any other such beast) newly ome out of r blly. Fecture, the frihing, o making up of. Fulent, thi, mddy, dreggy. Fée, a Fairy. Fée, fatal;  bewitched. Féerie, fatality, destiny. Fein, for foin, ay. Feine, bch-mast▪ also a kinde of Cider-appl. Feintement, , aily. Felerin, Fla, or a  like it. Felice, happy; also fertile, rit∣ful. Flle, a kind of h-t. le, (Ai.) . lure, as . lu, . ll, as flin. Fellon, Felloe, as fel▪ felonie in the N. D.
Felogne, Selandine the greater. Felonnement, feloniously, cruel∣ly. Felure, a flaw, or small crack. Femelin, womanish, effeminate. Femellette, a little Female crea∣ture. Femier, a Bayliff, or overseer of the husbandry in a Gentlemans house. Femmette, a little woman, or wife. Femois, a kinde of fish-net. Fenasse, as Sainct-foin. Fenault, an hay-loft. Fendant, a great flash, or cut. Fendasse, a cleft, or chink. Fendement, a cleaving. Fendillé, cloven, broke into small chinks. Fendiller, to cleave, to break in small chinks. Fendu, (Subst.) the slit of a thing. Fenerateur, an Ʋsurer. Feneration, usury. Feneratoire, usurious. Fenestrage, windows; the fashion, or contrivement thereof. Fenestré, windowed, having win∣dows. Fenestrelle, a little window. Fenestrier, belonging to a window; also placed in, or looking out at a window. Feneur, a hay-maker. Feneux, full of hay. Feniste, a little Shad-fish. Fenier, as Fenil, a hay-loft. Fenné, withered, faded. Fenoil, for fenou, fennel. Fenons, outward splints (made of sticks about a finger thick; first wrapped in hay or straw, then within a piece of linnen.) Fenugrec, the herb, or seed Fenni∣greek. Feodalité, the estate of a Feodal or chief. Fedé, infeoffed. Fere, a wilde beast. Fereules, the thing whereon Images or Pageants are carried; also coffins. Fereluche, as freluche, a moat. Feri, hit, struck, wounded, hurt. Feriage, as Feage. Ferial, of, or belonging to a holy-day; idle, ing, vacant; jocund, mer∣ry, pleasant; also ridiculous. Feriat, a vacation-time, an idle (or a play) day. Ferm. wilde, savage, cruel. Fermail, the clasp of a book, &c. Fermaille, a small clasp, or buckle. Fermailles, for fiançailles, a for∣mal betrothing of a couple before their full marriage. Fermaillé, clasped, buckled; also garnished, or set thick with small buckles. Fermailler, to buckle, to clasp; also to set or garnish with small buckles. Fermailler, (a Subst.) a buckle-ma∣ker, or clasp-maker. Fermailler, a small buckle or clasp; also a carkanet, or border of gold, such as Gentlewomen wear about their heads or hoods; also an in∣chanted image, collar, or chain worn about the neck, as a preser∣vative against poison, witchcruft, wounds, &c. Fermance, a certain Officer within the Jurisdiction of La Solle. Fermant, (Subst.) a buckle, hasp, or clasp; also a shutter; any thing that surely bindes or fastens. Fermative, an affirmation, or pro∣testation of right unto a thing in controversie, made before a Judge by him that pretends it. Fermeille, as fermaille. Fermeillet, as fermaillet. Fermement, (Subst.) a shutting, locking, closing, or making up. Ferment, as fermant. Fermesse, for fermeté, stedfastness, constancy. Fermeture, Fermeure, a shutting, locking, closing, or making up. Fermier, (Adj.) farming. Sergent fermier, that hath farmed his place (which by law he should not do.) Fermoirs, the clasps of a book; or as fremoirs. Fernel, a certain beam in the prow of a Ship. Feronnier, an Iron-monger. Ferrage, the shooing of horses; also any work, or working in Iron. Droict de ferrage, a Priviledge whereby some special Officers and followers of Court claim to have their horses shod at the Kings charge; also a certain fee due to the cutters of the Mint. Ferrailleries, iron-work, implements, or tools. Ferran, as Aguillade. Ferrandier, a dresser of hemp. Ferrasse, the Fork-fish; also course tow. Ferrat, shod (as a horse) with iron. Ferrementiporte, a wandring Priest that ever carries about him the Ornaments or implements belong∣ing to the Mass, called, ferremens de la Messe; also a carrier of tools, or heads of Spears, or blades of Weapons. Ferret, the tag of a point. Ferreur, a flax-comb, or hatchel of Iron. Ferreux, of Iron, as hard as Iron. Ferriere, a kinde of big Dutch lea∣thern bottles; also a place to keep Iron in; a pouch to put horse∣nails in &c. a kinde of adamant. Ferronnier, for ferron, an Iron∣monger, one that sells unwrought Iron in bars, &c. Ferruginosité, rust of Iron. Ferrumination, a sodering, or fa∣stening together, properly in mat∣ters of Iron. Fers, for fer, Iron. Fertilizé, made fertile. Fertilizer, to make fertile. Ferve, par ferve, according to, after the rate of. Fervement, fervently, ardently. Fervesti, Fervestu, clad in, or ar∣med with Iron. Ferulacé, round; also of the kinde of the herb Ferula. Ferules, splents for broken legs, arms, fingers, &c. Ferun, rankness, rammishness; ex∣tream or strong unfavouriness. Ferure, a stroke, or hit; a striking, or hitting. Fessé, crazed. Fesseau, for faisceau, a bundle. Fesse-breviaire, a Priest that quick∣ly whips over, or mumbles up, his breviary; any one that says over his ordinary prayers too fast. Fesse-cul, a pedantical Whip-arse. Fessée, a lash on the breech. Fesse-Matthieu, an Ʋsurer. Fesse-pain, a great bread-eater. Fesse-pinte, a good-fellow, one that can drink lustily. Fesse-tondue, a hawdy companion; a small-smock. Fesseur, a whipper. Fessier, belonging to the breech, or buttocks. Fessisier, to play tricks with the buttocks. Fessu, well breeched, great buttock'd. Fest, for faite, top, or ridge. Gibet à fest, a Gibbet that hath a top∣ping or chaplet made over it. Festard, and Festardise, as fetard, fetardise. Feste, for faite, the ridge, or top of a house.
Festé, festival, kept holy. Fester, to feast it, to keep holy day. Festide, for fâcherie, grief, or trou∣ble. Festier, for fêtoyer, to treat, or en∣tertain his friends. Festiere, for faitiere, a ridge-tile, or (being turned) a gutter-tile. Festinant, a feaster, a feast-maker. Festination, speed, haste. Festoyement, a feasting, or ban∣quetting. Festuser, as Fetuser. Fetard, lazy, dull, faint-hearted. Fetardise, laziness, dulness, faint∣heartedness. Feteur, stink. Fetide, stinking. Fetisse, as liqueurs fetisses, made, or compounded liquours. Feton, as feston in the N. D. Fetusé, touched, or wiped over with a fescue; also tickled by such a touching. Fetuser, to touch, or wipe over with a fescue; also to tickle by touch∣ing with a fescue. Feuäge, for fouäge, chimney-tax. Feuchere, Feuchiere, fern. Feverondes, the eaves of an house. Feugiere, for fougere, fern. Feu∣giere de chesnes, the herb Oak∣fern. Feuillée, as fueillée. Feuillure, as fueillure. Feultré, made of felt, covered with felt. Feultrer, to make of, or cover with felt. Feulu, for feuillu, full of leaves. Feur, the cost and charge a hus∣bandman is at in the tilling and reaping of his ground; also a fair; a rate or price set on a thing. Fevre, a Blacksmith. Feurmariage, as formariage in the N. D. Feurolles, night-fires. Feustre, for feutre, felt. Feutraict, drawn out of his Country; also wine, corn, &c. take the . Feutré, wrought thick as lt; also stuffed, or istened with felt. Feutré d'herbe,  thick, or overgrown with gss. Feyturae, a charm, or inchantment. Fez, a . Fiable, a feable, tru. Fiace, for confiat . Fials, for Fnçes, a formal but  of a Couple before their  marriage. Fia, trust. Fibreux, full of hair-like threads, or strings. Fichement, a fixing, or fastening. Fichément, fixedly. Fiche-pain, an ear-wig. Fichet, as arbre de fichet, a tree that is come of a twig or tender scion planted. Ficheur, a fixer, or fastener. Fichere, a fixing, or fastening. Fichu, absurd. Ficotte, as par ma ficotte, by my feckins. Ficte, a little Shad-fish. Fictil, made of earth. Fidejusseur, a Surety. Fidelium, the last Prayer that's said for the dead. Il passe plusieurs choses par un fidelium, he hud∣dles up many things under one. Fidicule, the Harp of Heaven, a company of stars which resemble an Harp. Fiduciale, the index or hand of an Astrolabe. Fiebvrette, a slight ague. Fied, & Fieffe, for fief, a Fief. Fiefferme, a fee-farm. Fiefvé, for fieffé, infeoffed. Fiefvement, a feoffement, or an in∣feoffing. Fieller, to make bitter. Fielleux, fall of bitterness, as bitter as gall. Fiens, for fiente, dung, ordure. Fienté, dunged; also beshit. Fienter, to dung. Fienteux, full of dung, or ordure. Fientifie, beshitten. Fieret, somewhat lofty, a little fierce. Fiereté, Fierettement, as fierté, fierement in the N. D. Fier-humble, a stout heart hum∣bled. il Fiertà, 'tis like unto, or agrees well with. Fieul, for fils, son. Figon, a lover of figs. Figueraye, Figuerie, Figuiere, a ground fll of fig-trees. Figurement, a figuring, shaping, or forming. Figurine, a pretty little image, or figure. Filace, as filasse in the N. D. Filacier, ready, or easie to in pun. Filamenieux, fall of filaments. Filandier, a man that Spins. Filandiere, a spir, a flax-wo∣man; also a ki of small boat. Filaé, full of small threads or ss. Filandrerie, spinstry, spinning. Filant, a Congar. Filé, for filets, a net. Filée, a kinde of Eagle. File-habits, cloaths-spinning. Fileret, as filleret. Filerie, a spinning, or spinstry; also a friendly meeting between the young men and maids of a Coun∣trey-Town, where they play at many sorts of active Games, while these both spin and look on. Fileul, for filleul, a God-son. Fil-gros, shoomakers thread. Filiastre, a Son-in-Law, a step-son. Filiation, the being or estate of a son. Filipende, Filipendule, filipendula, Dropwort, red Saxifrage. Fillains, the tackling of a ship. Fillandrerie, as filandrerie. Fillasse, as filasse in the N. D. La fillasse de nostre Dame, the small and tender strings of a Cobweb. Fillastre, a Son-in-law, or step-son. Fille-femme, one that goes for a maid, but is none; a crackt piece; also one that has got a clap. Filleret, maidenly, effminate. Fillerie, as filerie. Fillet, a watering bit for a horse. Fillette, a young girl; also a small wine-vessel. Filliastre, as fillastre. Filliere, as filiere in the N. D. Filloche, a little thread. Fillol, for filleul, a God-son. Fillole, a buddy knob in a Vine, like a wart. Fillot, for filleul, a God-son. Filoire, a spinster. Filon, a vein of metal in a Mine. Filoselle, ferret-silk. Fimport, a curse in Law, binding a Plaintiff to stch in, and make joyn in suit with him, all such as can pretend any right or interest in the thing which he means to recover. Fimporter, a Plaintiff to do as a∣foresaid. Finablement, for finalement, finally. Finage, the smallest tackling of a ship. Finages, the utmost limits or liber∣ties, the utmost bouds or borders of a Country or City. Finaison, as quand argent saut fi∣naison nulle,  gain, or satis∣faction, without money. Fine de poules, as dng, or or∣dare. Finé, for sini, ended, finished.
Finement, (Subst.) an ending, or finishing; in end, or conclusion. Finer, for sinir, to end, or to finish. Finerot, as chemin finerot, a way that is about 18 foot broad. Fingard, lazy, idle. Finiteur, the circumference of a Pil∣lar from the top to the bottom thereof. Finoinct, a kinde of pear. Fins, for confius, borders, frontiers. Fiole, for phiole, a glass-bottle. Fiquatelle, a womans privity's. Fique, par ma fique, by my feckins. Fiquer, for ficher, to fasten. Firme, for ferme, firm. Firmeté, for fermeté, firmness. Frealins, children, or freed men, maintained or nourished in the Kings house, or upon h land. Fiscellette, small pack-thread. Fiscellé, fuzelly, in haraldry. Fisq, as Fisque in the N. D. Fissaigne, a certain tumbling trick. Fissau, a Fitch, or Fulmart. Fissaye, a quick and violent dance much used by the French. Fisselle, for fiscelle, pack-thread. Fissure, a cleft, or chink. Fissuré, cleft, chinked. Fisticin, of fistick nuts. Fistique, the fistique nut. Fistonneau, a little Knae. Fistuleux, full of fistula's, or of holes like a spunge. Fivatier, a Copy-holder, or customa∣ry Tenant, properly the Vassal or Tenant of a Lord Cavier. Fivele, a huckle. Fizain, spindle-tree, pri k-timber. Fizellé, as fisellé. Flabellation, a fanning, or giving wind unto. Flabellé, fanned, that hath wind given to it. Flaccide, flaggy, limber, hanging loose. Flacconner, to y the pot, to drink hard. Flache, as flaccide. Flacquer, to mak a thing to s. Flaa, Flagellation, a whipping, or lash∣ing. Flagell wd, hed. Flageller, . Flageo, . Fla  gcoler en  to itter. Fla  a wir; also , s stag, or slower de . Flagorner, to tell tales. Flagorneur, a tale-teller, a pick-thank, a secret accuser. Flagrance d'un delict, the plain ap∣parency, or paableness, of an of∣fence; the crying of a sin. Flagrant, flaming, burning. Prendre au faict flagrant, to apprehend up∣on the deed doing, or presently after. Flaine, a tick for a bed. Flair, scent, smell. Flairement; a scenting, or smelling. Flaireur, a scenter, or smeller. Flaironné, scented, smelt, vented. Flaironner, to scent, smell, or vent. Flaistri, Flaistrir, Flaistrissure. See flètri, flètrir, flètrissure in the N. D. Flaitrir, as aistrir. Flaman, Flambant, a kind of Sea-fowl, of the bigness of a Stork, and indifferent good meat. Flambant, (Adj.) flaming. Flambe, flame, a great blaze of fire; also the blue flower de lace. Flambelet, a small link. Flambillon, a small flame, light, or link. Flambo, a kind of long, slender, and flame-coloured Sea-fish. Flamboyantement, radiantly. Flamiche, a kind of better bread than ordinary; also a kinde of cake. Flamman, as flaman. Flammeche, as Flammesche, a spark. Flammette, a little flame; the herb Crowfoot; a kind of lat. Flammie, the Office, or Dignity of a Pagan Arch-Priest. Flamme-vome, flame-vomiting. Flammuche, as flamiche. Flammuie, the herb called upright Clamberer, or upright Virgins bower; also the herb Spear-wort, or Spear-crowfoot. Fln a arg-horses drawing , these that run along his , e-lang, arr for  thcks or of a barbd . Flahere,  or  build∣ing. F a , or little custard. . or tes of , read, to be . Fl  stag. Flasche, as flache. Flasconner, as flaconner. Flasquet, a little flask. Flassade, the covering of a bed; al∣so the daintiest kinde of Ray, or smooth Thornback. Flastereau, a kind of flat Naveau. Flastrer, as Flastrir. Flastri, marked, burnt, or branded with an hot iron. Flastrir, to mark, burn, or brand with an hot iron. Flatant, Flatard, flattering, or sawn∣ing on. Flatelet, an Hallibut-fih. Flatement, a flattering, or fawning on. Flatereau, one that flatters a lit∣tle. Flateresse, a flattering, or coxing woman. Flateusement, slatteringly, fawning∣ly. Flatré, branded in the forehead, bored through the ear, marked for a knave. Flatrer, to brand, burn, or mark with a hot iron. Flatri, as flatré. Flatrissement, a branding, burning, or marking with a hot iron; a publick mark, or disgrace. Flatti, heaten, or made flat. Flattir, to heat, or mak flat. Flatucux, Flatulent, flatulent, win∣dy, full of windy humours. Flatuosité, windiness, fulness of wind. Flavelle, trifling. Flayau, a slail (to thrash with.) Fleble, for foible, feeble, or weak. Flecheurs, bowers, the muscles that serve to bow the joynts of the fingers. Flechissure, a bending, or bowing; also crookedness. Flection, the same. Flegart, a common place, or way. Flegmon, a hot and  welling or inflammation of blood. Fleichade, a wound or rick of an arrow. Fleiche, for fleche, an . Fleschier, an Archer. Fletan, as flettan. Fletlet, a Hallb-fih. Flettan, the greatet k of Salt-fish. Flte, a ighter, a small or  a slnder. Fleve, weak. Flemattique, for flegmatique, fleg∣matick.
Fleume, for flegme, flegm. Fleurage, a heap of flowers. Fleurant, smelling, or casting a scent. Fleurée, sroth, or scum. Fleureter, lightly to pass over; to vent, or wind; also to sneak, or cave-drop it. Fleuretis de paroles, an idle flourish of words. Fleurette, for petite fleur, a little flower. Fleuretter, as fleureter. Fleureux, stored with choice of flow∣ers; also fragrant, sweet-smelling. Fleurin, for florin, a Low-Country Coyn worth about 11 s. sterl. Fleuronné, flourishing; set thick with flowers. Fleuronner, to blossom. Fleurtis, a flourish, or flouri hing. Fleurtis des oysillous, the war∣bling of little birds. Fleuter, and Fleuteur, as fluter, fluteur in the N. D. Fleuteuse, a woman that plays on a Flute. Fleutrer, as flatrer. Flexir, to bend. Flexueux, full of crankles, that hath many turnings and windings. Flexuosité, a crooked turning, an often winding in and out. Flez, a Flounder. Flie, a jerk, a twang; a shaft, or arrow. Flin, a Thunder-stone, wherewith Cutlers surbish their blades; or as Esmeril. Flion, the name of a fish not much unlike a Cockle. Flique de lard, a slitch of bacon. Flis, a slight-shaft. Flisquant, whisking, twanging. Flo, the high-water mark at Sea. A lo, floating or swimming on the Sea. Choses du flo, Goods that lie floating or swimming on the top of the water. Floccard, a fashion of head-attire put on by the betrothed Maidens of Lyons, and left off when they have been marri'd a twelve month. Floche, as flosche. Flocquars, tass ls, puffs, or tufts, as of Sarcenet that is drawn out of, or cut under ather staff. Flocquer, to pull out, as Sarcenet in a breech ut after the Swisse fa∣shion; to hang forth loose, or to sit flagging, as an over-wide gar∣ment. Flocquoir, a squirt. Floflotement, a floating, or surging; a bubling, or tempestuous noise. Flofloter, to float, surge, or wave up and down; to make a bubling, or tempestuous noise. Flon, Flondelaict, flawn. Floquer, as flocquer. Floquet de poil, a lock of hair. Gentil floquet, a spruce youth. Florable, the herb Cheese-runnel, or Maids hair. Floraux, as Jeux floraux, a witty and pleasant Contention among French Poets; a silver Eglan∣tin being the reward or prize for the best doer, and a Marigold for the next. Florée, the blue sum of Woad boy∣ling in the Dyers lead; which sleeted off and dri'd unto powder, serves Painters and Sick-dyers for divers uses. Floret, for fleuret, a soil, a sword with the edge rebated. Flori, bloomed, blossomed. Floride, lively, lusty, flourishing. Flosche, staggy, weak, or soft, as a boneless lump of flesh. Soye flos∣che, Sleave-silk. Floage, a floating, or swimming on the top of. Le premier lotage d'un Navire, the launching of a new Ship. Flotelant, floating, sging. Floton, a ta, or lock of. Flottage,  flotage. Flouin, a Bk of s 4 for 5. tun. Flo for fleur, flower. Flourir, for fleurir, to blossom. Fluctio, for fluxion, a running of liquor, . Fluctuation, a ging, floating, or swimming; a doubting, or wa∣ing. Fluctuer, to float, sarg, or wave up and down; to be tossed, or dispu∣ted; to be at no certainty. Fluer, to flow, , or gilde. Flueurs de femine, a womans flow∣ers. Fluidment, slowingly, glibly smooth∣ly long; also moitly, tinly, wely. Fluste, a little Flute, or Pipe. Fluste-ergiere, Water-plantane. Fluviatile, of, or belonging to a ri∣ver, ream, or water. Fluxible, Fluxil, flowing, slitting, running. Forre, strw; also litter, or sed∣r. Foarreux, fll of straw. Focile, the arm from the elbow to the wrist, the leg or shank from the knee to the ankle. Fodine, a quarry, a mine; a place or pit whereout any thing is dig∣ged. Foetide, stinking. Foeu, for feu, fire. Fogat, an Engine to catch fish with. Foguer, to grumble; powt, lowr. Fogon, as fougon. Foiblage de poids, want of weight, scant weight. Foignasse, Snail-claver. Foigne, a long staff that hath at one end a square casting-net, used most by Sea-fishermen. Foigner, to grumble, or be offended at; also to dissemble. Foine, as foinne, a Pole-cat; also a Pigeon-house that hath one en∣try on the top without other hole or window for light or air; also as faine, Bech-mast. Foinil, for senil, a Hay-lost. Foirard, a shitten fellow; also a kind of white Vine or Grape of no great worth, and apt to loosen the belly. Foirelle, French (or Garden) Mer∣cury. Foirer, to squit, to shite thin; also to beray with squirting. Foiret, as forc. Foirolle, as foirelle. Foi du corps, the waste, or middle. Foisonner, to abound. Foisonneux, abundant, plentiful. Foite-cul, a pedant, a whip-arse. Foiter, for fouetter, to whip. Folatrie, wantonness, foppery, soolery. Foleton, petit-folet, a little fop. Folier, to lay the fool. Follasses, Beets. Follastrerie, Follet, as folátrerie, folet in the N. D. Follettes, Orage, golden herb. Follicule, a little bag, or sack; also an husk, peel, or skin inclosing seed. Follier, as solier. Folliner, to play the wanton. Fonceau, a little bottom, hole, hol∣low (or deep) place. Fonceau d'un Canon, the big or broad end of a Cannon-bit. Fondalité, right of, or interest in the soil. Fondamment, fondéement, ex∣treamly. Pleurer fondéèment, to melt into tears, to weep extreamly. Fondegue, a Merchants Ware-house, or Store-house.
Fondelfe, a kind of Engine for bat∣tery, used in old time. Fondier, a slinger, one that throws stones out of a sling. Fondileures, rises, or choans in a womans overful breasts. Fondrailles, the grounds, lees, or dregs of liquor. Fondreau, as fondrillon. Fondrée, as fondrailles. Fondrillon, a bottom to wind silk, thread, or yarn on; also a knot tangled in thread. Fondroyer, to hang down to the ground. Fondure, a founding, melting, or casting of metals, &c. Fonge, a Mushroom, or Teads-stool. Fongeux, spungy, light, or full of holes as a spunge. Fongnement, a frowning, a discon∣tented grumbling. Fongner, to frown; also to grum∣ble. Fons, as fonts in the N. D. Font, for fontaine, a spring, a foun∣tain. Fontaigner, of, or belonging to a fountain. Fontaigneux, full of springs, or foun∣tains. Fontainer, as fontaigner. Fontanel, as veine fontanelle, the principal vein in the thigh of a horse. Fontanelle, a running sore, an is∣sue. Fontenelle, Fontenette, Fontenil, Fontenille, a little spring, or fountain; also an issue. Fonte∣nelle de la teste, the upper part of the head forward. Foradjour, as Adjour. Forage, as Droict de forage, four pots of wine upon every piece sold by retail, due unto the Lord of the Jurisdiction wherein it is sold. In some Places it is also two pots upon every piece that's sold in gross. Forans, a certain Receptacle for Sea-water (whereof salt is made) conveyed into it out of others by a wooden pipe or trunk. Forbatu, throughly beaten, swinged out of doors. Forbe, for fourbe, a cousening trick. Forbeu, mellow, cup-shotte. Cheval forbeu, a horse that hath drank, being too hot, and is thereby foundered. se Forboire, to furfeit with drink∣ing, to take a dram too much; also to founder, as a horse, by drinking when he is very hot. Forbour, for faubourg, a suburb. Forçable, forceable, that may be forced. Forcement, a forcing, or compelling; also a bursting open, or breaking through. Forcenant, as Chien forcenant, a hot dog after his game. Forcenement, madness, fury. Forcener, to be mad, or furious. Forcenerie, as forcenement. Forceur, a forcer, a violent subduer, conqueror, or overcomer. Forchaffer, to shoot awry, as a bow that is stronger of one side than of another. Forcheminé, wandered, gone out of the way. Forcheminer, to wander, to strag∣gle. Forchette, for fourchette, a fork. Forcommand, a putting out of pos∣session by order or command of a Court. Forcommandé, outed, put out of possession. Forconseillé, ill-advised. Forconseiller, to give ill advice. Forconte, a misreckoning. Forconté, misreckoned. Forconter, to misreckon. Foré, bored. Forer, to bore. Fores, de fores, without, forth of. Forestain, woody. Forsan, a knave, rogue, or rascal. Forfanter, to play the rogue. Forsanterie, roguery; also a crue of Rogues. Forgas, a seisure, or sale of goods, upon execution. Temps de for∣gas, certain days after the open sale of goods in execution given to prove the Execution wrongful, and recover them with costs; or to sa∣tisfie his Creditor; or to have his goods again for the money which was bid for them; which time if he neglect, they are gone for ever. Forgetture, as forjet in the N. D. Forhu, the hooping of huntsmen at the death of their chace. Forhuer, to whoop, shout, or hollow. Foriboles, as fariboles. Forissir de raison, to exceed the li∣mits of reason. Forissu, sprung, or issued out of. Forjur, a release, or discharge. Forjurement, the same. Forliner, for forligner, to jut (or lean) out. Formage, for fromage, cheese. Formaillet, an inchanted Image, as fermaillet. Formarcher, as fauxmarcher. Formelier, a last-maker. Formelizé, formed, whereunto form is given. Formelizer, to form, to give form unto. Formené, disquieted, vexed, tor∣mented. Formener, to vex, disquiet, or tor∣ment. Forment, for froment, wheat. Formentin, of wheat. Formerets, the small branches of a Vault in the ends or inside thereof. Formi, for fourmi, an ant. Formiant, as pouls formiant, a pulse that beats very fast, but weakly. Formie, for fourmi, an ant. Formiere, Formiliere, an ants hole, or nest. Formillement, as fourmillement in the N. D. Formilles, as Herpes. Formillon, a small black spider like an ant, and spotted on the back with little star-like specks. Formion, a small ant, or pismire. Formoret, a kinde of strong lye, whereof soap is made. Formort, formorture, an escheat falling to a man by the death of another. Formosité, beauty, comeliness. Formoture, as formort. Fornage, as fournage. Fornaise, for fournaise, a furnace. Forniquer, to play the fornicator. Forparler, to speak ill. se Forpasser d'un pas, to go a step further than he needs. Forpie, the mouth, or middle of an opened pair of sheers. Forrage, as forage. Forregardant, outlooking, or look∣ing awry. Forsage, overweight in money. Forsaire, for forçat, a Galley-slave. Forsené, for forcené, mad. Fortelet, Fortet, a little strong. Fortifiable, which may be fortified. Fortifiement, a fortifying, or streng∣thening. Fortraction, a withdrawing; a lurching, or purloyning. Fortunable, unfortunate. Fortunal, fortune; also a great and sudden tempest at Sea. Fortunément, fortunately, happily.
Fortuner, to make fortunate. Fossaillé, ditched in. Fossailler, to ditch in. Fossal, a ditch. Fosselu, dimpled. Fossetteux, full of little pits or pock-holes. Fossile, grand fossile, the bigger of the two bones in the leg. Petite fossile, the less. Fossile, (Adj.) which is, or may be digged. Fossoir, a mattock. Fossourer, for fossoyer, to dig. Fossoye, a certain Garment used in old time. Fossoyement, Fossoyeure, a dig∣ging. Foterle, Foterne, Sarasins birth-wort, or heart-wort. Fotu, a fomentation, or medicine ap∣plied to warm or comfort a di∣seased part. Fou, for hêtre, a beech-tree. Fouaille, the reward which hunters give their dogs at the death of a wilde swine. Fouailler, the sindging, or dressing of a wilde swine. Fouant, a musk-cat, or a pole-cat. Fouarre, as foarre. Fouasse, for fouace, a bun, or cake hastily baked. Fouassier, a maker of such cakes. Foueque, for foulque, a fen-duck. Foucées, Kids, the smallest sort of baven. Fouere, the squirt. Fouettable, worthy to be whipped. Fouettade, Fouettement, a lashing, or whipping. Fouerreux, fit to be whipped. Foufoulet, as jouër an foufoulet, to play the whore. Fougade, a mine, an up-blowing fire-work, or wilde-fire; a sud∣den fury, or impetuous passion. Fougasse, as fouasse. Fougeraye, a ferny plot of ground. Fougon d'un navire, the Cook-room of a ship. Fougoux, for fougueux, furious. Fouïr, for foyer, a hearth. Fouier, for fouiller, to search, or feel all over. Fouigner, as foigner. Fouillard, a leavy bough, or branch. Fouille-merde, a beetle. Fouillouse, a bag, or scrip. Fouisseure, a digging. Foulage, as foulement in the N. D. Foulere, a fen-duck. Foulée, the slot of a Stag; the fuse of a Buck, their foyling. Fouliere, as foulerie in the N. D. Foulis, as foulement in the N. D. Foullage, full age, money paid for the thickning of cloath at a fulling-mill. Foullé, fouller, foullon, foullure. See them with a single l in the N. D. Foullonné, thickened, or fulled. Foullonner, to full, or thicken cloth in a mill. Foullouaire, or Fouloire, the round trough, wherein the wheel of a press often turning, or the treader often stamping, crushes the stuff that is in it. Foulz, certain pieces of Venison cut out from between the neck and the essay of a Deer, that part of the side which is next to the neck. Foupi, rumpled. Foupier, for fripier, a broker. Foupir, to rumple. Fouquer, to lay hold o. Fouquer, a Game wherein one set∣ting a staff against his nose rns tilting at a candle. Fourbouilly, boyled or stewed meat, with broth or pottage. Fourbure, the foundering of a horse. Foure, a fork, or any thing that makes a sharp angle; also for∣kedness. Fourcelle, the breast-blade, or heart-blade; also the channel (or crow) bone. Fourchage, a branch of a family. Fourché, for fourchu, forked. Fourche-fiere, a quarter-staff. Four∣che-fiere à trois pointes, a trout-spear. Fourchelle, a little fork. Fourchément, fork-wise, also crook∣edly. Fourcheon, a forket. Fourcheran, drageon fourcheran, the vine-sprig that shoots out be∣tween two branches. Fourcheu, for fourchu, forked. Fourchier, a cord untwied in the midst, and used as a sling. Four∣chier à trois dents, a trout-spear, or eel-spear. Fourchument, as fourchément. Fourdrines, Slos; also wilde or mountain-plumbs. Fourdrinier, the black thorn that bears sloes; also the wilde or mountain plumb-tree. Fourgangnement, a recovering of, or a re-entring into land, for non-payment of rent. Fourgangner, to re-enter into land, for non-payment of rent. Fourmage, for fromage, cheese. Fourmageon, a little cheese. Fourmagere, and Fourmagerie, as Fromagere, and fromagerie in the N. D. Fourmageur, Fourmagier, for fromager, a Cheese-monger. Fourmageux, full of cheese. Fourman, wheaten. Fourme, a kinde of net for water-fowl. Fourment, for froment, Wheat. Fourmentée, Furmety, boyled wheat. Fourmenter, to bring forth wheat. Fourmentier, yielding wheat, or of wheat. Fourmiant, soft, and gentle. Fourmier, for fourmiller, to swarm as Ants. Fourmiere, for fourmillere, an Ants hole, or nest. Fourmion, a little Ant. Fournaillé, baked. Fournailler, to bake. Fournaisier, belonging to a fur∣nace. Fourni, or Fournil, a Bake-house. Fournillé, baked. Fourniller, to bake. Fourniller, (Adj.) haunting the Bake-house. Fournissement, a furnishing. Fournoyé, baked. Fournoyer, to bake. Fourquat, a kinde of Plough. Fourque, for fourche, a fork, a pair of gallows. Fourquier, a Brewers stirrer. Fourrager, for fourragement, a for∣raging. Fourré, (Subst.) a kinde of fish∣net stretched out with hoops in the form of a Whale-bone-sleeve. Fourrie, pillage, forrage. Fourriere, a close cillar to lay wine or oyl in. Fourrons, a nick-name given by those of Thoulouse to the Ser∣jeants or Attendants of the Cap∣tain of the watch. Fourser, to spawn, as Carps in a pond. Fousser, to dig, to turn up a Vine∣yard somwhat before the vines begin to bud. Foussette, as fossette in the N. D. Fousteau, Fouteau, a Bch-tree. Foutoir, a battering am; also a rammer, or a rammer-head for a piece of Ordnance.
Fouton, a Snipe. Foutouer, as foutoir. Fouyasse, as fouässe. Fouyer, for foyer, a hearth. Le fouyer d'une arquebuse, the fire∣pan of a Gun. Fouyer de ga∣lere, the Cook-room in a Gal∣ley. Fouynne, as fouinne. Fousil, as fusil in the N. D. Foy, as le soy du corps, the middle, or waste. Foyes, the slot of a Stag, the view of a Buck, the footing of either. Foyne, Beech-mass. Foynne, as fouinne. Frac, as on ne trouve chez luy ni sric ni frac, there is nothing to be got in his house. Fracteur, a breaker; also a Bank∣rupt. Fracturé, burst, broken. Fragate, for fregate, a Frigat. Fragrant, fragrant, odoriferous. En fragrant delict, while the of∣fence is fresh in memory, or pre∣sently after the committing there∣of. Fraille, frail, brittle. Fraillé, crumbled in pieces. Frailler, to crumble in pieces. Fraire, to surfeit; to fill full; also to swell. le Frais d'un homme, the fresh or new steps of a man. Fraisé, pain fraisé, a kinde of pa∣nado. Fraisier, a strawberry-plant. Fraslé, broken, burst. Fraislé, as fraile, frail. Fraisler, to break, to burst into many small pieces. Fraislure, frailty, brittleness. Fraisturement, in a frail manner. Fraisne, for frêne, an Ah-tree. Fraizé, febves fraizées, shaled beans. Fralater, Fralaté. See frelater, frelaté in the N. D. Fralatement, a racking of Wine, a drawing it off the lees. Franc-estu, the Garden-globe, (the name of an apple.) Franc-gontier, a good rich Yo∣man. Franche-mariette, the name of an apple. Franchemulle d'un mouton, a seeps awl. Francier, to speak fine and eloquent French. Francisque, a kind of ax, and sword. Francoly, Francoule, as Francolin in the N. D. Francquiesine, a certain free Tenure or Mannor differing from a Fief, and conserring on such as hold by it many priviledges. Francsoreau, the name of a Pear. Franctopin, a clown, or churle. Frangible, apt to be broke. Frapart, Frappart, a knocker, stri∣ker, beater. Frapperie, a knocking, or beating; also knocking staff. Frappe-teste, a Spider whose sting is near, or in her head. Frarachage, as fraresche. Frarachaux, coheirs, partners in an Inheritance, or succession. Frarager, as frarescher. Fraresche, partition of lands a∣mongst coheirs. Frarescher, to part land, or a suc∣cession, as brethren or coheirs. Frarescheur, a partner, or coheir. Frareuseté, the custome, course, or ti∣tle of partition among Coheirs. Frareux, parted, or partable among co-partners. Frarieparage, fraternity, brother∣hood. Frasque, a mockery; also an odde trick. Frater, a Frier; also a Surge∣on. Fraterniser, to agree, as Bro∣thers. Fratesque, Frier-like; of or belong∣ing to a Frier; also hypocritical, sperstitious. Fratre, a Frier, a Brother, a Conse∣derate. Fratrisseau, a nouice, a young and unexperienced Friar. Fraudateur, as fraudeur. Fraudation, a defrauding, deceiv∣ing, beguiling. Fraudeur, a dfrauder, deceiver, or beguiler. Fraudulement, Fraudulentement, fraudulently. Fraux, commons, common-grounds; or as fros. Frax, a kinde of ravenous fish. Fraxinelle, bastard-dittany. Fray, a Frier; also, as fraye, the spawn of fish. Frayable, as chemin frayable, a beaten way. Frayeux, fearful, dreadful. Frayoire, the rack-staff, or nog of a mill. Frayouer, for frayeure, a Deers bar∣nishing of his head. Fredaine, a roguish prank. Fredinfredailler, to leacher. Fredonneux, full of quavering. Fredonnisé, quavered. Fredonniser, to quaver. Fregolier, the lote-tree, or nettle-tree. Freguereul, the little fish called a Minnow. Frelan, Butchers-broom, (a shrub.) Frelaut, a good fellow. Freloque, a tatter that hangs down trailing from a Garment. Frelore, undone, forlorn, lost. Frelot, as frelaut. Freluche, a moat, a small straw, or lint. Freluquer, a French half-penny; also a pretty dpper fellow. Frelus, as frelore, or overthrown horse and foot. Fremiller, for fourmiller, to swarm. Fremoirs, the clasps of a Book; also a Joyners straight chizels. Frenasie, Frenatique, as frenesie, frenetique in the N. D. Frenouiller, to rake, to pudder in. Frerage, as fraresche. Frere-lay, a Servant, or Houshold-officer in an Abbey or Convent. Frerer, to swell, also to itch. Frerescheur, as frarescheur. Frereux, as Cousin frereux, Consin-germane by the brothers side. Frerie, a Frir. Frerot, a shaving, or shifting fel∣low. Fres, for frais, char, st, expence. Fres, for frais, (Adj.) fresh, new, cool. Fretange, one hog, or more, due un∣to the Master of the Waters and Frc of Auigny (and else∣where) by the Farmers of the Maage and Brsage there∣of. Freseades, refreshments, or things refreshing. Freschedent, a Glutton or greedy fellow. Freschin, a certain bitter-sweet apple; also rankness; the small or scant of rmines, foxes, pole∣cats, &c. Fresillon, Privet. Freslonné, stung with Hornets. Fresnaye, a groe, or wood of Ash-trees. Fresnier, Fresnin, of, or belonging to Ash. Fresnoy, as fresnaye. Fresqude, as fresades. Fresrades, compliments of outward
courtesy in matters of entertain∣ment or salutation; idle gestures, actions to no purpose; also a horses lifting up of his legs. Fretail de perles, ragged pearls, pearls of small value. Fretaillé, out, hacked, notched. Chemise fretaillée de filets, a shirt or smock wrought in frets about the skirts. Fretel, a kinde of whistle which the Sow-gelders of France usually carry about them. Fretoure, for fret, a fraughting, loading, or farnishing of an hired ship. Fretille, straw. Fretillard, Fretilleur, a wanton companion; also a busi-body. Fretillon, a little nimble Dwarf, or hop on my thumb; a Jack-stic∣kler. Fretinfretailler, as fredinfredailler. Fretrots, a Sif of Religious men and women inuous, as the A∣damits, by night, and suppressed in the year 1310. Frez, for fraicheur, cool, or cool∣rs. Frez, for frais, (Adj.) fresh, new, or cool. Freze, for fraise, a ruff; also a es-chaldern. Frezé, set as a rss, ruffled. Febves frezées, shaled beans. Frezillon, as fresillon, Prit. Friable, asie to be broken, or bruised. Friandeau, a littl pick-morsel. Friander, to feed daintily. Fribours, a kinde of counterfeit dou. The Huguenots ha also  rmed so by such as ac∣counted them counterfeit stff. Frie, See frac. Fricandeux, short, sless, and dainty puddings, made of good flh and hrbs chopped together, then rolled up into the form of ri g, &c. and so boyled. Friction, ication, rubbing, or frig∣ging. Frid. as frit. Fries, the view, or footing of a . Friez, as friche in the N. D. Friler, to feed curiously, to pick but the best its. Frialet, a dainty mouthed youth, a pi k-orsel. Frigalleries inties, icksh-mors. Frigoide,  Tym. Friller,  cold. Frime, as il n'en fit point de frime, he seemed not to be moved at it. Bled frime, black wheat, cow (or ox) wheat. Fringant, fine, spruce. Fringoter, to quaver; or as frin∣gotter. Fringoteries, frets, cranklings. Fringotter, to fret, or work frets in Gold, Silver, &c. Fringue, faire la fringue, to frig. Fringuer, the same; also to be fine, or spruce, to wash a glass. Fringuereau, a fine fellow, a spe companion; also a lascivious per∣son. Fringuerie, sprucenss; waton∣ness. Frinson, as Pinson. Friolé, consumed, devoured. Frioler, to consume, or devour with a noise, as fire doth stubble; also to brav it. Friolet, a lickorous boy. Frioller, as frioler. Fripaillé, foiled, or r with wearing or handling; ragged, or full of jags. Frippe-sauce, a likish fellow. Frippe-lippe, the same. Fripponiere, a ing Slt. Friquandeux, as fricandeux. Friquenelles, small chitterlings; also a company of rogues, rascals, hag∣rags, and ignorant clowns. Friscades, as frescades. Frisotte, d. Frisquaire, Frisque, frisk, lily, brisk. Frissement d'un traict, the wh∣ing sound of  thing ∣row. Frissure. as frizure. Frisure, a ght hurt, a sratch. Friteau, . Fritou, a  of Shell-fih of a spas lth, and somewhat like a Mllet. Friture, a saying. Frivolment, , to  pur∣pose. Frivusule, a , or . Frizailles,  of seis. Frize, frizé, rizer, frizon, frizure. See them with  of  the N. D. Frizoter, to . Fro, a C. Frodiere, . Frodilie, as Aphrodille. Froidelet,  sh. Froidelettement, lushly. Froidilleux, lly. Froidure, coldness, winter-wea∣ther. Froidureux, ery chill, very cold. Froislon, for frelon, a hornet. Froissis, a rushing, or breaking in pieces; also a hstling, or knock∣ing of armed bodies one against another; also fallow ground, plowed lands. Les froissis de Causes, the conflict of adverse Allgations or Pleadings. Froissure, as froissis; or a crash, or breach. Fromentin, of, or belonging to wt. Froncis, eit, fold, or gathering. Le sroncis du sourcil, the krit∣ting of the eye-braws. Frondé, cast, hurled, as from a sling. Frondelée, the cast, or shot of; al∣so a rap, or blow, from a sting. D'une mesme frondelée, at once, at one , with one stone. Frondelet, baked meat somewhat resembling a flawn. Frondillon, as fondrillon. Frondoyer, to bring forth leaves, or leaved branches. Fronal, (Adj.) of, or belonging to the forehead. Frontiger, to front, or accost; also to dwell on the frontiers of. Frontoyant, fronting, affronting, near unto a front. Frontoyer, to front, to affront, or he near unto a front. Froqueur, a mender of high-ways. Fros, as froe; also all kinde of common waters. Frotis, a common place, or void ground in a Town. Frorte, as frete in the N. D. Frotte-botte, a maker of boots clean, a bse drdge. Frottée, Frottis, for frotement, a rubbing. Frottoir, a rubbing cloth; also a rubbing, or friction. Frou, a publick and common place  for every man to resort uo,  make use of; a waste ground. Frouelle, an agel, pin, or warnel in the Frouër, to crum, or break small. Frouent, for froment, wht. Frouente, a kinde of sweet and ing ite gra. Froumenté, farmety. Froumenteux, full of weat. Froyé, raed, frtted. Froyement, a rabbing, a fretting. Froyer, to , to ft.
Froyer, (Subst.) a rubber; also a rasp. Fructueux, fruitful. Fructuosité, fruitfulness. Fructure, fruition, injoyment, pos∣session. Fruir, to injoy. Fruition, fruition, possession. Frumentau, the wild Malberry. Frumenteau, a kinde of white Vine. Frumentée, as froumentée. Frumentelle, a certain pear good to be dried. Frustratoirement, in vain, to no purpose. Fryez, the view, or footing of a Deer. Fuchiere, as feuchiere. Fueillade, a green arbor. Fueillage, as feuillage in the N. D. Fueillame, a bunch of leaves. Fueillants, an Order of begging Friars wearing habits of a brow∣nish colour. Fueillar, a green branch or bough; also a close thief. Fueille, for seuille, a leaf. Fueillée, a green arbor. Fueiller, to bear leaves, to wax green with leaves. Fueiller, fueilleté, fueilleter, as feuillet, feuilleté, feuilleter in the N. D. Fueillette, a Wine-vessel, or measure containing about eleven and an half of our Gallons. Fueilleux, for feuillu, full of leaves. Fueillir, as fueiller. Fueillu, for feuillu, full of leaves. Fueillu, (Subst.) a kinde of round, red, and very sweet apple. Fueillure, plenty of leaves; also leaf-work. Fuiroles, as furoles. Fuitif, for fugitif, a fgitive. Fulei, supported, upheld. Fulcir, to support, to uphold. Fuligine, soot, smoakiness. Fuligineux, sooty, smoaky. Fulmination, a thunder-striking. Fulminatoire, fulminatory, thun∣dering. Fumage, a dunging, manuring, or fattening with dung. Fumat,, a Ray, or Seate-fish. Fumeau, a smoaking stick. Fumelle, for femelle, female. Fumement, as fumage; also a smoaking; a hanging in the smoak. Fumeron, a little dunghil, a small heap of dung. Fumeusement, smeakily. Fumier, (Adj.) of dung. Fumiere, for fumée, smoak. Fumigation, a smoaking, or persu∣ming with smoak. Funain, as mettre un navire en funain, to more a ship, to tye her under a lee-shore. Funambule, a Rope-dancer. Function, for fonction, function. Fundigue, a Ware-house, or Store-house. Fundique, the same. Funebrement, mournfully; after the manner of a funeral. Funge, a Mushroom, or Toadstool. Fungosité, spunginess, lightness, hol∣lowness. Fungueux, spungy, light, or hollow. Fur, as au fur de, proportionably, according to, after the rate of. Furain, as funain. Furas, as fatras in the N. D. Furculaire, as Os furculaires, the points of the forepart of the shoul∣ders meeting a little below the neck. Furemplage, as fur. Furfuré, branny, scaly like bran. Furfures, dandriff. Furgon, for fourgon, a fire-fork. Furial, aging, furious, mad. Furibond, the same. Furiole, as furole. Furluqué, searched, frreted, hun∣ted out. Furole, S. Helmes fire. Furt, theft. Furuneule, a fellon, a whitlaw. Fusain, spindle-tree, prick-timber. Fuselé, span upon a spindle, made like a spindle. Fuselier, a spindle-maker. Fusier, as fusain. Fusiller, to search every corner. Fusque, dusky, brown, dark. Fustaillier, a Cooper, or Cask-maker. Fusté, fusty, tasting of the cask; also branchless, or without boughs, as a tree; also rifled, ransacked. Fustée, bois de suftée, branchless wood, naked, or powled trees. Fuster, to stock a tree, to bare it of its branches; also to ravage, ran∣sack, or rifle. Fusterne, the upper part of a fir-tree, full of joynts or knots. Fustier, any Artificer that works in wood. Fustigation, a whipping, or scourg∣ing; also a basting with a cudgel. Fustiger, Fustiguer, to whip, to bang. Futile, vain, foolish, unprofitable. Fuye, a pidgeon-house; also a flight of pidgeons. Fuyeur, a flyer, a coward, a run-a∣way. Fuzain, as fusain. Fuze, fuzée, fuzer, fuzil, fuzilier. See them with s instead of z in the N. D. G GAbarrier, a lighter-man. Gabellage, an imposing, or pay∣ing of Custom. Gabeloux, a scoffing knave. Gaber, to deride; also to cheat. Gaberies, Gabes, jeers. Gabet, a white leper. Gabeur, a jeerer, a cheat. Gabgregeux, rogues, rascals, base fellows. Gabian, as Gavian. Gabinet, for Cabinet, a Cabinet. Gabors, the ribs, or knees of a Ship. Gabot, as Gabet; also a red fish; also as Gavot. Gaboux, apt to seer. Gades, red Gooseberries. Gadille, as Gadrille. Gadiller, to paddle, jog, or stir up and down. Gadouärd, a Jakes-farmer, Tom∣turd; also a Scaenger. Gadoüe, dung, ordare. Gadriers, as gades, red Gooseber∣ries. Gadrille, a Robin-red-breast. Gadriller, a wench to play the rig. Gadrouillette, a feigned word ap∣pliable to any cattle. Gaffe, an iron-book wherewith Sea∣men pull great fishes into their ships. Gagerie, a distraining, a distress. Gages, a kinde of artificial stone. Gagnole, a kinde of hornbeak fish. Gagrille, a Robin-red-breast. Gahets, a generation of poor, irre∣ligious, and very laborious Le∣pers in Gascony. Gaian, the name of a fish. Gaiderope, an unsavory and ill-tasting Oyster. Gage-plege, a kinde of Jurisdiction or Court in Normandy, where∣in the Parties must binde them∣selves by pawns or sureties, to continue or make good their Suits. Gagier, a Church-warden.
Gagnable, to be got, or won; also commodious, profitable. Terres gagnables, rich, or fruitful ground. Gagnaux, prez gagnaux, fertile mea∣dows which yield a double crop, or may be twice mowed. Gaigne, for gain, gain, profit. Gaigné, Gaigne-denier, Gaigne-pain, Gaigner. See them with∣out i in the N. D. Gaigne-journée, a day-labourer. Gaignerie, a tilled ground; also tillage; or the profit that is made of it, or the beasts that be used therein. Gaigneur, a gainer, getter, or win∣ner. Gaillard (Subst.) the Round-house, or hinder-castle of a Ship. Gaillardet, as guaillardet. Gaillardeté, for gaillardise, chear∣fulness; also a piece of folly, or indiscretion. Gaille, as perdrix gaille, the French Partridge. Gaimaux, Gainaux, as Gagnaux. Gainette, a little sheath. Gaings, the fruits growing on, or coming of tilled grounds. Gaiosle, Gaïole, as Gayole. Gaioler, to prattle, or twattle. Gaïon, a Jay. Gajure, for gageure, a wager. Gaiz, fords, or shallow places. Gal, a Cock; also a Derce, or Gold∣fish. Galactite, pierre galactite, the milk-stone. Galaffre, a ravenous feeder. Galaffrerie, a ravenous feeding. Galange, Galangue, English Galin∣gale, or its Aromatical root. Galaxie, the milkie way in the Fir∣mament. Galbe, a Wn; the fore-part of a doublet; comeliness, graceful∣ness. Galbé, bien galbé, comely, graceful, having a good garb. Galbuge, for grabuge, Garboil. Gale-bon-temps, a merry Grig, a Good-fellow. Galée, the top, or scuttle of a Gal∣ley. Gale-fesson, a scabbed arse. Galefreté, rigged, or trimmed up, as a Ship. Galefreter, to trim, to rig up, a Ship. Galefretier, rigger, trimmer, men∣der of Ships; or as Galefrotier, an idle vagabond, a poor scabby knave. Galemar, a pennar. Galemment, for galamment, gal∣lantly, bravely. Galeote, a kind of Lizard that's an enemy unto all Serpents. Galerand, the fowl termed a Bit∣tor. Galerien (Adj.) of, or belonging to a Galley. Galerite, the Meadow-lark. Galerneux, North-westerly. Galetage, Garrets, or Garret-work. Galier, a Jade, a dull horse. Galiffre, a greedy feeder. Galiffré, greedily eaten. Galiffrer, to eat greedily. Galimachue, Galimassue, a Club. Galingal, Galingale. Galin-galois, Galin-galon, a merry scab, a Whores son. Gallangue, as Galangue; also the Sea-toad. Gallant, gallanterie, gallantise. See them with a single l in the N. D. Gallé, rubbed, scratched; also enter∣tained with variety of sport. Gallée, for galere, a Galley. Gallemar, as galemar. Galler, to gall, fret, itch; also to rub, or scratch; also to be merry, or to make merry. Galler le bon temps, to pass the time merrily away. Gallerand, a Bittor. Gallere, Gallerie, and Gallerien. See them with a single l in the N. D. Gallet, the shoulder-piece, or point; the hinder and upper part of the neck; in a horse, the Withers. Gallette, for galete, a kind of wrea∣thed Cake. Galleverdine, a gaberdine, a long coat of course stuff. Gallicelle, as Biaut, or Sequenie. Gallico, naping, unprovided. Gallie, gar, or gracefulness. Gallien, a Galley-slate. Gallier, a scurvy fellow, a shifting companion. Gallimart, a case for pens. Galline, a Gurnard. Gallochier, a Foot-messenger. Gallon, brawn, hardness of the flesh or skin. Les gallons de cheveux, hard curled locks. Gallopins, as Galopins. Galoche (m.) as Galochier. Galocher, to behave himself rudely or clownihly; to trot or wander in∣discreetly up and down. Galochier, a maker of wooden shooes. Galochier (Adj.) base, mean, poor; also clownish, rude, rustical. Galoise, a scabby quean. Galopade, a galoping. Galopins, Ʋnder-cooks, or Scullions in a Monastery. Galvardine, a Gaberdine. Galvol, a Shittlecock. Gambage, Droict de gambage, a see or duty of four pottles upon e∣very brewing, paid unto divers Lords within the County of Bou∣lonois. Gambayer, to wag the legs in sit∣ting, as children use to do. Gambe, for jambe, a leg, or shank. Le plus en gambe, the best foot∣man. Gambeson, a fashion of long horse∣mans coat. See Gobisson. Gambi, bent, crooked, bowed. Gambier, to go; also as Gambayer. Gambiller, as Gambier. Gambir, to bend. Gambre, the Sea-crvisse. Gamella, a wooden bowl. Gammare, a Lobster. Gamme, a chime. Ganabin, the North-wind. Ganché, let fall (as in a strappado) on sharp stakes pointed with iron, and thereon languishing until he die. Gandalin, a bawd. Gandole, for gondole, a Gondola. Ganglion, a watery impostumation in the throat. Gangules, kernels, or wartles in the throat. Ganivet, a little Pen-knife. Ganivetier, a Pen-knife maker. Gantelée, the herb called Fox-gloves, or our Ladies gloves. Gantes, for Jantes, the selles of a Cart-wheel. Gaquiere, land which lieth lay. Gar, un regard à gar, saint look. Garagnon, a Stallion. Garantage, a warranting. Garavelle, the rame of a pear. Garbe, a garb, comeliness, or good fashion. Garber, to spruce it, to set forth. Garbot, a kind of fih. Garbouil, Garburge, garboil, hurly-burly. Garchote, a water-fowl. Garçonne, ridden by boys. Garçonner, to play the boy; also to defile a woman. Garçonniere, a leacheros quan. Garde-corps, a Yeoman of the Guard.
Garde-main, a strong glove for a Mason or Stone-cutter to work with. Gardemaneur, a Creditor, or any o∣ther placed by order of Law in a Debtors house; the which he may keep until he be satisfi'd, or have security for satisfaction. Garde-nappe, a wicker wreath set under a dish at meal-times to save the table-cloth from siling. Garde-poing, a vamplate. Garde-porte, a piece of Tapstry hung before an open door, a door-piece. Garde-serre, the rest of the lock of a Harquebuse. Gardin, for Jardin, a Garden. Gardouche, a store-house, or gar∣ner. Gardouër, a little pond. Garé, Terre garée, old fallow ground. Garenciere, a plot of ground sowed with Madder. Garendie, for garantie, warran∣ty. Garenné, made into a Warren; made private, or kept from com∣mon use. Garenneux, loving, or living in Warrens. Garent, Garenti, Garentie, Garen∣tir, Garentissement. See them with an a instead of e in the N. D. Garentage, warranty. Garentigionné, Instrument garen∣tigionné, an authentical Instru∣ment made by a Notary publick, and signifying that execution is ready to come out against a con∣fessing and almost condemned Debtor. 'Tis also a kind of in∣rolled Bond, whereby both a mans body is subject unto arrest, and  goods to execution. Garentisseur, for Garant, a War∣ranter. Garenty, for garanti, one that is warranted. Garer, to beware. Garet, for gueret, new-broken land, or fallow. Gargamelle, the throat. Garganton, a great gltton, one that wasts hs substance on good cheer. Gargantua, great throat. Gargarcon, the forepart of the throat. Gargassane,  wind-pipe. Gargate, the same; or the throat-pipe. Gargatte, the vula, a little piece of spongious flesh like a Cocks spur, and hanging down in the roof of the mouth. Gargouille, the weesel, or weason of the throat; also the mouth of a spout representing a Serpent, or the antick face of some ugly Crea∣ture; also a gutter, a bubble, the joynt of a flat hinge. Gargouillis, a gargling, or gargling noise. Gargoule, as gargouille. Garguesquers, a fashion of strait Venetians without codpieces. Garguette, as gargatte. Garguille, an odd man. Garguillon, the throat-pipe, where∣by meat passeth into the stomack or raw of birds, Gaieur, a warranter. Garignon, a buckle bone. Garigues, as guarigues. Gariment, warranty. Tenir en gariment, to hold part of a fief otherwise than by succession, and upon covenant to pay or yield for it some duty which is noble, and no way rorutier. Garine, the shrub Cistus, or Holly-rose. Garingal, as galingal. Garinnon, as garignon. Gariosilé, aromatique garlofilé, a certain Composition (wherein there are Ch) good for the passions of the h art. Garioller, to whistle, chirp, or war∣ble, as birds. Garyophyllate, herb Avens, Bennet, or blessed. Gariot, the wind-pipe of a horse or other beast. Garipot, the wilde Pie, or Pith-tree. Garlande, for guirlande, a garland. Garlet, a little Plaice. Garniche, a frock for a Carter. Garniment, for garnement, a ras∣cal. Garnis, a kinde of engine, to catch fish with. Garnissement, a garnishing, trim∣ming, adorning; a taking to pawn, or in mortgage; the gi∣ving of assurance or security for a debt, &c. Garon, pickle of fish; also the little Anchove-like fish. Garou, wild, savage, cruel. Garouäge, as aller en garouäge, a marry'd man to go a caterwaw∣ling, or steal abroad by night a wenching. Garoupe, the shrub called Spurge-alive, and Widow-wail. Garous, look to your selves. Garoute, a Carrot-root. Garrau, as garrot. Garrigues, as Guarrigues. Garrobe, the Carob-bean-cod. Garrobier, the Plant that bears Carobs. Garrot, Garroté, Garroter. See them with a single r in the N. D. Garrotement, the winding up of a¦cord with a cudgel; also a bind∣ing, or tying hard with cords. Garrulité, chattering, twat∣tling. Gars, a lad, a boy. Aller à gars, a wench to hunt after lads. Garscher, to chap, as the hands or lips do in a sharp wind. Garsette, a young lass, a young whore. Garson-fillette, an Hermaphrodite. Garsonnaille, a true of lads, a troop of boys. Garsonner, to use boyish tricks. Garsonner la femme d'autruy, to lie with another mans wife. Garsonner, a little boy. Garsotte, a eal. Garsouiller la femme d'autruy, to lye with another mans wife. Garuche, a torturing Wheel. Garvences, fitches, chichlings. Garum, pickle of salt fish. Garzignole, the name of a pear. Gaschettes, pour tenir les doigts fermes, splints for broken, or crooked fingers. Gascheux, flashy. Gasconner, to steal, or pilfer. Gason, Gasouillement, Gasouiller. See them with a z instead of s in the N. D. Gasse, the weed Darnl. Gast, waste. Gaste-bois, an unskilful Carpen∣ter. Gastelet, a little cake; also  name of a Cler-ap. Gastelier, a maker, or seller of cakes. Gastement, a spoyling. Gaste-museau, a lenten loaf. Gaste-pavé, a rambler,  that doth nothing but trt up and down the Town. Gaster, (Subst.) the belly. Gasteresse, a woman that wasteth. Gaste-santé, unwholesom. Gasteur, a spoyler. Gastier, an Officer appointed by Ju∣stice to guard and watch the fruits
of Vineyards, &c. and to keep them from being imbeeled or spoil∣ed by men or beasts. Gastine, a waste, a desart, a rock or sandy ground; also a Commons; a kinde of earth found in Mines of Iron, and helping to melt it. Gastis, waste, spoil, or a trespass done in grounds by a strangers beasts. Gastre, veine gastre, the third branch of the trunk of the Port-vein, issuing side-ways out of the right side thereof, and spreading abroad in the bottome of the Ven∣tricle. Gastrimythe, a belly-god. Gastrique, the second branch of the trunk of the Port-vein. Gastrolatre, a belly-god, one that makes a God of his belly. Gastromantie, divination by the belly. Gastroraphie, the stitching up of a rent or divided belly. Gastrotomie, the section or cutting up of the belly. Gare, a bowl, or mazr. Gathe, a little Shad-fish. Gatte, the top of the Main-mast. Gattouiller, for chatouiller, to tic∣kle. Gau, as geau. Gavache, a Country-clown. Gavache, (Adj.) aggy, limber; also clownish; also licentious, ssal, glttonish. Gavar, splay-. Gaubison, as gobisson. Gauché, a blow with the left had. Gauché, (Adj.) awry, crooked. Gauchier, for gaucher, left-han∣ded. Gaudé. See Gaudez. Gaude, t ak of a certain plant wherewith Dyers make thir cloths yellow, and afterwards (adding Wood) green; also a small shower of rain. Gaudeamus, a ient. Gaudebillaux, the fat tripes of stal∣ld oxen. Gaudées, babbling prayers, or as gaudez. Gaudence, a  in an In∣hritance,  to nie , and so forward for . Gauderon, and its . See Goderon in the N. D. Gaudez, Prayers beginning with a Gaudete. Gaudi, scoffed, jeered. Gaudine, a pleasant Lass, a game∣some Wench. Gaudinette, a young merry Lass. Gaudipise, a codpiece. Gaudipisé, wearing a codpiece. Gaudir, to play the good-fellow, to be merry. Se gaudir de queleun, to jeer one. Gaudissant, being merry with, jest∣ing. Gaudisserie, a merriment, a jesting. Gaudisseur, a pleasant fellow, a jeerer; also a drunken good fellow. Gave, the gorge or craw of a bird. Gaveau, a hole, or little pit to keep fish in. Gavereau, a kinde of Sea-fowl. Gauffre, as gaftre. Gauffreure, the printing of a gar∣ment; also a setting out with pffs. Gauffrier, a Wafer-print. Gauge, as Jauge in the N. D. Gaugo, as gogo. Gavian, a Sea-mew. Gavier, the throat. Gaulde, as gaude. Gaulé, beaten with a cudgel; also rbbed. Gaulée, a cudgelling; also a heat∣ing down of fruit, or the hrting of trees thereby. Gauler, to cudgel; to beat dow with poles; to rob. Gaueur, an learned, or Country-Sor, hat measures land on∣ly by the Pol. Gaulge, Gaulger, Gaulgeur. See Jau∣ge, jauger, jaugeur in the N. D. Gaultir, a rak-ll, a mad wag; also a cox. Gaultiere, a . Gavot, a little Sea-fish. Gaote, a kinde of brawl, dad commonly by one ane. Gaupe, a wa; also as gauliere. Une lae gaupe, an ugly filty . Gauque, as cauque, a  for a wod. Gaunrier, as gorrier, arrogant, pr, . Gause, (for cote) d'ail, a clo of . Gautier, as toile gautier, a kind of Sea h. Gautte, a d-fish. G, , a Jay. Hur le gay, . Gayable, for gueable, fordable. Gayae, lignum vitae, pock-wood, guiacum. Gaye, jet. Gayé, for gueé, waded over. Gayer, for gué, a ford, or wada∣ble passage over a river. Gayer, for guer, to wade. Gayer, jet. Gayetier, one that makes all man∣ner of small toys in jet; also one that carries people over a ford on his shoulders. Gaymaux, as Guimaux. Gayole, a cage; also a prison. Gay∣ole d'un moulin, the trundle, or a pair of trundle-heads. Gayoler, as Gaioler. Gayon, a kinde of small fish. Gayvé, wained; left, forsaken. Gayver, to wai; to leave, to for∣sake. Gayves, choses gayves, things for∣saken, miscarried, or lost; which not being justly claimed in a year and a day, may be lawfully re∣tained by th finder, or by the Lord of the Mannor wherein they were found. Gazaille, a Commons, or common field, wherein the Inhabitants of several Parishes have distinct parts. Gazeau, for gazon, a green turf. Gazel, Gazelle, a kinde of wild Goat. Gazonné, covered with green f. Gazouillard, Gazouilleux, singing,  chirping as a bird. Gazouillis, a singing, or chirping. Gazouillis de fontaines, the war∣ning of Fountains. G a. G, . Geallove, a msure containing a∣b 12 of or quarts. Gorie, Giant, t generation of Giants. Geantin, (Ss.) a young Giant. Geantiser,  it a Gi. Geau,  Cock. Gect, for ,  a Ma∣riners , or wlt; a  Count. Gectons, . Gede, . Gehainer, . Gehenn, . Gehi, . Gehir, . Gil,  to plain.
Geine, Geiné, Geiner, as gêne, gê∣né, géner in the N. D. Geisses, a kinde of flat or square pease. Gel, for gelée, frost. Gelais, arbaleste à gelais, a Stone∣bow. Gelamine, a kinde of Mineral-earth. Gelasin, a wrimple in the face, or a dimple in the cheek of one that laughs. Gelatine, an excellent white broth made of the fish Maigre. Gelenaibin, honey mixt with ro∣ses. Geleur, a freezer. Geline, a hen. Gelinette, a little hen. Gelineux, of, or belonging to hens. Gelinier, a Hen-house. Gelure, Ice, Frost; also a freez∣ing. Gembette, as Jambette. Geme, tar, or pitch. Gemeau, for Jumeau, a twin. Gemelier, double, twin-like. Gemelle, a she-twin. Geminé, iterated, doubled. Geminer, to iterate, to double. Gemissable, lamentable. Gemme, a Gem, a Jewel, a precious stone, also pitch. Gemmé, as couleur gemmée, a Pearl, or Peacock-colour. Gemmeux, full of Gems, or Jew∣els, rich, precious. Genaux, casters of Nativities. Gendresse, a daughter-in-law (by the marriage of a Son.) la Generale, an Admiral-Galley, or ship. Generé, ingendred, begotten, made, framed. Generer, to beget, to ingender, to make, or frame. Genesie, generation, rativity; also a kinde of herb of sundry colours. Genestaye, a broom-close. Genesteux, full of broom. Genestier, of, or belonging to broom. Genestriere, a ground full of broom, or iunipr. Genethliaque, birth, nativity. Genethliatique, a caster of nativi∣ties. Genette, for genet, a Genet, or spa∣nish horse; also a bit for a genet; als a kind of weesel. Gengive, for geneive, a gum. Genial, genial, belonging to luck, or e, or to a mans nature, disposition, inclination. Geniculiere, the herb Solomon-seal, white-root, or white-wort. Genillette, a hen. Genin, a Wittal. Genne, Genner, as gêne, gêner in the N. D. Genoillet, Genoilliere, as genicu∣liere. Genouillet, a little knee. Gensemy, for jasmin, jasmine. Gent, (Adj) neat, fine, or spruce; also pliant, soft, easie. Gent corps, a little man. Gente, as Jante in the N. D. Gentement, neatly, finely, sprucely; also softly, easily. Gentienne, for gentiane, the Gen∣tian, bitter-wort, or fell-wort. Gentisame, a Gentlewoman. Gentilhommeau, a Gentleman of low degree. Gentiliser, to live as the heathen. Gentilisme, Paganism. Gentilité, the same. Gentillastre, a mean Gentleman; one that pretends to be a Gentle∣man and is none. Gentillastreté, mean gentry; usur∣ped, or new gentry. Gentillement, for gentiment, pret∣tily, quaintly, neatly. Gentre, as Jantre. Genuflexion, a bowing, or bending of the knee. Geomantie, divination by points and circles made on the earth. Geometrien, for Geometre, a Geo∣metrician. Geraffe, as giraffe. Geratien, a kinde of blackish stone. Gerbé, bound up (as Corn) into sheaves; also a great Garner to keep salt in. Gerbée, a shock, half thrave, or heap of sheaves; also a bundle of straw. Gerber des javelles, to sheave up Corn. Gerber des tonneaux, to range, or set Wine-vessels one up∣on another. Gerbiere, a rik, or stack of corn. Gerce, Gercer, Gerceure, as gerse, gerser, gersure in the N. D. Gere, the Hbrew-half-penny, some∣what more than our penny. Geré, done, performed, managed; also carried. Gerer, to do, perform, or manage; also to carry. Gerfault, for gerfau, a Ger-saul∣. Germaine, (Subst.) the name of an apple. Germeux, sprouting, budding; full of young sprigs, or buds; full of seed. Germination, a budding, or putting forth. Geron, for giron, lap, or bosom. Gerre, the small, or white cackerel-fish. Gesante, a woman that lies in. Gesine, a lying in. Gesir, to lie down, to lie in childe∣bed; also to remain, or abide. Gestation, a bearing, or carrying. Gestion, an action. Gesver, as guesver. Get, a casting, or throwing out; al∣so a set of counters; also set. Getisse, terre getisse, such as is thrown out of a house, &c. Gets, as Jects. Getteen, of jet, black as jet. Getter, for jetter, to cast. Gettonner, to bud. Gettons, for jettons, counters. Get∣tons des arbres, buds. Geve, a cage, coop, or open basket to keep chickens in. Geural, a Pass for a Traveller. Geure, as Giure. Ghirlande, for guirlande, a Gar∣land. Giaret, a small sea-fish. Gibbar, a kinde of Whale. Gibbasse, a pouch, or budget; also a great bunch. Gibbe, a bunch, or swelling, any thing that stands poking out. Gibbecier, a pouh-maker. Gibbeux, bunched. Gibbeyer, as Gibboyer. Gibbosité, swelling, bunchiness. Gibets, little packets of Grapes wrapt up in Fig-leaves, whereby they are preserved fresh two years together. Giblet, a gimblet, or piercer. Gibolée, for giboulée, a great and sudden shower of rain. Girogliphique, hieroglyphick. Giez, a hawks gests. Giffiard, full cheekt. Giffle, a cheek, or the bag on either side of the chap wherein meat is hidden or held. Gigandal, Gigantal, Gigantin, giant-like, monstrous, or huge big. Gigantomachie, the wars of the Giants against the Gods. Gigoteau, a knuckle, or the bony-end of the leg. Gigotte, as Chausses à la gigotte, a fashion of very close Venetian-breeches.
Gimbelet, as giblet. Gimbreter, to play wanton tricks. Gimbreteux, lecherous, wanton, lascivious. Gimpier, a maker of crepines for hoods. Gindre, as geindre. Gingembré, seasoned with Ginger. Gingioule, a sort of fruit. See Gingeole in the N. D. Gingioulier, the narrow-leaved tree that bears the gingioule. Ginglyme, a mutual receiving, or lodging of one bone within ano∣ther. Ginguets, sowr Wines. Ginguette, small, poor, or sowr Wine. Gippon, a short Cassock; also a rag, or clout thrown up and down. Cottonner le moule du gippon, to eat much, to stuff the guts. Gips, Morter, Plaister. Girandin, the name of a bird. Giraudette, the name of an apple. Girbe, the cawl wherein the bowels be wrapped. Giré, turned with the wind, whir∣led about. Girelle, the name of a fish. Girer, to turn with the wind, to whirl about. Girets, armour for the thighs of horses. Giroflade, for giroflée, a Gilly-flower. Giroflé, stuck, or seasoned with Cloves. Girofleat, made of Cloves, or of Gilly-flowers. Girole, the Skirt-wort, or Skirret-root. Giromantie, divination by Circles. Gironnée, a lap (or bosom) full of. Gironomique, circular. Girouët, for girouette, a Weather-cock. Girouëtté, furnished with a Wea∣ther-cock; also inconstant, uncer∣tain. Giroufle, for girofle, a Clove. Giroule, as girole. Gisié, the gisern of birds. Giste de boeuf, a rand of beef. Gith, Bishops-wort. Gitte, a sprig in a branch. Giver, as Girer. Givereau, the name of a water-fowl. Giure, a white, or hoar-frost upon trees after great and long free∣zing. Glaçoir, a privy. Gladiation, fencing. Glagou, as glayeul; also sedge, or a collop of flegm spet out. Glaieul, as glayeul in the N. D. Glainage, Glainé, Glainer, and Glai∣neur; see them without an i in the N. D. Glaireux, slimy; also full of gravel. Glais, Glaitel, as glayeul in the N. D. Glaize, terre glaize, a moist and slimy white foil. Glamet, a sea-mew. Glandage, mast; also mastage; the season of turning hogs into the woods; the feeding of hogs by mast in woods. Glandagé, fed with mast. Glandager les porceaux, to feed hogs with mast; to lay swine in masty woods. Glandaux, the name of a kinde of olives. Glandée, as bonne glandée, good store of mast; a good year for a∣corns. Glandeer, to get, or gather mast. Glandeux, full of mast, stored with acorns. Glandier, the same; also of or be∣longing to mast. Glands, pellets, bullets. Glandulaire, like a kernel, in ker∣nels. Glane, a gleaning; also the corn that's gleaned, or left for the Gleaner. Glangion, a Cuttle-fish. Glap, the barking of a Dog. Glappier, as Clapier. Glappisseur, a yelper. Glass, noise, crying, bawling; also ice; also a knll for the dead. Glas, (Adj.) bled Glas, blought Wheat. Terre glase, fat earth. Glason, a clod, or turf of earth. Glasonneux, turfy, full of turves. Glassé, Glasser, and Glassis, as gla∣cé, glacer, glacis in the N. D. Glassoër, a privy. Glastre, Sea-mud. Glatir, to bark, vawl, bawl. Glatissant, barking, yawling, bawl∣ing. Glatissement, a barking, or bawl∣ing. Glatisseur, a barker, or baw∣ler. Glatteron, the great bur. Glaumet, a Sea-cob, or Sea-gull. Glavoir, a screaking. Glay, a noise; also as Glaye, the blew-Lilly, or Flower-de-luce. Glaz, for glace, Ice. Glazeux, cloddy, tursie; clammy, fat, clayish. Glebe, Glebe-land belonging to a Parsonage. Glene, a small hollowness in a bone, the outward concavity of the Shoulder-blades. Gleneur, gleaning, or gathering af∣ter. Glenoïde, as glene. Gleteron, as glatteron. Glette, the froth of an egg; also jelly; the flegm or filth which a Hawk throws out at her beak after her casting. Gletteux, slimy, frothy. Glic, as jouër auglic, to lecher, to play at fast and loose. Gliceau, a bottom of thread. Glimpe, a light made of the stalk or stem of an herb dryed, and af∣terward greased over. Glincer, for glisser, to slide, to slip. Glire, for dire, to say. Gliron, a Dormouse. Glischer, for glisser, to slide. Glisseau, a bottom of thread. Glisse-tousjours, ever gliding, al∣ways moving. Glix, a Dormouse. Globeux, Globuleux, round like a Globe, of or belonging to a Globe, full of Globes. Glo, the clucking of a hen. Gloë, a cloven piece of wood. Gloriation, a glorying, or boa∣sting. Gloriette, small glory; also a little room in the top of a Tower; al∣so a little banqueting-house in a Garden. Glorieuse, (Subst.) a kinde of Scate-fish. Glorieuseté, pride, boasting, vain∣glory. Glorin, the fork-fish. Glosier, a kinde of white Vine. Glossateur, for gloseur, a Glosser, an Interpreter. Glouglouter, to guggle, to sound like a narrow-mouthed pot, or strait-necked bottle when it is emptied. Gloussant, poule gloussante, a cluck∣ing Hen. Glout, for glouton, gluttonous, gree∣dy. Gloutement, gluttonously, greedi∣ly.
Glouteron, the Bur-dock, or great Bur. Gloutonnaire, Gloux, gluttonous, greedy. Glu de soarre, a bundle of Straw. Gluaux, Lime-twigs. Gluber, to slay, or pill. Gluc, Ergo glue, a word used by Scholars in derision of an absurd Conclusion. Gluement, a catching with Bird-lime. Glueur, a Glwer. Glueur, (f.) glewiness, clammi∣ness. Glueux, full of glew; also clam∣my. Gluit, long and whole Straw. Glutinosité, clamminess. Gluy, as Gluits. Glyphonoire, a Plaisterer's bosse. Goache, perdrix goache, the gray Partridge. Goalon, a sloven. Gob, tout de gob, at one gulp. Gobeau, a gobbet, bit, or morsel; also a Viol, or strait-mouthed vessel of Glass; also a great gob∣let. Gobelin, as face gobeline, a crim∣son face, the face of a ply-pot. Gobeliner, to play the Goblin, to make a hideous noise. Gobe-mouche, a bird that lives al∣together on flies. Gobeguinaut, a greedy feeder. Gober, to feed greedily, to let down whole gobbets. Gobe quinault, down with it Whoreson. Goberge, a kinde of Haddock, or Cod-fish. Goberger, to cast up, to vomit. Se goberger, to please himself. Gobier, as chant gobier, homely singing. Gobisson, a fashion of long and quit∣ted cassock or coat, used in old time by Horsemen. Gocourt, short. Godal, a tit, a jade. Godde, as une lasche godde, a slothful bylding. Goddon, a filthy glutton, or swil∣ler. Gode, as godde, Godeluré, smbled, rumpled. Godelureau, a Coxcomb, a proud Wood-cock. Gopemare, the Night-mare; also a sound made, or a word cast out of a feast, whereby the Guests are warned to forbear eating for a certain time. Godemiche, a Dildoe. Godet, an earthen bole, a stone cup, or jug. Godichon, mon godichon, my pi∣lock. Godillon, a Girdle. Godin, neat, fine, or spruce. Godiner, a pretty lad. Godinette, a pretty lass. Godiveaux, as goudiveaux. Godran, for goderon, pitch and tar. Godron, Godronné, Godronner, as goderon, goderonné, gode∣ronner in the N. D. Goerin, as Gorret. Goes, the name of a kinde of Grapes. Goetie, devilish magick, or witch∣craft. Goffe, dull, blockish. Goffre, for gaufre, a wafer; a ho∣ney-comb; a kinde of scurf. Gogaille, a feasting, a merriment. Gogayer, as goguer. Gogo, à gogo, with full content∣ment, or his belly full. Gogue, a Sheeps-paunch; a haggas. Gogues, jollity. Estre en ses go∣gues, to be in a pleasant hu∣mour. Goguenarder, to break jsts. Goguenelle, a Wenh. se Goguer, to be crank, or merry, to set cock a hoop. Gohée, a welcome, joyful salutation, or harty entertainment. Goiart, a long Hedging-bill, or Hook. Goibier, Baker-legged; also splay∣fted. Goiffon, a Gadgeon. Goilant, the name of a Sea-fowl. Goildronneur, a pitcher, or tighter of ships. Goimpre, for goinfre, a good fellow. Goiran, a kinde of short-wing'd Ea∣gle that li altogether on fish. Goitrons, waddles, or wattles. Goiveau, il fait goiveau, it is dawy (a rustical word.) Golette de mais, as holette. Gomar, a Kneading-table, the board wherein bread is worked, or pis made. Gomene, as Gumene. Gomir, for vomir, to vomit, cast, or sp up. Gomissement, a vomiting, casting, spaing up. Gommene, as Gumene. Gomorrhean, a Sdomite, a buggerer. Gomphose, a fastening of one bone within another. Gonagre, the Gout in the Knees. Gondolier, a Venetian-wherry-man. Gonfalonnier, Gonfanier, an En∣sign, or Standard-bearer. Gonsalon, Gonfanon, an old fashion Standard, such as is used in the Wars made by the Pope. Gonfanonnier, as Gonfalonnier. Gonfler, to cause a swelling. Se gonfler, to swell. Gonin, Maistre Gonin, a notable Jugler. Gonnelle, a whole Petticoat, the bodies and skirts being joyn'd to∣gether. Gonomphe, a kinde of box. Gontfanon, as Gonfalon. Gontier, franc gontier, a substan∣tial Yeoman, a rich fellow. Gorbion, as Euphorbe. Gorde, for corde, a rope. Gorgaillet, a Quail-pipe. Gorgément, up the throat. Gorgerin, (Adj.) of, or belonging to the throat. Escrouelles gorgeri∣nes, the Kings-evil in the throat. Gorgette, a pretty little throat, or mouth. Gorgias, for gorgerette, a Gorget. Gorgias, (Adj.) gaudy, flaunting, delighting in bravery; also feed∣ing with mirth. Gorgiasement, gaudily, flaunting∣ly. se Gorgiaser, to flaunt it, to please himself in the bravery of his ap∣parel. Gorgiaseté, bravery, sineness, gaudi∣ress. Gorme, for gourme, the strangles, a thick rumour which young horses void at their narrls, or by the overture made under their throat. Gormette, for gourmerte, a curb. Gorre, a Sw; also the French-pox; also bravery, gallantness. Fem∣mes à la grande gorre, hussing or flaunting Dames. Gorreau, as gorret; also the thread, or quantity of flax, &c. that's drawn at once from a distass in spinning. Gorrerie, gallantry, bravery; also pride, or vain-glory. Gorret, a little Sheat, or Barrow-pig. Gorrette, a cap; also a justle, or thump. Gorrier, gallant both in apparel and carriage; also proud, vain-glori∣ous. Gorrierement, bravely, gallantly; proudly, vain-gloriously.
Gorron, a Sheat, or little young hog. Gort, a Weare in a running water; or as gourt. Gosaran, a necklace, a border, an ornament for the bosome or neck. Goscoté, as Coscoté. Gossampine, the Bumbast, or Cotton∣bust. Gossé, Gosser, Gosserie, & Gosseur. See Gausser, &c. in the N. D. Gotereux, for goitreux, that hath a wen under the throat. Goton, as groton, a little grot. Goualon, as alon. Gouasche, as goasche. Goubeau, as gobeau. Goubelet, for gobeler, a bowl, a cup. Goubelettes, little tin vessels used by Jugglers and Inchanters. Gouber, an afternoons repast. Goude, a Marigold; also a Sow. Goudeau, for godeau, a Gardiners setting iron. Goud-sallot, a good fellow, a boon companion. Goudiveau, a kinde of open Pye, also a figure in carving like that Pye; or a long painted Oval. Goudron, &c. See goderon in the N. D. Goueastre, for goitreux, one that hath a wn, bunch, or swelling under his throat. Gouest, the name of a fruitful Vine, whose wood is of a tawny colour. Gouet, a little hart knife to crack nuts, and pill gree walnuts with∣al; a little catparse knife. Faul∣con gouer, a dropt hawk. Goutreux, fll of gll, infinitely deep; swallowing up whatsoever comes near it. Gotage, as Vouge; also a Joyner's Gouge; a Souldier's P or Whore; the hammer wherewith ts are marked in the Ki gs Forrests. Gouhourde, a guard. Goujur, a gudgon. Goujataille, a troop of Souldiers s, a cru of Crack-ropes. Gouate, a Souldiers Wench. Gouaterie, Souldiers boys, young Ra-hells that follow a Camp. Gouillard, a lor of his belly. Gouillarder, to eat greedily. Gouillardise, a greedy feeding; al∣so nice feeding. Gouinsre, for goinsre, a boon com∣panion. Govions, stters. Gouir, for jouir, to injoy. Gouju, full-cht, plump-faced. Goulard, goularder, goulardise. See Gouilard, gouillarder, gou∣illardise. Gouldron, gouldronné, gouldron∣ner, as goderon, goderonné, go∣deronner in the N. D. Goulée, a mouth full of. Gouleeur, for Arpenteur, a Sarvey∣or of land that measures onely by the Pole. Goulet, a gullet, the end of a Con∣duit-pipe whereat it dischargeth it self; also the mouth or neck of a narrow-neck Vessel; the hole of a Fox or Badger; a narrow Brook, or deep gather of water. Goulet de cheminée, the funnel of a chimney. Goulet de fenestre, a narrow loop-hole in the wall of a Prison, &c. Goulette de vin, a mouthful of wine. Goulfe, for golfe, a Gulf. Goulfi, swoln, or puffed up; plump, sat, well-fed. Goulfre, for gouffre, a Whirlpool. Goullardise, as gouillardise; also Ribaldry, licentious or lewd talk. Goullée, à la goullée, secretly, by stealth, or as in Goulée. Goulet, the pipe of a sink, or gut∣ter. Goultran, for goderon, Ship∣pitch. Gouluement, for goulument, gree∣dily. Gouphon, the iege of a door or window. Goupil, a Fox. Goupille, the iron pin that gos through the joynt of a hinge, or lap of a clh. Gourat, for Goujat, a Souldiers boy. Gourd, as gourt, or gourgue; also a whirl-pool. Gourd, (Adj.) drowsie, dull, heay; stiff, senseless, bned. Gourd-foulement, as gourfoule∣ment. Gourdi, hnumd. e Gourdir, to  bened. Gouret, as gorret, a Sheat, or barrow-pi. Gourfoulé, crushed, bruised, morti∣fied by violent handling. Gourfoulement, a crushing, or brui∣sing, a mortifying by violent handling. Gourfouler, to crush, or bruise, to moifie by violent handling. Gourgias, as gorgias; also proud, lofty, stately. Gourgue de moulin, the conduit of a Water-mill, the water-course or ditch that is directly under the wheel. Gourmanderesse, a gluttonness. Gourmandeur, a glutton. Gourmet, a Wine-cunner, a Wine-merchants broker. Gourmeter, Gourmetter, to curb. Gournauld, Gourneau, a Gurnard-fish. Gourré, beguiled, cheated, con∣sd. Gourrier, as Gorrier. Gourt, a violent stream, or gulf of waters; a whirlpool, or deep hole in a water. Goussé, devoured, eaten; also stuf∣fed with eating. Goussepillé, shaken, or tugged, as a Cat by a Dog; also shaked, un∣usked, shipped. Goussepiller, to shake, or tug, as a Dog doth a Cat; also to shale; to strip. Gousser, to devr; to stuff or fill with meat. Goussu, huske. Gouster, for Collation, afternoons nunchion. Gouté, gowty, troubled with the Gowt. Goutran, ship-pitch. Goutte-rose, an extream redness of the face. Goutreuse, the name of a bird, in bigness and shape somewhat re∣sembling a Swan. Gouvernal, for gouvernail, the rud∣der of a ship. Gouverneresse, for Gouvernante, a Goness. Gouvert, for gouvernement, go∣vernment, Gouytrouz, as goitrons, Swines wddls. Goy, a little hand-bill, vine-hook, or vine-knife. Goyart, a long hedging bill. Goye, for joie, joy; also as goy. Goyelle, a kinde of cheese-cake. Goyon, a gudgeon. Gozal, a sitting Pidgeon. Grabat, a poor mans bed; a coarse mattress, a straw-bed; or a cou h. Grabeau, a garbelling of spices, &c. also a precis search into matters. Grabellé, garbelled; also curiously searched into. Grabeller, to gari le spices, &c. to search curiously into.
Grabué, for Gradué, a Graduate. Grabuger, to make a great stir. Grachinoier, as grafigner. Gracieusement, graciously. Gracieuseté, graciousness; also gra∣tuity. Grade, degree, state, or dignity; a step. Gradé, graduate, or having taken a degree. Gradot, a Gurnard. Graduel, a Mass-book, or part of the Mass, invented by Pope Ce∣lestine in the year 430. Graduellement, gradually, by de∣grees. Grafigner, to scratch. Graffe, as griffe graffe, by hook or by crook, any way. Graffions, the best sweet Cherries. In old time the Lieutenants of Earls bore that name. Graier, the Officer that gathers the King's right of Grarie in Woods and Forests. Graigneur, as Greigneur, greater. Graillant, as grailleux. Graillat, for graille, a rook, or white-bill'd Crow. Graille, for grêle, slender. Grailleu, speaking hoarsely, sounding hollowly, croaking like a rook. Grainant, seeding, running to seed. Grainé, seeded, run unto seed. Grainer, to seed, or run unto seed. Temps de grainer, the season of laying Swine, the time wherein they are driven into Forests and Woods for Mastage and other feeding. Grairie, as grarie. Grais, a kinde of Potters clay or earth, fit to make vessels of; al∣so a hard and sparkling brown free-stone; also a certain Vine that hath a very big stock. Graisle, for grêle, thin, slender. Graisleté, as gresleté. Graissayer, to lisp. se Graisse-sondre, to swelter. Graissement, fatly, greasily. Graisseure, fattiness, greasiness. Graisseux, fatty, greasie. Graissier, one that loves fat things; also a Grasier, or fattener of cat∣tle. Graissin, fat mould, or dung to ma∣nure ground with. Graller, to parch, as pease, nuts, &c. Grame, Gramen, grass; also Couch-grass, or Dogs-grass. Gramigne, Couch-grass, Dogs-grass. Gramment, for grandement, great∣ly. N'a pas gramment, it is not long ago. Grammouse, a kinde of French dish. Grampé, taken with the cramp; or not able to stir, as one that hath the cramp. Grampelle, a Grampel, or Pungar. Granche, for grange, a barn; al∣so the carcass of a fowl. Grand (Subst.) le grand des biens ou de la terre, the whole sub∣stance, or inheritance, that's to be parted among Coheirs. Grangeage, corn, or fruits laid up in barns; also a Fee paid for corn-room in a barn. Passer grangeage d'un champ, to lease out a corn-field, or the crop there∣of. Grangée, a Grange, or Country-houshold. Grangée de bled, a barn full, a large heap of corn. Granger, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a barn. Grangeux, of a barn, full of barns. Grangier, for Granger, a Farmer, or Barn-keeper. Grangiere, for Grangere, a Farmers Wife. Grangousier, a great throat. Granet Oriental, an Oriental Gar∣net, a stone very near as good and well-coloured as the Ruby. Granule, reduced into seed or grain. Granuler, to reduce into seed, or grain. Granuleux, grainy, seedy; also in grains, or little seed-like pieces. Graphide, a description, or deline∣ation. Graphigné, scratched. Graphigner, to scratch. Grapillon, as grappillon. Grapir, to creep, crawl, or climb up. Grappage, a grape-gathering. Grappe, for grape, a bunch of grapes. Grappelle, the less Burdock. Grapper, for grapiller, to glean af∣ter Vintage. Grappes, the scratches, in a horses legs. Grappetant, gleaning after Vintage. Grappeté, gleaned, as Grapes after Vintage. Grappeuse, a woman that gleans after Vintage. Grappil, for grapin, the grapple of a Ship. Grappillage, a grape-gleaning. Grappiller, Grappilleur, as grapiller, grapilleur in the N. D. Grappillon, a little cluster of grapes. Grappin, as grappil. Grappu, for grapu, full of clusters of grapes. Grarie, the Kings right in every sale of Wood, made in the Forests of his Subjects. Grasselet, somewhat fat. Grassesse, fatness. Grasset, as grasselet. Grassette, the herb Orpine, or Lib∣long. Grasseur, as grassesse. Grassier, to lisp. Grat, pasture, feeding, grazing for cattle; also a scratching, or claw∣ing. Envoyer au grat, to send a grazing, a master to turn away his servant. Grate, for agreable, grateful, ac∣ceptable. Grateleux, scabby, itchy. Gratement, a scratching; also an itching. Gratia Dei, Harts-fodder. Gratieusement, Gratieuseté, as gracieusement, gracieuseté. Gratieux, for gracieux, gracious. Gratigné, scratched. Gratigner, to scratch. Gratin, the remnant of Childrens pap left in the bottom of the skil∣let wherein it was boyled. Gratiole, the herb called Hedge∣hyssop. Graton de pore, a fleshy part of the fat that holds the entrals being melted and cut in pie∣ces. Grattement, as gratement. Gratter, for grater, to scratch. Grattoir, a bread-grater. Gratture, a scratch, a scratching. Gravade, a reproach; also any hard measure. Gravage de la Mer, the Sands, the Sea-shore. Gravaigne, the wilde Goose, called a Barnacle. Gravan, the name of a small Sea-fish. Grave, sand, or gravel; also the pulse Axfitch. Gravée, a shaking. Gravelé, as cendres gravelées, ashes made of Wine-lees burned. Gravelée, Tartar, old lees of wine. Gravellon, the stone. Gravanter, as grevanter.
Graveolence, an ill smell. Gravoir, a heap of gravel. Gravois, gravel. Gravonner, to dig with the Fin∣gers, to search out. Gravouer, for gravier, Gravel. Graux, sluces, or open passages, made of purpose to let the Sea into Ponds or low places. Graye, for graille, a rook; also the Cornish chough. Grayerie, as Grarie. Greal, sang greal. See Sangreal. Greau, a dish, or dish full of. Grebe, as griaibe. Grebonde, a service at Tennis, wherein the Ball runs not along on the house, but bounds on the side thereof. Grecanisant, speaking Greek, or imi∣tating a Grecian. Greciser, to act the Grecian, or to speak Greek. Grecques, Gregs, Gallogaskins, wide Venetians. Grecs, a wilde Boars upper tushes. Grée, an agreement. Greé, agreed unto, allowed of. Greer, to agree, or give consent un∣to; to approve, or allow of. Gref, for grief, grievance, wrong, injury. Greffer, to graft. Greffiers, a kinde of white hounds. Gregeois, Grecian, of Greece. Gregual, a North-east-wind. Gregues, great hose. Greguesque, as Gregeois. Greguesques, as gregues. Greigneur, great; also greater, lar∣ger, bigger, elder. Greinselle, for groseille, a Goose-berry. Grelace, a great hail. Grelle, for grêle, hail. Grelot, trembler le grelot, as Grelotter, to quake for cold. Grelurette, as gurluret. Gremeau, (for grumeau) de sang, a clot of bloud. Gremeler, for grommeler, to grum∣ble. Grenadille, a Pomegranate-blossom; also a little Pomegranate. Grenage, Grain, Corn, Seed; also the growth, or increase there∣of. Grenaille, Grain, or Seed; also the Gold, Silver, &c. taken out of water, whereinto it hath been thrown red-hot out of the cruci∣ble. Grenaille de bronze, the scaly dust or substance lying on Brass, &c. after it hath been mel∣ted, and falling from it of it self, or with little blowing. Grenatier, the little border engraven about a seal. Grenatine, a small granet; also marble spotted red, whether na∣turally or artificially. Grene, for graine, Seed. Grenée, as pouldre de grosse gre∣née, great Grain, powder fit for the Cannon. Greneterie, the place or Office where∣in the Controlers of the Kings Garners reside. Grenetiers, Overseers, Keepers, or Controlers of the Kings Salt-gar∣ners. Grenie, as garder une fille à grenie, to keep a Maid long without a Husband. Grenil, for gremil, herb Grummel. Grenouillette, a little Frog; also the herb Crow-foot. Grenouillon, a little Frog. Grenu, full of Grains. Gres, as grez. Gresil, hail, drizling; also the white frost that hangs on trees. Gresillé, drizzled on. Gresiller, to hail, to drizzle. Gresillon, a Cricket. Gresillonné, whitish, as Grass with frost. Gresillonner, to chirp like a Cric∣ket. Greslement, thinly, slenderly, lankly, prettily; also shrilly, or speak∣ingly. Greslet, little, pretty. Gresleté, littlene, slenderress. Gresleux, haily, fail of hail, subject unto hail; stormy. Greslier, of, or belonging to hail. Gresse, for graisse, fat, or grease. Gresser, to grease, to liquor. Gressier, a Li per, one that lisp∣eth. Gretiller, to crackle. Grettes de lin, the hards, or tow of flax. Grevable, grievous, painful; also likely to burd. Grevance, a grievance. Grevant, grieving. Grevanté, grieved, vexed, oppres∣sed. Grevanter, to grieve, vex, or op∣press. Greve, sand, or gravel; a sandy shore; also the shin, or fore-part of the leg. La greve des che∣veux, les cheveux departis en greve, the shedding, or shading of the hair, the parting thereof on the forehead. Grevé, grieved, troubled, molested, hindred; also burst, whose bow∣els are fallen into his cods. Grevelure, the mail of a Hawk. Grever, to grieve, trouble, molest, hinder; also to dig into, or make hollow with the nails. Greveure, an inward rupture, or bursting of the lower part of the belly; an extraordinary swelling of the Cods by the bowels fallen into them. Grevolable, deserving the rope. Greux, the nails. Grez, a kinde of free-stone good to pave with. Grezillé, wrigled, crumpled, cur∣led. Greziller, to wriggle, crumple or curl; also to crackle as a shell in the fire, or salted flesh on coals. Grezillons, Hawks-bells; also little gobbets of fat or salt meat broy∣led; also twirls, as of hair cur∣led. Griache, for greche, speckled. Griaibe, a Sea-mew. Griais, a kinde of dainty red-legged Partridge. Griais, (Adj.) gray, or of the co∣lour of a Starling. Griblettes, collops. Gribouiller, to rumble, or croak, as the guts do through windiness. Gribouillis, the rumbling, croaking, or stirrirg of the Guts; also a feigned name for a Devil. Gribouri, a Goblin, a walking spi∣rit that rumbles in houses a nights. Grieux, a villain, a thief, a ras∣cal. Griffu, having great claws. Grigne, wrinkled. Grigner, to grin. Grignette, the ordinary Par∣tridge. Grigneur, greater, larger, big∣ger. Grignon de pain, a corner of a loaf. Grignote, gnawed, or nibbled away. Grignoter, to gnaw, or nibble a∣way, to eat like a Coney or Squir∣rel. Grillement, a broyling; a parch∣ing with great heat; a gliding, or sliding along; a grating, or shutting up with Grates. Grilletier, a Cricket-catcher; also a maker of Hawks bells.
Grilletté, furnished with bells, as a Hawk. Grilleux, full of Grates, made like a Grats. Grillot, the name of an apple. Grillotier, a Gridiron-maker; also a maker of rattles, and such-like toys for Children. Grillottement, a ringing, or rat∣tling; also a jogging. Grillotter, to ring, or rattle; also to jog. Grimacer, to make faces. Grimacier, a Carver, or maker of such Anticks as in buildings seem to support great arches, pillars, or beams. Grimasseur, a maker of faces. Grimau, Grimaud, or Grimauld, a grim-faced-fellow; also a Grammar-school-boy. Grimaude, a kinde of Owl. Grimauderie, or Grimaulderie, a School, or crew of mean Gram∣mar-scholars. Grìmbeti Colltée, as Besong∣née. Grimelet, as grimouche; or a smatterer in learning. Grimoire, a book of Conjuring, or exorcising. Grimouche, a paultry Pedant. Grimpe-mur, one that scrambles up a wall. Grimpreau, for grimpereau, a Wood-pecker. Grimpure, for grimpement, a climbing up. Grinceur, an angry gnasher of the teeth. Grinches, a kinde of black sweet cherries. Grimeur, greater. Gringalet, a merry Grig. Gringette, as grignette. Gringoriane, as eau Gringoriane, holy-water. Gringotis, for gringotement, a qua∣vering. Gringunaudes, the filth which af∣ter purging sticks to the tail. Gringuenoter, to quaver. Gringuenoteur, a quaverer. Gringuenotis, a quavering. Grinon, for grillon, a Cket. Grinson, a Chassinch. Grinsor, for grincer, th. Grio, new Barley std  water, then dried by a s, then sd, and kept for  uses. Grioter, to gither fwer Cheri. Grioteux, gravell; als . Griotte, Gravel; also  meal or flower of fri'd barley; or as grio. Grip, Rapine, Violence; a vio∣lent catching of other mens things. Allons au Cap de grip, let us go for a prize, (a phrase of Pirates.) Gripauline, the herb Motherwort. Griphe, Gripher, as griffe, griffer in the N. D. Gripp-argent, a gripe-money; a greedy, or covetous Judge, Ma∣gistrate, Officer, Lawyer. Grippeminaud, a griping, greedy, cruel fellow. Grippeminer, to gripe, or grasp gree∣dily, covetously, cruelly. Grippets, the ramples of an over∣long, or ill-made Garment; also the rustings or sarles of over∣twisd thrd. Grisard, a Badger; also a Sea-Gll. Griser, for grisoner, to grow gray-hair'd. Grisle, for grille, an Iron-grate. Grislement, a crackling noise, as of meat a broiling. Grison, as pierre de grison, a kinde of free stone which is but lft when it is taken out of the Quarry, but afterward grows very hard. Grisonneure, a growing whitish, or gray-hair'd. Grisser, to crackle, or creak like a shooe. Elles grissoyent d'ar∣deur de le voir, they longed ex∣treamly to see it. Grivelement, Griveleure, speck∣ledness, or a speckled colour. Grivette, a Throstle, or Mavis. Grivolé, Grivoler, as grivelé, grive∣ler in the N. D. Grivolement, Grivoleure, as gri∣velement. Grizonner, for grisoner, to grow gray-hair'd. Groe, for gros-bee, a certain a-coloured and great-headed bird, somewhat less than a Th. Grobiamisme, sloliness. Grobi, as faire du grobis, to be , or ly, to take state up∣. Gro.  quatity of stir∣ng  things. A la groée,  sambling for nuts, &c.  on the ground. Grener, to puzzle. Groinon, a kind of Peach. Groiseller, for groeillier, a Goos∣berry-shrh, or l. Groiselle, for groseille, a Gooseber∣ry. Groisellettes transmarines, red Gooseberries. Groisse, for grossesse, a womans be∣ing great with childe. Groisseler, as groiselier. Groizil, broken Glass. Grole, a Rook. Grolle, the round circle in the white at butts. Grollé, parched, as Pease, Beans, &c. Grollier, a Cobler. Noyer grol∣lier, a young or little Walnut-tree. Gromé, cuffed. Grommelement, a grumbling, or muttering. Grommeleux, grumbling, mutter∣ing, murmuring; also rugged, rough. Grommellement, as grommele∣ment. Grommé, cuffed. Grommer, to cuff. Gronau, a Gurnard. Groncer, to roar, as the Sea in a storm. Grondeller, to rumble, or to roar, as a tempestuous water that beats against rocks or roots growing to the banks thereof. Gronderie, a grumbling. Grondin, a Hog. Grondir, as grondeller. Grongnard, grunting; also frown∣ing. Grongnement, a grunting. Grongner, to grant, like a Hog. Gros-doux, a kinde of apple. Groselier, for groseiller, a Gooseber∣ry-shrub. Groselle, for groseille, a Gooseber∣ry. Gros grain, the name of a suff. Grossé, tottered, rocked, shaken. Feves grossées, parched, or car∣led beans. Grosser, to totter, rock, or shake, as weak building in wiy wea∣ther. Groslier, as grollier. Gros-menil, a kinde of pear. Gros-oeil, a kind of apple. Grosselle, for greseille, a Gooseber∣ry. Grosser, to rattle in the throat. Grosserie, great work; also rade∣ness, grosness; also Grocery; wares uttered, or the uttering of wares by whole-sale. Grossier, a Grocer.
Grossoyé, ingrossed, written fair, or in great and fair letters. Grossoyer, to ingross, to write fair, or in great and fair letters. Grotesquer, to lurk in Caves, or Dens, and obscure places. Groüée, la groüée des fruicts, that fruit which falls in the night; Windfalls. Grouëtte, gravel, or a gravelly soil. Grouëtteux, gravelly, stony. Grougnaut, a Gurnard. Grougouler, to rumble, or croak, like the Guts. Grouiller, to move, stir, or scrall; to rumble; to swarm. Grouillier, as grollier. Grouillis, a stirring heap of worms, &c. also the springing of a child in the womb. Groulard, a bunting. Groule, as groslé. Grouler, as grouiller. Groulette, a kind of little earthen-vessel. Groumeler, for grommeler, to grum∣ble. se Groyer, to boast. Gruan, Gruant, for gruau, Oat-meal. Grue (Adj.) simple, silly. Le mon∣de n'est plus grue, the world grows wise adays. Grugeoir, a small Grater. Grugeons, the smallest, or most wri∣then fruit on a tree; Writlings. Gruger, to grudge, repine, or mutter; also to eat a crust of bread. Gruiner, to grtle, like a Hog. Gruire, as grie in the N. D. Grum, for grain, a Grain. Grume, a knot, bunch, or cluster; also a twinkling, or sparkling, as of a Diamond. Grumelement, a grunting as of Hogs. Grumeler, for grommeler, to grun∣tle. Grumeleux, clotty, cluttering. Bois grumeleux, rough, knotty, rugged wood. Grumer, to shit Grates. Grumux, as grume leux. Gruotte, for grive, the tart kind of Chry. Grepé, Gruper, as gripé, griper in the N. D. Grupeme, Grupade, a grasping, a atng ld. Grus, for gruau. Gruel. Gruser, to grieve, or to repine at. Grusler, to qk to shir. Grusler des pois, to parh Pease. Gruyau, for gruau, oatmeal. Gruyer, (Adj.) of a Crane; also made (as a Hawk) only for the Crane. Gruyerie, & Gruirie, as gruerie in the N. D. Gruyo see, as grio. Gryllon, for grillon, a Cricket, or Grashopper. Gryotte, as gruotte. Grypaume, the herb Motherwort. Gryper, for griper, to catch hold. Grys, for gris, gray. Guaillardet, a Streamer in a ship. Guainier, Judas-tree. Guaire, for guere, little. Guaives, as Gayves. Gualebaut, a toss-pot. Guaranion, a kinde of horse. Guarantir, as garantir in the N.D. Guarbances, Fitches, Veths. Guarde-manger, for garde-manger, a cup-board. Guardon, as gardon in the N. D. Guare, for gare, beware. Guarent, for Garant, a Warrantee. Guari, for gueri, cured. Guarigues, plain chapian fields. Guarir, Guarison, Guarissable, as guerir, guerison, guerissable in the N. D. Guarite, for guerite, a watch∣tower. Guarot, as garot in the N. D. Guasaliens, an Order of religious people, consisting both of  and women. Guastier, as Gastier; or one that is hired to tend other mens grouds. Guatte, the small or young Shad, the river-Pil. Gualt, a kinde of apple. Guyae, Lig . Guayer, for ger, to ford. Guaylier, as Guainier. Guayre, for guere, little. Guerlé, craed with meat and drink. Guedon, nice, aint, srlo of receiving what iwa  longed for. Et apres gued, and afterward  to it with a better  k than they had refused it. Guedouar, as godouard. Guedoule, a small  or bottle. Guedouille, as gueole. Guedoue de vinaigre, a small Vi∣negar-bottle. Guelphe, faction, seditious. Guemente. askd, or inred after; also lamented, or coined of. Guementer, to ask, or inquire af∣ter. Se guementer, to lament, mourn, complain, groan. Guenaud, a beggar; also a digger of Graves. Guenchir, to start aside, thereby to avoid a coming blow. Gueneau, the throttle, or throat∣boll. Guenipe, a rag, or clowt; also a clouterly woman. Guenonnée, a most beastly wench, one that hath been ridden by a Monkie. Guenot, a Shepherds familiar. Guenupe, a little Monkey. Guepillon, a Holy-water-sprinkle. Guepillonneux, sprinkling, casting water upon. Guerb, Common of pasture for a mans beasts throughout all his Neighbours Grounds. Temps de guerb, is from mid-September to the middle of February. Guerdon, recompence, or reward; also the name of a fish. Guerdonné, recompenced, rewarded. Guerdonnement, a recompencing, or rewarding. Guerdonner, to recompence, to re∣ward. Guereté, laid, or made fallow, ma∣nered, fitted for seed, &c. Guereter, to lay, or make land fal∣low, to prepare it for seed. Guerguesses, wide Country-hose. Guerissable crable. Guerisseur, a aler, or carer. Guerité, as murs gueritez, walls, or rampiers farnished with places of retreat. Guerle, a free made of a skin dri'd and pierced full of oles. Gurlé, spi-eyed, or goggle-eyed. Guerler, to sift through a guerle. Guerluset, a by-word for a beggar∣ly Souldier, a Shagrag. se Guermenter, as se guementer. Guernette, a Prawn. Guernier, for grenier, a Garner. Guerpie, Guerpine, Guerpison, a qitting, forsaking; who a cree∣ping, crawling, or moving for∣ward by little and little. La Guerpie, a wid. Guerrite, as Guerie in the N. D. Guerroyable, sit to e wared on. Guerroyé, warred against. Guerroyement, war, warfare. Guerroyer, to war, to make war u. Gurroyeur, a Warrior; also a swaggerer, a contentious person.
Guespée, Guespiere, a nest, or swar of Wasps. Guespilleur, a squanderer. Guespillonné, besprinkled. Guespillonner, to beprinkle, or be∣dew with a Holy-water-sprin∣kle. Guespine, a waspish Dame. Guest, as harang guest, a shotten, or lean Herring. Guestrê, having startups on. Guesve, Seigneur Guesve, a Land∣lord to whom surrender is made of the ground held of him. Cho∣ses guesves, waifs, strayes, or things left, quitted, abandoned. Guesvé, waived, refused, abandon∣ed, given over. Guesvement, a waiving, or refu∣sing; also a resignation, or sur∣render of land. Guesver, to waive, refuse, abandon, or give over; also to surrender, give back, or resigne. Guesveux, plashy, flashy; also be∣plashed. Guette, for guet, a Watch-man. Guetté, watched, observed, dog∣ged. Guettement, a watching, observing, or dogging. Guetteur, a watcher, a busie obser∣ver of. Guetteur de chemins, a way-layer, a highway-robber. Guen, for Cuismier, a Cook. Gueuänt, begging in the highway, or like a rogue any way. Guever, as guesver. Gueuer, for gueuser, to beg. Gueuësse, for gueuse, a woman-beggar. Gueullard, the muzzel, or mouth of a beast; also a wide-mouthed fel∣low; also an imhoss (like the head of a Lion) upon ancient buskins. Gueulle, as gueule in te N. D. Gueus, for gueux, a beggar. Guey, for gué, a foord. Gueuze, for gueuse, a woman-beg∣gar. Guidage, a pasport, or writ of safe-conduct. Guidé, guided, conducted. Guidean, a kinde of fish-net. Guider, to guide, lead, or conduct. Guiddeymant, the needle of a Sea-compass. Guicor, a Guide. Guier, as guider, to guide. Guieres, as guere, little. Guiges, the handles of a target, or shield. Guignade, Guignement, a winking, or aiming at a thing with one eye. Guigne-queüe, a wag-tail. Guigneron, a dung-farmer. Guigneur, a winker; also a blin∣ker. Guignons de roches, the corners, or edges of rocks. Guilée, a great shower of rain. Guilhedin, for guilledin, a Gel∣ding. Guille, the quill, or faucet of a wine-vessel; the keel of a ship; also guile, craft, deceit. Guille de beurre, a piece of butter made of the fashion of a finger. Guillé, beguiled. Guillebardeau, a tool, or instru∣ment. Guillée, as guilée. Guillemine, a certain Edict against some exorbitant Privileges of the Church, devised and published by Guillaume Pojet, a Chancellor of France. Guillemins, an Order of Hermits. Guillemot, the name of a fowl that somewhat resembles a Plover. Guillenard, part of a womans &c. Guiller, to cousen, beguile, deceive. Guilleret, merry, pleasant; also red about the gills, as one that hath drunk somewhat hard. Guillerie, Guillery de passercux, the chirping of Sparrows. Guillochis, a kinde of flourishing in Masonry, or Carpentry. Guilloquet, part of a womans &c. Guilmin, a coxcomb, a sot. Guilon, a wanton girl. Guilverdons, great gobbets of liquid meats, as of Oysters, &c. Guimaux, Prez guimaux, fertile meadows, mowed twice a year. Guimpier, a maker of crepines. Guimple, the crepine of a French-hood. Guinche, a sword, or hatchel for a flex-wise. Guincher, to wriggle. Guindage, a hoysing, or lifting up; or an engine to lift up things with. Guinderesse, the rope whereby the Mizzen-sail is hoised up. Guindol, for guindal, an engine to lift up stones with. Guindoles, Guindoules, the fruit called Jujahes. Guindre, a wheel to wind silk on. Guinguois, de guinguois, slovenly, unhandsomely; also hassingly, swaggeringly. Guinson, for pinson, a Chassinch. Guipilon, an holy-water sprinkle. Guirlandé, wearing a garland, or set out with garlands. Guisarme, a kinde of weapon, a staff that hath within it two long pikes, which with a shoot or thrust forward come forth. Guise, guise, manner, fashion, cu∣stome. Guisnier, a sweet cherry-tree. Guiterne, or Guiterre, for guitare, a guitar. Gulpe, a wound, or bloud-wipe. Gulpine, a quitting, or forsaking; a waiving, or giving over an Estate in Land. Gulpir, to quit, leave, or waive. Gumenes, the tackling of a ship. Guoguettes, for goguettes, a merry humour. Guorre, Guoy, as gorre, goy. Gurleret, a nickname or by-word for a beggarly Souldier. Gurpir, to quit, forgo, leave, aban∣don. Gurpison, as guerpie. Guses, the ball of the eye. Gutale, Guttale, ale, good ale. Guy de Flandres, a kinde of mortar wherewith fret-work is made. Guyberges, as guymberges. Guynettes, young Guinny-hens. Guynes, for guines, sweet Cherries. Guypiere, Guypure, for guipure, guimp. Guyron, geronne, in Heraldry. Guysarme, as guisarme. Guysarme, as guisarme. Guysarmier, one that serves with a guisarme. Guyure, a snake, an adder. Gy, as gyp. Gymnaste, exercised, or nimble at exercise. Gynecocratie, Gynocratie, the Go∣vernment of a woman. Gyngois, as guinguois. Gyp, or Gyps, morter, plaister, or a kinde of white stone whereof plai∣ster is made. Gypsé, like morter, or plaister, also mortered, or plaistered. Gyraffe, as girafe in the N. D. Gyrine, the frog called a Tadpole. Gyroflée, for giroflée, a Gilly-flower. Gyroles, Skirret-roots. Gyron, as guyron. Gyrouet, & Gyrouëtte, for girou∣ëtte, a weather-cock. Gyrouëtteux, flitting, wavering, inconstant, as a weather-cock.
H HAaler, as haler in the N. D. Habarre, as gabarre. Habatre, as abbatre in the N. D. Habeliné, distempered; also all be∣pissed. Habileté, for habilité, fitness, aptness, skill, ability, nimbleness, acti∣vity. Habilité, inabled, fitted, confirmed; allowed of. Habiliter, to inable, to make fit for; to allow of. Habiliter un mi∣neur, to inable an Infant to sue, or answer in Law, by appointing him a Guardian who may do it for him. Habillage de poulailles, the dressing of poultry, the pluming, drawing, &c. Habitacle, an habitation. Habitual, for habituel, habitual, or got by degrees. Habituation, for habitude, an habit, or custome. Habitué, (Subst.) a houshold-servant, or attendant. Hable, for havre, a haven, or har∣bour. Habordean, the fish Haberdine. Habrizer, to shrowd himself; also to sleep. Hachement, a hacking, slicing, or cutting in pieces. Par hachement, in slices. Hachereau, a little ax, an ad∣dis. Hachette, a hatchet, or small ax. Hacquebuse, an harquebuze. Hacquebuter, to shoot in or with an harquebuze. Hacquet, as haquet; also a little Ci∣stern, or open vessel, for the rin∣sing of Glasses, or cooling of Wine in Summer. Hacquetier, as haquetier. Hadea, (an Interjection) ha! are you there? Hadot, Hadon, a salt Haddock. Haffres, fright, astonishment. Haffreux, for afreux, frightful. Hagiographe, written holily, or sa∣credly. Haglé, mailed, speckled as the coat of a Hawk. Haglure, the mail, or speckledness of a coat of a Hawk. Hahay, as faire gros hahay, to make a great stir, or mighty slaugh∣ter. Haias, a kind of Beech-tree. Haict, as hait. Haillonné, cut into rags, or tatters, whereof clowts are made. Dis∣cours haillonnez, ragged, or pat∣ched discourses. Haillonner, to cut into rags, or tat∣ters; to make clowts of. Haillonneux, ragged, tattered. Haim, a fishing-hook. Haines, the hips. Haineur, a hater, loather, abhor∣rer. Haineuseté, hatefulness, odiousness. Haineux, full of hate; also odious, or hateful. Haineux (Subst.) enemies, adversa∣ries. Haire (masc.) a carrion-jade; also a wretched or miserable fellow. Haireux, rough, rugged. Haironneau, a young Heron. Haironnier, of, or belonging to a Heron; also Heron-like, long, tall, slender, lank. Faulcon hai∣ronnier, a Herner, a Faulcon made onely to the Heron. Haironniere, a Herons nest, or ayrie; a Hershaw, or shaw of wood, wherein Herons breed. Haistre, for hêtre, a Beech-tree. Hait, liveliness, lustiness; gladness, cheerfulness; readiness. Cela est bien à mon hait, that fits my humour, pleases my fancy. Haité, lively, found, lusty. Haiter, to like well of, to be well pleased with; also to cheer up. Haitié, as haité. Haitoudeau, as hestoudeau. Hal, an ashy-coloured Scate-fish, whose skin is poudered all over with brown spots. Halachie, a Shad-fish. Halainé, as halené. Halberné, for halbrené, broken-fea∣thered. Halebant, for albren, a little wilde Duck. Halebran, a Teal; also a little wilde Duck. Halebreda, an ill-favoured man or woman. Halebrant, as halebran. Halecret, a Croslet. Halecreté, armed with a Cros∣let. Haleine, for halene, breath. Haleineux, long-winded, full of breath. Halené, breathed on; also searched, or smelt out. Halené de la flat∣terie, fed with the breath of flat∣tery. Halenée, Halenement, a breathing; also a breath, wind, or exhala∣tion. Halener, to breathe, or blow upon; also to smell out. Haletant, short-winded. Haletement, a painful (or fast) pan∣ting; also a breathing, or ven∣ting out. Haliboron, as Aliboron. Haligornes, trash, old (or out-cast) stuff. Halime, a kind of Sea-Purslane. Haliter, for haleter, to pant; also to excite, or stir up. Halitre, for hâle, a scorching heat. Hallage, as Droict d' hallage, hal∣lage, the toll that's due to the Lord of a Fair or Market for such Commodities as are vented in the Hale of the place. Halle, for hale, an open Market-house, or Hall standing on pil∣lars. Halle (an Interj.) ha-boys, now now. Halleboter, to glean after Vintage, to rake, or gather together. Hallebotté, flaggy, or ill-filled. Hallebottes, the tops or flowers of a certain weed containing two or three little red seeds apiece. Hallebrené, crest-fallen, off the in∣ges, clean out of heart; also grie∣vously beshitten. Hallebrent, as halebran. Hallecret, as halecret. Hallefessier, a Scoundrel, a base or scurvy fellow, a Tyrants flatter∣er. Hallené, Hallener, as halené, hale∣ner. Haller, to hallow, or Incourage dogs with hallowing. Halleron, part of a womans &c. Halles. See hale in the N. D. Halleter, for haleter, to pant, or to blow hard. Halmyrach, for Amiral, an Admiral. Halot, a hot and blasting mist. Halte, for alte, a stand or stop. Hambour, Hambourg, a kind of little barrel. Hamé, furnished with a hook. Hamech, a purging composition. Hameçonné, full of, or furnished with fish-hooks. Hameçonner, to furnish with fish-hooks. Hamesson, for hameçon, a fish-hook.
Hamessonné, as hameçonné. Hamet, a small fish-hook. Han, the groan wherewith Wood-cleavers keep time to their strokes. J'ai chanté à son han, I have spoken with him. Hanap, a drinking-cup, or goblet. Hancher, to snatch at with the teeth. Hanchois, a Pilchard. Hanchu, great-hipt. Handon, a kind of Dragon, whose biting is not venemous. Hanebane, Henbane. Hanede, as enter à la hanede, to graft in a Willow-pole. Hanegue, a Corn-measure, contain∣ing about six Parisian bushels. Hannebane, as hanebane. Hannicroches, Hannicrochemens, intanglements, subtilties, cavils. Hannir, for hennir, to neigh. Hannissement, the neighing of a horse. Hannon, a Cockle. Hanse, a certain Society of Mer∣chants combined together for the good usage and safe passage of Merchandises; also an association with, or the freedom of the Hanse; also the fee, or fine, which is paid for that freedom. Hansé, free of the Hanse, sworn of the Company of Hanse-Merchants; sworn and made free of any Com∣pany, or Corporation. Hanser, to make free of the Hanse, or of any Civil Company, or Corpo∣ration. Hantement, for hantise, an haun∣ting, or frequenting. Hape, or Happe, a clasp, or the hook of a clasp, or a hook to clasp with; also the clowt or band of iron that's nailed upon the arm or end of an axeltree, and keeps it from being worn by the often turning of the nave of a wheel. Clou à happe, a clowt-nail. Happée, a grasp, a snatch. Saisine d'happée, a violent seisure of, or entry into another mans land; a forcible entry, or disseisin. Happelopin, a Catch-bit, a Smell-feast. Happement, a catching. Happe-sonpe, a spoon. Haquebute, an Arquebuse. Haquebutier, an Arquebusier. Haquet, a Dray. Haquetier, a Dray-man. Har, as hard in the N. D. Harangeson, Herring-season. Haranguant, for harangueur, an O∣rator, or one that makes a Speech. Haranier, of, belonging, or like unto an Herring. Haransor, for harang soret, a red-Herring. Harassier, the Owner, or Overseer of a Race. Haraud, the form of an Hare; also a certain Cry used in Normandy, for which see Haro in the N. D. Haraudé, openly reviled, or railed at. Harauder, to revile, or rail at open∣ly. Harault, as haraud. Le monde luy crie harault, the world cries out, or bids fye, upon him. Harce, for herse, an Harrow; also a Portcullis. Harcelle, a little With. Hardage, for hardes, a Travellors things that he carries with him. Harde, an herd, flock, or troop of wild beasts; also a soft-shelled egg, a wind-egg; also an hoord. Hardé, loaden with baggage; also trucked, bartered, exchanged. Hardelle, a little With, or faggot-band; also a herd of beasts; a crue of men; also a young maid, or lass. Harder, to truck, barter, exchange. Hardeux, as hardé. Hardiement, for hardiment, bold∣ly. Hardillon, the thong of a buckle. Hardouer, a resorting, or a repair unto. Hardré, as oeuf hardré, a wind-egg, or soft-shelled egg. Harelle, a herd, or flock; also a po∣pular Commotion. Harene, for harang, a Herring. Harengade, a fish like a little Shad. Harengerie, an Herring-shop, or Market; also a selling of Her∣rings, or the Herring-sellers trade. Harengeson, Hrring-seaon. Harengiere, for harangere, a wo∣man that cries, or sells Herrings. Faire la mouë aux harengieres, to stand on the Pillory. Harer un chien, to set a dog on a beast; to incourage him by some voice, or by clapping on the back, when he is set on. Harfleur, an ebbing. Hargas, as saulcon hargas, a sore-Faulcon. Harié, harri'd, vexed, molested. Harier, to harry, vex, or molest. Harigot, a kind of Jig. Harle, a kind of Sheldrake. Harlou, instead of Hare-loup, a word wherewith dogs that hunt or assail a Wolf are cheered and incouraged. Harmene, a little Basilisk. Harmonique, for harmonieux, har∣monious. Harnachement, for harnois, the har∣ness of a horse. Harnas, the same. Harnas de mou∣ton, the head and pluck of a sheep. Harnas de roture, a Plough. Haroder, as harauder. Harondelle, for hirondelle, a Swal∣low. Harou. See haro in the N. D. Harpade, a catching, or snatching at. Harpail, a flock, hrd, or crue. Harpaille, as herpaille. Harpailleur, a Keeper, or Overseer of Deer; also as Arpailleur. Harpanter, for arpanter, to survey, or measure land. Harpaut, the name of a Shepherds dog. Harpechorde, a Harpsicord, a Dul∣cimer. Harpens, a kind of Night-bird. Harpes, for hardes, a Travellors things. Harpeur, an Harper, one that plays on the Harp. Harpi, catching, snatching, grasping at. Harpoy, poyson. Harquebousade, and harquebusade, harquebouse, harquebuse, har∣quebousé, harquebusé, harquebu∣ser, and harquebusier. See them without h and o in the N. D. Harquebutier, for Arquebusier, an Arquebusier. Harry, a carterly voice of exciting. Hars, for hard, a fagt-band, a With. Harse, for herse, an Harrow. Harselle, a little With. Harseller, for harceler, to vex. Harsé, Harsement, Harser, Harseur. See them with an e, instead of a, in the N. D. Hart, for hard, a With. Les harts, the shoulder (or neck) vein of a horse, whereat most commonly he is let bloud; or as les Ars. Haschehsach, a feigned voice of coughing. Hase, an old female Coney, or Hare. Haseau, a Bream of a middle size. Haste, for broche, a spit.
Hastelé, bound up with small splints. Hastelettes, little splints, wherewith Faulconers binde up their Hawks broken legs. Hasteleux, hasty, quick, speedy, nim∣ble. Hastemenue, an Hogs haslet. Hastereau, the throat-piece, or fore∣part of the neck of a hog; also a dish made of one Liver or more of a calf, &c. Hasterel, as hastereau; or a Hogs haslet. Hasteur, an hedger, or hedge-ma∣ker. Hastilles, the inwards of a beast; as an Hogs haslet, Calves gather, Sheeps pluck, &c. Hastivel, for hâtiveau, an hasting-apple, or pear; a soon-ripe apple; a hair-brain'd fool. Hastiveté, hastiness, speed, rashness. Hatelier, for attelier, a place for a Tradesmans tools. Hattereau, as hastereau. Hau, for ho, an Interjection of cal∣ling. Haubans, for aubans, the Shrowds of a ship. Haubelon, for hoblon, Hops. Haubereau, for hobereau, an Hob∣by-hawk. Haubergeon, a little coat of mail, or onely sleeves and gorget of mail. Haubergeon de femmes, the roll wherewith some women bear up their gowns about their hips. Haubergeonnier, a maker of Coats of mail. Have, dreadful. Yeux haves, hol∣low, or sunk in the eyes. Havé, soaked, withered, wasted; also difigured, dreadful to look on. Havée, a gripe, or handful; a booty, or prey; a toll exated by the Ex∣ecutioner of some towes upon small waes, and fruit sold on Market-days. Havement, greedily, ravenously. Haver, for happer, to hook, or grap∣ple with an hook. Haveron, wilde Oats. Havet, a little hook. Havi, parcht, burnt up, as grass by the hot Sun. Havir, to parch, or burn up, as a hot sun doth grass. Haulche, a raising, or out-bidding in an out-cry. Baulcher, to raise, or out-bid in an out-cry. Haulchié, raised, or out-bid. Haulchier, as haulcher. Haulsage, as haussage; also pride, arrogancy. Haulsaire, lofty, slately, high-min∣ded. Haulse, the underlaying of a shooe, or the piece of leather that under∣lays it. Haulse-bee, a lifting up of the chin in scorn; also a blow, or chock under the chin. Haulse-menton, a crutch-like prop of wood, serving to bear up the head of one that's fallen into ex∣tream weakness; also a false boasting. Haulse-pied, a net, or engine where∣with Wolves, Badgers, Foxes, &c. are caught. Haulsereé, the drawing, or haling of Barges, or great Boats up a river by the force of men ashore. Haultaineté, haughtiness, loftiness, or stateliness, Haultbert, as hauber in the N. D. Hault-muré, high-walled; also tall. Un plat de soupes hault murées, a dish of Brewes, whose sops are heaped roof-ways one upon ano∣ther. Hault-murer, to compass, or fortifie with high rampiers. Haumelore, an Omelet, or Pancake of eggs. Havoir, for avoir, to have. Havre, (Adj.) dreadful. Haussage, an hoising, or heaing up. Haussaire, as haulsaire. Hausse, a scoop to lade or fetch up water. Jouër à la hausse qui baisse, to play at tittr totter, to ride the wilde mere. Hausie-bee, as haulse-bee. Hausse-ul, a French Vardinga, or the kind of roll d by such w as use o Vardingals. Hausse-plie, a Vardingale. Hausse-plié, furished with a Var∣dingale. Hautaignes, Vs which (is ps) imbra and creep up on long poles. Hautainté, as haulié. Haut-bert, for haubere, a igh, or chief Lord. Haut-cofté, a Srn. Haut-d'a, a Cloth of Estate. Haute, a Dock, to mend, or build ships in. Haute-lissier, a maker of . Haut-gourdier, a dperate . Hautin, the Sea-pike, or Spit-fish. Hautins, as Autins. Haut-licier, as haute-lissier. Haut-parage, the highest Peerdom; a title, or tenure whereby the Peers and Princes of the bloud of France hold their land, or (more generally) a tenure in Capite: for (as that tenure) it moves wholly and directly of the Crown. Haut-passage, an Imposition of 7 pence in the pound upon Wools, Cloths, Linnens, Canvasses, &c. Hauvens, for Auvens, Penthouses of cloth hng before Shop-windows. Hay, and Haye, two Interiections. Hayer, to hedge; also to hate. Hayeton, edge-making; also hedg∣ing-time. Hayeur, a hater. Hayneux, as haineux. Hayon, for tente, a Tent. Hayreux, lean, scraggy; poor, mi∣serable; also rough, ragged. Hayt, as de bon hayt, willingly, freely. Haze, as hase. Heaulme, or heaume, an Helmet; also the Heart-cherry. Heaulmé, as heaumé, wearing an Helmet. Heaulmer, or heaumer, to put on an Helmet. Heaulmerie, or heaumerie, an Ar∣mourers-shop, or Ware-house. Heaulmier, or Heaumier, an Armor∣er, or Helmet-maker; also the Heart-cherry-tree. Heaulmiere, the Rudder-port of a ship. Hebbe de la Mer, the ebb, or ebbing of the Sea. Hebene, for ebene, Ebony. Hebenin, of, or belonging to Ebony. Heberge, an house, lodging, harbour. Hebergé, housed, lodged, harboured. Hebergement, as heberge. Heberger, to house, lodge, or harbour; to dwell, or ibid. in. Hebrieu, for hebren, the Hebrew. Hectique, for Etique, sick of an He∣ctick or continual Feater; also lean, in a consumption. Hederiforme, fashioned like . Veine hederiforme, a certain vin which asses do along by the sides of the Wh. Hedre, f hetre, a Btree. Hedret, as haidroide. Hee, or Hei, an Interjection of la∣menting. Helaine, Elicampane, Sea-wort. Helinites, an Order of white Friars, that wear a yellow Cross on their brsts.
Heleoseline, Smallage. Helepolle, a great Wooden-engine wherewith in old time the tops of Rampiers were battered. Helesie, the name of an herb. Heliotrope, the herb Turnsol; also a precious stone, which, as a Bur∣ning-glass, receiveth and retor∣teth the Sun-beams. Helixine, barren, or creeping Ivy. Helvenaque, the name of a kinde of Grape. Hematide, pierre hematide, the Bloud-stone. Hemicraine, the Megram. Hemicanique, troubled with, or sub∣ject unto the Megram. Hemine, as Emine. Hemiole, so much, and half so much again. Hemiplexie, a dead Palsie in half of the body. Hemitrité, la fiebvre hemitritée, an Ague compounded of a continual Tertian, and an intermittent Quotidian. Hemorrhoïdal, as Veine hemorrhoï∣dale, a small branch of the Spleen∣vein coming to the Fundament; also a certain vein in the neck of a womans Womb. Hemorrhues, for hemorrhoïdes, the Emrods, or Piles. Hemy, an Interjection of lamenting, ay me. Henouars, Salt-porters, carriers of salt. Heouse, Holly, or the Holm-tree. Heptaphon, seven-fold. Heptomagene, the seventh Male. Herage, an airy of Hawks; a brood, kinde, or stock. Herauder, to blaze, publickly to de∣nounce, or declare. Herbageux, grassie, full of grass. Herbaux, certain duties whereto some Inheritances are liable in Poictou. Herbé, fed with grass, laid on the grass, turned into grass. Herbelette, small herb, or grass. Herbergage, or herberge, as heberge. Herbergé, herbergement, herberger, as hebergé hebergement, heberger. Herbergerement, Herbergerie, a house, lodging, or dwelling. Herbette, small herb, or grass. Her∣bettes, lettice, burrage, purslain, sor∣rel, and such like wholesome herbs. Herbeux, grassie, full of grass, or herbs. Herbier, for herboliste, an Herbalist; also a Gardener; also an Herbal. Herbiere, an Herb-woman; also the windpipe of a bird, and the throat∣pipe of a beast. Herbist, grassie (or well-grown) pa∣stures. Herbiste, as herbier. Herbregé, herbregement, herbre∣ger, herbregerie, as hebergé, he∣bergement, heberger, hebergerie. Herce, for herse, an Harrow. Herceler, for harceler, to trouble, vex, or molest. Hercement, Hercer, Herceur, as her∣sement, herser, herseur in the N. D. Herceure, an harrowing. Hercher, for herser, to harrow. Herculiane, Herculienne, a loadstone. Herdertiler, the great, or master-devil. Herdre, to cleave, or stick fast unto. Here, for haire, a shirt made of rug∣ged hair, a penitential shirt. Hereditable, inheritable. Heredital, hereditary; or as herital. Heredité, an Inheritance. Heresié, turned heretick; as obsti∣nate, or impious as an heretick. Hereste (for arête) de poisson, a fish∣bone. Hergne, for hernie, a bursting, or rupture within the cods. Hergneux, burst; also froward. Herigoté, dew-claw'd, having spurs or dew-claws. Herigotes, Dew-claws, also Spurs. Herigoteure, the having of dew-claws, or spurs. Heripé, Heriper, as herupé, heruper. Herissonnement, a sudden quivering, or shivering, by the sense or appre∣hension of an abhorred thing. se Herissonner, to have his hair stand up on end. Heritable, inheritable; also held in Fee-simple, or for ever. Heritablement, inheritably, in Fee-simple, or for ever. Heritableté, an inheritance, or the soil inherited. Herital, of inheritance; also inheri∣ted, or held in see. Heritance, Herité, (Subst.) for heri∣tage, an inheritance. Heritel, as herital. Heritier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to an heir, or inheritance. Herle, as harle. Hermaire, for armoire, a Cupboard. Hermandrée, for germandrée, Ger∣mander. Herme, for ferme, firm; also waste, untilled, solitary. Hermile, a little round member in Architecture, the same as Astra∣gale in the N. D. Herminer, to fur with Ermins. Herminette, a little plaining ax. Hermitresse, a Woman-hermit. Hermodacte, Dogs-bane. Hermole, Burstwort, Rupturewort. Herné, burst, having a rupture a∣bout the Privities. Herniaire, as hermole. Heroë, for heros, a Hero. Herouët, the name of an apple. Herpail, a herd, or flock. Herpaille, a crew of shirking fellows. Herpailleur, a seller of old trinkets of Iron, &c. Herpé, grasped, snatched; also harp-like; out-breasted and lank in the groin like a Greyhound. Herpelu, a Stiver, a French shilling. Herper, to grasp, or snatch. Herper contre terre, to creep, or crawl. Herpes, the shingles, running-worm, or wilde-fire. Herr, Master, Sir; also a Rogue; also a sawcy man. Herre, a Rogue, Beggar, Vagabond. Herry, the Fundament, or Arse-gut. Hers, an Interjection of Calling. Herselé, for harcelé, vexed, tormented. Hersoir, for hier à soir, yesternight. Herte, as Erte in the N. D. Hertringue, I drink to you. Herupé, whose hair stares or stands an end; also bristly, pricked, di∣shevelled, disordered. Heruper, to make it stare, or stand ill-favouredly; to disorder the hair. S'heruper, to set up the bri∣stles, her hair to stare. Heruppé, as herupé. Hespalier, a Sailer, or Mariner. Hesperie, the West Tower. Hestoudeau, for Etoudeau, a great Cock-chick. Hestreau, a young, or little Beech-tree. Hetaudeau, as hestoudeau. Hetique, as hectique. Heu, a dutch Hoy; also a Lighter. Heu hasch, feign'd words for a cough. Heudri, musty, corrupted, putrifi'd; stai∣ned, or spotted as unaired linnen. Heudrir, to must, corrupt, or putri∣fie; to spoil for want of airing. Heulet, a boult, or little Isle cut out of the land of purpose to be over∣flowed every tide by the Sea, that of the froth salt may be made. Heullant, yelling, howling. Heuré, set, or appointed as an hour; limited, stinted, or tasked by the hour. Bienheuré, for bienheureux, happy. Heureté, Heureuseté, happiness, pro∣sperity.
Heurlement, and Heurler, as hurle∣ment, hurler in the N. D. Heurlerie, for hurlement, an howling. Heurt, Heurtade, a shock; also a piece of high ground; or the top of a mountain. Bastir en heurt, to build on high, or on the upper side of an hill. Heurté, as heureté. Heurtes, small azure balls. Heurtis, for heurtement, a knocking, hitting, or striking. Heuse, as house. Heusse, the linch-pin, whereby the arm of the axle-tree is kept with∣in the nave of a cart-wheel, &c. Heyron, a Sea-mew. Hiacinthin, light blew. Hibernal, of, or belonging to the Winter. Hideur, dread, horrour; a thing horrible and fearful to behold; also hideousness. Hieracite, a kinde of bloud-stone. Hiere pierre, a certain yellow and very bitter composition in powder. Hierobotane, Juno's tears, Holy-herb. Hierre, for lierre, Ivy. Hilux, black-tailed, or black on the tail, as a bean is. Hillots, fellows. Hinard, wry-necked. Hinnelement, as Isnellement. Hipate, a sixth, or the proportion of six in Musick. Hipogriphe, as hypogriphe. Hipothecaire, as hypothecaire. Hippiatrie, horse-physick. Hippoglosse, horse-tongue. Hippopotame, a water-horse. Hirable, as Giraffe in the N. D. Hiraudie, a paltry Garment. Hirein, Goat-like, of a Goat. Branche hircine, brank ursin, bears claw. Hire, a rammer. Hireté, an Inheritance. Hisnel, as Isnel. Historial, historical. Histrion, a Stage-player. Histrionique, Player-like, sit for, or belonging to a Stage-player. Hiulque, gaping as the earth in drought; full of chinks. Ho, a great troop of Cavalry. Hobain, Hobaine, as Aubaine in the N. D. Hober, to remove from place to place. Hobere, as Aubere. Hoberger, to fly, or to save himself by flying. Hobille, a Jerkin, Jacket, or Coat. Hobin, an hobby; a little ambling horse. Aller le hobin, to amble. Hobineux, hobby-like, or belonging to an hobby. Hoc, as ho; also a grapple, or great hook. Hoche, a nick, or notch on a tally. Hochebot, a kinde of boat. Hochebride, a rakehel, a desperate fellow. Hochecuë, for hochequeuë, a Wag∣tail. Hochement, a shaking, or jogging. Hochepli, a Vardingale. Hoche-prunier, a plum-tree shaker; a mans yard. Hocqueteur, a basket-carrier. Hocton, for hoqueton, a Jacket. Hode, toil, wearisomness. Hodé, toiled, wearied. Hoder, to toil, or to weary. Hoe, for ho! an Interjection of wondering, of reprehension, of forbidding. Hogner, as hoigner. Hoguiné, vexed, molested, offended. Hoguinement, a vexing, molesting, or offending. Hoguiner, to vex, molest, or offend. Hoguines, the pieces of armour which cover the arms, thighs, and legs. Hoho! an Interjection of wondering. Hoigne, a grumbling, mumbling, muttering, or whining. Hoigner, to grumble, mumble, mut∣ter, or whine. Holette de maille, a shirt of mail. Holostion, hairy small Plantain; also mountain-Plantain; also the herb called Stitchwort. Holothurie, a certain thing found in the Sea, yet neither Plant, Fish, nor fit to be eaten. Holotte, a Madge-howlet, or little Owl. Hom, for homme, a man. Homage, for hommage, homage. Homar, a Lobster. Homelette, for aumelette, an Ome∣let, let, or pancake of eggs. Homenage, for hommage, homage. Homenas, a good silly Cokes. Homicidé, killed, slain, murdered. Homicider, to kill, slay, or murder. Homicidere, an homicide, or mur∣therer. Hommace, a Virago, a manly, or stout woman. Hommager, to owe, or do homage unto; also to reverence. Hommasse, as hommace. Hommeau, Hommelet, Hommet, a dwarf, a very little man. Hommesse, as hommace. Homocentricalement, in one center. Homologation, an allowance, or ap∣probation of, a consent unto. Homonceau, a petty fellow. Homs, for homme, a man. Hon hon, an Interjection of wonder∣ing. Faire hon de la teste, to seem loath. Hondlée de soin, a load of hay. Hondrespondre, a drunken, or swag∣gering Dutchman. Hongner, as hoigner. Honni, reproached, shamed, disgra∣ced; spotted, blemi hed. Honnir, to reproach, shame, or dis∣grace; also to sport, or to blemish. Honnorance, Honoraire, an honou∣rable Present given to a Prince, Embassador, or great Officer at his first Entry; a Donative be∣stowed on Souldiers; a fee. Honoraire, for honorable, honourable. Honorance, as honnorance. Honorifique, honourable, worthy. Honouars, as henouärs. se Hontir, se Hontoyer, to be asha∣med of. Hopelande, for houplande, a Shep∣herds cloak, pelt, or gaberdine. Hopperie, a whooping, or shouting. Horaprime, as Oraprime. Horcentric, Horcentrique, out of the Center. Horche, à horche, near a wind. Hord, as heurt. Horleat, Barl y-water, drink made of Barley. Hordoux, soenly, greasie, nasty. Hore, as de là en hore, from that time to this. Horepole, a sh called Whirlpool. Hormale, as Orvale. Horo, I see him (an Hunters term.) Horologuer, and Horologier, for Horloger, a Clock- (or Watch-) maker. Horreau, a Mackerel. Horribler, to make terrible. Horribleté, horribleness, terribleness, hideousness. Horripilation, a sudden quaking, or shivering; also a growing rough with hair. Horripiration, the same; also smart. Hortailles, all kinde of gardening Ʋtensils. Hortatif, exhorting. Hortie, for ortie, a nettle. Hortolages, garden-stuff. Hoseaux, as houseaux. Hospillé, Hospiller, as houspillé, houspiller. Hospitable, hospitable,; also fit to dwell in.
Hospitaler, to receive into an Ho∣pital. Hosquet, for hoquet, the hiccock. Host, an Host, or Army; a Squa∣dron, or Battalion close toge∣ther. Hostager, given in hostage, laid in pawn. Hostarde, a Bustard. Hostau, for hòtel, a Noblemans house. Hostelage, hospitality; also a bed, or nights-lodging, for a guest. Droict d'hostelage, the rate Merchant-strangers are at in some parts for their Ware-houses, whether they hold them but a night, or a whole year. Pains d'hostelage, a cer∣tain Duty paid by some Vessels unto their Lords, in regard of the Houses wherein they dwell. Hostelé, lodged. Hosteler, to lodge (in both senses.) Hostelier, an Host, an Inne-keeper. Ris d'hostelier, a feigned lough∣ter, mirth ouer from the teeth out∣ward. Hostellage, as hostelage. Hosteller, as hosteler. Hostiere, as Gueux d'hostiere, a beggar from door to door. Hostigement de fief, a declaration in open Court, to whom a fief be∣longs after the decease of him that had it last, or for the security of a debt. Hostigié, as heritage hostigié, an Inheritance whose true Owner is declared in Court. Hostile, hostile, enemy-like. Hostilement, hostilely, with deadly fud. Hostise, as Ostize. Hot, as host. Hottailles, baskets, dossers, &c. Hottée, a sttle full of. Hotter, to carry a dosser on the back. Hottereau, a small dosser. Hotteu, Hottier, one that carries a dosser on his back. Hotton, the stalk of an ear of corr. Houäge, a digging, or turning up of the ground. Houäller, to yawl, or cry out aloud. Houay, w-now. Houlande. for houplande, a Sh-ds cloak, pet, or gaber∣. Houbiller une Vache, to milk a Co. Houde, a Surgons Instrument where∣with the mouth of a Wound is stitched and drawn together. Houcau, for hoyau, the French mat∣tok (a tool of husbandry.) Houët, a tenter-book. Houille, sedge, or fennegrass; also a kinde of Mineral that makes very good fires. Houische, ht. Houlle, the rolling of the waves of the Sea. Houpé, tsted, or sselled; also whooped at. Houpelu, tusted. Houper, to tust, also to whoop un∣to. Houpier, or Houppier, the thick top, or ping of a tree. Houquet, for hoquet, the hiccock; also s old. Hourd, as où est meu le hourd, where blows are walking, or thumps given. Hourdage, a fashion of walling, or covering for walls, of reeds wrought like hrdles, and daw∣bed over with loam, or clay. Hourde, a herd, or flock of wilde beasts. Hourdis, as hourd; also hurdles. Hourt, a boisterous incounter, a vio∣lent conlici. Hous, as houx. House, a drawer, or course stocking worn over a finer by Country-people. House, that bath such drawers on; also booted. Houseau, a course drawer worn o∣ver a stocking instead of a boot. Il a laissé les houseaux, he is no better than a dead man. Housée, as houseau; also an Hippo∣cras-bag, or hose to strai Hipo∣cras through; also a shower of rain. se Houser, to pull on Drawers, to draw on boots. Housleau, the Holly, or Holm-tree. Houspaillier, a Groom in a Stable. Houspillé, tagged, or fed, lugged; also , ragged, tattered. Houspillée, as houssepillée. Houspillement, a violent pulling, or tagging; a tearing of ones gar∣ments, or of one by the gar∣ments. s'Houspillr l'un l'autre, to tug, or ar one another, to towse as a dog doth another. Houssée de pluye, a shower of rain. Houssepillée, a sluttish draggle-tail, whose Gown ever sticks full of straw. Houssepailler, as houspiller. Houssepillée, a ragged slut. Houssepillement, as houspillement. Housseur, Housseuse, a sweeper. Houssiner, to swinge with a switch. Houssineux, full of switches. Houssoir, any broom tyed to the end of a long stuff, for the sweep∣ing of Chimneys, or the upper parts of dusty rooms. Housson, for houx, the Holm, or Hulver-tree. Houssoner, as houssoir. Houssu, hairy, rugged with hair. Mouton houssu, a sheep well-woolled, or of great burden. Crins houssus, thick locks of hair. Houssure de laine, a sleece, or great lock of wool. Houtarde, a bustard. Houtin, as Autin. Houzé, as housé. se Houzer, as se houser. Hoyé, tired, overtoiled; also lame, or impotent by nature. Hu, for huée, a hissing at one. Hua, a kinde of black Kite. Huard, a buzzard-like Eagle. Huau, as hua. Huaume, the helm of a ship. Hubi, lively, sprightly; also well-batled, well-amended in flesh, &c. Hubir, to make thrive. Hubit, a setting up of the bristles. Hucrie, a outing. Huge, for huhe, a kneading-trough. Hugrement, bravely, gallantly. Huguenotterie, Calvinism. Huguenottique, Huguenot-like; of, or belonging to a Huguenot. Hui, to day. Huictante, eighty, fourscore. Huilerie, a room to keep Oyl in. Huisserie, the Office of an Ʋsher, Door-keeper, or M ssenger in a Court; also the furniture or stuff of a door. Huisset, a wicket, or litle door. Huistrire, a bed of Cysters; the place wherein Oysters are got, or fished. Hullement, an howling. Huller, for hurler, to houl. Hum hum, a coughing accent, or voice. Humable, that may be supped. Humaige, as humée. Humanthin, as Bernadet. Humble; (a Subst.) a Trout-like fish. Humble-fier, meek and froward. Humblesse, humility. Humée, a broth for a sick man; al∣so as humet.
Humement, a supping, or sucking up. Humeraire, Humeral, of, or be∣longing to the shoulder. Humerie, as humement. Hume-sang, the herb Burnet. Humet, broth, pottage, candle; any liquid and supping meat; also a sup thereof. Humeter, to sup, or sip. Hume-vesne, a Suck-sist, one that lays his nose on his next fellows bum. Humeux, a notable drinker. Humier, the Occupant of a thing whereof another is the owner. Humiere, a supping, or sucking up; also the occupancy of another mans lands, &c. Humoire, a close bit, a bit without any liberty for a horse. Humoral, of humours, moist, juicy, sappy. Hunisque, espée hunisque, a kinde of Cimitar used in old time. Hupée, as huquée. s'Huper, to raise, or set up his crest; to become proud, lofty, stately. Huque, a Dutch-womans mantle. Huquée, as il n'y a qu'une huquée, you have but a little way thither. Hurlegay, throughly tipled. Huraut, a great, or full-grown wilde Boar. Hurbee, a Vine-fretter. Huré, staring, bristly, like a wilde Boars-head. Hurelais, Vine-fretters. Hurgon, red Beets. Hurque, an bulk. Hurt, as hourt. Hurte-bise, one that scuffles with the North-wind. Hurteller, to trample on with the feet. Hurter, for heurter, to knock, hit, or ran against. Hurtis, knocks, dashes, hits. Hus, the Elder-tree. Husche, for huche, a kneading-trough. Husciame, Henbane. Hustite, a Bohemian Coyn. Hussité, turned Protestant. Hustaudeau, Hutaudeau, a big cock-chick. Hutin, a brabling, or scoulding. Hutin, (Adj.) contentions. Hutinement, a brabling, or scolding. Hutiner, to scold at, to vex. Hutineux, contentious, troublesome. Hutudeau, a big cock-chick. Huvelot, up-headed, well-aped on. Huy, as hui, to day. Huyé, hooted at. Huyer, to hoot at. Huystre, for huître, an Oyster. Huze à huze, cheek by jowl. Hyaseyame, Henbane. Hybleanne, a Bee. Hydrargire, Quick-silver. Hydraulique, as voix hydraulique, the sound of running waters. Hydrie, a water-pot, or bucket to draw water with. Hydrocele, the falling down of hu∣mours into one of the stones. Hydromantie, divination by the ob∣servation of water, or by spirits appearing in it. Hydropholie, an extream fear of water. Hye, for hie, a rammer. Hyer, for hier, yesterday. Hyere, a powder made of Aloës, and other bitter Simples. Hyeuse, for yeuse, the Hlm-oak. Hygienique, health-preserving Phy∣sick. Hymenean, of, or belonging to a wedding. Hynaire, a Saker passenger. Hyoïde, os hyoide, the forked bone which is at the root of the tongue. Hypate, as hipate. Hypenemien, windy, barren, like the eggs laid by an untroddn hn. Hyperbolie, for hyperbolique, Hy∣perbolical. Hyperdulie, the highest worship, such as belongs only to God. Hypernephelisie, a contemplator of high matters among the clouds. Hypocauste, a sto, or hot-house. Hypociste, the exscency that hoots up from the root of the shrub Ci∣sts, or Hll R; also the Me∣dicinable ji tracted from it, and hardened by Draggists. Hypocriser, to dissemble, or play the hypocrite. Hypocrisement, hypocritically, dis∣semblingly. Hypogastre, the lower part of the lly, from the Navel to the hair of the privities. Hypogastrique, of, or belonging to the hypogastrum. Hypogée, a vault, or cellar arched over head. Hypogriphe, a Monster, half horse, half griffon. Hypopie, matter growing or gather∣ing in a crushed eye; also a bone under the eye. Hyposarque, a kinde of Dropsie. Hypostase, a substance; also a resi∣dence in urine flitting towards the bottom thereof. Hypothadée, given, or devoted unto God. Hyppodrom, a Course, or Running-place for horses; also a place wherein horses are managed. Hyrundelle, for hirondelle, a Swal∣low. Hyrundinier, of, or belonging to a Sow. Hysgin, a light red, or bright bay; or a kinde of purple stain made by the black-berry. Hysser, to hoise up. Hysterique, affection hysterique, the suffocation of the Matrix. Hyvernée, the Winter-season. J JA, almost, very near, already. Ja n'avienne, God forbid. Il ne viendra ja, he will not come at all. Jabler, to make the croes of a pice of cask. Jabol, a truckle, or pulley. Jacée, herb Iriity, Hearts-ease. Jacent, lying. Jachere, fallow ground, lay-land; also any earth that lies idle. Jaçoit que, though, although, not∣withstanding. Jacqué, Jacked, armed with a Jack, or Coat of Mail. Jacquelet, a Jack of the Clock-house, or the little man that strikes the quarters in a Clock. Jaqueard, a Coat, or shirt of Mail; also a great statue of wood, against which in old time young Soldiers practised to sight. Jacquemin, as Jaquelin. Jacquet, a Spunger, a Smell-feast. Jactance, a bragging, or boasting. Jactateur, a bragger, or boaster. Jactation, as Jactance; also a swing∣ing, tsing, or shaking up and down. Jacture, loss, damage; or a wrack. Jadau, a bowl, or maz. Jaet, for jayet, pt. Jagayette, a kinde of short spear. Jaglu, bastard (or ater) slower de l. Jaguette, a Pye. Jaant, as Geant. Jaibeau, a little pi or  full of water to keep fish in.
Jalaye, a Wine-measure containing 12 French pints; also a Soe, or tub. Jalet, as jallet. Jallage, as forage. Jallay, as Jalaye. Jalle, a Chilblane; also as jalaye. Jallée, as jalaye. Jallet, a little casting bowl. Jallet embrasé, a fire-ball. Are à jal∣let, a stone-bow. Jallir, Jallissant, as jaillir, jaillis∣sant in the N. D. Jallissement, a spouting up of wa∣ter. Jalousement, jealously, suspiciously. un Jamais, a very long time. Jambette, a little leg. Donner la jambette, to give a foil. Faire la jambette, a horse to go on three legs, and gracefully to shift and hold up the fourth. Jambier, of, or belonging to the leg. Jambier (a Verb) to go. Jambonnier, a seller of bacon, or gammons of bacon; also a beg∣gar. Jamboyer, to jet, or wantonly to go in and out with the legs; also to cross the legs often in dancing. Jamme, Pearl. Jan, for Jean, John; also a Cuc∣kold. Jan de blanc, a white Kite; also the Corpus Christi. Jan gipon, a coxcomb. Jancer un cheval, to stir a horse in the stable till he swart with all. Jane, a certain vessel, or measure for Vinegar, &c. Janequin, Janet, Jack. Jan-femme, an Hermaphrodite; also a Milk-sop. Jangler, to jangle, to talk saucily, or scurvily. Janglerie, a jangling, a saucy tal∣king. Jangleur, a jangler, or saucy tal∣ker. Jannet d'eau, Water-lilly, Water-rose. Jannette, Jenny. Jannin, a Wittal. Janot, Jack. Jans femme, as Jan-femme. Jans pilhommes, Gentlemen. Jappement, a barking. Japper, to bark. Japperie, a barking. Jappeur, a barker. Jaquelin, Jaqueline, Jaquelot, Jaque∣lotte, Jaquemin, Jaquemine, all diminutives of Jaques James. Jaquet, a Pilgrim to St. James of Compostella; also a flattering Smell-feast. Jaquetter, to prattle; also to flat∣ter. Jaquiers, a sort of Rebels so called, because they wore a fashion of Jac∣kets used by the Souldiers of those times. Jar, a gander. Pied de jar, the herb Goose-foot, or wild Orage. En jar, a caterwawling, or bitch-hunting. Jarbe, for gerbe, a sheaf. Jarcé, chawned. se Jarcer, to chawn. Jarceure, as jarsure. Jard, as Jar; also the first great receptacle or pond of salt-water, whereof salt is made. Jardeau, Jardereau, a codded weed that winds about Corn, and in∣tangles it. Jardinage, garden-stuff; also as Jardinement. Jardiné, dressed, as a Garden. Jardinement, a gardening, a dres∣sing of a Garden. Jardiner, for dresser un Jardin, to make a Garden, to dress it. Jardinet, a little Garden. Jare, a Jar. Jargeot, as jargot. Jargonnement, a gibridge. Jargonneur, a gibridge-monger. Jargonnois, gibridge. Jargot, a kind of course garment worn by Country-people. Jargouiller, to warble, chirp, or chatter. Jargueul, the wind-pipe of birds, whereout they warble. Jarnage, a swaggering; or a swaggerer. Jarnat, a swaggerer. Jarnigoi, the same; also a rustical blasphemy. Jarre, the name of a codded and Corn-intangling weed. Jarretade, a slash over the hams. Jarretier, Baker-legged, that goes in at the knees. Cheval jarretier, an interfeering horse. Jarrons d'une rouë, the fellows of a wheel. Jarrousses, a kind of Tares, or small Vetches. Jarrus, Starchwort, or Calves∣foot. Jarrye, the Oak-tree. Jars, a gander. Jarser, to chawn. Jarsure, a chink, or chawn; also the nib of a pen. se Jarter, to garter himself, to tye his garters. Jartier, for jartiere, a garter. Jartier (Adj.) of, belonging to, or serving for a garter. Veine jar∣tiere, the garter-vein, or ham-vein. Jasard, a chatterer, an idle tal∣ker. Jasarde, a prating gossip. Jasement, as jaserie. Jaseran, a flagon-chain; also a bracelet, or neck-lace of that chain-fashion; also a coat, or shirt of great and close-woven mail; also the hoop of a shac∣kle. Jasereau, as jasard. Jaserie, a pratling, or tittle-tattle. Jate, a bowl, a mazer. Jatte, the same; or a measure con∣taining about the Parisian pint. Jau, a Cock; also a Barbel; or a Dorce-fish. Javar, Javard, Javarre, a swelling in the hollow of the pastern of a horse. Javelier, Javeliere, a Corn-pike, or Pitchfork wherewith sheaves of corn be loaden and unloaded. Javelin, for javeline, a Javelin. Javelinier, one that useth a Jave∣lin. Javelotier, a Darter. Jaugeage, the gaging, or measuring of Casks. Javioler, to prattle. Javioleur, a prattler. Jaule, a Prison. Jaulnement, of a yellow hue. Jaulnet (Adj.) yellowish. Jaulnette, S. Peters wort. Jay, for geay, a Jay. Jayon, the Jay. Jazer, for Jaser, to prate. Jazeran, as jaseran. Jazerane, à la jazerane, of a flagon∣chain fashion. Ibice, a wild beast like a Goat, li∣ving amongst the snowy tops of mountains. Icelui, he. Icelle, she. Ichneumon, the Egyptian Rat. Ichoreux, whayish, waterish. Ichthiomantie, divination by fish. Ichthiophagie, fish-eating. Icosaëdre, one of the five regular bodies in Geometry. Icosimité, as Lychnocosimité. Ictere, the yellow Jaundies. Icterique, sick of the yellow Jaun∣dies.
Ictide, as belette ictide, an Otter, or water-Weesel. Ideal, for ideel, imaginary, onely in the fancy. Idiotisme, simplicity, sottishness; also propriety in a language. Idoine, fit, proper, convenient. Idoinieté, aptness, fitness, conveni∣ency. Jean-Almy, the name of an ap∣ple. Jecoraire, of, or belonging to the Liver. Jectée, a cast, throw, or fling. Jectement, a casting, throwing, or flinging. Jecteur, a caster, thrower, or flin∣ger. Jectice, terre jectice, earth newly cast up out of a ditch, or fur∣row. Jectigation des espaules, a wag∣ging, or shrugging of the Shoul∣ders. Jectisse, as jectice. Jectonner, to shoot, to put forth twigs. Jenin, as Cocu jenin, an arrant Cuckold. Jens, an herb like Rosemary. Jercer, as jarcer. Jeré, as geré. Jerver, to be loth. Jessemin, for jasmin, Jasmin. Jesuïtains, an Order of white Fri∣ars, wearing hoods on their heads like women, and shaving their beards continually. Jet, Jette, Jet. Jettien, made of Jet. Jettonner, as jectonner. Jeunastre. somewhat young. Jeunastrer, to behave himself like a young man. Jeunement, youthfully, youth-like. Jeunet, somewhat young. Jeuneux, much fasting. Jeuse, for yeuse, the Holm-oak. Ignave, lazie, dull. Igné, burning, or firy; also fired, burned. Ignise, a burning, or firing. Ignition, the same. Ignoramment, ignorantly. Iky, for ici, here. Ila, as illec. Iles, the flanks, or the sides of the lower part of the belly. Iliade de maux, as many mischiefs as befel the Trojans at the siege and destruction of their City. Ilias, the same. Ilicine, as Chelydre. Illation, inference, or conclusi∣on. Illec, there, thither. D'illec, thence, from thence. Illegalité, illegality. Illiteré, illiterate, ignorant. Illimité, boundless, unlimited. Illiné, softly anointed, gently rubbed on. Illiner, to anoint softly, to rub on gently. Illiquide, obscure, doubtful. Illudé, deluded, mocked. Illuder, to delude, to mock. Illuminateur, an illuminater, or en∣lightener. Illusoire, illuding; also vain, idle, to no purpose at all. Illustrateur, an Illustrator. Illuvion, as alluvion; also fil∣thiness, nastiness, unclean∣ness. Imager, (Adj.) of, or belonging to Images; adorned, or furnished with Images. Imager, for Imagier, a maker, or seller of Images. Imagette, a little Image. Imbecille, weak. Imbecillement, weakly. Imberbe, beardless. Imbibé, soaked, or drunk in. Imblessable, not to be wounded. Imbriago, a most venomous kinde of the Sea-hare; also the beardless Sea-barbel, or Sore-mullet. Imbrocation, as Embrocation. Imbuvable, unfit to be drunk of. Imitatif, imitating; or done by imi∣tation. Immangeable, unfit to be eaten. Immanité, inhumanity, outragious∣ness. Immariable, unmarriable, past mar∣riage. Immedicable, uurable. Immeuble, for immobile, unmova∣ble. Immiscé, intermeddled with. s'Immiscer, to intermeddle with. Immisericorde, unmercifulness. Immisericordieusement, unmerci∣fully. Immisericordieux, unmerciful. Immixte, unmix'd. Immobilaire, unmovable. Immondicité, uncleanness. Immortalisation, an immortalizing, or immortalization. Immortifié, unmortifi'd, too much addicted to his pleasures. Immortification, the state of one that is unmortifi'd. Immune, free, or exempted from. Immutable, for immuable, unchan∣geable. Impact, hard fastened. Impacter, as empacter. Impar, odde, uneven. Impartir, to impart, to make parta∣ker of. Impatronisé, impatronized. Impatroniser, to give possession. Impendent, imminent, near at hand. Impenses, costs, charges, expen∣ces. Imperatoire, Masterwort. Imperer, to rule, command, or do∣mineer. Imperfaict, for Imparfait, imper∣fect. Imperforation, a closing, or shutting up, for want of boring or pier∣cing. Impericon, St. Johnswort. Imperiosité, stateliness, imperiousness. Imperissable, Imperissible, unperish∣able, which cannot miscarry. Imperit, unskilful. Imperitement, unskilfully. Impersonnellement, impersonally. Imperspirable, not to be breathed in∣to, not to be pierced with air. Impetigine, a dry itching scab. Impetrable, obtainable upon re∣quest. Impetration, an obtaining by re∣quest. Impetré, obtained by request. Impetrer, to obtain by request. Impiement, impiously. Impiteux, pitiless, without mercy. Implantation, an Implantation. Implanter, to implant. Implication, Implicité, implication. Implorateur, an implorer; an hum∣ble and earnest intreater. Imployable, inflexible. Impoli, unpolished. Impollu, unpolluted, undefiled. Importable, not to be born. Importamment, importantly, forci∣bly. Importeux, without Port or Har∣bour. Impossibiliter, to make impossi∣ble. Impost de sa personne, impotent, un∣weldy. Imposte, the springer of an arched Gate; the moulding that bears the arch. Impotence, impotency, weakness. Impourveu, as improuveu. Impreciable, unvaluable.
Impregnation, a getting with young, a conceiving. Impremedité, unpremeditated. Imprescriptible, without the com∣pass of prescription, which by no length of time can be alienated or lost. Imprestance, prest, or imprest money, received, and to be imployed for a∣nother. Imprevoyance, improvidence. Improbable, improbable. Impropere, an exprobration, upbrai∣ding, or twitting in the teeth; a reproach, or imputation; also a nickname, or disgraceful title. Improperer, to exprobrate, upbraid, or lay in ones dish; to nickname, or miscal. Improuveu, unprovided for, unlook∣ed for. A l'improuveu, suddenly, unawares. Impugnance, for impugnation, an impugning, resisting, or withstan∣ding. Impuissamment, impotently. Impulsé, urged, compelled. Impulser, to urge, to compel. Impulseur, an urger, a compel∣ler. Impuniment, without punishment. Impurité, for impureté, impuri∣ty. Imputeur, one that puts things upon others. Inabordable, unaccessible. Inactionable, unsuable. Inadmissible, unallowable. Inadvertamment, unadvisedly, heed∣lesly. Inaguerri, grown warlike. Inamendable, unamendable. Inamollissable, not to be soften∣ed. Inanité, inanity, emptiness. Inanition, as inanité; also, an em∣ptying. Inapercevance, dulness, stupidity. Inarcature du col, the bowing of the neck. Inassociable, unsociable. Ination, as inanité. Inaudite, unheard of. Inauguré, consecrated, dedica∣ted. Incagant, beraying, disgracing. Incaguer, to beray; also to disgrace. Incant, for encan, an outcry of goods. Incaquer, as incaguer. Incarnatif, flesh-breeding. Incastré, inclosed in a Castle. Incentriquer, to place within a center. Inceratif, cleaving, or sticking un∣to. Inceré, for inferé, inserted. Incertain, (Subst.) Incertaineté, an uncertainty. Incessible, undeterminable. Incession, a pace, gate, or going; also a hot bath for the lower parts of the belly. Incidemment, incidently, by chance. Incineration, a reducing, or bur∣ning unto ashes. Incis, a Rock, or hard ground, cut to give passage to a spring. Incisif, making an incision. Incisoires, the four Fore-teeth. Incitant, for incitateur, an inciter, or inticer. Incitement, an inciting, or incita∣tion. Inclement, severe, cruel. Inclinant, inclining, disposed. Incliné, inclined, bent unto. Incliner, to incline. Inclite, famous, renowned. Incolumité, safety. Incommendable, discommendable. Incommensurable, unmeasurable. Incommesurable, the same; or not to be measured by one and the same measure. Incommuable, immutable, unchan∣geable. Incommun, not common. Incommutable, as incommuable. Incongelable, not to be congealed. Incongrue, incongruous, absurd. Inconsiderant, inconsiderate. Inconsumptible, unconsumable. Incontaminé, undefiled, unspot∣ted. Incontinemment, incontinently, un∣chastly, immoderately. Inconvenable, improper, unfit, unbe∣coming. Inconvenance, an unfitness. Inconvenient, (Adj.) as inconve∣nable. Incornifustibuler, to plod upon, to beat the brains about. Incorrompable, not to be corrupted, seduced, or won by gifts, &c. Incrasser, to thicken, to make thick. Incredible, for incroyable, incredi∣ble. Incrediblement, incredibly. Increpation, a reproof. Increpé, reproved. Increper, to reprove. Incrustation, a pargetting, or rough-casting; a crustiness or ruggedness. Incrusté, pargetted, or rough-cast; grown to a scab, or crustiness. Incruster, to parget, or rough-cast; to set a scab, or crust on; to make rugged and thick, as a crust. Incuisable, not to be sodden. Inculpé, charged with, or guilty of; also blameless, innocent. Incurie, carelesness, negligence. Incurieusement, plainly, after a homely manner. Incuriosité, plainness, unaffectati∣on. Incurrir, to incur. Indagateur, a diligent searcher. Indague, dishonest, base, unwor∣thy. Indalgos, a Gentleman. Indanniser, for indamniser, to save harmless, to indemni∣sie. Indar, a Turkie-cock. Indé, Indico, light blue. Indecentement, undecently, unhand∣somely. Indecision, an undecision, a doubt∣ful or undetermined state of things. Indecrotable, not to be made clean. Indefatigable, indefatigable. Indegene, home-bred; born, or growing within the same Territo∣ry. Indeleble, for indelebile, indeli∣ble, or uneffaceable. Indemné, indemnifi'd. Deniers in∣demnez, money which comes in clear to the purse. Indemne, harmless, cleared of all damage. Indevidable, unwindable. Indevinable, not to be guessed at. Indiciblement, unspeakably. Indict, denounced, commanded, ap∣pointed by authority. Indicte, an Indiction, or Command. Indigestible, not to be digested. Indiguer, for indiquer, to shew. Indiligent, negligent, careless. Indire, to publish, denounce, or de∣clare. Indispos, for indispose, indisposed, not well. Indissolu, undissolved. Indition, a numbring of time, or years; also a mark, signe, or to∣ken. Individuité, individuity. Indoleance, want of sense in pain; no feeling of sorrow, no apprehen∣sion of grief. Indon, a Turkie-cock, or a young Turkey. Indubitamment, undoubtedly. Induce, a truce, or cessation of Arms;
also a Vacation, or a cessation from proceeding in a suit for a certain time agreed on by both parties. Induëment, for indeuëment, un∣lawfully. Indulgentieux, full of indulgence. Indult, a pardon of indulgence, the Pope's Bull for that purpose. Indult, (Adj.) young, not yet of age. Indultaire, one that hath an Indul∣gence or Pardon from the Pope. s'Industrier, to labour, endeavour, or bestir himself, to make himself fit for some imployment. Ine, for une, one. Inecroulable, as inescroulable. Ineffaceable, or Ineffaçable, inde∣lible, which no time nor violence can wear out. Ineffroyable, not to be frighted, or scared. Ineloquent, not eloquent. Inepte, unapt, unseasonable; also idle, or vain. Ineptement, unaptly, unseasonably, idly. Ineptie, Ineptitude, unaptness, un∣seasonableness; idleness, or foppery. Inequalité, for inegalité, disparity, or disproportion. Inescroulable, Inexcroulable, un∣shakable. Inexcusablement, without excuse. Inexecuté, unexecuted, unperformed. Inexpugnable, impregnable. Inexterminable, not to be cast out, or destroyed. Inextinguible, unquenchable. Inextricable, inextricable. Infaict, or Infaicté, for infecté, in∣fected. Infaicter, Infaire, to infect. Infamé, defamed, discredited. Infamement, infamously. Infamer, to defame, discredit, or disgrace. Infameté, disgrace, or discredit. Infanticide, Child-murthering. Infantile, Infantin, for enfantin, childish. Infauste, ominous, unfortunate. Infectioner, for infecter, to infect, or fill with infection. Infeodation, Infeodé, Infeoder. See Infeudation, Infeudé, Infeu∣der in the N. D. Infiable, not to be trusted to. Infibulation, a buckling, or clasping together. Inficiation, a denial. Infiguré, figured, marked or noted with a figure. Infiniement, for infiniment, infinite∣ly. Infinitude, an infinite number. Infirmatif, weakening; also disa∣nulling, or disallowing. Infirmer, to weaken; also to disa∣nul, or to disallow. Inflammable, apt to flame. Inslation, an inflation, a windy swelling, or puffing up. Infleschissable, inflexible. Inflictif, inflicting, apt to inflict. Insoliature, Leaf-work, in Carving, &c. Insondre, to infuse; also to sleep. Inforçable, impregnable. Informe, shapeless, ill-favoured. Infortiat, one of the three Volumes of the Pandects. Infracteur, an infringer, violater, breaker of. Infraction, Infracture, infringement, violation, breach. Infrangible, not to be broken. Infrasqué, intricated, pestered, in∣tangled. Infrasquer, to intricate, pester, in∣tangle; also to feed with vain hopes. Ingambé, light-legged, swift of foot. Ingargouillat, the cross point in dan∣cing. Ingenier, to beat his brains about a thing. Ingenieux, for Ingenieur, an Engi∣neer. Ingeniosité, ingeniousness. Ingenue, for ingenu, ingenuous. Ingenuement, for ingenument, in∣genuously. Inglorieux, inglorious. Ingravé, for engravé, ingraven. Ingraver, to ingrave. Inguerdonné, unrecompenced. Inguerissable, uncurable. Inguine, the Groin. Ingurgité, swallowed in. Ingurgiter, to swallow in. Inhabilement, unably, weakly, un∣handsomely, unfitly, sottishly. Inhabilitation, a disabling. Inhabilité, (Part.) disabled, made unable. Inhabilitement, a disabling. Inhabiliter, to disable, to make un∣able Inhabiter, to inhabit, reside, or dwell in. Inhabitué, unaccustomed. Inhibé, forbidden; hindred. Inhiber, to forbid, to hinder. Inhonneste, dishonest. Inhonestement, dishonestly. Inhumation, a burying, an interring. Inian, by St. John (a childish oath.) Inidoine, unfit. Injectement, an injection, a casting in or upon. Inimaginable, unconceivable. Injurieur, an injurer, a wronger. Inné, innate, born, or bred in. Innocenter, to whip, or lash, as they do in France on Childermas or Innocents day, all such whose Breech they may easily come at. Innomme, as Contract innomme, an equal exchange of money, and land given onely for land. Innumerable, innumerable. Innumerablement, innumerably. Innumerableté, innumerableness. Inobedience, disobedience. Inobedient, disobedient. Inoffensible, not to be hurt. Inofficieux, unserviceable, unkinde; also unrespectful. Inofficiosité, want of due respect. Querelle d' Inofficiosité, a suit commenced by Orphans, &c. whose Parents have given from them what was their due. Inopie, want, scarcity, need. Inquant, the place where things are sold by Outcry. Droict d' In∣quant, five in the hundred due unto the King, upon things sold by Outcry, in some parts of Pro∣vence. Inquanter, to sell, or pass away at an Outcry. Inquietation, a disquieting, vex∣ing, molesting, or troubling. Inquietement, unquietly. Inquieteur, a disquieter, or trou∣bler. Inquilin, a Tenant, Lodger, or In∣mate. Inracinable, which will not take root. Insail, the Rudder, or Stern of a ship. Insalubre, unhealthful, unwholesom, noisom. Insalubrité, unhealthfulness, unwhole∣somness, infection. Insatiabilité, or Insatiableté, unsa∣tiableness. Insciemment, unwittingly, igno∣rantly. Inscience, ignorance, want of know∣ledge. Inscophié, Inscrophié, as cheveux inscrophiez, hair turned up after the nearest manner. Insculpé, ingraven.
Insculper, to ingrave. Insectable, insectible, not to be cut, or divided. Insidiation, treachery, deceitfulness; a laying in wait for; a laying of snares. Insidieux, treacherous, deceitful, lying in wait for. Insigne, for enseigne, a sign. Insimulé, accused of, charged with. Insipience, indiscretion, sottishness, dotage. Insipient, indiscreet, sottish, doting. Insolation, a sunning, a setting or laying open in the Sun. Insolide, unsolid, loose, or weak. Insolidement, unsolidly, weakly; also throughly, wholly, for the whole. Insolite, strange, unused, unaccu∣stomed. Insolu, unpaid, undischarged, unde∣frayed. Insperé, unhoped for. Insperément, beyond all hope. Inspersé, inspersed, sprinkled, or cast upon. Instable, unstable, unsteady. Instablement, unsteadily. Instauration, instauration, a renew∣ing, or repairing. Instauré, restored, renewed, or re∣paired. Instaurer, to restore, renew, or repair. Instigué, instigated, inticed, ur∣ged. Instiguer, to instigate, intice, or urge. Institutaire, a Title of the Empe∣rour Justinian, who writ the In∣stitutes of the Civil Law. Institute, for Instituts, Justinian's Book of Institutes. Instructive, for instruction, instru∣ction. Instruer, for instruire, to instruct. Instruisable, fit to be instructed. Instrumenter, to draw & ingross an Instrument, Conveyance, Evidence. Instrumentier, a certain Vine-de∣vouring Vermine. Insuave, unsweet, unpleasant. Insubstantiel, unsubstantial; light, idle, vain. Insulain, an Islander. Insult, for insulte, an insult. Insuperable, insuperable. Insurger, to rise up against; to la∣bour earnestly. Insuyvre, to pursue. Intarissable, not to be dryed up. Integralité, wholeness. Integré, integrated, perfected, made whole. Intelligencier, an Intelligence-giver. Intemperé, intemperate, immoderate. Intemperément, for intemperam∣ment, intemperately, immoderately. Intempestif, intempestive, untimely, unseasonable; also disordered, un∣reasonable; also unlucky. Intempestivement, unseasonably; un∣reasonably, out of course; unluckily. Intendit, a principal deposition; writings, or books, wherein the chief or main points of a Suit are contained. Intenteur, an intender, an attem∣pter; also the beginner of a Suit. Interbasté, basted, or quilted be∣tween. Intercalation, a setting of an odd thing between even ones. Interclaire, as Intercalaire in the N. D. Intercostal, between the ribs. Interject, an Interposition, a speech put in, a word cast between. Interiné, Interiner, as Enteriné, Enteriner in the N. D. Interlocation, an interposition. Interloquer, to interpose some speech, or speak in another mans tale; also to delay a Cause by some new allegation; or to stay the whole for a while, by ending only some part thereof. Interlunaire, the season between the going out of the old, and coming in of the new Moon. Intermediat, in the middle or inter∣medium, that is, between two. Intermettre, to put between; also to leave off for a time. Interminant, boundless. Interminer, to prescribe. Intermis, intermitted, discontinued. Intermittant, intermitting, discon∣tinuing. Internecion, an universal slaughter. Internement, internally, inwardly. Interossel, between the bones. Interpellateur, an interrupter, or di∣sturber; a saitor, or intercessor. Interpellation, an interruption, or disturbance; a summons; a re∣quest, suit, or intercession. Interpolation, a polishing, scowring, furbishing, new-dressing of things. Interposement, interposition. Interpretateur, an Interpreter, or Expositor. Interrogat, a questioning, or exa∣mining. Interrogué, Interroguer, as Inter∣rogé, Interroger in the N. D. Interroy, a Regent, or Protector, that governs a State from the death or deposition of one Prince, to the entrance or election of an∣other. Intersigne, a sign, or token of. Intervallé, put in distances, done by pauses. Interversion, a wrongful turning, or conveying away of; a pur∣loyning, or deceiving; also a tur∣ning upside down. Interverti, interverted, converted or turned the wrong way; pur∣loyned; deceived; overturned. Intervertir, to intervert, convey or turn the wrong way; to purloyn, or deceive; to overthrow, or turn upside down. Intestinal, of, or belonging to the Intestines. Intheriner, as Enteriner in the N. D. Inthimé, for intimé, adjourned to an appeal. Inthronization, an inthroning, or inthronization. Inthronizé, inthronized, placed in a Throne. Inthronizer, to inthronize, or place in a Throne. Intimant, an Appealant, one that cites his Adversary upon an Ap∣peal. Intirable, not to be drawn, or pulled out. Intitulation, an intitulation, deno∣mination, description. Intonation, a rumbling, or thunder∣ing. Intonation de gare & ser∣re, the sounding of Drum or Trumpet, whereby Souldiers are warned to stand close, and look to themselves. Intouchable, not to be touched. Intrade, revenue, rent, profit coming in. Intraictable, for intractable, intra∣ctable, unruly. Intrans, senior Sophisters, such as prepare themselves to commence Batchelors. s'Intregenter, as s'Entregenter. Intrication, an intrication, pester∣ing, or insnaring. Intrinqué, Intrinquément, Intrin∣quer, as Intriqué, Intriquément, Intriquer. Intrinseque, intrinsecal, inward. Intrinsequement, intrinsecally, in∣wardly. Intrique, a Labyrinth, or Maze. Intriqué, intricated, intangled, per∣plexed. Intriquément, intricately.
Intriquer, to intricate, entangle, or perplex. Intronisation, intronisé, introniser, as Inthronization, inthronizé, inthronizer. Intrus, intruded, thrust into. Intrusion, intrusion. Intruz, an Intruder, an Ʋsurper of the possession of a vacant thing. Intuitif, which is, or may be seen into. Intumescence, a swelling. Invadé, invaded. Invader, to invade. Invasible, invasible. Inventeresse, for Inventrice, an In∣ventrix. Inventif, inventive, full of devises. Inventorizer, for inventorier, to take an Inventory of. Invers, inverted, inside outward, upside down. Investison, Investiture. s'Inveterer, to inveterate, or grow old; to become rooted, or come to a habit by custom. Invigilance, invigilancy, sleepiness, or laziness. Inviolableté, inviolableness. Inviolé, inviolate, sound, uncor∣rupted, constant, faithful, true. Invitement, an invitation. Involuere, a cover. Involver, to involve; also to in∣tangle. Involution, an involution; also an intangling. Involution de proces, the perplexing of a Cause. Invoqueur, an invoker. Invulnerable, invulnerable. Jo, for moi, I. Joannes, a Pedant. Joannitiques, an Order of Monks wearing red Habits, and the re∣presentation of a Challe in their breasts. Jobelin, a Sot, a Coxcomb. Jocondale, a Dollar. Jocquer, to stop, or stand still (as a horse, or cart, in the way.) Jodelle, a Sea-coot. Joeudi, for Jeudi, Thursday. Joffu, plump in the face. Jointe, a joint, a sam. Jointée, a joynt, or double handful of, as much as can be held within both hands together. Joletrin, a Youngster, or young Gal∣lant. Jolice, a soft and tender stone, which in frosty weather falls unto dust. Joliement, for joliment, prettily, handsomly, neatly. Jolier, for Geoler, a Gaoler. Joliet, handsome, pretty, spruce. Jolieté, Joliveté, handsomness, pret∣tiness; also jollity. Jombarbe, for joubarbe, Houseleek. Joncade, a spoon-meat (made of cream, rose-water, and sugar.) Jonchement, a strewing with, or making of rushes; also a decei∣ving, or beguiling. Joncheur, a strewer of rushes, a worker of things with rushes; also a deceiver, a dissembler. Jonchu, full of rushes. Jong, for jonc, rush, bulrush. Jongler, to juggle; also to play the Poet. Jongleries, juggling tricks; also old Poetical inventions. Jongleur, a Juggler; also a Rimer, or Poet. Jonne, for jeune, young. Joquetter, to leacher; or to line, as a dog doth a bitch. Jorroise, a Horse-plum. Josmin, for jasmin, jasmin. Jotte, Beets. Jotteux, clammy. Jou, for joug, a yoke. Jou, for moi, me. Et jou mot, for my part, I will not speak one word. Jouarre, an old Rimer, or Ballad-maker, a maker of Interludes for Children and Country-folks to act. Jouärt, a windgal in the leg of a horse. Joudarde, a Sea-coot. Joüée, the whole cheek, extending from the eye-brow to the chin; al∣so a box on the ear. Jougneur, a younger Brother. Jouelle, a yoak. Jouëlles, yoaked or arched Vines, Vines so underpropped that one may go under the middle of them. Jouëresse, a woman-gamester. Joueté, youth. Joufflu, as joffu. Jougal, as l'os jougal, the end, or outward part of the cheek-bone towards the ear. Jougler, Jougleur, as jongler, jon∣gleur. Jovial, Jovien, sanguine, born un∣der the Planet Jupiter. Jouigleur, as Jongleur. Jouncher, for joncher, to strew. Journal, (Adj.) daily, done in (or belonging to) the day. Journalier, (Subst.) a journey-man, or a day-labourer; also a poyso∣nous herb, which being eaten of, kills within a day. Journau, Journeu, as Journeau in the N. D. Journieur, a daily work. Jouste, for proche, near, hard by. Jousteux, that loves to just. Jouvence, for jeunesse, youth. Jouvenceau, Jouvencel, a youth, or young lad. Jouxte, as jouste. Jouaulerie, the trade of jewelling. Joyaulier, for Joyalier, a Jewel∣ler. Joyeuseté, joyfulness. Iracond, cholerick, fretful. Ire, anger, wrath. Iré, angry. Ireusement, angrily. Ireux, as iracond. Iris, the Rain-bow; also a flower-de luce. Irrachetable, unredeemable. Irradiation, irradiation, a shining upon. Irraisonnable, unreasonable. Irrecevable, unreceivable. Irrecuperable, unrecoverable. Irrefragable, unrevocable. Irreligieuseté, irreligion. Irreligieux, irreligious. Irremarquable, not to be remarked. Irremeable, from which one cannot go back. Irremediablement, without remedy. Irremittent, continual, not ceasing. Irreprouvable, unblamable. Irrequiet, restless, unquiet, turbulent. Irrespectueux, rude, or unrespectful. Irresveillable, not to be awaked. Irreveland, not to be revealed. Irreverent, unreverent. Irrogé, imposed, injoyned; laid, or set upon. Isars, the wilde Goats, of whose skins Shamois-leather is made. Ischie, the Sciatica, or Hip-gout. Ischine, the back-bone. Ischion, the huckle (or hip-) bone. Isciatique, troubled with the Scia∣tica, pained in the hips. Islaye, a willow-grove; also a great bundle or quantity of Osier-twigs. Islette, a little Island. Isleux, full of Islands. Islois, an Islander. Isnel, quick, active, nimble. Isnellement, quickly, actively, nim∣bly. Isope, Hyssop. Isopleure, a triangle, or other Fi∣gure, whereof all the sides be e∣qual. Issant, as Timon in the N. D. Issant, (Adj.) going, issuing forth.
Issir, to issue, to go out. Istau, for tel, such a one. Iste-miste, as parler en iste-miste, speak finely. Istiomené, as Estiomené. Italianizer, or Italiennizer, to do like an Italian. Ithiobole, a swallower of bits, or morsels. Ithyphalle, a standing up. Jubilation, exultation. Jucheoir, Juchoir, a roust. Jucondale, a Dller. Judiciellement, judicially, accor∣ding to the law. Juene, for jeune, young. Jugeolle, as Jugeoline in the N.D. Jugere, a Roman furlong, 240 foot long and 120 broad. Jugerie, a Court, or Seat of Justice; also the Jurisdiction, Liberties, Territory, or Precincts of a Town. Juglande, a Wall-nut. Juglaire, of, or belonging to the throat. Juillet rosat, a Syrrup made with Rose-water and Sugar. Jule, a small worm. Jumelet, a young, or little twin. Junjubier, for jujubier, a Jujube-tree. Junonique, belonging to Juno. Juoil, a white and transparent fish, no bigger than a mans finger. Ivoirin, of (or like) Ivory. Jupin, Jupiter. Jupinesque, Jupiter-like. Jupper, to showt, or cry out aloud. Jurande, an oath, or deposition. Juratoire, swearing, or to be sworn. Jurat, a Sheriff. Juraye, for yvroie, Darnel. Ivreson, the act of drunkenness. Juridiciant, a Judge, or Magi∣strate. Juridicié, a Party, or Client, one that is in law. Juron, an oath. Juroye, Darnel. Jus (Adv.) down, to the ground. Mettre jus la saye, to lay down his coat. Juscle, a Cackerel. Jusier, the gifirn of a bird. Just, for jus, juice. Justicement, the effect, or execution of Justice, or of Jurisdiction. Justiciaire, of, or belonging to Ju∣stice, or Jurisdiction. Justicier (a Verb) to iudge, or have jurisdiction over; to punish, to execute the acts or appointments of Justice. Jusvert, Green-sauce. Juveignerie, youngership, the condi∣tion, estate, or title of a younger brother. Juveigneur, a younger brother. Juveigneurle, Juveigneurerie, as Juveignerie. Juvenile, young, youthful, childish. Juvenilement, youthfully, childish∣ly. K KAlendrier, for Calendrier, a Calendar, an Almanack. Kali, Glasswort, Saltwort, Crab∣grass. Karabe, the best yellow Amber. Karat, as Carat. Karesme, for Carême, Lent. Karobbe, Karoble, a Carob-seed; also the 24 part of a grain. Kebule, Kebus, the biggest kind of the Mirabolan-plum. Kedusudure, the land-Adder. Keratoïde, as tunique Keratoïde, the horny tunicle of the eye. Kermes, Scarlet-berries, the seed of the Scarlet-oak. Kesudure, as Kedusudure. Ketre, Tar. Kyriele, Kyrielles, a multitude; also a mighty coil, or noise. Kyst, a membrane within the body, containing superfluous humours. L LAbeche, a South-west wind. Labeurer, for labourer, to work, to labour. Labie, a lip. Labier, of, or belonging to a lip. Labile, fleeting, unstable, uncertain. Laboration, a labouring, working, or toiling. Labordean, an Haberdine. Labour, Tillage, Husbandry. Labouret, Shepherds purse, Case∣weed. Labrusque, the wild Vine. Labyrinthé, intricated, made as a Labyrinth, or Maze. Labyrinther, to intricate, to make a Labyrinth or Maze, or something like it. Labyrintheux, most intricate, jull of windings and turnings. Laceration, a tearing, or mangling. Laceré, torn, mangled. Lacerer, to tear, or to mangle. Lacert, a Lizard; also the Viver, or less Sea-Dragon. Lacerte, a fleshy muscle. Lachrymal, weeping, bewailing. Laconiquement, shortly, or pithily in speech; strictly, or sparingly in life. Laconiser, to speak short and pithi∣ly, to live strictly or sparingly. Lacquay, for Laquais, a Foot-boy. Lacre, a kind of hard wax. Lactifiant, Lactifique, milk-bree∣ding. Lacunaire, the main beam of a house being somewhat arched; also an arched cieling, or floor of boards. Lacune, a puddle, pit, or ditch of standing water; also a sen, marsh, or waterish ground. Lacustre, of, or belonging to a Lake. Ladrige, Leprosie. Ladronnerie, a den of Thieves. Lagagne, Corn-rose, red Poppy. Lai, bredth of cloth. Laictée, a litter of whelps. Laictence, for laitance, the milt, or soft roe of fishes. Laictier, milkie, full of milk, milk-yielding, made of milk. L'herbe laictiere, Wolves milk. Vache laictiere, a milch-Cow. Laictifique, milk-making, milk-yielding. Laidange, a reviling, railing, or defamation; an hainous imputa∣tion. Laidanger, to revile, rail, or de∣fame. Laidangeux, reproachful, reviling, opprobrious. Laideron, somewhat ugly. Laidoyer, as laidanger. Laignie, wood. Laignier, a wood-yard, or wood-pile. Laigs, Legacies. Laine-facture, a spinning, carding, or working of wool; clothing. Laineux, woolly, full of wool. Mar∣cher avec des pieds laineux, to go softly, to tread gingerly. Lairre, a thief. Laisarde, for laisard, a Lizard. Laisardin, Lizard-like; of, or be∣longing to a Lizard. Laische, as lesche. Laisse, as lesse in the N. D. Laist, the right side of the cloth. Laitisse, a kind of whitish grey fur. Laittage, the ballast of a ship. Laive, a kind of tille.
Laiz, a Legacy; also the increase that a River yields to a Lord by an Island or Hoult growing with∣in it; also rows of bushes or shrubs marked out in a Copse or Ʋnder∣wood. Laize, for laise, the breadth of cloth. Laize de cuir, a thong of leather. A la grande laize, amply, fully, or in full measure. Lamaneur, the Pilot of a Ship. Lambdoïde, as Commissure lamb∣doïde, a certain joynt or seam in the hinder part of the scull. Lambeliner, to deceive, to delude, to bring into a fools Paradise. Lambin, the great Humble-bee; al∣so a clouterly fellow. Lambiqué, distilled. Lambiquer, to distil. Lambourde, a Summer-tree, full of mortaises for the ends of Joysts to lie in. se Lambriquer le cerveau, to beat his brains about something. Lambrissage, Lambrissement, a wainscotting, or feeling; also an imbowing, or frettizing in wain∣scot. Lambrun, Wainscot, feeling. Lambrunche, for lambruche, the wild Grape-bearing Vine. Lambrunchement, Wainscot, or wainscotting. Lambrusque, as lambrunche. Lamen, lamentation. Lamibaudichon, a Tale of a Tub, or of a rosted horse. Lamie, the Breaknet-fish. Lamine, a thin plate of metal, a sword-blade, a shingle, or state, a thin plank or board, a brasen-tomb, a corslet made of rib-like joynts to move with the body. Lampas, Lampast, the lampas, or swelling, in a horses mouth. Lampereau, the name of a black vine. Lamperon, a little lamp. Lampeux, full of lamps; of, or be∣longing to a lamp. Lampier, a branch for a lamp. Lampiride, a gloe-worm. Lamponner, to dally or play the fool with. Lamponniers, an idle companion. Lampourde, the great bur. Lamprillon, Lamproyon, a little lamprey. Lampsane, Lampsans, dock-cresses. Lampugos, a kind of Lobsters. Lampugue, the name of a sea-fish. Lanage, woollage, the trade of wool. Lane, a stroke in swimming; also a space or interval. Lançade, a throw, or fling. Lanceman, ones Country-man. Lancement, the same; also a throw∣ing, or flinging; also a rowsing, or thrusting up a Deer. Lanceole, Lanceolette, for lancelée, rib-wort. Lanceron, a Jack a Pickerel that's about a foot long. Lanceur, a hurler, darter, thrower. Lanci, the squinzy, also a kind of stitch, or pain like a stitch. Lanciner, to prick, strike, or thrust into; also to tear, wast, or con∣sume. Lancy, as lanci. Landie, the dew-lap in a womans privities. Landie deschiquetée, an over-ridden Hackney, or Har∣lot. Landits, as lendits. Landore, a rude clown; a poor sneaksby. Landrivel, the lantern of a ship. Landyer, to cloy, to trouble, or be tedious unto. Lanfrelucher, to lecher. Langager, to chat, tattle, or prattle. Langager, Langageur, Langagier, a pratler. Langart, for languard, a pratler. Langager, to discourse, or hold chat with; also to worm, or search the root of the tongue of an hog, &c. Langayerie, the worming of hogs, &c. Langayeur, a great talker, also an Officer that searches the tongues of Market-hogs, therein to discern whether they be sound or not. Lange, a kind of sea-bird, which diving into the belly of a Whale, feeds on his heart. Langeots, little swath-bands, or clouts of wool for little children. Langoureusement, languishingly, droopingly. Langoureux, languishing, drooping, pining. Langoustin, a great Prawn. Langoyer, to languish, or pine away. Langrole, the Ask, or small lizard that haunts old and ill-kept hou∣ses. Langroust, the sea-Crevice. Languagier, for languard, a great talker. Languarde, a tatling housewise. Languayeur, as langayeur. Languisson, languishment. Lanice, of, or belonging to wool. Lanifice, wool-work, cloth work∣ing. Lanifique, wool-breeding. Lanisse, as lanice. Lanoy, for lanier, a Lanner. Lanstringue, drink Countryman. Lantagine, a kind of laurel, or bay∣tree, whose leaf yields no manner of smell. Lantane, the waysaring tree. Lante, a kind of spider. Lantenaires, Laniers. Lanternerie, loytering. Lanterne∣rie de cervelle, trouble, or in∣toxication of the brain. Lanugineux, cottony, downy, mossy; soft as cotton, or wool; also co∣vered with soft and short hair, down, or wool. Lanuleux, wolly, as soft as wool. Lanzon, a Pike, or Pickerel. Lapace, the ordinary, or sharp-pointed Dock. Lapas, patience, Monks rhubarb. Lapes, fiery ejaculations in the ayr. Lapidement, a stoning. Lapideur, a stoner. Lapifidié, Lapifié, turned into a stone, made (or become) stony. Se Lapifier, to be turned into a stone. Lappe, a Bur. Lapreau, for lapereau, a young rab∣bet. Laqs de tems, a lapse (or course) of time. Laqs, a snare. Laqs courant, a run∣ning knot. Laquesenée, a mans yard. Lar, a mans chief house. Lardasse, a stick, thrust, or great prick. Lardier, a tub to keep lard or ba∣con in; also a board to lay it salted on; also a slovenly fat fel∣low. Lardier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to lard. Lardonnement, a smart jesting. Lardonner, to jest smartly. Lardonneur, a smart jester. Lareze, for larege, the Larch, or Larinx tree. Larfondement, the disease wherein one voids his fat or grease in his excrements. Larfondu, that voids his fat or grease in his excrements. Larget, somewhat large, or wide. Largiteur, a liberal giver. Larigau, the head of the wind-pipe. Boire à tire larigau, to drink till the throat cracks.
Laringe, the root of the Tongue; or as larigau. Laringuau, the same. Larix, the larch, or Larinx-tree. Larmelette, Larmette, a small tear. Larmeux, full of tears. Larmot, a kinde of Lizard. Larmoyable, lamentable, woful. Larmoyement, a weeping, or shed∣ding of tears. Larmoyer, to weep, or to shed tears. Larmoyeux, full of tears. Larmuse, a little Earth-newt, or Aske. Larnesse, for larronnesse, a Woman-thief. Larre, a Thief. Larre de chats, catterwawling. Larreciner, as larronner. Larrecineusement, thievishly. Larrecineux, thieving. Larris, untilled ground. Larronceau, a little thief. Larronner, to steal, to play the thief. Larronnerie, a thieving, or steal∣ing. Larronneux, thievish. Larronniere, a Den of thieves. Larval, haggish, ghostlike, dread∣ful. Larve, a Hag, Ghost, or Spirit; also one that looks like Death, or like a Ghost. Larynx, as larigau. Las, as laqs, a snare. Lasanon, the pan of a Close-stool. Lasonophore, a Groom of the Close-stool. Lasché, (Subst.) the name of a fih. Laschée, a loosing, or slackening. Lasdaller, a tired Jade; a dream∣ing or lasie draw-latch; a kinde of bird. Lasseron, the Sw-thistle. Lasset, a Snare; also a Lace. Lasseté, weariness. Lassiere, a kinde of net, or toil for wilde beasts. Lassis, coiffure de lassis, a net-work Coif. Lassus, or Lasus, above, yonder; upward. Latent, hidden, lurking. Latentement, hiddenly, lurkingly. Laterne, the Scutheon, or Knob in the middle of a Timber-vault. Laticlave, a kinde of Cassock worn by the ancient Romans. Latinement, in Latine, after the manner of the Latines. Latinier, an Interpreter. Latinisateur, as Latiniseur. Latiniser, to make Latine, to turn into Latine, to write or speak Latine. Latiniseur, one that writes or speaks Latine. Faire du Latiniseur, a dune or ignorant fellow to pre∣tend to Scholarship. Latinogotisë, barbarous gibridge, mixed of Latine and the Goths language. Latitation, a hiding, or lurking. Latité, hidden, concealed. Latiter, to lie hid. Latomie, a Quarry of stones. Latonien, as flambeaux Latoniens, the Sun and Moon. Latre, a Church-yard. Latrineux, stinking, full of ordure. Latteron, for laiteron, the Sow-thi∣stle. Lavace d'eaux, a floud of wa∣ters. Lavacier, (Adj.) washing away vi∣olently, sweeping all away before it, as a swift current. Lavage, a Water-pool; a piece of land surrounded, or drown'd up by water; also a washing. La∣vage de chaulx, white lime. Lavages, for lavaille, hogs wash. Lavanche de glace & de neige, a great heap of Snow tumbling from the top to the bottom of a hill, and overthrowing whatsoever lies in its way. Lavaret, a whitish Trout, or Shad∣like fish. Lavaron, as Cabasson. Lavasse, as lavace. Lavatoire, a place, or vessel to wash in. Laubaut, as Claubaut, a great yel∣ling cur. Laude, the toll that's paid for Wares retailed in certain Fairs and Markets. Lavedan, an iron-gray Jennet. Laveur, a washer. Lauraye, a plot of Laurel-trees. Laurens, as Cloche de S. Laurens, great blisters in the face. Lauriere, as lauraye. Laurin, of Bayes, set or stuck with Bayes. Lauserne, Lauserte, shrub (or milk) Trefoil. Laxif, for laxatif, laxative. Laxité, laxativeness. Lay, a lay, song, roundelay; also the bredth of cloth, &c. also a dolful complaint. Lay, for laïque, a lay (or secular) man. Layé, as bois layez, Woods marked how far to be felled, how much to be sold; or that hath rows of Copse-wood left growing to the same purpose. Layer un bois, to leave marks in a wood for the felling or selling of trees. Layn, sober, modest, of a soft or still disposition. Lays, trees, or ranks of trees left in Copses. Lazanon, as lasanon. Lazur, the Lazal, or Azure-stone. Leal, loyal, true, trusty. Leans, within there, in that place. Leauté, loyalty, trustiness. Lebeche, as leveche. Lebre, for lievre, a Hare. Leconomantie, divination by water in a bason. Lechard, as leschard. Lechedoigt, à lechedoigt, sparing∣ly. Lechercan, a lick-dish. Lecheresse, a licorous woman. Lecheur, a licker. Lectrin, for lutrin, a Readers pul∣pit. Ledanger, as Laidanger. Lede, as ledon. Ledoires, reproaches, revilings. Ledomier, the lote, or nettle-tree. Ledon, the shrub Cistus ledon. Ledoyer, as laidanger. Lee, for laye, a wilde Sow. Legart, a Lizard. Legater, to bequeath. Legement, a Lighter for Salt-barks. Legendier, the golden Legend, a book of the lives of Saints. Legeresse, for legereté, lightness, nimbleness. Legible, legible. Legier, legierement, legiereté. See them without an i in the N. D. Legumage, Pulse, as Beans, Pease, and any Cor that's gathered by pulling. Legumineux, of, or belonging to pulse. Legz, for legat, a legacy. Leiche, as lesse in the N. D. Leicher, for lecher, to lick. Lendeux, full of nits. Lendit, a great Fair kept (in a field near to St. Denis) from the second Wednesday of June, till Midsummer-eve. Lendits, fai∣ri gs, or yearly presents bestowed by the Scholars of Ʋniversities on their Tutors.
Lendole, the flying fish. Lengaier, Lengaieur, as langayer, langayeur. Leniment, a comforting, easing, or refreshing. Lenir, to lenisie, asswage, ease, com∣fort, or refresh. Lenklat, a kinde of Dog-fish. Lente, as lentille in the N. D. Lenteux, as lendeux. Lentice, for lentisque, the Lentisk, or Mastick-tree. Lenticulaire, an Instrument where∣with Surgeons plane and cut a∣way the broken bones of a woun∣ded skull. Lentillade, the spotted and long∣nosed Thornback. Lentillat, the Dun-hound, or Dun∣cow, a fish. Lentillé, freckled. Lentisce, as lentice. Lentiscine, Mastick. Leonceau, for lionceau, a young Lion. Leonin, lion-like; of, or belonging to a Lion. Leontin, as Leonceau. Leopardé, libbard-like. Leporin, of, or belonging to a hare. Leppe, Sea-grass, or Sea-weed. Lepreserie, leprousness. Leproserie, a Spittle for the le∣prous. Lequesat, a kinde of sawce for Wood∣cocks. Lerelot, the foot, or down of a Coun∣try-maidens song. Lermier, for larmier, the eave of an house. Lerot, a Dormouse; also the nut∣mouse, or hasel-mouse. Lerre, a Thief. Lesard, for laizard, a Lizzard. Leschard, a slap-sawce; also a mi∣ser. Lesche, a long slice of bread; also a leash to hold a dog in. Lesche de mer, a slimy worm, thick as a finger, and a foot long. Leschedoigt, as lechedoigt. Lescherie, much licking. Lesciver, to buck cloaths, to wash or scow with lie. Leser, to hurt. Leser la majesté, to commit high treason. Lesion, hurt, harm, offence. Lestager, to ballast a ship. Letabonde, jocund, merry. Lethal, deadly, mortal. Lethe, death, mortality; also obli∣vion. Lethean, deadly, mortal. Letice, a beast of a whitish-gray co∣lour. Letiere, for litiere, a Litter. Lettager, as lestager. Lettrisé, as Vers lettrisez, Verses whose words begin with one and the same letter. Lettron, Gum (or rush) Cichory; al∣so the Sow-thistle. Letuge, the leakage of a ship. Leu, for lieu, place. Sans feu ne leu, without house, or harbour. Levage, as Droict de levage; an Imposition of 3 bushels and 3 quar∣ters, or 15 sous upon every boat full of sal transported. In some parts of France, 'tis also a penny for a beef-pipe of Wine, load of Corn, &c. And a half-penny for a Sheep, Hog, &c. due unto a Lord of Jurisdiction, if they have been within his Liberty eight days together before their sale or transportation. Levaille, an uprising, or getting up. Levandiere, a Midwife. Leucophlegmatie, a flgmatick drop∣sie. Leucophlegmatique, sick of (or troubled with) such a flegmatick dropsie. Leud, Leude, a Vassal, Tenant, or Liegeman. Leudes frans, Gen∣tlemen professing Arms or Soul∣diery, and holding their Lands of others; but paying no tax to any. Leudes serfs, Villains, subject to all Impositions. Leve, for levée, a trick at Cards; also a mallet. Leveche, a South-west wind. Levement, a raising, or setting up; also a levy, or levying; also a leavening. Levesche, Levesse, as leveche. Leveton, Leveure, Yest. Leveur, a raiser, or reaver up; a Collector; a aener. Leville, Darnel, or Tares. Levistie, Lovage. Levreton, Levron, a young Grey∣hound. Lexive, for lessive, lye (wherewith linnen is cleansed) also a buck of linnen cloaths. Lexivier, of, or belonging to lie, sit for ly. Lexiveux, Lexivicux, full of lye; or as lexivier. Leyau, a Wound of the bredth and depth of an inch. Leyde, a certain Tax, or Imposition uon Wine and other commodities. Leyette, for layette, a Drawer. Lez, nigh, hard by; also as lé in the N. D. Lezard, for laisard, a Lizard. Lezard, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a Lizard. Liace, as liasse. Liage, a binding, or tying; a so∣dering, or combining together. Droict de liage, hoopage, or a fee due to some Lords for the hoop∣ing of every Wine-vessel their Vas∣sals have. Liairre, for lierre, Ivy. Liais, a very hard free-stone where∣of Stair-steps, and Tomb-stones be commonly made. Liants, the bands of lead that fa∣sten the panes of a window to the bars. Liarder, to beg, or get poorly, slowly, or by the penny. Liarre, for lierre, Ivy. Liasse, a bundle, or handful of. Li∣asse d'oignons, a rope of Onions. Libament, a Sacrifice, a thing of∣fered, or tasted of in the offer∣ing. Lïbanomantie, divination by fran∣kincense. Libanot, Libanotis, herb Frankin∣cense, Hart-root. Libidineux, lascivious, lustful. Libidinosité, lasciviousness, lustful∣ness. Libure, a little Isle cut out of the land, whereon Bay-salt is gather∣ed after every tide. Liburnique, a very light and swift Ship, used by the ancient Pi∣rats. Licaleil, a Lamp. Licanthrope, and Licanthropie, as lycanthrope, lycanthropie. Lice, (Adj.) smooth, sleck. Licharder, to pick morsels curious∣ly. Liche, a kinde of the fish Glau∣cus. Liche-casse, a Lik-o. Liche-doigt, one that li k, his fin∣gers; also one that d s things leisurely. A liche-doigt, sparing∣ly. Liche-frite, a Dripping-pan. Lichement, a liking, or slapping up. Lichene, a Ring-worm, or Tettr. Licher, for lecher, to lick. Licherie, a licking. Licheron, a lickerous fellow. Licheur, a licker. Licisque, a dog ingendred between
a Wolf and a Dog. Licisque or∣goose, a salt-bitch. Licitation, a setting to sale unto him that will give most; also a prizing, a cheapening. Licitation & decret, Fine and Recovery. Lictée, as littée. Lide, a kinde of wooden and war∣like Engine used in old time. Lie, as faire chere lie, to be merry; dire une chose de chere lie, to say a thing with a merry counte∣nance. Liegé, corked, stopped with cork. Soulier liegé, a cork-shooe. Lieger, to cork; to stop, raise, or underlay with cork. Liement, a binding, tying, or fa∣stening. Liément, merrily. Liens, as leans. Lienteric, flux lienteric. See the next word. Lienterie, a flux wherein meat is voided raw and undigested pre∣sently after the eating thereof. Lienterieux, Lienterique, troubled with that flux. Liepard, for leopard, a leopard. Lier, (Subst.) the allay of Coyn. Liernes, slits, interlaces, or inter∣toises of timber. Liesse, mirth, gladness. Liet, as liais. Liet, (Adj.) merry, glad. Liette, a till, or drawer; also a casket, or small cosser full of tills or drawers. Lieve, as leve. Lievement, as levée in the N. D. Lieur, a binder, or tyer. Lieure, for liaison, connexion. Lieutrin, for lutrin, a Readers Pul∣pit in a Quire. Lieux, (Adj.) full of lees, dregs, or grounds. Lifrelofre, a Swag-belly. Ligament, a ligament, or ligature; a tye, band, or string. Ligamenteux, full of ligaments, strings, or ligatures. Ligeaulté, loyalty, or the fidelity due by a subject unto his natural Prince. Ligence, as ligeance in the N. D. Ligier, for leger, light. Lignade, provision of wood. Faire lignade, to take in fuel, or fire∣wood. Lignear, of, or belonging to a line; also in a direct course or line. Ligneraye, a line-yard, or flax-yard. Ligneux, woody; also full of lines, or small and long threads. Lignier, a pile of wood. Lignoul, for ligneu, Shoomakers thread, done over with pitch. Ligombeau, a Sea-crevice, or little Lobster. Ligoter, to prune a Vine; to take from about it the stones, clods, or herbs that hinder the budding thereof. Ligule, a little tongue, or tenon; a spoon, slice, or small ladle used by Apothecaries; also a small Roman measure containing about a spoon∣ful, and in weight three drams and a scruple. Ligumbault, as ligombeau. Ligustic, the herb Lovage. Limaceux, full of snails, or as Limacial, snail-like, winding, or tur∣ning about like the shell of a snail. Limaçonner, to turn, or winde a∣bout, like the shell of a snail, or as Souldiers that cast themselves in∣to a ring. Limailles, for legumes, pulse. Limaire, a young Tunny. Limande, a Burt, or Bret-fish; also a short cudgel; a broad pipe-staff or boord fit for a cake. Limas, Limasse, Limasson, a snail. Limature, a filing; also file-dust. Limbe de bouteille, the mouth, or brink of a bottle. Limestre, drap de limestre, the cloth whereof hoods be made. Limestres, those that wear such hoods. Limignon d'une chandelle, the week of a candle. Liminaire, set before the entry, or at the beginning of; dedicatory, fore-running. Limitateur, Limiteur, a limiter, or bounder. Limitrophe, bordering upon. Limoine, wild beets. Limonne, as poncille. Limpide, clear, transparent. Linage, for lignée, linage. Linagier, a direct, or near kinsman. Linarole, the name of a pear. Linceul, a sheet for a bed. se Linder par terre, to creep, or crawl along the ground. Line, for ligne, a line. Lineament, Lineature, lineament, or feature. Linée, for lignée, linage. Linement, as liniment. Linge, (Adj.) lean, thin, scraggy. Lingiere, for lingere, a Seamster. Lingotiere, the mould wherein ingots are framed, or cast. Linier, a flax-man, a seller of flax. Liniere, a flax-woman. Liniment, a thin Oyntment; also a soft rubbing on. Linir, to anoint, to rub softly or gen∣tly on. Linitif, refreshing, mollifying. Linition, an anointing, a gentle rubbing. Linomple, a fine and thin linnen. Linon, lawn. Linostolie, a cutting of the hair. Linsueil, a sheet (for a bed.) Lintheau, for linteau, the lintle over a door. Lionin, of, or belonging to a Lion; Lion-like. Lionneau, for lionceau, a young Lion. Lionneux, full of Lions. Lionnier, a Keeper of Lions. Lionnin, as Lionin; also of a Lion-tawny colour. Liperquam, as faire du liperquam, to shew his authority. Lipie, as lippie. Lipothymie, a swooning. Lippaire, Lip-salve. Lippe, a lip; also as lippie, & lip∣pitude. Lippie, the redness or soreness of a blear eye. Lippion, part of a womans &c. Lippitude, blearedness, a running of the eyes with pain and redness. Lippu, thick-lipt; also hanging the lip, as a child that's ready to cry. Liquabilité, aptness to melt, or to become liquid. Liquation, a melting. Liquerice, for reguelice, lickorice. Lire, for lyre, a Lyra. Lire-liron, the burden of a Song. Liripipié, hooded, as a Graduate. Liripipion, a Graduates hood. Liripipionné, as liripipié; also mellow, cup-shotten. Liron, a Dormouse. Liron de pain, a luncheon of bread. Lisable, for lisible, legible. Lisard, for laisard, a Lizard. Lisarde, the same; also a woman that reads much. Liser, to list, or border a garment; also to coast along by a Country. Lisiereux, prescribing the limits, set∣ting the bounds of several Countrys. Lisisque, as licisque. Lissaron, the herb Perwinkle. Listeau, a little list; also a selvedge. Litarge, as litharge in the N. D. Literaire, of, or belonging to letters, or learning. Literon, as litron.
Lithiase, the Stone in the Bladder. Lithomantie, Divination by casting of Pible-stones. Lithortipon, stone-breaking, stone-dissolving. Liticontester, to protest in a Suit, to deliver or lay open before a Judge the chief points of the Declaration and Answer. Litiger, to wrangle, or to contend; to be at variance, to go to Law with. Litiscontestation, the delivery or laying open of the chiefest points of a Case pro & contra before a Judge, after the answer is put in. Litorne, a Wing-thrush. Litron, a wooden measure, contai∣ning somewhat more than our pint, and used by the Retailers of Salt, Pulse, &c. Littée, the litter of a Bitch, Lio∣ness, &c. also a bed of leaves, hay, grass, &c. to lay or pack up things in. Litteron, Littron, as litron. Litue, a crooked staff used by the Roman Augurs; also a Crosier, or Bishops staff. Liture, a dash with a pen; a dash∣ing, or blotting out with a pen. Livane, a Pelicane. Liveau, for niveau, a Masons or Carpenters level. Livel, level. Lividité, the colour appearing upon a stroke, black and blue. Livoy, a small Vine-hook, or Vine-knife. Livraison, a delivery; also a Court-dish. Livrement, a delivery. Livresque, bookish; of, or belonging to a Book. Lixive, for lessive, lye. Lizant, bordering, setting a list or border on; also coasting along. Lize, glib, smooth, sleek. Lizeron, & Lizet, as liseron, liset, in the N. D. Lizette, a little grayish vermine. Liziere, for lisiere, the list of cloth. Lizieux, a sort of woollen Cloths. Loage, for louäge, a letting out. Lobeau, a little lobe, or lappy piece of. Lober, to cousen, or deceive. Local, local; belonging to, or con∣tained in a place. Locar, bled locar, a kinde of Wall-barley called S. Peters corn. Localement, locally, in a place. Locateur, a letter, or hirer of. Locatif, a tenant, inmate, or lodger. Location, a hirer, or letter out of; also a setting, or bestowing in a place. Loch, a loche; a liquid Confection, or soft Medicine, to be held in the mouth till melted. Locher, to wag, like a thing that's loose. Lochette, a groundling, a small-bearded Loach. Locule, a little Purse. Locupleter, to inrich, or make weal∣thy. Lodier, a quilt, or a quilted coun∣terpoint for a bed. Lodes, as lods in the N. D. Loe, a quantity of fish taken by some few Normand Lords, of every fisher-boat that comes into, and moors within their havens, creeks, or harbours; especially if the Boat belong unto any of their Tenants, or any inhabitants of their territories. Loere, a Ducker. Lof, as loo. Logeable, fit to be lodged, or enter∣tained in a house. Une maison fort logeable, a house of great re∣ceipt. Logie, as Droict de logies, a yearly Tax levied unto the Kings use up∣on every Provostship within the County of Poictou, besides the rent at which it is farmed, and 18 d. for the Officers of the Chamber of Accounts. Logisme, the due and judicious un∣derstanding of a thing according to reason. Logistique, the Art of counting. Lohoc, as loch. Loidorer, to revils, or rail on. Loinceau, as loinseau. Loingnet, somewhat far off. Loingnettement, a little way off. Loingtain, forrein, remote. Loingtaineté, farness, remoteness. Loinseau de sil, a clue, or bottom of thread. Loisible, lawful, allowable. Loist, as il me loist, I may, I am allowed, 'tis lawful for me. Lombaire, as lumbaire. Lombles, the parts which be on each side of the Navel. Lombe, the loin, flank, or haunch; the leg, or knuckle. Lombris, a Ground-worm. Lonce, for Once, the Ounce, a rave∣nous beast. Lonche, for louche, squint-eyed. Longale, a Loyn. Longard, a delayer, prolonger, or protracter. Longeastre, somewhat long. Long-encollé, long-necked. Longierre, a long narrow towel. Longis, a tall and dull slangam, that hath no making to his height, nor wit to his making; also one that being sent on an errand is long in returning. Longue, for longe, a Loyn. Longuement, long, a long time. Longuerie, for longueur, length. Long-vestu, a coyn worth 11 sh. 6 p. Longuet, somewhat long. Lonze, a match to keep fire with. Loo, the Loof of a Ship. Bouter de loo, to go a wind, to lay tack aboard. Looh, or Loot, as loch. Lopiné, cut into gobbets, divided into lumps. Lopiner, to cut into gobbets, to di∣vide into lumps. Lopinet, a bit, a small gobbet. Loquacité, talkativeness. Loque, a rag, or tatter. Loquence, speech, talking. Loqueteux, ragged, tattered. Loquette, a little rag, or tatter. Lordault, for lourdaut, a block-head. Lorderie, as lourderie. Lorgue, as tique toque lorgne, thwick thwack; also here and there, at random, without discre∣tion. Torche lorgne, the same. Loricard, a mis-shapen fellow. Loricarder, to lubber it. Lorion, for loriot, the Wit-wall, or Hick-way. Lormerie, small iron-work, as nails, spurs, &c. or a Spurriers trade. Lormier, a worker in small iron; a Spurrier. Los, laud, or praise; also willing∣ness, consent. Losengier, a flatterer, a pickthank. Lor, lot, portion. Loti, as loty. Lotie, division, partition, sharing. Lotir, to casts lots for; also to di∣vide, part, or share. Lotizé, divided, parted, shared. Lots, Fines of alienation. Lottir, as lotir. Loty, divided by lots; parted, shared. Louäde, as laude. Louäger, Louägier, an hirer, or far∣mer; a lodger, an inmate. Louänger, to praise, to commend. Louängier, a praiser, or commen∣der. Loubet. Seek May-loubet. Loubine, the Sea-fish called a Base. Louche, (Subst.) a little ladle, or great spoon. Loucher, to take up with a ladle.
Louchet, a spade, or spade-like in∣strument, half headed with iron. Les louchets d'une bale, the cor∣ners of a pack. Loudier, for courtepointe, a coun∣terpoint, or quilt; also a Smell-smock, a leacherous Knave. Loudiere, as une grosse loudiere, a common hackney, a filthy lascivi∣ous quean. Louer, for loir, a dormouse. Louëresse, a woman that praises, or commends. Louëur, a praiser, or commender. Lougaru, as loup garou in the N. D. Loup-araigne, a kind of Spider that hunts or watches for flies. Loupasson, a young or little sea-Wolf. Loup-chat, the Lynx, or Ounce. Loupeux, full of wens, troubled with a wen. Loupie, Louppe, for loupe, a wen; and in a horse, the water-farcy. Lourche, the game called Lurch, or a lurch in game. Il demeura lour∣che, he was left in the lurch. Lourdant, as il est en son lourdant, he is in a surly mood, or churlish humour. Lourderie, for lourdise, sottishness, blockishness. Lourdin, blunt, blockish, clownish. Lourdinet, the same. Lourdois, as en son lourdois, blunt∣ly, rudely. Lo ure, a bag-pipe. Lourette, a small bag-pipe. Lourpidon, an old Witch. Louschement, a squinting, or look∣ing askew. Louscher, to squint, or look askew. Louschet, as louchet. Lousse, as louche. Loutrier, an Otter-hunter, or Otter-catcher. Louveau, Louvet, Louveton, a young Wolf, a little Wolf. Louviche, greedy, ravenous. Louvichement, greedily, ravenous∣ly. Louvier, for Louvetier, a Wolf-catcher. Louvier (Adj.) Wolf-like; of, or belonging to a Wolf. Melancholie louviere, a frenzy which makes the patient shun all company, on a conceit that he is turned Wolf. Louvin, as louvoir, wolf-like, of a Wolf. Loyaulment, loyally, faithfully. Loyer, hire given for a house or Country-farm, or unto Servants, or Work-folks; a stipend, salary, wages; also a reward. Loyette, a Marlin. Loz, as los. Lozange, and Lozénge, for losan∣ge, a lozenge. Lozengé, lozenged, Lozenge-like; also mocked, gulled, beguiled. Lozenger, to cousen, cheat, or de∣ceive. Lu, light. Luberdine, an old maid. Luberne, the female Libbard; a Panther. Lubin, Lubine, a Base, or Sea-wolf; a Monk, or Friar. Lubre, lubrick, filthy. Lubrifier, to make slippery. Lue, for lut, a Lute. Lucarné, having windows in the roof. Lucel, Lucet, a young Pike, or Picke∣rel. Lucheran, a scritch-Owl. Luchet, a spade, or as louchet. Lucifugue, a kind of beetle, or light-hating flie. Lucide, shining, bright. Lucrative, (Subst.) lucre, gain, or profit; also the profession of the law, because very lucrative. Lucs, as lus. Luctation, a wrastling, or strugling. Lucte, for lute, wrestling, or the art of wrestling. Lucté, wrestled, strugled with. Ludicre, toyish. Ludificatoire, mocking, deceiving. Lueil, ray, darnel. Luet, Devoir de luets, a bushel of Ry due by every Tenant and Hous∣holder, that keeps a fire and til∣lage within a Parish in Brittany. Luettes, little bundles of pieces of Ivory cast loose upon a table; the play is to take up one, without shaking the rest, or else the taker looseth. Lueux, light, glittering, shining. Luictement, a wrestling, or strug∣ling with. Luisans, sparkles, or fiery and star-resembling Meteors, in the mid∣dle region of the air. Luisantement, brightly, shiningly. Luisarner, to glow, or glimmer. Luiton, a Goblin, or Robin-good-fellw. Luiton de mer, a Triton, a fish that resembles a man. Lumbaire, of, or belonging to the flank, or loyn. Lumbrique, a ground-worm. Lumer, to shine, to give (or cast) a light. La chandelle lume mal, the candle burns dimly, or burns but ill. Lumillette, Luminette, the herb Eye-bright. Luminier, a Vestry-Keeper; also an Agent, or Sollicitor for a whole Township. Luminon, for lumignon, a thing that gives a clear light. Luné, rounded, or bowed, like an half-moon. Luner, to round, bow, or compass. Luner un arc, to bend a bow. Lupasson, as loupasson. Lupege, Lupoge, the whoop, or dung∣hillcock. Luvré, for leuvré, lured, allured. Lus, a Pike (fish.) Lus marin, a Cod-fish, also the Haddock. Lustreux, Lustrueux, shining, glit∣tering. Lutiner, to play the Goblin, or Night-Spirit. Lutiz, clay, loam, dirt. Lutre, for loutre, an Otter. Luxation, a being out of joynt. Luxer, to put out of joynt; also to be out of joynt. Luxure, for luxe, luxury, sensuality; any superfluity, or excess in carnal delights. Luxurieux, luxurious, sensual, vo∣luptuous. Luyton, as luiton. Luz, as lus. Luzerne, for luserne, Medick-Fod∣der, horned (or snail) Claver. Luzerner, to glow, or glimmer. Luzerniere, a plot of ground sowed with Medick-Fodder. Ly, for le, the. Lyarre, for lierre, Ivy. Lyasse, as liasse. Lycanthrope, troubled with the Frenzy, or Melancholy, termed Lycanthropie. Lycanthropie, a Frenzy, or Melan∣choly, which causes the Patient (who thinks he is turned Wolf) to flee all company, and hide him∣self in dens and corners. Lyce, a bitch. Une fause lyce, a lewd quean, a wicked harlot. Lychnobien, the week of a candle; or one who instead of the day useth the night, doing all his business by candle-light. Lychnocosomite, the chiefest Light, or Lanthorn of the World. Lychnon, a light, candle, or link; also the wek of a candle, or match of a lamp; also a lanthorn.
Lycopse, a kind of the red-rooted herb Orchanet. Lycopthalmie, a precious stone of four sundry colours. Lye, for lie, dregs, lees, or grounds. Lyerre, for lierre, Ivy. Lymitrophe, bordering upon. Lymon, as limon in the N. D. Lymphatique, allayed, or mixed with water; also mad, furious, giddy, fantastical. Lyncée, a Lynx. Yeux de lyncée, quick, piercing eyes. Lyncurse, a precious stone bred of the congealed urine of a Lynx, and preserving the eyes from charms. Lynges, for liens, bands. Lyon, for Lion, a Lion. Lyonceau, for lionceau, a young Lion. Lype, a lip. Faire la lype, to hang the lip, as a child who is a∣bout to cry. Lypothimie, a kind of deadly swoo∣ning. Lyripipié, Lyripipion, as liripipié, liripipion. Lys, as lis in the N. D. Lysarde, as lisarde. Lysimachie, Water-willow, or Wil∣low-herb. Lysteau, as listeau. Lyturgie, or Lyturgue, for liturgie, Liturgy. M MA dia. See Madia. Macabré, as danse macabré, death. Macaleb, the bastard-Coral, of whose sweet and shining black berries Chains and Bracelets be made. Macalep, and Macalet, as maca∣leb. Macar, a mate, match, or fellow. Macareau, a Mackerel-fish. Macaronique, a Macaronick; a confused heap or huddle of many things. Macault, a scrip, or wallet; also a chest filled with precious stuff and hidden in a secret corner. Mace, as Mage in the N. D. Macer, a redish, aromatical, d astringent rind of a certain Indian root. Maceris, as macer. Maceron, the herb-Can Alexanders. Maceronne, s maceron. Mache, Water-torch, Cats-tail. Machecoulis, as maschecoulis. Mache-rave, a Turnep-eater. Mache-rivet, a Cobler, or Shooma∣ker. Macheron, as maceron. Maches, the mashes, or holes of a net between thread and thread. Machette, the Owl, or Madge-how∣let. Macheure, a black smutch, or smear; also a crush, or bruise, which leaves a black or blue spot after it. Ma∣cheure de fer, the dross of iron. Macheuré, besmeared; also made black and blue with a crush, &c. Machiavelisme, subtil policy. Machiavelizer, to follow Machiavels politick Maximes. Machicoulé, fortifi'd with maschi∣coulis. Machicoulis, as maschicoulis. Machoirier, a horned, and great-jawed Snake. Machonner, to chaw slowly, or gently; to mumble. Machoter, the same. Machoueres, for machoires, the jaws. Machurer, to besmear. Le chaude∣ron machure la poisle, one knave disgraces another, or one neighbour detracts from another. Macis, mace. Macle, the mash of a net; also (in Blazon) a Mascle, or short Lo∣zenge, having a square hole in the midst. Macle (Adj.) raw. Macles, Pot-hangers. Macque, a Lozenge, or Net-mah. Macreau, for maquereau, a Macke∣rel-fish. Macreon, an old man. Macrobe, that hath had a long time in this life. Maculatures, waste-papers. Macule, a spot, or blot, a stain, or ble∣mish. Maculer, to spot, to blot, to bspatter, to stain. Madamoiselle. See Mademoiselle in the N. D. Madant, wt, molst; drunk with. Madfier, to wet, or to moiten. Maia, in good truth. Madia non, no sot. Madiene, a cholerick old wives oath. Madier, timber. Madoure, a oggrhead. Madre, a thick-streaked grain in wood. Madrier, a plank, or piece of timber, whose grain is full of crooked and speckled streaks. Maeut, a maker of Sallads, or May-sauces. Mafe, Mafi, by my faith. Magagnat, in timed. Magagne, as mehaing; also defect, imperfection, corruption, putre∣faction. Magault, as macault. Magdaleon, a Langate, a Rowler. Magdaleon d'entract, a salve spread upon leather or linnen, and hard rowled up. Magique, magical. Magistere, Mastership, authority; also mastery, a masters part, or master-piece. Magistral, magistral, of a master or magistrate; also master-like, skil∣ful, artificial. Magistralement, Master-like, arti∣ficially. Magistronostralement, dunsically. Magnagna, true Roger. Magnan, a loor, clown, Country-fellow. Magnanimement, magnanimously, stoutly. Magniaux, Silk-worms. Magnie, a company, or number of people. Magnigoules, wide-mouthed knaves. Magnin, a Tinker. Magnymagna, twittle-twattle. Magot, a Baboon, or Ape, that's fa∣ced like a dog; also the Scottish Coot, or Moor-hen. Maguelet, as macaleb. Mahaleb, as macaleb. Maheustre, a swaggerer. Mahonne, a kind of great ship. Mahutte, the pinion of a birds wing. Mai, for may, the month of May. Maict, a batch, a kneading-trough; a salting-tub. Maidin, a Turkish coyn worth about a penny. Maie, the greatest kind of Sea-crab, a Frill. Maiens, timely hay, gotten in May. Majeul de rouë, the nave of a wheel. Majeur, for Maire, the Mayor of a Town. Nos Majeurs, our An∣cestors. La majeure partie, the major part. Maignan, as magnan. Maigne, great. Maignen, as magnin. Maigre (Subst.) the name of a great fish. Maigrelet, Maigret, somewhat lean.
Maigreté, for maigreur, leanness. Maigue, Whey. Maillerie, a Marl-pit, or Marly soil, the place wherein Marl is gotten. Maillettes, small mashes, or links of mail. Maillol, as mailleton in the N. D. Mailloque, the 24 part of a second, and the least weight that Jewel∣lers and Goldsmiths use. Mailloter, to beat, or break with a mallet. Maillotins, a factious Multitude which in old time did much mis∣chief in and about Paris. Maillotonnerie, any factious Crue, or seditious Company. Main, for matin, the morning. Main-bonne, Main-bournie, ward, government, oversight, admini∣stration; also the patronage, de∣fence, or protection of a Sove∣reign. Main de gourre, an hogs foot, or one that's handed like a Sow. Main-mettre, to manmit, to set at liberty. Main-mis, manumitted, made free. Main-mise, a manumission, or set∣ting at liberty. Mainotte, a small hand, a childs hand. Main-pleine, sufficient Goods taken, or Land enough seized upon an Execution. Mainsme, a bundle of Grapes. Mainsné, a younger brother. Maint, many. Maintefois, often, oftentimes. Maintenance, maintenance, support. Main tourner à main, in the tur∣ning of a hand, instantly, sudden∣ly. Mairerie, for Mairie, Mayorship. Mairgue, Whay. Mais, as je n'en puis mais, 'tis not my fault, 'tis not long of me. Mais-huy, not this day. Maisné, a younger brother. Maisne, as argent baillé à maisne, money let out to use for the bene∣fit of younger brethren, being In∣fants or Orphans. Maisneaux, as meneaux. Maisneté, youngership, the estate or title of a younger brother. Maisonnage, timber-trees cut down for the building of a house. Maisonnages, houses, lodgings, dwel∣lings. Maisonné, housed, furnished (or sto∣red) with houses. Maisonnée, a house full, houshold, or family. Maisonner, to build houses, to store or furnish with houses. Maisonnier, keeping a house; also belonging to, or serving for a house. Maistraille, the Main-sail of a Ship. Maistral, the North-west wind. Maistre, (Adj.) chief, principal. Un maistre cable, a Sheat-cable. Le maistre doigt, the middle finger. Maistre-garde, a Master-Warden in a Forrest. Maistrement, as magistralement. Maistre-pied, the stock, or principal arm of a plant. Maistre-sergent, a Master (or chief) Serjeant; an Officer in Forests. Maistre-Sergenterie, the Office, or Walk of a Master-Sergeant in Fo∣rests. Maistrier, for maitriser, to master, rule, or govern. Maistroqueux, a Master-cook. Majuscule, somewhat greater, of good stature, of a reasonable age. Maiz, Turkey-wheat. Mal, (Adj.) ill, bad, naughty; mis∣chievous, hurtful; unseemly; sore, crary. La male bosse, a plague-sore. Malabatre, an Aromatical Indian leaf, which swims on pools and ditches, without any apparent root. Malace, a storm, or tempest. Maladerie, an Hospital for the dis∣eased; also the sick-mans Ward in any Hospital, Maladré, infected with a scurf, or leprosie. Maladvis, rashness, indiscretion, in∣consideration. Malagine, a mollifying Plaister for Scabs and hard Impostumes. Malaginer, to mingle, or incorporate several things (especially metals) together. Mal-aigre, a kinde of worms that breed in an Hawks gorge. Mal-aisance, uneasiness, difficulty, trouble. Mal-aise, disease, pain, or trouble. Mal-aiser, to disease, trouble, or dis∣quiet. Malandres, the Malanders (a horses disease). Malandrin, a cassed Souldier with∣out pay, or imployment. Malarmat, a kinde of rough-sealed Gunard, which being alive is red; but dying, of another co∣lour. Malart, a Mallard, or wilde Drake. Malaxé, mixed, beaten together; al∣so kneaded, handled, or wrought with the hands until it be soft. Malaxer, to beat together, as eggs; also to soften, work, or knead un∣to a softness; to handle a thing un∣til it be soft. Mal-cindré, ill-supported, weakly underpropped (by a weak, or ill-made Centry.) Malcontent, the name of a Game at Cards. Malcontentement, discontent. Malcus, a Hangar. Maleable, as malleable in the N. D. Male-bosse, a plague-fore, a pestilent botch. Maledicence, detraction. Male-façon, an absurdity, or ill manner. Male-façons des proces, faults committed in pleading. Malefice, a mischief, an ill act; also a mischievous witchery. Male-grace, as Malgrace. Maleir, for Maudire, to curse. Malement, ill, badly, mischievously. Mal-endurant, tichy, impatient. Mal-engin, fraud, cheat, or deceit. Malengineux, fraudulent, deceit∣ful. Malengroin, sullenness, sowr look. Mal-enthalenté, ill-minded, ill-af∣fected. Maleole, as malleole. Malesuade, hunger; also a sweating pain, or sickness. Maletoste, for maltote, an extra∣ordinary Tax, or Subsidy; also any Imposition. Maletote, and Maletoulte, the same. Maletoultier, for maltotier, a Col∣lector of Taxes, or Subsidies. Malfaict, a misdeed, fault, offence, or trespass. Mal-feable, not to be trusted. Mal-gisant, a masterless man, or one who for want of a Master is often sped with a bad lodging; also a fellow of ill-behaviour, or lewd cversation. Malgrace, dissavour, displeasure; anger, or blame incurred. Mal-hardi, fearful, timorous. Malheurer, to make unhappy. Malheureté, mischance, misfortune. Malheustre, the Pinion of a Birds wing. Maligne, a Spring-tide. Malignement, malignantly, malici∣ously, wickedly.
Malignité, malignity, spite, ill will. Malingre, sore, scabby; also crazie, tichy. Pomme de malingre, a sowrish apple called the Maligar-apple. Malivole, malicious, spiteful, chur∣lish. Malleation, an hammering. Mallece, the dregs, or coursest of Sugar. Mallement, much, mightily. Malleole, the Ankle, or Ankle-bone; also the vein that runs along up∣on the Ankle. Malletier, bearing, or belonging to a male, budget, or wallet. Mallette, for malette, a little male. Malobatre, as malabatre. Malot, a little Boar. Mal-patient, impatient. Mal-seance, unseemliness. Mal-talent, spight, ill will. Mal-tassé, ill made up, unorderly hudled or jumbled together. Maltaulte, Maltaultier, as maltote, maltotier in the N. D. Maltoute, as maltote in the N. D. Malvaisie, for malvoisie, Malmsey-wine. Malubec, the Falling-sickness. Malvedi, a small Spanish-coyn. Mal-vestu, ill-cloathed, ragged. Malvoism, of Malmsey. Mal-usité, ill-fashioned, rude, that hath not been in much good com∣pany; also raw, unexperien∣ced. Mamaye, a great Indian-peach. Mambour, or Mambourg, a Cap∣tain; also the Governour of a Province; also the Guardian of an Infant, Protector of a Widow, &c. Mambournie, as Main-bournie. Mamelue, as mammelue. Mamilaire, Mammal, of, or belong∣ing to the breasts. Mammeaux, a kinde of panick. Mammelette, a little dug, breast, or udder. Mammeleux, as mamillaire; also having great dugs. Mammellement, breast (or pap) like. Mammelu, as mammeleux. Mammeluch, as Mammelu in the N. D. Mammelue, a fools bable. Mammeron, for mammelon, the nipple (or teat) of a breast. Mammillaire, as mamillaire. Mammuque, a wingless bird, of an unknown beginning, and after death not corrupting. Manable, habitable. Manance, a dwelling, abiding, or inhabiting in. Manant, a dweller, abider, or in∣habiter; one that dwells where he was born; also a boor, clown, country-fellow. Manat, a monstrous Indian-fish that resembles an Ox. Manbourg, as Mambour. Mancelles, great iron-rings, whereby the Thill-horse, &c. is fastened un∣to a Cart. Manché, hafted, helved. Manchereau, a little haft, or han∣dle. Les manchereaux de la Charrue, the Plough-handles. Mancheron, a bracelet, or bracer; also a half-sleeve, or wrist-sleeve; also a muss. Mancherons de robbes, the hanging half-sleeves of some fashioned gowns. Manciper, to deliver the possession of, to sell, pass away, or give up. Mand, for mandement, an Order, or Command. Mandataire, one that comes to a Benefice by a Mandamus. Mande, a maund. Mandegloire, for mandragore, Man∣drake. Mandication, for manducation, an eating. Mandil, Mandille, a Mandillian, or loose Cassock. Mandole, a Cackarel-fish. Mandore, a Kit, a small Gittern. Mandosiane, Mandoussiane, a broad and old-fashioned short Sword. Mandre, the Cell of a Monk, or Hermit; also a hovel, or shed; a stall, or soddering-place for beasts in the fields. Mandregloire, a Mandrake. Manducité, great eating. Manée, a small vessel, or measure, whereof 96 make but one Minot. Droict de manée de sel, that measure full due to the Abbot and Covent of S. Sulpice upon every horse-load of salt brought into Bourges, and of every one that sells any salt in Bourges. Mancquinage, antick ingravery, or carving in Wainscot or Stone-work. Manette, a small hand; also a manacle. Maneuvre, for manoeuvre, a work∣man. Manganese, a certain mineral, which being melted with glass amends the colour thereof: there is also good glue, or black enamel made of it. Mangeaille, food. Mangeatif, eat able. Mangemerde, the name of a fish. Mangeoire, the gullet, or swal∣low. Mangerie, gluttony, hasty or gree∣dy feeding; also a room, or house, to eat in. Faire mangerie a∣vec, to eat, or keep house with. Mangeson, an itch. Mange-sujet, a fit Epithet for a Ty∣rant. Mangeves, mast, acorns, any thing that wilde swine usually feed on. Mangonel, as mangouelle in the N. D. Mangonisme, the craft of setting out of saleable things. Mangonne, a Brokers wife. Mangonneau, as mangonelle in the N. D. Mangonner, to set out things to sell; also to mangle, or disfigure by mangling. Mangouri, a base Turkish coyn, whereof sixteen do little more than countervail our penny. Manguiere, a great headed, and short stalked nail used about ships. Maniacle, for maniaque, mad, fran∣tick. Maniance, a managing. Manicles, hard-fetters. Manicordion, an old fashioned Cla∣ricord. Maniement, for maniment, a ma∣naging, or handling. Manieur, a handler, a manager. Manifacture, for manufacture, ma∣nufacture. Manifacturé, wrought, or done with the hands. Manifacturer, to work, or frame with the hands. Manigance, a secret practising; al∣so an unstay'd, or unseemly beha∣viour. Manigotter, to handle, or finger much. Maniguet, the spice called Grains, or grains of Paradice. Maniguette, as maniguet. Manille, the handle of a pot, &c. Maniller, a Bracelet-maker; also one that in Popish Churches gathers for a poor Preach∣er. Manjore, a Manger.
Maniot, a certain Root, which boil'd is good meat; but raw, poi∣son. Manipulon, for manipule, a mani∣ple, or fannel, a scarf-like Orna∣ment worn about the left wrist of a sacrificing Priest. Manivelle, an instrument wherewith disjointed bones are set in their former places; also the handle whereby a Grindle-stone is tur∣ned. Manivilles, the braces whereby a windbeam is turned. Mannequin, as manequin in the N. D. Mannequinage, as manequinage. Manneux, full of Manna. Manoir, a Mansion, Mannor, or Mannor-house; also a room in a house. Manople, a kinde of long Gantlet; or as manipulon. Manouvrer, to hold, occupy, or pos∣sess. Manouvrier, for Manoeuvre, a me∣chanical workman. Manque, (Adj.) lacking, want∣ing. Manquerot, a maimed, or lame crea∣ture; one that wants some of his limbs. Mansais, as deniers and sols man∣sais, double the worth of deniers and sols Tournois. Mansart, a Culver, or Ring-dove. Manselles, as mancelles. Mansionnier, a dweller, one that hath a mansion in a place. Mansuet, gentle, courteous, meek, or milde. Mansuetement, gently, meekly, mild∣ly. Mansuetude, gentleness, meekness, mildness. Mantel, for manteau, a Cloak. Manteler, to cloak, or cover with a cloak. Manthe, a rough mantle, a rug. Manticore, a ravenous Indian beast, that hath a face like a Man, a body like a Lion, and three ranks of sharp teeth. Mantil, for nappe, a table-cloth. Mantin, a kinde of Prawn. Mantonel, the catch of a d. Mantonniere, as mentonniere. Manuel, (Subst.) a manual, a poc∣ket-book. Manuellement, as bailler manu∣ellement, to give in hand, pay ready money, deliver present∣ly. Manumission, a manumission, or af∣franchising. Manutenteur, a maintainer, or up∣holder. Mappule, a little piece of Lawn, wherewith the sacramental Pix is covered. Maquerelleux, full of bawdry, be∣longing to the bawdy art. Maquignonner, to drive a Horse-coursers trade, to deal deceit∣fully in bargains; also to play the bawd. Mar, as harang de mar, a great, fair, fat, and full-rowed Herring. Marabais, a kinde of base Coyn. Maramedi, as maravedi. Maran, a Renegado. Marant, as mareant. Marasme, a Consumption in the high∣est degree. Marasmé, wholly consumed, wasted, or drained of moisture. Maratresque, Step-mother-like. Maraudaille, a pack of silly rogues; a crew of beggarly vagabonds. Marauder, to play the idle vaga∣bond. Maraudise, idle knavery. Maravedi, a little Spanish Coyn. Marbreux, full of marble. Marbrier, a Marble-cutter, one that worketh in marble. Marbriere, a quarry of marble. Marcanet, a kinde of River-fowl. Marcasite, for marcassite, the Mar∣casite, or Fire-stone. Marcez, March-corn, such as is sow∣ed about March, as Barley, Oats, &c. Marcgrave, a Marquiss. Marchage, as Droict de marchage, the Common of pasture which the Inhabitants of one Jurisdiction, Parish, Village, or Mannor have over all the grounds belonging to another. Marchal, for Marechal, a Marshal. Marchandement, Merchant-like. Marchement, a marching, walking, or stepping. Marchette, a little step, a small foot∣ing. Marchettes, small Organ-keys. Marchir, as marchiser. Marchis, a thick trace or tract of men or beasts; also a path beaten out by oft n treading. Marchiser, to border, adjoyn, or lie so near together that one touch a∣nother. Marchons, stillings for wine-vessels to stand on. Marchure, as marchement. Marciage, Droict de marciage, all the profit of natural fruits, as hay, &c. and the half of all others, as wine, corn, &c. due every third year within Bourbonnois to a Landlord, in lieu of his whole rent. 'Tis also due as a fine, up∣on every change of Lord and Te∣nant. Marcier, to receive the rent or fine called Marciage. Marcote, Marcoter, as marquote, marquoter in the N. D. Marcou, an old male-cat, a gib-cat. Mardelle, for margelle, d'un puis, the brink, or brim of a Well. Maré, moored, fastened with cables, held fast by anchors, as a ship in a harbour, &c. Mareant, mooring. Mareer, as marer. Marenge, our ordinary blue Tit∣mouse. Marer, to moor, or be moored; to lie fastened with cables, or hold fast by anchors. Mareschal, (Adj.) of, or belonging to, made or done by a Smith, or Farrier. Mareschaucées, timber to build withal. Marets, or Marez, for marais, Marsh, Fen, or Moor. Marfil, Ivory, or the Elephants-tooth unwrought. Margaigne, as mortgage. Margaignon, a male-eel. Margaire, the name of a bird. Margariton, Pearl, or the powder thereof. Margasin, for magazin, a Maga∣zine, or Storehouse. Marger, to make a margent, brink, edge, or brim. Margne, for marne, Marl. Margotte, Margotter, as marquote, marquoter in the N. D. Margouiller, to gnaw, to mumble with the teeth, instead of kissing to bite. Margoute, for marquote, a Vine∣sprig. Margueillier, for Marguillier, a Church-warden. Marguillierie, Church-wardenship. Marguy, a Hanger. Mariable, marriageable. Mariaulet, a man of no account, e∣steem, or credit; an insufficient witness; or as mariolet. Mariée, the caul of a beast.
Mariement, a marrying. Mariets, mariets, violets. Marieur, a Match-maker. Marille, a Register. Marine noire, the name of a grape. Marinesque, à la marinesque, mari∣ner-like. Marinesques, long mariners hose. Marinette, the Load-stone. Marinier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a mariner. Marin-onfroy, the name of an ap∣ple, round on the one side, and flat on the other. Mariolement, bawdery, lascivious∣ness. Marioles, the waddles and stones of a Cock. Mariolet, a Wencher, a wanton Youth; or as mariaulet. Marisque, a great unsavory fig, that ripening opens on the sides and discovers its seeds. Marital, belonging to a marriage or wedlock, (especially on the Hus∣bands side.) Marlane salé, a dri'd Whiting. Marliere, a Marl-pit. Marlotte, a fashion of light gown, or mantle for the Summer. Marmaille, young rascals, a troop of lewd and idle boys. Marmaride, a kinde of very hard gray marble. Marmaux, arbres marmaux, hedge∣trees, wilde trees. Marme rayée, a kinde of sundry-coloured Sea-fish. Marmes, a rustical oath. Marmitonnage, scullionry, or the Office of a Scullion; also nastiness, sloveniiness. Marmitonner, to tend the Beef-pot, like a Kitchin-boy; to play the sawcy rogue. Marmo, toothed, or furnished with teeth. Marmonné, mumbled, muttered. Marmonner, to mumble, to mut∣ter. Marmontaine, as marmotaine. Marmor, the Goldeny, or a kinde thereof; also as marmo. Marmorat, Mortar, wherein among other things little pieces of the bst marble are put. Marmoset, as marmouset in the N. D. Marmotaine, marmotan, marmote, the Alpine-mouse, or Mountain-rat. Marmoterie, a muttering, or mum∣bling of words between the teeth. Marmotonné, made to grumble, or that yields a grumbling sound. Marmotonner, to grumble, mutter, or murmur; to make a rumbling noise. Marmouselle, a little puppy, or pug to play with. Marmouserie, doating, raving. Marneux, full of Marl. Marniere, a Marl-pit. Marochemin, Horehound. Maronne, Federfew. Maronnier, for marinier, a Mariner. Marouque, a shrub called Lybia-rush, or Christ's thorn. Maroute, bastard-Camomil. Marpaut, an ill-favoured scrub; al∣so a lickorous fellow. Marquable, of mark, of note. Marquasin, for marcassin, a young wilde-boar. Marquet, a small Venetian coyn. Marquetage, for marqueterie, in∣laid work. Marquette, as marquet. Marqueture, a marking, or spotting; a mark, or spot; also inlaid work. Marquisotte, as barbe faicte à la marquisotte, a beard cut after the Turkish fashion. Marrabais, as marran. Marrabaise, as bonnet à la marra∣baise, a flat cap. Marrain, for marrein, timber for building. Marran, Marrane, a Renegado, a Christian turned Turk, or Jew; also a converted, or baptized Moor, Turk, or Jew; one that turns Christian for fear, rather than out of devotion; also a Jew∣ish, cruel, hard-hearted, or hollow-hearted fellow. Marranisé, turned Turk, or Jew; also conerted from a Jew to a false-hearted Christian. Marrant, digging, or fetching up weeds with a French mattock. Marrassau, a kind of short sword or ax, for an Executioner. Marré, digged, broke up. Marrer, to dig, or break up. Marrine, a Godmother. se Marrir, to grieze, frt, or fame. Marou, grief, sorrow. Marroe, for marrube, the herb Horehound. Marroche, a mattock, or instrument like it. Marrochon, a little French mat∣tock. Marrouchuin, the herb Horehound. Marson, a Shoat, a Hog that's a year, or under a year, old. Marsupie, a purse, or pouch. Martel, jealousie, suspition, a flea in the ear. Martelage, martelerie, martelle∣ment, a hammering. Marteline, a small bewing pick; a Masons hammer, or pick. Martengalle, a kinde of dance. Martiner, to guzzle. Martingale, a martingale for a horse. A la martingale, absurdly, foolishly. Martre, for marte, a Martin; also a Game playd with huckle-bones and a little ball. Martroy, a place of execution or punishment. Martyrément, Martyr-like. Martyrer, for martyriser, to mar∣tyr one. Martyrologie, a Book of Mar∣tyrs. Marzol, as Escourgeon. Marzolin, a kinde of delicate Ita∣lian cheese made of sheeps milk, not curdled with runnet, but with Artichokes flowers. Mas de terre, an Ox-gang, contain∣ing about 20 acres. Mascarer, to blot, soile blur, sully, disfigure. Mascaret d'eaux, a huge and sud∣den ravage, or inundation of wa∣ters. Mascaut, as macault. Mascelles, the jaws. Maschaut, a bag of money, or as macault. Maschecoulis, the stones at the foot of a Parapet (especially over a gate) resembling a grate, through which offensive things are thrown upon Pioneers and other Assai∣lants. Elle a les dents à mas∣checoulis, le haut defendant le bas, she hath a thin row of teeth, whose rottenness and stench drive men from her trench. Masche-crouste, a gnaw-crust, a hun∣gry fellow. Maschefouyn, a bar, or one that's fitter to feed with cattle, than to convr with men. Masche-frain, a bridle-champer; a Lawyer. Mascherivet, as macherivet. Mascheur, a chwer. Mascheure, a cawing, o chew∣ing. Maschiller, to nile, or ch pr∣tily. Maschurer, as machurer.
Masclon, the Cholick of the Sto∣mack. Masculeyte, manhood, or the male-kinde. Masle-femelle, an Hermaphrodite, or one that is both man and wo∣man. Maspeton, Laserwort. Masquarade, for mascarade, a Ma∣scarade. Masquarizé, masked. Masquerade, Masquerie, a Mask, or Mummery. Masqueure, a masking, or disgui∣sing. Masquine, the representation of a Lions head, &c. upon the elbow or knee of some old-fashion Gar∣ment. Masserotte, a Wood-cleavers beetle; also the head, or but-end of a club or beetle. Masseter, one of the muscles where∣by the nether jaw is drawn up∣wards. Massicor, a yellow colour made of lead; or as Massicot, oaker made of ceruse, or white lead. Massir, to make massive, solid, hard, or sound; to compact, beat close, or ram hard in. Massitere, a kneader of bread, or of paste. Massonnier, (Adj.) of, belonging to, serving for a Mason, or Masons work. Massoret, a Spirit, Ghost, Hobgob∣lin. Massorets, such Jews as corrected the false-written words of Scri∣pture, not blotting them, (for of that they made ascruple) but no∣ting them with a little o, and setting down their corrections in the margent. Masterel, a small mast, or any mast but the main one. Mastication, a chewing. Masticatoire, a masticatory, a me∣dicine for the rhume chawed, or held between the teeth. Muscles masticatoires, the muscles from which the jaws receive their chawing motion. Mastiché, wherein there is Ma∣stick. Mastieine, manna in grains, manna of the Levant. Mastine, a matiff, or cur-bitch; al∣so a fll quean. Mastiquer, to infuse, or put maslick, rozin, &c. upon any thing before it be sodered; also to joyn, or close with mastick. Mastoïde, as apophyses mastoïdes, processes of bones descending from the sides of the head behinde the ears. Muscle mastoïde, a muscle that bends and bows down the head. Masturbation, filthy frigging. Matachin, for matassin, the Matachin dance; also those that dance it. Mate, a number of sprigs growing together upon an herb. Enfans de la mate, Cheaters, Cut-pur∣ses. Matelotage, the hire of a ship or boat, and of the Sailers or Water∣men thereto belonging; the sraight or fare due for the use of a ship or boat. Mateologie, vain inquiry, or over-cu∣rious search into high matters and mysteries. Mateologien, a vain, or over-curi∣ous searcher into high matters. Mateotechne, vain knowledge, croo∣ked art. Materas, for matelas, mattress, or quilt to lie on; also a quarrel, or arrow for a Crosbow. Materas desempenné, an unfeathered quarrel; also a shittle-headed fellow. Matereau, as matz, or as masterel. Materien, timber for building. Maternité, motherhood. Matetoultier, for maltotier, a ga∣therer of taxes. Mathelineux, frentick, wilde, half mad. Mathematique, (Adj.) mathematical. Matheotheene, as mateotechne. Matine, as mastine. Matlas, as materas. Matlassé, of quilts. Matou, Matouard, a He-cat. Matrac, a kinde of glass-bottle. Matrasser, to mall, or beat down; to break, or bruise asunder. Matraz, as matrac. Matrical, belonging to, or serving for the matrix. Matricave, Fedderfew. Matricide, that hath kill'd his mother. Matricile, of, or belonging to the matrix. Matrimonie, matrimony. Matronal, matron-like, motherly, grave. Matrones, Damask-violets, Queens-gilliflowers. Mattarruys, a mad, rash, or hair-brained ass. Mattelé, knotted, clotted, curd∣led. Mattes, curds, or curdles. Matti, dried up. Mattinel, of the morning; also time∣ly, or early in the morning. Mattonné, as Ciel mattonné, a skie full of small curdled clouds. Mattraz, as materas. Maturatif, ripening. Maturation, maturation, or ripen∣ing; a growing to a head, or a resolving into matter. Maturer, to ripen; also to matter. Matz, the mast of a ship. Mau, an evil, or mischief. Mau, (Adj.) bad, ill, naughty. A mau chat mau rat, two knaves well met. Maubrenage, as une femme qui de∣meure à maubrenage, a stinking, or nasty draggle-tail. Maucoereux, queasie stomached. Mauconduict, ill-guided, or govern∣ed. Maudisné, that hath had but a course dinner. Maudite, a kinde of sandy-coloured vermine like a Viper. Maudolé, mishapen, ill-favoured. Mauduict, clownish, unmannerly. Mauffait, Mauffe, a Goblin, a Spirit. Maufle, a Wretch; or as mauffe. Maugisant, ill-bedded, ill-lodged. Maugratieusement, hastily, rudely, unpleasingly. Maugratieux, rude, unpleasing. Maugré, as maulgré. Maugréement, a cursing. Maujoin, the Arabian gum called Beninne. Maujoinct, loose, gaping, ill set to∣gether. Maujoine, as Barbier de maujoine, a Barber of a womans &c. Maulavé, ill-washed. Mauldisson, curse. Maulgré, for malgré, in spight of. Mauloubet, the Wolf (a disease.) Maulubec, as malubec, or as mau∣loubet. Maulx, for maux, mischiefs. Maumarié, ill-married. Maumené, misused. Maunet, unclean, nasty, filthy. Mavortien, martial. Maupiteux, pitiless, unmerciful. Mauplaisamment, unpleasantly, un∣handsomely. Mauplaisance, unpleasaneness, un∣handsomeness. Mauplaisant, unpleasant, unhand∣some.
Mauprest, unready, unprovided, un∣prepared. Maurelle, for morelle, the herb Mo∣rel. Maurequine, as goute maurequine, blindness, or extreme dimness of sight, caused by the obturation of the Optick Sinews. Mausade, harsh, unsavory; uncivil, unmannerly; unapt, unseasonable. Mausadement, harshly, unsavourly; uncivilly, unmannerly; unaptly, unseasonably. Mausadeté, harshness, unsavoriness; incivility, unmannerliness; unapt∣ness, unseasonableness. Mausoigneux, careless, or negligent. Mausoupé, ill-supped, that hath had but a bad supper. Maussane, the wayfaring tree. Mauvaisement, badly. Mauvaistié, badness. Mauvis, a Mavis; a Throstle, or Thrush. Max, as mas. Maxillaire, of, or belonging to the Jaw-bone. Dents maxillaires, the Grinders, or Cheek-teeth. Maye, a kneading trough; also a pile of wood, &c. Mayenche, a Titmouse. Mayeres, the branches of Poplars and Willows, fit to make props or stayes for Vines. May-loubet, the disease called the Wolf. May-mis, maimed. Mayrastre, a step-mother. Mays, Turkey-wheat. Maz, a small Country-Tenement; al∣so the Mast of a Ship. Means, void and empty places be∣tween beds in Gardens, reserved for special herbs. Meat, a way, or open passage; a hole, or pore in the body. Mecaniquerie, Mecaniqueté, mecha∣nicalness; baseness of humour. Mecer, for menacer, to threaten. Mechanizé, made, or grown base, or vile. Mechef, as meschef. Mecheron, a little match, or candle∣week; also a sparkle. Mechine, a Maid-servant, or Cham∣ber-maid. Mechoir, as meschcoir. Mect, a kneading-trough, or tub. Medaillé, set, or furnished with Me∣dals. Medaillon, a little Medal. Medalle, for medaille, a Medal. Medamothi, of no place. Mede, a precious stone that yields a Saffron-like sweat, and a taste like Wine. Medecin, (Adj.) physical. Mediastine, a partition made in the body by certain thin skins, which divide the whole Breast from the Throat to the Midriff into two hollow bosoms. Medicamenteux, curing, healing. Medication, Medicinement, a curing, or healing. Medier, to divide into halves; also to mediate. Medicu, Medicus, so God help me, or by the faith of my body. Medimne, a corn-measure, contain∣ing almost two of our bushels. Medin, an Egyptian coyn of Silver. Mediocrer, to temper, to qualifie. Medique, Medick-fodder, Snail-claver. Medisson, as mesdisson. Medon, the drink Mede, or Braget. Medullaire, of marrow. Medulle, marrow, pith. Medulleux, pithy, full of marrow. Mefaict, a fault, offence, or trespass. Meffaict, (Partic.) misdone, trespas∣sed. Meffaire, to misdo, trespass, or offend. Megalopsychie, magnanimity. Megicier, as Megissier. Megis, tawing; the pieces cut from skins in tawing, or the liquor wherein they are, or have been tawed. Megisserie, the tawing, or dressing of thin skins for gloves, purses, &c. Megissier, a tawer, a leather-dresser. Megiste, very great. Megle, a kinde of forked pick-ax, or gruh-ax. Megre, for maigre, lean. Megrelin, a lean scrag. Megue, as maigue. Mehaigné, lamed, maimed, grown impotent. Mehaigner, to maim, or make lame with blows. Mehaing, a maim, weakness, or im∣potency. Mejane, a Mizzen-sail; also a Guilthead of a middle size. Meiche, for meche, match. Meicheron, a little match, week, or snuff; also a sparkle. Meignie, as mesgnie. Meillauque, Turkey-millet, great black millet. Meillarer, to improve, or make bet∣ter. se Melancholier, to be melancholy. Melandrin, a Sea-fish, that (his black∣ish colour excepted) resembles the Pearch. Melanterie, a Caustick Mineral (of the colour of Sulphur) found in Brass-mines. Melegette, the spice called Grains, or Grains of Paradise. Melet, the name of a Sea-fish. Melette, the Smie, or Sea-groundlin. Meliceride, an Impostume, or Sore, whose humour resembleth honey. Melichore, a winged Scorpion that hath two stings; also a precious Stone that's white on the one side, and of a honey-colour on the other. Melicrat, Mede, or Metheglin. Melin, bastard-yellow, straw-colour. Melioration, an improvement, or bet∣tering; the repair of a House, whereby 'tis much improved. Meliorer, to improve. Melitite, the sweet (or honey) stone. Melle, an apple like a Quince, both in smell and bigness; also a Med∣lar. Mellifier, to make of honey. Melliflue, out of which honey flowes; also sweet as honey. Mellindres, delicate little Pies made of Indian wheat and Sugar. Melline, a filberd. Melliturgie, the making of honey, Bees-work. Melonniere, a garden, ground, or bed of Melons. Melopepon, a Melon-pumpion. Melte, the Circuit of a Judge or Serjeant, the Territory wherein they exercise their Jurisdiction. Melze, for melese, the Larch, or Tur∣pentine-tree. Memarchure, surbating of the feet of cattle. Membraneux, filmy, full of mem∣branes. Membret d'esperon, the gimmew, or joint of a spur. Memelon, as mammelon. Memener, to misuse, molest, oppress. Meminges as meninges in the N.D. Memithé, the bitter and stinking juice of the herb Glaucium. Memorablement, memorably. Memoratif, mindful. Memoriallement, memorably. Memorieux, of a good memory. Menacement, a threatning. Menaceux, menacing, full of threats. Menandé, surely, without doubt. Mendé, as menandé. Mendeux, faulty, false.
Mendicité, beggary, beggarliness. Mendience, a begging. Mene, as mendole. Menestranderie, a company of Min∣strels, or Fidlers. Menestrandier, Menestrel, for Me∣netrier, a Fidler. Menier, ones own. Meniguette, as maniguette. Mennetot, the name of a sweet Apple. Menon, a gelded Goat. Menone, a Ministrel. Mensale, the table-line in the hand. Mensionnier, as Mansionnier. Mensonger, false, untrue. Mensonger, (a Verb) to lie, to fib. Mensongerement, lyingly, falsely, Menstrual, menstrual, of, or belong∣ing to a womans flowers. Menstrue, a womans flowers. Mensurable, measurable. Mentastre, Calamint, Mountain∣mint. Mentereau, a fibber. Menterie, a lye, a fib. Menteusement, most untruly, very falsely. Menteux, full of lies. Menthastre, as mentastre. Menthe, for mente, Mint. Mentibules, the jaws. Mentonnier, of, or belonging to the Chin. Mentónniere, a chock, or bob un∣der the chin; also the chin-piece of a Helmet; also a chin-cloth. Mentule, a mans yard. Menuailles, small ware, or trash. Menuement, slnderly, thinly. Menuet, something small. Menueté, smalness, littleness, thinness. Menuisse, small fish of divers sorts; or the small fry of fish cast into a Pond, &c. for the storing thereof; also a kinde of net wherewith such fish may be caught; also any small trash, guts, or garbage; and the gobbets or parings of fish cut and cast away by Fihmongers; also a small kinde of Gudgeon. Menuiseté, smalness, littleness, slen∣derness. Menuisier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a Joyner, or to Joyners work. Menusaillerie, small stuff. Menuville, as manivelle. Mequine, as mehine. Merane, as mejane. Meratre, for marâtre, a step-mother. Mere de Chastel, du Gibet, de la Justice, the Seat, place, or mark of the Huse of a Lord Chastlain, and of hs Gibbet, or Gallows, which be signs of his Jurisdicti∣on. Mercadence, small traffick. Mercader, a Merchant, or Trades∣man. Mercandeau, mercandier, a paultry Merchant. Mercantil, Merchant-like. Mercerot, a Pedlar. Mercier, for remercier, to thank, or give thanks. Mercuire, the herb called Mercury. Mercurial, of Mercury; born under the Planet Mercury; humorous, fantastical; talkative; crafty, deceitful. Mercurializer, to be humorous, or fantastical; also to talk too much. Merdaille, a crew of shitten knaves, of stinking fellows. Merdé, a kinde of oath. Merdefer, the dross of iron. Merdefin, a Physician. Merdigues, a rustical oath. Merdré, as merdé. Merdugues, as merdigues. Mereau, as marreau in the N. D. Meregrand, for grand' mere, a Grandmother. Merge, a name for ducking sowl. Meriane, Noon-rest. Merianer, to rest, or sleep at Noon-tide. Meridian, for meridien, the Meri∣dian. Meridien, for meridional, Southerly Merin, a Sergeant, or common Bay∣liff. Meritément, meritoriously, deservedly. Merlane, for merlan, a Wting. Merle, for nele, a Medlar. Merlet, a battlement of a wall. Merlier, a Mdlar-tree. Mermelade, Marmalade. Merque, for marque, a mark. Mer∣que de bois, a row, or grove of trees near to a house. Merrain, and Merrien, for marrain, timber for building. Mers, as batture faicte an dessus des mers, upon the head or face. Merveillable, marvelous, admirable. Mery, the gullet, or pipe, whereby meat passeth down into the sto∣mack. Mes, for mets, meat, a mess or ser∣vice of meat. Mes, for plus, more. Oncques mes, never more. Mesadvenance, uncomeliness, or mis∣becoming. Mesadve ir à, to mishappen, to suc∣ceed ill unto. Mesadventure, Mesadvenue, mis∣chance, msfortune. Mesaise, trouble, a fiction, misery. Mesarriver, to happen unluckily. Meschance, a mischief, or mischance. Meschef, the same. Mescheniere, candle-week mullein. Mescheoir, as mesadvenir. Meschine, as mechine. Meschinon, a girl, a little or young Maid-servant. Mesele, Maslin, wheat and rye min∣gled. Mescreable, not to be credited. Mescreu, as mescru. Mescroire, to mistrust, or suspect; also to believe amiss. Mescru, mistrusted, suspected; not credited. Mes-dames, the title of the French Kings Daughters. Mes-damoiselles, the title of the French Kings Brothers Daugh∣ters. Mesdisson, obloquy, detraction; a railing on. Mesdonner, to give amiss. Mese, an eighth, or proportion of eight in Musick. Meseau, Mesel, leprous. Meselerie, mesledness, leprosie. Meseleux, meselled, leproas. Meselle, a leprous woman. Mesellerie, as meselerie. Meselleux, as meseleux. Mesenterique, of, or belonging to the mesenterium. Mesescrire, to write ill, or amiss of; to write against. Mesestimer, to disesteem. Mesfaire, to wrong, or to abuse. Mesgnie, as mesnie. Mesgue, Whay. Mesguis, as megis. Meshaigne, peevish, froward. Meshain, as mehaing. Meshingande, almost off the hinges, loose in every joynt. Meshuy, not to day, not till to mor∣row. Meslangeur, a mingler, a hudler of things together. Meslément, mixtly, confusedly. Mesleure, a medley, or mixture; mingling, or medling. Meslié, for mêlé, mixt. Meslier, a Medlar-tree; also a fruit∣ful Vne, whose leaf is almost round. Meslinge, Meslingé, Meslinger, as melange, melangé, melanger in the N. D. Meslouër, to dispraise, or discommend. Mesmarché, trodden, or gone awry.
Mesmarcher, to tread, or go awry. Mesmarcheure, a wry step, or trea∣ding; an ill posture, or setting of the foot in treading; also a strain got thereby. Mesmement, especially, chiefly. Mesmeté, selfness, its own essence or being. Mesnageable, husbandable. Mesnagement, good husbandry, fru∣gality, thriftiness. Mesnagerement, frugally, thriftily. Mesnagier, Mesnagierie, as mêna∣ger, mênagerie in the N. D. Mesnie, a houshold, or family. Mesoffrir, to underbid; also to wrong, or abuse. Mesolabe, an half Astrolabe. Mesouan, or Mesouen, henceforward, from henceforth. Mesparler, to speak ill, or amiss of. Mespartement, a misparting; an unfit division. Mespert, a half part, or a keeping of a thing for half the profit com∣ing of it. Mesple, a Medlar. Mesplier, a Medlar-tree. Mesprisement, a contemning, or de∣spising. Mespriseresse, a scornful Dame. Mesprison, misprision, error, offence; a thing done, or taken amiss. Mesrien, Mesrin, for marrein, tim∣ber for building. Messagier, for Messager, a Messenger. Messeamment, unseemly, unhandsomly. Messeance, unseemliness, unsuitableness. Messel, for missel, a Mass-book. Messer, a Master. Messeresque, as generosité messe∣resque, the generosity of Italian Gentlemen. Il Messied, it becomes not. Messier, a Keeper, or Oversee of a Vineyard. Messiffier, to say, or sing Mass. Messilier, Sergent Messilier, an Of∣ficer that looks unto Vineyards, and other fruit-bearing grounds. Mession, the Vacation (among Law∣yers & Scholars) during Vintage. Messire, Sir. Messottier, a massing Priest. Mestais, for Metayer, a farmer, a handman. Mestif, for metis, a mgrel. Mestivailles, Mestivales, Harvest-feasts. Mestivé, reaped. Mestiver, to reap, to make harvest. Mestoyant, middle, between both. Mesvenir, as mesadvenir. Mesurage, a measuring. Droict de mesurage, the right of appointing or proportioning of measures. Mesurant, as mesure mesurante, the vessel, or instrument wherewith a thing is measured. Mes-usage, bad usage. Met, for maître, master. Metacarpe, the upper part of the hand, from the wrist to the knuc∣kles, or the root of the fingers. Metagraboulizé, puzzled in. Metagraboulizer, to puzzle himself about. Metais, as mestais. Metaise, a farmers wife. Metalepse, a figure, whereby a word is put from its proper signification. Metalier, of, or belonging to metal; full of, or abounding with metal. Metalise, reduced into metal. Metallier, one that deals in metals. Metallurgie, a searching for metal in the earth. Metaphoriquement, Metaphorically. Metaphrene, that part of the back which is over against the heart. Metaposcopie, a mans psignomy. Metayerie, for metairie, a farm; also the revenues thereof. Metayse, as metaise, and as metaye∣rie. Mete, a limit, bound, or end. Meteil, as mescle. Metelle, the Thorn-aple. Meteorologie, a dirse of Mttors. Methelle, as metelle. Methridat, for mithridat, Mithri∣datum. metopomantie, diination by the face. Metoyant, parting in two; also e∣qually belonging to two. Mur metoyant, a partition-wall. Metrisié, made into mter, put into verse. Mette, the drink Mad. Metteur, & encherisseur de Fermes, a Chapman for Fas. Mettre, (Subst.) a C-measure in some parts of Burgundy, contain∣ing two and a half of that Coun∣try bhels. Metz, a Mssuage, or nement. Meus. the Mood of a Verb. Meuglement, a lling. Meugler, to bellow. Meulette, a little mid-o, or grie∣dle-stone. Meulier, o or belonging to a will (or grindle) a. Dents meu∣lieres, t grinders. Meulon de foin, a cock of Hay. Meulonner, to make up hay into cocks, or slacks. Meulot, a little cock of hay. Meur, for muraille, a wall. Meureté, maturity, ripeness. Meuriere, a ground, or grove of Mlberry trees. Meurisson, a ripening; a making, or growing ripe. Meurler, to bellow. Meurlon, the name of a certain whit. Vine, or Grape. Meurole de pommes, a hoord of Apples. Meuron, a black, or bramble-berry. Meurs, for moeurs, manners. Meurtrier, (Adj.) murthering. Meurtrierement, cruelly. Meusnier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a mill, or Miller. Mx, a Plow-land and Tenement thereto belonging. Meyans, as means. Meyenne, dung, dirt, silthy ordure. Mezarin, a Physician. Meze, an untilled Ground, wherein many several mens cattle run. Mezeau, as meseau. Mezelle, a kinde of brass, or copper, good to make Ordnance of. Mezellerie, meselness, leprosie. Mezenge, for mesange, a Titmouse. Mial, for miel, hon. Miaulement, a mewling, or mewing. Miauleur, a mewler, or mewer. Miauleux, mewling, or mewing. Miault, a mwing, or counterfeit oi of wailing. Mibaudichon, as faire le mibaudi∣chon, to do any thing unhandsome∣ly. Mibrutal, uncivil, barbarous, almost as ade as a beast. Micacollier, the Lote, or Nettle-tree. Michelot, a Pilgrim to S. Michaels mount. Michemis, a Tarkish fruit somewhat resembling the Apricock. Michette, a small manchet. Michon, a Sot, a Loggead. Miclette, an excellent Composition, that stops all kindes of Flaxes, and d's up the superfluous moi∣sture of the body. Micocoules, Lote-berries. Micooulier, the Lote, or Nettle-tree. Micourr to bend, or bow himself a pretty deal; almost, or half to double. Micraine, for migraine, Megrim. Microist, as my-croist. Mideloret, a word coyned in derision of our My Lord.
Midenier, half-penny, or half a fine. Mideronner, to sleep in the after∣noon. Miel (Adv.) not at all, by no means. Mielleusement, sweetly, lushiously. Mielleux, sweet, lushious, full of ho∣ney. Miellier, of, or belonging to honey; bearing honey. Mielsaude, Mtheglin. Mi-esté, Midsummer. Mi-estoupement, an half stopping. Miesure, as miesureux. Miesuresse, incontinency, wanton∣ness. Miesureux, wanton, lascivious. Mieucre, malapert, outragious; or as miesureux. Mieuresse, a saucy quan. Migeotté, full ripe, well-ripened. Mignardelet, pretty, dainty. Mignardeur, a luer, dandler, or cherisher; a soother, or flatterer. Mignardiser, for mignarder, to dan∣dle, cocker, or make much of. Mignie, a troop, or company; a houshold. Mignonnet, a minikin. Mignonneté, quaintness, spruceness. Mignonnette, ones Sweeting, or Sweet-heart. Mignot, a wanton, a darling. Mignotement, tenderly, kindly. Mignotement, Mignotise, a tender usage, a dandling, or cockering. Migration, a removing. Migrelin, a small thin scrag, or ten∣der starveling. Migrer, to remove, to shift from one place to another. Mi-jour, noon. Mil, for millet, Millet. Mil sarra∣sin, French-wheat. Milace, a kind of the Holm, or Scar∣let-oak. Milacié, fed with Millet. Milaire, a mile; also as Cenchrite. Milandre, a little Dog-fish that's mortal enemy to mankind. Miliart, as milliart. Miliasse, thousands, or a huge num∣ber of. Militer, to war. Millefeuil, for milleseuille, Milfoil. Mille-graine, Oak of Jerusalem, Oak of Paradise (an herb.) Millene d'années, a thousand of years. Mille pieds, the Palmer-worm. Milleraye, a M llet-ground. Milleret, a middle Ray, the half of a Ray (a piece of gold worth al∣most 7 shil. Millerine, the straw, or stubble of Millet. Millesoudiers, old maimed Soul∣diers; such as have 1000 sous (or 5 l. sterl) of yearly pension. Milliart, a thousand millions of mil∣lions. Millier (Adj.) of, or belonging to a thousand. Milliet, a Serpent of a greenish co∣lour. Millon, a kind of flint, or hard stone. Milloque, Furmety, or Pottage made of Millet. Milods, half fines due in cases of col∣lateral succession unto Censuel in∣heritance, or in cases of Donati∣on. Milrai, Milret, as milleret. Mime, a fool, jester, or scoffer; a dancer in a Play; a foolish and ridiculous Poem, part, or play; also a grave and sententious Po∣em. Mi-more, swarthy, blackish, half-Moor. Minage, a measuring of corn by the Mine. Droict de minage, a fee due unto some Lords, upon every Mine of corn that's measured within their Territory. Minatere, a Mine digger. Minau, a corn-measure. Minauderies, foolish tricks. Mincé, minced, cut very small. Mince-feuille, Federfew. Mince-feuillé, thin-leaved. Mincelet, somewhat thin, small, or slender. Mincement, slenderly, thinly. Mincer, to mince, to cut into small pieces. Minceté, thinness, slenderness. Minchon, as michon. Mineux, outward, seeming, appa∣rent; belonging to, or consisting in the countenance or gesture of the face; also one that minces it ex∣ceedingly; also mining, or under∣mining; also full of mines. Mingant, a broth thickened with the meal of pounded roots. Mingrelet, thin, or lank. Minime, tres petit, the least, or smallest. Minion, sinople, red lead, vermillion; Painters red, made of burned Ceruse. Ministré, ministred, served, assisted; offered, or afforded unto. Ministreau, a little Minister, small Officer, or Assistant. Ministrer, to minister, serve, or assist; also to offer, or afford unto. Ministresse, a woman that ministers or serves unto. Minois, a or face, or crabbed coun∣tenance; a crafty or discontented look. Minon, a little Kitling. Minons, cat-tails, or catkins; the long aglet-like buds of nut-trees. Minoratif, as medecine minorative, a gentle Physick. Minu, the particular Survey or De∣scription which a Purchaser is bound to deliver unto the Lord of whom his purchase is held. Minué, diminished, lessened. Minuer, to diminish, to lessen. Mioche, a crum, or scrap. Mioler, to mew, like a cat. Mi-panché, half-bowed, half hang∣ing down. Mipotence, as en mipotence, made like a half-gibbet. Mique, a kind of hasty pudding. Miquelot, a Pilgrim to S. Michaels mount; also a petty Pedlar. Mirach, the outward lower part of the belly, covering all the entrals. Miracleur, a doer of miracles. Miraclifique, wonder-working. Miraillet, a kind of thornback. Mirailler, a looking-glass maker. Mirailler, (Adj.) of a looking glass. Miraine, oak of Jerusalem, oak of Paradise. Miramomelin, a Lord over Lords. Mire, for Medecin, a Physitian, or Surgeon. Mirecoton, Mirelicoton, the de∣licate yellow peach, called a Meli∣cotony. Mirelifique, exceeding wonderful. Mirelifiques, toys, bables; tricks to mock apes, to amaze Infants with. Miriade, ten thousand. Mirifique, strangely wrought, ad∣mirably done. Mirlirot, harts claver. Mirloret, a spruce fellow. Mirouiller, Miroitier, as Mirail∣ler. Mirond, semicircular, half round. Mirouaillier, as Mirailler. Mirouallier, (Adj.) often looking into a glass. Mirouer, for miroir, a Looking-glass. Mirtil, a Mirtle-berry; also a Sala∣mander, or Deaf-worm.
Misaille, a wager laid. Misanthrope, a hater of mens com∣pany. Mis en avant, as mon mis en avant, my subject, the thing which I have propounded. Misque, moss. Missal, of, or belonging to the Mass. Missile, as feu missile, a squib, or other fire-work thrown. Missotage, things belonging to the Mass. Missotier, of the Mass. Mistagogue, a Teacher, or Interpre∣ter of mysteries and ceremonies; also a keeper of the Churches Re∣liques. Miste, neat, fine, or spruce. Mistement, neatly, finely, spruce∣ly. Mistigouri, my pretty rogue. Mistoudin, a spruce fellow. Mistrouille, a great slut. Misy, a caustick a rug, or mineral of a golden colour and luster. Mitaille, great file-dust. Mitan, the middle of. Mitanier, of the middle. Mitaut, as la region du mitaut, the middle region of the air. Mithologie, as mythologie in the N. D. Mithologiquement, mythological∣ly. Mithre, for mitre, a miter. Mitifier, to soften; to digest, or concoct. Mitigation, mitigation, qualifica∣tion. Mitigué, mitigated, qualified. Mitiguer, to mitigate, to quali∣fie. Mi-tirer, to draw out the half of. Mitis, nice, curious, precise; hypo∣critical. Miton, the small worm called a Mite. Mitou, a great cat. Faire le mi∣tou, to dissemble, or play the hy∣pocrite. Mitouard, a cat; also an hypo∣crite. Mitouflé, furred like a cat, or with cats skins. Mitouin, a dissembler, an hypo∣crite. Mitoyen, as moitoyen. Mitraille, broken brass, or copper; lamps of divers metals mingled and melted together. Mitrement, a crowning with a mi∣ter. Mixtionné, Mixtionner, as mistion∣né, mistionner in the N. D. Mizone, the name of an Italian pear. Monadies, good morrow to ye. Mobilaire, for mobile, moveable. Mocayart, the stuff Moccado, or a kinde thereof. Mocquereau, a little mocker. Modeler, to model. Modelon, as modillon in the N. D. Modesteté, modesty. Modicité, moderateness. Modie, an ancient Roman measure containing somewhat less than our peck and a half. Modifiable, qualifiable. Modulation, harmony. Module, the same; also a model, the measure, bigness, or quantity of a thing; also a certain mea∣sure in Water-conduits. Modurre, as madoure. Moe, for mouë, a mouth, an ill-fa∣voured extension, or thrusting out of the lips. Moellon, for moilon, rubbish. Moge, a measure containing about six bushels. Moiau, for moyen, the yolk of an egg. Moignon, a stump, or the blunt end of a thing. Moil, a Sea-barbel, or Sore-mul∣let. Moile, a dam whereby the force of water is broken. Moileux, for mouelleux, full of mar∣row. Moillonneux, moilonneux, full of rubbish. Moiner, to play the Monk, to breed Monks. Moinerie, the state or profession of a Monk. Moinichon, a little paultry Monk. Moinsné, as mainsné. Moissine, a great bunch, or bundle of bunches of grapes, (an Over∣seers fee in Vintage-time) also a little not of bunches or clsters tied together with long stalks, and hangd up to be kept long. Moissonnier, of, or belonging to har∣vest. Faueille moissonniere, a reaping-sickle. Chevreau mois∣sonnier, a fat kid. Oison mois∣sonnier, a stubble-goose. Moite, moist, wet. Moiteau, as motteau; or as motte in the N. D. Moiteur, moistness, humidity. Moiton, the half of a bichot; two bushels and a half, and in some places three. Moitoyen, any whole thing that is injoyed in common; also parting in the midst several possessions. Mur moitoyen, a partition-wall, whereof the one half or side be∣longs to one, and the other to a∣nother; also a wall wherein ma∣ny have parts according to the scope of their Tenements, or state of their Tenures. Moitoyennerie, the enjoying of a thing by many in common. Moitoyrie, for metairie, a Farm. Molaine, as moulaine. Molard, as poire de molard, a ve∣ry tender and delicate pear. Molares, as les dents molares, the grinders, or cheek-teeth. Molé, moulded, cast in a mould. Molebout, a kinde of great Sea∣lump. Moleste, offensive, troublesome, noi∣som. Molestément, offensively, noisom∣ly. Molesteur, a molester, troubler, or vexer. Molestie, molestation, or trou∣ble. Molet, for mollet, somewhat soft, or tender. Molibdene, as plombaigne; also the erb Ledwort. Moliere, a og, or quagmire. Moliere, as pierre de moliere, a grindstone, or grindlestone. Molin, for moulin, a mill. Moliner, to work, or thicken in a mill. Molinet, for moulinet, a round flou∣ri h with a two-hand Sword; also the roll wherein the whip of a Rudders tiller goes. Molinier, a miller. Molition, attempt, endeavour. Mollart, as molard. Mollete, Moloice, softness, tender∣ness. Mollification, a mollifying, or soften∣ing. Mollifié, mollified, softened. Mollifier, to mollifie, to soften. Mollifieur, a mollifier, a soften∣er. Mollinets, the jwels at the end of bodkins; also rings having pearls harging at them. Mollir, to mollifie, to soften. Molu for moulu, ground. Molosse, a foot of three long sylla∣bles.
Molue, for morue, cod, or green fish. Molure, for moulure, a grinding. Molurien, the name of an harmless serpent. Molyboïde, the mineral and leaden coloured calamine; or else the oar of lead, or lead-stone untried. Mome, a momus, a carping fellow. Momentaine, momentary, transi∣tory. Momental, Momentane, the same; also weighty, important, of mo∣ment. Momerie, a carping, or fault find∣ing. Mommerie, a mummery, a mum∣ming. Mommur, a mummer, one that goes a mumming. Mommon, the same; also a com∣pany of Mumers; also a visard, or mask; also a let, by a Mum∣mer at dice. Il luy couvra son mommon, he swived her. Mon, the gisern of a bird. Asçavoir mon sy, whether. C'est mon, cer∣tainly, truly. Monacal, Monastical. Monacalement, monastically. Monade, an unity, or singleness. Monaquat, Mnkhip, the duty or state of a Monk. Monjacart, Silk moccadoe, or a kind thereof. Monceler, to heap, or pile up. Moncelet, a little heap or pile. Moncet, a sparrow. Mondanifer, to be worldly. Monde, (Adj.) clean, neat, clear, pure, sincere. Mondification, a mundifying, or purging. Mondinet, a spruce fellow. Monettes, warning or admonishing women. Monial, of, or belonging to a Monk. Moniale, a Nun. Monilles, neck-laces. Monine, as monnine. Monitorial, moitory, admonishing. Monne, a Monkey, or Pug. Monneage, an Ai or Subsidy of 12 d. paid to the  of Nor∣mandy,  third  by every Hhlder, (except Ci Offi∣cers, benefid men, Gentlmen, poor Widos, and me other pri∣viledged per ons) to the end that the in of the Cotry might not b altered. Monnier, the Chevi, or Chb-fish. Monnine, a marmoset, or little mon∣key. Monnoyage, as monnoyage in the N. D. Monnoyement, a coyning, or money making. Monnoyer, for monoyeur, a mint man. Monochordiser des doigts, to qua∣ver with the fingers. Monocle, monocule, one-eyed. Monogame, one that never had but one wise. Monologue, one that loves to hear himself talk, or talks very much about a very little. Monomachie, a single combat. Monon, a little green-leaved shrub, which bears a red fruit like a small cherry, but not to be eaten. Monope, a Peonian beast as big as a bull, which neerly pursued squirts out a sharp and fiery ordure dead∣ly to such as it lights on. Monopolier, for monopoleur, a Mo∣nopoler, or Monopolizer. Monoue, an Eunuch. Monstier, a Monastery; also a Min∣ster, or Cathedral Church; also any Parish-Church. Monstrée, for montre, a view, sight, or muster of. Monstrement, a shewing. Monstreur, a shewer. Mont, for beaucoup, much. Montable, ascendable. Montagner, faulcon montagner, as Montagon, a kind of hardy faulcon, hard to be kept. se Montaigner, to look big on't, to carry it high. Montaignette, a little mountain. Montaignois, of, or belonging to mountains; residing or dwelling in mountains. Montaignolle, as montaignette. Montain, a kind of faul on that useth to look much on her feet; also the little bird called a Bramb∣ling. Montanage, as montenage. Montance, as à la montance de cent, a rising, or amounting to above an hundred. Montelet, a little mountain. Montenage, Toll paid unto certain Lords by such as buy and sell beasts and other Merchandise within their Territory's. Monte-vin, a strait-mouthed vessel of glass. Montigené, born, or bred on the mountains. Mont-joye, a barrow; a little hill, or heap of Siens laid in or near an high way, for the better dis∣cerning thereof, or in remembrance of some notable act, or accident befallen in that place; also an heap; also a goal to run at. Montouer, for montoir, a mounting block. Montrouäge, as montenage. Montueux, for montagneux, hilly. Moquettes, mocks, gudgeons. Moralisur, an Expounder of mora∣lity's. Morbifique, unwholsome, breeding of diseases. Morbleu, a kind of foolish oath. Morbilles, the small pox. Morcel, for morceau, a bit of any thing. Morcelaire, as Collation morce∣laire, a short collation, a bit and away. Morcelé, nibbled, eaten by bits. Morceler, to nibble, to eat by little and little. Morcelet, a little bit. Morche, food, victals. Morcillant, as un al morcillant, a greedy or hungry eye; such an one as expresses a great appetite to be at it. Mrcillé, piece-mealed, divided into small morsels or pieces; also nib∣led. Morciller, to piece-meal, to divide into small morsels or pieces; also to nibble. Mordant, (Subst.) a kind of great, black, and slow Spider. Mordeur, a biter. Mordicant, nipping, pinching, bi∣ting. Mordication, a nipping, pinching, or biting. Mordienne, a kind of oath. Mordillé, nibled, gnawed. Mordiller, to nibble, or gnaw. Mordiquer, to bite, pinch, or nip. Mords, for mordu, bitten, gnawn, nipped, stung. M reau, as cheval moreau, a black horse. Morée, a kind of murrey, or dark red colours. Morel, as moreau. Morelles, mrl-berries. Morené, th rods, or piles. Morengue, the name of a kind of Olive. Moresse, a woman-Moor. Moret, a kind of Lie, whereof Soap is made; also as morée.
Morets, winne-berries. Morfe, a feasting. Morfée, as morphée. Morfiaille, greedy eating; also bad, or dead wine, such as is no bet∣ter than droppings. Morfiailler, to feed greedily, to writh the mouth ill-favouredly in chaw∣ing or swallowing. Morfiailleres, food, or victuals gree∣dily and ill-favouredly taken in. Morfil, Ivory, Elephants teeth. Le morfil d'un cousteau, the edge-side of a new and unground knife. Morfondement, for morfondure, an over-heating of the blood. Morganegibe, a matrimonial gift, or such a title as our frank mar∣riage. Morgoy, a kinde of rustical Oath. Morguesoupe, à la morguesoupe, whilst they were eating their brewes, or sat pottage. Morgueur, Morgueux, a maker of strange mouthes, or sow fa∣ces. Morhoue, a Porpoise, or Sea-hog. Moribonde, dying, or ready to die. Morienne, dying a natural death. Morigeré, for Moriginé, mannerly, of good carriage. Morille, the smallest and daintiest kinde of red Mushrom. Pinse∣morille, the game called Hinch-pinch, and laugh not. Morin, vent morin, the South∣wind. Morionné, armed, or covered with a murrian. Lievres morionnez, silly and cowardly Tradesmen tur∣ned Watchmen. Soldats morion∣nez, Footmen. Morique, for Morisque, a Morrisk Turnament. Morir, for mourir, to die. Morme, Mormyre, the ruddy and spotted Sea-bream, or Golden∣ny. Morné, dlled, blunted; also tip∣ped, headed, or pointed with. Esperons mornez, spurs with blunt rowels. Morner, to blunt, or dull the point of a weapon; also to tip, head, or point with. Mornil, an Ialian fruit growing like a tad-stool; a trick at cards; a cuff, or pash on the lips. Bailler mornifle sur les levres du Roy, to coin false money. Moroche, the smallest, coursest, and driest kinde of Indian wheat. Moromancie, foolish divination. Moron, as mouron. Morosophe, foolish-wise. Morphée, the morphew. Morphie, Ivory. Morpiaille, as morfiaille. Morquacassé, all bruised, or out of joynt. Morrail de mulet, a kinde of muz∣zle tied about a mules nose, and having hanged at it a great poak full of hay or oats for him to feed on as he goes. Morrailles, as mourrailles. Morre, a pouch-mouth, a mouth guarded with great out-standing or slouching lips; or as mour∣re. Morrion, for morion, a murrian. Morrude, a Gurnard, or Curre-fish. Morsaul, as marsaul. Morsllant, Morsller, as morcillant, morciller. Morsllure, a piece-mealing; a breaking, or dividing into many small pieces. Mortaillablement, by (in) mort∣main; also servilely, slavishly, by villanage. Mortau, for mortel, mortal. Mortement, deadly, as one that's dead; also weakly, faintly, like one that is half dead. Morte-saison, the season wherein her∣ring, or other sea-fish, are not fit to be caught. Mortgage, or Mortgaige, mort∣gage. Mortifere, deadly, mortiferous. Mortifieur, a mortifier. Mortmain, as main morte in the N. D. Mortuage, a mortuary, that which is due or given to a Parson out of a dead mans goods. Mortuaille, a Funeral. Mortuaire, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a Funeral, or mortuary. Morvat, a dot of snivel, or of snot. Morveau, snot, snivel. Morveau de limaçons, the slime of snails. Morvenie, the rough Cdar of Ly∣cia. Morver, to snivel, to be snotty. Morves, les morves de petit point, a kinde of nzie in an horse, du∣ring which b neither knows any that have tded him, nor hears any that come near him. Moscaire, Os moscaire, the great bone whereupon the ridge-bone reth. Moscellin, of, or belonging to musk. Moschardins, small pellets, or grains of a delicate paste made of the gum Dragagant, rose-water, dra∣gons bloud, and musk. Mose, a pattern, as one herring in a barrel shewing the goodness of the rest; or as moison. Mossé, bois moslé, billets, logs, or Logwood. Mosler, to cast in a mould. Mosleur, as mouleur. Mosquets, as mosquettes. Mosquette, a little Turkish Church; also a Musquet. Mosquettes, little Jewels, ear-rings, &c. Motacille, a Wagtail. Moté, as motet in the N. D. Motelle, a powt, or eel-powt. Mothe, a little earthen fortress, or strong house built on an hill. Motoire, moving, that makes to move. Motrice, moving, stirring. Motté, as motet in the N. D. Motté, (Adj.) set, or usually sitting on a clod. Motteau, as mottelet; also a clot of congealed moisture. Mottelet, Mottelette, a little clod, or trf of earth. Motteleux, cloddy, tursie. Mouaillon, for Moilon, rubbish. Mouäner, to yawl, or cry like a lit∣tle childe. Mouärd, mumping, mowing. Moucade, the stuff Moccadoe. Moucadou, a handkerchief. Mouce, blunt. Moucet, a sparrow. Mouchard, a sly fellow; a spy, a pickthank. Moucharder, to spy, watch, or ob∣serve. Mouche, (m.) a ship-boy, or a sailer; also a vine-branch that runs out in length, and is under-prop∣ped. Mouchement, a wiping of the nose; a snuffing of a candle; a moc∣king; a curtailing. Mouchet, a Msquet; a little sing∣ing bird like the friquet; an ear of me kinde of corn, as of mil∣let, &c. the cats tail or haglet that hangs on nut-trees; also any manne of flap. Mouon, a li fly; also the snuff  candle. More, for mouture, a grind∣ing. Mouée de gs, a crowd of people.
Mouffle, a Winter-mittain; the vaulted cover or lid of a Gold∣smiths crucible. Moufflet, plump. Mougnon, as moignon. Mouillement, a wetting, or moisten∣ing; a soaking, or steeping. Mouille-vent, a bibber, one that often wets his wind-pipe. Mouilleure, as mouillement. Mouilloir, a little vessel wherein Spinsters moisten their fingers. Mouillure, as Mouilleure. Mouisson, a Cows milking. Moul de bois, a wood-stack, or pile of wood. Moulaine, mullein, longwort. Mouldeur, a grinder. Mouldure, grist, or grinding; also a pounding, or stamping into pieces. Moulerie, a casting in a mould. Moulette, for molette, a grind-stone for colours. Mouleu, a Moulder, or caster of things into moulds; also a grin∣der; also an Assizer of wood (whether for building or firing) an Officer that looks it be suffici∣ent both in size, quantity, and quality. Moulie, wife. Mouliner, to grinde. Moulinier, a Miller. Moulle, for moule, a mould. Moulleur, as mouleur. Moullon, Moulon, a dry wall made with lime or mortar; also a heap or mass of any such thing. Mou∣lon d'eau, a great billow of wa∣ter. Moulon de foin, a Hay-cock. Mouloter, to hunt after field-mice. Moult, much, greatly, exceedingly. Moulue, for morue, Stock-fish. Mounier, for munier, a Miller; a Kings-fisher; a Titmouse. Mourable, ready, or likely to die. Mourene, as murene in the N. D. Mourin, a Weevel. Mourlon, the name of a fertile Vine. Mouron, for mourron, the herb called Pimpernel. Mourrailles, barnacles for a horses nose. Mourrin, a mite, or weevel. Mourru, chuffy, like the face of a Lion, or the muzzle of an Ox. Mourrues, the Piles or Emrods in the fundament; also the mumps, or mourning of the chine. Mourue, the mumps, and (in a Horse, &c.) the mourning of the chine; also a fish called Poorjack. Mousce, for mousse, moss. Mouschard, as mouchard. Mouschebout, the spotted Cod, whereof Haberdine is made. Mouschetiere, a fly-flap; also the end of a beasts tail. Mouschon, a little fly. Mousque, a name of contempt, or nickname for an ordinary boy. Mousque, (Adj.) that hath lost his ears, or both his ears and his tail. Mousse, (m.) a Skipper; or a Ship-boy. Mousse, (Adj.) dull, blunt. Moussé, dulled, blunted. Mousseau, a little round heap, or ball of moss. Mousselu, mossy. Mousseron, for moucheron, a gnat. Mousseux, mossy, full of moss. Mousson, a Cows milk, or milking, as much as she yields at a milk∣ing. Moussu, as mousseux. Moustaché, having a mustachoe. Moustardier, (Adj.) of, or affecting mustard. Moustele, Moustoile, a Weesel. Moute, grist, or grinding. Moutonnage, Toll paid unto certain Lords by those that buy and sell beasts, or other merchandise, with∣in their Territories. Moutonnaille, Sheep, Weathers. Moutonnée, a tractable, fond, or silly Wench. Mouveur, a mover, or stirrer; a stir∣ring, busie, or troublesome fellow. Moux, the plural of mol, soft. Moyau, the middle, or center of; the nave of a wheel. Au moyau de, in the very bowels of. Moyennement, meanly, moderate∣ly. Moyenneté, meanness, competency. Moylon, Moyne, Moyneau. See them with an i instead of y in the N. D. Moynerie, as Moinerie. Moynesse, a Nun. Moynoton, a little Monk, also the little Titmouse. Moyson, size, bigness, or quantity. Moyton, as moiton. Muableté, mutableness, changeable∣ness. Muance, change, alteration. Mucagineux, slimy. Mucer, to hide. Muche, an hiding hole. Mucilage, slime, or a slimy liquour drawn from seeds, roots, &c. a clammy sap, or juice. Mucosité, sliminess. Mucqueux, slimy, snotty, musty. Mucydan, slimy, mouldy, hoary all the year long. Muement, a changing, altering, or transforming; a turning, or cast∣ing of the coat; a mewing. Muere, dampish. Muerier, for meurier, a Mulberry-tree. Muette, the Chamber or Lodge of a Lieutenant, or chief Ranger of a Forest; also an Hares nest, the form or place wherin she kindles. Mugault, as macault. Mugereul, a kinde of mullet. Mugot, an hoord, or secret heap of treasure. Mugotté, hoorded; also ripened, as fruit in straw. Mugotter, to hoord; also to ripen, as fruit in straw. Muguette, a Nutmeg. Muguette de mouton, the nut of a leg of Mut∣ton. Muguot, as mugot. Muifle, Muifleron, a kinde of Sar∣dinian sheep, whose wooll is hairy like a Goats. Mular, a kinde of great Whale. Mulard, one that hath kiby heels. Mulasse, the Sea-monster called a Whirl-pool. Mulataille, mules, a company of mules, also the kinde or generation of mules. Mulcté, fined, amerced. Mulctoire, finable; also a fining, or amercing. Muletaille, as mulataille. Muliebre, womanly; womanish. Muliebrement, woman-like, woma∣nishly. Mulin, a narrow heel, a high coffin, such as all mules have. Mulin, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a mule. Mullon, as moulon. Mullot, for mulot, a field-mouse. Mulon de soin, an hay-stack, or hay-cock. Muloteur, Mulotier, hunting for, or feeding on field-mice. Multation, a fining. Multe, a fine, or penalty. Multer, to fine. Multicuple, a great multiplicati∣on. Multicuple, (Adj.) manifold. Multiplicable, multipliable. Multipliement, a multiplying. Multre, the skin wherein the Calf lies in the Hindes belly.
Mumer, the little Wag-tail. Munde, clean, neat, or pure. Mundé, Mundifier, as mondé, mon∣difier in the N. D. Mundificatif, mundifying, clean∣sing. Municipial, for municipal, muni∣cipal. Muniment, a strengthening, or for∣tifying; also ammunition. Muni∣mens, justifications of allegati∣ons, in law. Munitionnaire, storing or furnishing with munition or victuals; also belonging thereto. Munitionner, to provide of, or fur∣nish with ammunition; to victual beforehand. Muque, for nuque, the nape of the neck. Muqueux, as mucqueux, Muraillé, walled. Muraillier, Mural, of, or belonging to walls; also cleaving unto walls, as Ivy. Mureraie, a grove of Mulberry-trees. Muret, the Purpleshell-fish; also a bench made against an out-wall to sit on. Murette de poisson, fish-broth, or sauce, wherein fish hath been throughly boyled; also the pickle wherein it is kept; the liver and long fat gut of a Pike. Murgé, a heap of stones pickt up out of a Vineyard or Garden in the dressing thereof. Murler, to low, to bellow. Murmurantement, with murmuring. Murmuratur, a murmurer. Murmuration, Murmurement, a murmur, or murmuring. Muron, a Salamander. Murte, for myrte, the Myrtle-tree. Murtrir, for mourtrir, to bruise; to kill. Musaïque, for Mosaïque, Mosaick. Musangere, a Titmouse. Musaphis, Doctors, or Prophets a∣mong the Turks. Musaraigne, a Shrew-mouse. Musard, a muser, or a dreaming fellow; one that stands gazing at every thing; also a man of no dispatch. Musard, (Adj.) musing, dreaming, or gazing on every thing; lingering, prolonging, delaying. Mort mu∣sarde, death that's long a com∣ing. Musardie, a mump, dump, or dream∣ing; a pause, delay or lingering. Muscadeau, Muscadel, the Wine Muscadel. Muscadelle, a Musk-rose. Pomme muscadelle, a Musk-apple. Muscadet, the wine Muscadel; also a Cider, which (made of a very small and sweet apple) resembles Muskadine in colour, taste, and smell; also the Muscadine raisin. Muscagineux, as mucagineux. Muscardins, as Moschardins. Muscatelin, muscadine. Muscateline, the Musk-pear. Muscellin, of Musk, having Musk in it. Huille muscalline, musk-oyl, an oyl extracted from musk and other Aromatick Simples; also oyl of Ben. Muschebout, as mouschebout. Muscositez, slimy, or snotty humours. Musculeux, brawny, full of muscles. Veine musculeuse, the first branch of the flank-Veins, which commu∣nicates it self with diers Muscles about the Belly and Loins. Musculosité, a musculous substance, or a brawny stiffness. Museleux, Muselier, muzzeling, or tying up the muzzle. Musequin, a little dogs pretty snout; also an effeminate Courtier; also a place to muse in, or gaze out at. Muserolle, a musrol for a horse. Muset, a Shrew-mouse. Musimone, a beast that's bodied like a sheep, and coated like a goat. Musnier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a Miller. Musquardins, as moschardins. Musquat, for muscat, muscadine. Musqueté, for musqué, perfumed with musk. Musquette, a mosquette; also a cer∣tain yellow and hard-rinded pear. Musqueux, full of musk; also as Mucqueux. Mussale, a kinde of shell-fish that somewhat resembles a musle. Musse, a secret corner, or hiding hole; an old nook to lay a thing out of the way in. Musser, to hide. Mussette, a little hole, to hide things in. Mustelle, a powt, or eel-powt. Mut, as mussette. Mut, for muet, dumb. Chiens muts, a kinde of white hounds, which never call on a change; also lime-hounds. Mutation, change, alteration, chang∣ing, exchanging; also a shadow∣ing with colours of a different kind. Mutinateur, a mutiner, a fire-brand of sedition. Mutination, Mutinement, a muti∣ning, a factious stirring. Mutules, brackets, corbels, or shoul∣dering pieces; Compartiments. Muyage, as bailler terre à muyages, to let ground for a certain num∣ber of muys of corn, to be paid in lieu of rent. Myagre, a great, thick, and greenish Snake or Serpent, that aunts houses to hut mi. Mycacoulier, the Lote, or Nettle-tree. My-cornu, half-horned. My-croist, half-increase, or half the profit that's made, half of that which comes of a thing. Bail de bestes à my-croist, a letting out of cattl to the halves. Bailleur de febves à my-croist, a cheater, a cousener. Myere, a Physician, or Surgeon. My-forchu, half-forked. Mygale, a Shrew-mouse. Mygrene, for migraine, Megrim. My-jour, Noon-day. Myne, as mine in the N. D. Mynsser, for mincer, to mince. Myope, a kinde of full-eyed Serpent which hath feet, though they be but little ones. Myre, the male Lamprey; also a Leech. Myrepsique, as balan myrepsique, the aromatical nut or acorn called Ben. Myrique, the shrub Tamarisk. Myrmecique, as Escadrons myr∣meciques, ants. Myrobalan, for myrabolan, a Myra∣bolan plum. Myrtil, a Myrtle-berry; also the less kinde of myrtle, called Noble-myrtle. Myrtillet, Myrtle-berries. Myrtin, of, or belonging to the Myr∣tle-tree. Huile myrtin, Myrtle-oyl. Mysanthrope, as misanthrope. Mysoyé, made half of silk. Mystagogue, as mistagogue. Mystaudique, seeming mystical. Mystaudiquement, mystically, or sacredly in shew. Myste, a Priest. Mythologe, an Expounder of fables. Mythologiser, to expound, or mora∣lize a fable. My-vouté, half-vaulted, half-arched.
N NAbote, Nabotte, a woman-dwarf. Nacle, as nacre in the N. D. Nacqueter, as naqueter. Nadair, as nadir in the N. D. Nadel, a Sloe-worm, or blinde-worm. Nadelle, a Smy, a Sea-ground∣ling. Nagement, Nager, Nageure, a swimming. Nai, a Ship. Naïfver, to represent in lively co∣lours; to describe rightly, or pro∣perly. Naintre, a Dwarf. Naintresse, Naine, a She-dwarf. Naïsé, steeped, or soaked (as hemp) in water. Naïser, to sleep, or soak hemp in wa∣ter. Naissant, (Subst.) as son propre naissant, his ancient Inheritance, Land whereto he was born, or comes. Naissant conventionnel, money given by a father or mo∣ther to be imployed on a purchase for their childe, or the land pur∣chased with such money. Naïzer, as naïser. Nambot, for nabot, a dwarf, a dan∣diprat. Namps, for nans, moveables. Nampt, a distress; a beast or move∣able distrained; also a beast seiz∣ed for trespass or Damage-fesant; also a seizure, or distraining (in which sense our Common-lawyers use Naam.) Obligation par nampt, a bond and pawn to boot. Namptir, Namptissement. See Nantir, nantissement in the N. D. Nantilles, freckles. Napel, Helmet-flower, great Monks hood (a venomous herb.) Naphe, as nafe in the N. D. Napleux, pocke, full of the French pox. Napoller, for napolier, the great clot-bur. Naquaire, a loud Instrument of mu∣sick somewhat like a hoboy. Naque, as naere in the N. D. Naque-mouche, a fly-catcher, an idle gull. Naquer, in gnaw, or bite often, and with a harsh sound. Naquet, the boy that serves or stops the ball after the first bound to make a better chace at Tennis; a Court-keeper, or Tennis-court-keepers boy. Naqueter, to serve or stop a ball at Tennis; also to wait at a great mans door; to observe dutifully. Naqueter les dents, to chatter the teeth. Naqueter de la queuë, to wag the tail. Narcaphthe, an aromatical Indian wood, called by some red Sto∣rax. Narcotique, stupefactive, benum∣ming. Nardin, of Spikenard. Huile nar∣din, Spike-oyl. Nareau, a nostril. Nargues, pish, fie, it cannot be so. Naricard, a great-nosed man. Nariller, as naziller. Narilles, a hawks narrels, or no∣strils. Narquin, Narquois, a cousener, an Impostor, a Gipsie; also the gib∣bridge used amongst such peo∣ple. Narrateur, a narrator, or rela∣ter. Narratif, narrative. Narré, told, related, reported. Narrement, a telling, relating, re∣porting. Narrer, to tell, relate, report. Narreur, as narrateur. Nasal, of, or belonging to the nose. Veine nasale, the Nose-vein, seat∣ed between the nostrils. Nasarde, a fillip, or rap on the nose; also a frump, or jeer. Nasardé, fillipped on the nose; also derided, frumped. Nasarder, to fillip, or rap on the nose; also to break a jest on; al∣so to speak in the nose. Cette corde nasarde, this string jar∣reth. Naseaux, the nostrils. Fendeur de naseaux, a swaggerer, a cut∣ter. Nasomonite, a bloud-red stone strea∣ked with many black veins. Nasquir, to be born, to rise, or have a beginning. Nassel, the chin-hand of an Helmet. Nasselette, a small Scull, or Cock-boat. Nasselier, of, or belonging to a cock-boat, or long-boat. Nasserie, as nassiere. Nassidure, any swelling or tumour in the body at its first rising, and before the kind thereof can be dis∣cerned. Nassiere, a Weel to catch fish in. Naste, a kinde of Pole-reed, or cane; also Naphta. Natel, (Subst.) birth-day. Natoire, a place to swim in. Natice, as Nerite. Nationnaire, ones Countryman. Natreté, knavery. Natté, matted. Natter, to mat. Nattier, a maker of Mats. Nattier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to mats, serving to make mats. Nau, for navire, a ship; also a gut∣ter on the top or side of a house. Navage, for naufrage, shipwrack. Naucelle, a boat. Naucheux, queasie-stomached, or apt to vomit. Naudin, a Coxcomb. Nave, a Ship. Navée, a ship full of. Nauf, a Ship. Naufrageux, causing shipwracks. Naviculaire, Os naviculaire, the se∣cond bone of the instep (so called, because fashioned like a boat.) Navigage, navigation; also a Na∣vy. Naule, nauleage, for naulage, fraught, or fare. Barques de nauleage, wasters, or passage-barks. Navré, wounded, hurt. Navrer, to wound, to hurt. Navreur, a wounder, a hurter. Na∣vreur de gens, a cheating shif∣ter, one that cousens all he deals with. Navrure, a wound, or hurt. Nauseatif, loathsome, or apt to make one spue. Nausée, an offer, or disposition to vomit; also a loathing or abhor∣ring of meats, &c. Nausiclete, the master, or owner of a ship. Naut, a gutter. Nautil, Nautile, the shelly Pourcoun∣trel, made somewhat like a round and open boat, and, swimming ever (except in time of danger) with her belly, or the inside of her shell, upwards. Nautonnier, a Mariner. Naux, as festes naux, Christmas ho∣ly days. Nayer, for neyer, to drown. Nayf, for naïf, plain, downright. Nazal, the nose-piece of an Hel∣met. Nazard, a kinde of harsh or jarring wind-instrument. Nazard, (Adj.) jarring.
Nazarde, as nasarde; also a kinde of pear. Nazarder, as nasarder. Naz de capre, Goodman Goats-nose. Naze, a nose. Nazeaux, as naseaux. Naziller, to root with the nose; al∣so to thrust his nose into every com∣pany. Nazilleux, well-nosed, or having a goodly nose. Neance, a denial; a Traverse in Law. Neantise, trifling, idleness, baseness, cowardise, unworthiness. Neant-prix, a very low rate. Neble, a little cloud; a mist, or fog. Nebulon, a knave, a rascal. Necessitaire, needy; also needful. Necessiter, to necessitate, or com∣pel. Nectar, (Adj.) Nectarin, of Ne∣ctar; sweet as Nectar. Necyomance, divination by confe∣rence with dead bodies raised. Neesle, gros de neesle, a piece of coyn worth about 3 d. sterl. Negatoire, negative. Negocieux, full of business. Negrier, a certain wilde Vine that yields a black grape. Negriez, as negrier; also the black grapes thereof. Negroeil, as nigroil. Neigeux, full of snow. Neigre, duskie, swart, blackish. Nele, cockle growing among corn. Nelle, as neesle. Neller, to varnish, enamel, or glaze with the stuff nelleure. Nelleure, an enamel, varnish, or glazing; one part whereof is of fine silver, two of copper, and three of lead; also a varnishing, or enamelling withal. Nemorale, the wood Tortoise. Nendea, marry no forsooth. Nenuphard, Nenuphar, the water∣lilly, or water-rose. Nepheu, for neveu, Nephew. Nephretique passion, pain in the reins by gravel, or the stone. Nephritide, the same; also the stone or gravel setled in the reins. Nephrocartaticon, (or rather) Ne∣phrocatharticon, physick that purgeth the reins. Neptunales, Neptunes feasts, or ho∣ly days. Nep union, Neptunois, of the Seas nature, of the Sea. Neraut, the name of a Vine. Neret, as le sol neret, is about a quarter less than the Tournois, or one part in six more than half the Parisian. Nerion, the shrub Oleander, or rose-tree. Nerite, a shell-fish and Sea-snail ve∣ry like the Periwinkle. Nerme, nothing. Nerprun, Buck-thorn, Way-thorn. Nerquois, as Narquois. Nerte, the Mirtle-shrub. Oyseau de nerte, the Mirtle-thrush. Nerver, to tie with sinews. Nerveures, strong or sinewy bands; bolt-ropes; welts; carved streaks in wood or stone. Nerveusement, strongly, stiftly. Nervu, for nerveux, nervous, si∣newy. Nesple, a medlar. Nesplier, a medlar-tree. Nesquin, a base fellow. Nessum, Nessun, no body. Netieures, as nettieures. Netre-dene, for nótre Dame, our Lady. Nettelet, pretty, and neat, smug, smirk. Nettier, for netteyer, to cleanse. Nettieures, the sweepings of a house, any cleansings. Nettissoir, a Comb-brush. Nettoyable, sit, or apt to be clean∣sed. Nettoyeures, as nettieures. Neuchu, knotty. Neve, a mole, or freckle on the bo∣dy. Neuëment, simply, absolutely; im∣mediately, forthwith. Neusain, of nine, for nine days. Neusaine, for neuvaine, a ninth, or the number of nine. Neusiesme, for neuviéme, the ninth. Neusiesmement, ninthly. Neusme, Neume, a sound, song, or cl of song after an Anthem, or the long holding of the last note of an Anthem. se Neutralizer, to stand neuter, to take neither part. Ni, (Subst.) a nay, or denial. Niance, as neance. Niant, a denier. Niard, faulcon niard, a Nias-fal∣con. Niceté, sloth, laziness, idleness; sim∣plicity. Nicette, as pucelle nicette, a slow, dull, simple, or foolih girl. Nichul, a nest-egg, the egg that's always left in a hens nest. Nichil-au-dos, a doublet whose back is of courser stuff than the forepart; any thing that makes an outward shew of goodness or worth which inwardly it wanteth or comes short of. Nichilodo, the same. Nicotiane, Tobacco. Nideur, the stench, or fulsome savour of things broiled or burnt. Nidoreux, Nidorulent, smelling, or savouring of broiled or burnt things; also fulsome as such things are. Nieblé, as niellé. Nieds, as niais in the N. D. Niée de poussins, a brood of Chic∣kens. Niellé, blasted. Niement, a denying, or gainsay∣ing. Niespe, an Aspen-tree. Nieu, for nid, a nest. Oeuf nieu, a nest-egg. Nieur, a denier. Nieuses, sweepings. Niez, Niezer, as niais, niaiser in the N. D. Niezeré, silliness, simplicity. Nigauder, Nigauderies, as niger, nigeries. Nigelle, nigella, Bishops-root. Niger, to trifle, to play the fop. Nigeries, sopperies, fooleries, tri∣fles. Nigeur, a sop, or trifler. Nigeuse, a fond, or idle wench. Nigroil, the Sea-bream. Nigromance, Nigromancien, as Negromance, Negromancien in the N. D. Nihil, as mettre nihil en, to disan∣nul, to annihilate. Nihil-gris, a dust, or foot, which mounting up with the smoak of Furnaces wherein copper, &c. is melted, sticks to the roof of the house. Nihilité, nullity, the being nothing, or of no value. Nille, the turning peg of a Vielle; also the ware-band of a Mill-stone. Nimbot, a dwarf, a dandipra, or little skip-ack. Nipheset, a mans yaa. Niqueter, to irde fault. Nii, as u peine de Nisi, under the pain of curse or excommunica∣tion. Nissole, a whith Dog-fi h. Nitouche, as faire de la saincte
nitouche, to play the hypocrite, or make an innocent shw; to seem not to care for a most affected thing. Nitreux, of niter, full of niter, salt or bracki h as niter. Nitriere, the pl wherein niter is frd or gotten. Nitrosité, the saltness, or brack∣shness of niter. Niveter, to be idle or lazy; to be sidling here and there to no pur∣pose. Nocher, a Pilot, or Strs-man. Nodeux, knotty. Nodofité, knottiness. Noë, as Nouë. Noër, to sri; to gird, or jert forward in swimming. Noeus, for neuf, new. Noïalliere, that part of an Orchard wherein the Kernels or Stones of several Fruits are set or sowed for increase. Noif, Snow. Noir-beau, a kind of dog. Noiret, Noiret, blackish, duskish, dun. Noireté, for noirceur, blackness. Noireton, a little black. Noirettes, blackish clifts; also small Walnut trees. Noir-mordant, the name of a great and very venemous Spider. Noirté, for noirceur, blackness. Noir-ver, an apple, or pear, that is not perfectly ripe. Noise, a quarrel, strife, or variance. Noiselle, for noisette, a small nut, or hasel nut. Noiser, to scold, squabble, wrangle, or quarrel. Noiseux, Noisif, contentions, quar∣relsome. Noisille, a small nut. Csser la noi∣sille, to cog a dye. Nois ller, for noiseller, a small-nut-tree. Noisillier, (Adj) full of, or stored with slln s. Noisill, a hasel nut, a small nut. Noisllous des dartes, little date∣sos. Noleage, Nolle, the frught paid for , the sr due for pas∣s . Nombra, . Nombr, a . Nomrement, a telling, or reckon∣ing. Nombres, for Nobe, the num∣bles of tg. Nombreur, a , or reckones. Nombriller, (Adj) of, or belonging to the navel. Nombrillet, a small navel. Nommée, a list. Nommeur, a namer; also a deno∣minator; the figure that's under the line in an Arithmetical fracti∣on. Nomothesie, the making, publishing, or proclaiming of a Law. Nompair, an odd number. Nompareillement, excellently. Non, as un non de la teste, a nod that imports a denial. Nonain, a Nun. Nonante, ninety. Nonantiesme, ninetieth. Noncer, to tell, or declare; to shew or signify. Nonceur, a teller, a reporter, a shew∣er, or signifier. Nonchalamment, Nonchalem∣ment, heedlesly, carelesly. Nonchalance, Nonchalence, heed∣lesness, carelesness. Nonchalant, Nonchalent, heedless, or careless. Nonchaloir, to neglect, or be care∣less of. Nonchalu, neglected, not cared for. Nonciateur, as nonceur. Nonciation, a report, relation, or message. None, the fourth quarter, or ninth hour of the day; happening in Summer about four in the after∣noon, in Winter about two. Nonnain, a Nun. Nonnie, not a whit. Nonpourtant, nevertheless. Non-prix, an undervalue, a low price. Non-valeur, a disability, or defici∣ency; a defect in worth, or want in value. Non-valloir, the same. Nopçage, Marriage, Wedlock; also a marrying. Droict de nopçages, the see d ie to Churchmen upon Marriages. Nopeier, nuptial, of a wedding. Nopeierement, by way of Marri∣age. Nopsage, as nopçage. Nore, the Wise of a Son, a daughter-in law. Norrecquier, a chief Shepherd or Hrsman, that oversees divers mens Cattel. Norroest, for Nord-ouest, North∣w. Nosocome, a Hospital for the disea∣sed. Nossieurs, my Masters. Nostradame, a Lyer, an Impostor. Not, a Southern wind. Notairial, drawn by, (or passed be∣fore) a Notary; belonging to the office of a Notary. Notamment, namely, especially, chiefly. Notariacon, the trick or jert of a Notaries pen, which makes a let∣ter serve for a syllable or words, as &c. for & catera. Nothe, bastard, adulterous, counter∣feit. Notice, notice, knowledge. Notification, a notification, infor∣mation, signification. Notte, for note, a note. Nou, a knot; also the knob, or bunch of the throat; a vessel of stone like a font wherein pots and glasses are set to cool in water. Nou, à nou, swimming, or by swim∣ming. Nouägeux, Nouäilleux, knotty, knobby. Nouäine, as neufaine. Novale, a Vine lately planted; a ground newly broken, or plowed up; land that's made arable. Novalité, innovation; or a renewing. Novalitez, novelty's, new things. Novation, as novalité. Nouë, a little low meadow lying near the water and apt to be over∣flowed; also a gutter between two tiled roofs. Nouël, for noel, Christmas; also a Christmass-Carol, or Song made to the honor of Christ; also a voice of acclamation or congra∣tulation used by people welcome∣ing such as are gracious with them. Nouël nouvelet, the bur∣den of a Christmass-carol. Novenaire, a ninth, or the number of nine. Novenaire, (Adj.) the ninth, also nine. Noverce, a step-mother. Nouet, a little knot; also a little linnen bag, or poke hard tyed up. Nouëure, a making into a knot. Nouëuse, centinody, knotgrass. Novimestre, of nine months, or at nine months end. Nourrin, the fry, or broad of young fish, reserved for the storing of a pond, &c. Nourissable, nourishable. Nourissement, a nourishing, feeding, or sustaining; a breeding, or bring∣ing up.
Nourrisseur, a nourisher, feeder, sustai∣ner. Nouvelet, pretty new. Nouvelis, as nouvellis. Nouvelleté, for nouveauté, novel∣ty; also novel disseisin, a new or late interruption or impeach∣ment of possession. Nouvellis, fallows, ground that lies fallow every other year; or as no∣vales. Nouzille, a small nut. Noveraie, a Grove, or Orchard of Walnut-trees. Noynce, the knuckle of a finger. Noysette, Noysettier, see them with an i instead of y in the N. D. Noz fieux, for mon fils, my Son. Nu, for nud, naked. Nuager, to cloud, to shadow. Nuageux, cloudy, full of thick clouds. Nuaux, clouds. Nubile, Marriageable. Nubileux, cloudy, overcast. Nubilosité, a cloudiness, or overcast∣ing. Nudosité, as nodosité. Nue, for nuée, a cloud. Nuesse, the extent or compass of feo∣dal or Censuel Seigneury, where∣of other Fiefs or Cens are held immediately. Nugicanoricrepe, an idle singer of lies, or trifling matters. Nuictal, nightly, by night, of the night. Nuictamment by night, in the night; or every night. Nuictegal, the equinoctial. Nuicteux, nightly, dark. Nuir, for nuire, to do hurt. Nuisance, hurt, annoyance, dam∣mage. Nuisant, Nuisif, for nuisible, noxi∣ous, hurtful. Nuitamment, as nuictamment. Nulluy, Nully, as Nul in the N. D. Numerable, that may be num∣bred. Numereux, for nombreux, nume∣rous. Numero, the number that's set on every billet in a Lottery. Il en∣tend le numero, he is fully ac∣quainted with the matter. Numerosité, a great number of. Numme, a little Silver coin among the ancient Romans, worth about three half pence sterling. Numulaire, money-wort, two-penny grass. Nuncupative, nuncupative. Testa∣ment Nuncupatif, a Will Nuncu∣pative, a Will not written, but declared in Words before sufficient Witnesses (now abrogated.) Nundination, a trafficking in Fairs and Markets. Nutritif, nourishing. Nuyct, for nuit, night. Nyaïe, an airy, or nest full of. Nyceté, as niceté. Nyche, for niche, a nice. Nyctalope, a night-wandring beast; also a certain herb that shines and is seen afar off in the night. Nymphal, of, or belonging to a Nymph. Nymphée, the water-lilly, or water∣rose. Nymphette, a little Nymph. Nympheux, full of Nymphs. O. OBaine, as Aubaine in the N. D. Obedianciers, four Church-Officers, viz. Dean, Arch-Deacon, Al∣moner, and Sexton. Obediemment, obediently. Obedience, obedience. Obedient, obedient. Obeine, as Aubaine in the N. D. Obeissamment, obediently. Obel, the white poplar-tree. Obelon, a sallad of sodden hop∣buds. Oberé, indebted. Obercau, a hobby-hawk; also a lit∣tle proud squal. Oberon, the hand-vice or tool wherewith a Locksmith holds a key as he files it. Obesité, fatness. Obfusquer, for offusquer, to ossus∣cate, darken, or make dim. Obice, a let, or hindrance. Obicer, as objicer. Objicer, to object, or lay against; to upbraid, or twit in the teeth with. Obit, a burial, or funeral. Objurgateur, a chider, rebuker, or reprover. Objurgation, an objurgation, or re∣proof. Objurgatoire, objurgatory, chiding, rebuking. Objurguer, to chide, reprove, or re∣buke. Oblade, a kind of Sea-ruff, or Sea-pearch. Oblectation, delight. Oblecter, to rejoyce. Obliage, Droict d'Obliage, a fine paid in some places by Tenants, who have not paid their rents, or performed their yearly duties on their usual days. Obliaige, as Obliage. Obligatoire, obligatory, binding. Obliteré, obliterated, abolished. Oblivieux, forgetful; also causing forgetfulness. Oblivion, oblivion, forgetfulness. Oblong, oblong, somewhat long. Obnubiler, to make cloudy, or dark. Obnunciation, a forbidding of any thing upon a sore-knowledge, con∣jecture, or likelyhood, of the ill success thereof. Obombration, an obumbration, or shadowing. Obombrer, to obumbrate, or sha∣dow. Obre, lung-wort, lions claw. Obreptice, stoln, falsly come by. Obreption, the getting of a thing by dissimulation or private conse∣nage. Obreptissement, by stealth. Obrize, Or obrize, gold perfectly sined or tried. Obrophore, a carrier of light. Obrué, overwhelmed, opppressed. Obsequieux, obsequious, officious, du∣tiful. Observance, observance, duty, re∣spect, or regard; an observation; a law, discipline, or ordinance; fashion, use, custom. Observantins, Freres de l'Obser∣vance, an Order of gray Francis∣can Friars. Obsesseur, a besieger. Obsister, to withstand, or resist; to gainsay, impeach, let, or stop. Obstaclement, a letting, hindering, or impeaching; also a stoping or shutting up. Obstacler, to let, hinder, impeach; to stop, or shut up. Obstant, withstanding. Obstaqué, hindered. Obtemperation, obedience. Obtemperé, obeyed. Obtemperer, to obey. Obtenebrer, to obscure, or dar∣ken. Obtenement, an obtaining, or at∣taining unto.
Obtenue, a purchase, or a thing ob∣tained. Obtester, to object, conjure, humbly or heartily to beseech; also to call to witness, or call upon for suc∣cour. Obtrectateur, a detractor, backbiter, or standerer. Obtrectation, detraction, backbi∣ting, slandering. Obtundre, to beat, strike, or thump; to blunt, or make dull; to incul∣cate, or repeat often; to weary, or they with words. Obturateur, a stopper, or shutter up. Obturation, a stopping, or shutting up. Obturber, to disturb, to trouble. Obtus, blunt, edgeless; weakened, without spirit. Obtusement, bluntly, dully. Obvention, a meeting with, a coming against; happening, or chancing unto. Obvention testamentaire, a Legacy bestowed by chance, or where it was not looked for. Obumbré, overshadowed. Obumbrer, to overshadow. Ocaigne, Ocaine, Dogs-leather, or a dogs skin well dressed. Occasionnellement, occasionally. Occasionner, to occasion. Occiant, West. Occiant, (Adj.) killing, staying. Occipital, belonging to the noddle, or hinder part of the head. Occire, to kill, to stay. Occis, killed, or slain. Occision, a killing, or slaying. Occultateur, a concealer, or hi∣der. Occultation, a concealing, or hi∣ding. Occulté, concealed, hidden. Occulter, to conceal, to hide. Occupateur, the occupier, possessor, holder, injoyer of a thing which he hath seized. Occurrent, an occurrent, or occur∣rence. Occurrent, (Adj.) accidental, oc∣curring, or coming in the way. Occurrer, to occur, or offer it self; to happen, or fall out on a sud∣den. Oceanique, of, or belonging to the Ocean; residing, or living in the Main. Ociux, idle, that hath little to do. Ocrisse, a scold, or shrew. Octaedre, a body, or figure of eight faces. Octante, eighty, fourscore. Octantiesme, eightieth. Octenaire, an eighth, the number or a proportion of eight. Octimestre, of eight months. Octonaire, eight, of eight. Octostique, a staff, or stanze of eight Verses. Octosyllabe, of eight syllables. Octroy, Octroyé, Octroyer. See Ottroi, &c. in the N. D. Octuple, eight times doubled, six∣teen. Oculairement, perspicuously, evi∣dently. Oculé, quick-sighted; circumsp. Ode, a way; also Diers Woad; so a poetical Ode, or Song. Odelette, Odette, a small, or sh Ode. Odoration, as odorement. Odoré, smelt, scented. Odorement, a smelling, or scent∣ing. Odorer, to smell, or scent. Odorifique, odoriferous. Oe, the voice wherewith Carters use to stop their horses. Oeconomat, Stewardship, (but e∣specially of a Church-living.) Oedemateux, full of (or subject un∣to) a stegmatick and painless swelling. Oedeme, a painless, waterish, and stegmatick swelling. Oedipodique, as jambe Oedipodi∣que, a lame, or gouty leg. Oeilladette, a pretty wink. Oeilladier, belonging to the eye, or look; also eying often affectionate∣ly or wantonly. Oeillage de vin, the filling up of leakie Wine-vessels. Oeillarder, to cast amorous looks. Oeillé, full of eyes, like a Peacocks tail; also filled up as a leaking vessel. Oeiller les vins, to fill up Wine-ves∣sels which have leaked. Ocillres, as bride a oeilleres, a bridle with eye-flaps for a Fore-horse. Oeilleton, a Pink, or small Gilli-flower; also a little bud. Oeiller, (Adj.) of, or belonging to an eye. Oeillieres, the eye-teeth, or tushes. Oesipe, the filth and sweaty greasi∣ness of wool growing on the flank and shoulders of a sheep. Oeson, the weason, or Throat-pipe. Oest, the East-wind, or Coast. Oestre Junonique, a gad-bee, or dun fly. Oeuf molette, an Omelet, or Pan∣cake of eggs. Oeuvance, Oeuve, the row, or spawn of a fih. Offendre, to offend, or displease. Offenfement, an offending, or dis∣pleasing. Offensible, offensive. Offux, ppy, full of lumps or gob∣bes. Officiux, officious, ready to serve n. Officine, a shop, or work house. Offraye, an Osprey. cation, su tion, a dimming, . harp taste-plea∣ O gress, or Gun-bullet in . Oe, crastness, indisposition. Ohié, craste, indisposed. Ohier, to make sickly, or craste. Oignement, an anointing; an oint∣ment. Oignoncettes, Chives, Rush-oni∣ons. Oignonnerie, for oignoniere, a plot, or garden of onions. Oignonnet, the Onion-apple, or pear. Oignonnette, a wilde onion. Oillet, as oeillet in the N. D. Oince, a hawks pounce; a hook; a hand, or fist; an Ounce, or Linx. Oinct, for oing, hogs-grease. Oingtereule, Sicklewort, Carpenters herb. Oingture, as Oignement. Oinse, as oince. Oisel, for oiseau, a bird. Oiseler, to fall a birding, or fly at birds, like an ill-made hawk. Oiselerie, Oiseliere, a fowling, or bird-hunting; also a cage for birds, a coop for fowl. Oisivement, idly. Oistre, for huitre, an oistr. Oistriere, as huistriere. Oleagineux, oyly, full of oyl; also of an Olive, or Olive-tree. Oleaginité, oyliness, or an oyly sub∣stance. Oleastre, a wilde olive-tree. Olecrane, the end or tip of the el∣bow; also the elbow it self. Oleeux, oyly, full of oyl. Oliban, Frankincense in drops. Oliette, poppy, chesbols. Oligophore, Vin oligophore, weak,
or small wine, such as can bear but little water. Olivaire, of an olive, like an olive. Olivot, a great olive. Olle, a seething pot. Ollonnes, as aulonnes. Olmeau, a young, or little elm. Olometre, an Instrument wherewith all kinde of dimensions are measu∣red. Olonne, canvas for the sail of a ship; also the sail it self. Olphe, the Mat-rush, or Mat-weed. Omaille, great cattle. Omase, the thick and fatty part of a Bullocks paunch; a fat tripe, or chitterling. Ombilic, as Umbilic. Ombilical, as Umbilical. Ombrageusement, obscurely, darkly; also jealously, skittishly. Ombraire, an umbrello, or sha∣dow. Ombreux, shading, full of shade. Ombriere, an Ʋmbrello. Ombroyer, to shadow. Omioteleftes, alike-sounding clau∣ses. Omitton, a furred Ornament worn by Canons. Omniforme, of all shapes. Omnigene, of all kindes; also most kinde. Omnimode, of every way; also in∣finite in means. Omnipotence, omnipotency. Omnipotent, omnipotent. Omoplates, the shoulder-blades. Omphacin, huyle omphacin, oyl made of green or unripe olives. Omusse, as omitton. Onagrier, of a wilde ass. Le pas onagrier, a very swift pace. On, ever, at any time; also ne∣ver. Oncial, of, or belonging to an ounce, weighing as much as an ounce. Lettres onciales, huge Letters. Oncles, for ongles, nails. Oncques, never. Onctuosité, oyliness. Ond, d'ond, whence, whereby. Ondé, waved; surging, waving; also streaked, wrought, or cut like waves. Ondée, a great and sudden fall of rain; a power of rain. Ondelé, as ondé. Ondeler, to run, to pour down by waves; or as onder. Ondelette, a little wave. Onder, to wave; to make plaits, or streaks like waves; to work, or flourish with waves. Ondette, as ondelette. Ondoyement, a surging, or waving; also a dangling, or a gentle mo∣ving in the wind. Oneraire, of burden. Nefs one∣raires, ships of burden. Onereux, onerous, burdensome, heavy. Onglade, a scratch with the nails. Onglé, nailed; also scratched, or marked with a nail. Ongler, to scratch, or mark with a nail. Onglet, a little nail. Onguentaire, of, or belonging to oyntments. Gland onguentaire, the aromatical nut or fruit where∣of the Perfumers oyl of Benne is made. Onicocrite, a judger of dreams. Onicocritique, judging of dreams. Oniropole, an expounder of dreams. Onitide, wilde (or grove) marjoram. Onocrotal, a swan-like bird that brays like an ass; or as Gout-treuse. Onogire, loose-strife, willow-herb. Onomantie, divination by names; also the skill of repeating many names by the art of memory. Onomatopose, the feigning of a name, or a word made by a cer∣tain sound. Onothomantie, divination by a mans name. Onques, never. Onques-mais, ne∣ver, at no time. Onques-puis, never after, at no time after. Onse des doigts, the fingers ends un∣der the nails. Onyche, the gem called an Onyx. Onymantie, divination by oyl and wax. Onzain, a small coyn worth 11 d. Tourn. Opacité, obscurity, gloominess. Ophiase, a sore, which fretting the skin of childrens heads, makes their hair fall off in divers pla∣ces. Ophioctene, a kinde of the many-legged Scolopendra, and a mortal enemy to Serpents. Ophiogene, the wilde Parship, or Harts-fodder. Ophite, a kinde of marble spotted like a Serpent. Ophraye, for Orfraye, an Osprey. Ophthalmiste, the uttermost skin of whose eye is inflamed. Opineur, an Opiner, one that deli∣vers his opinion. Opiniastrie, Opiniastrise, obstinacy, stubbornness. Opistographes, papers written up∣on on both sides. Opobalsame, Opobasme, opobalsa∣mum, the gum or liquor which issueth from the wounded Balsam-tree. Opocalpase, a kinde of poyson where∣with myrrhe is too often sophisti∣cated. Oportet, it ought, it must. Opportunément, opportunely, seaso∣nably. Opportunité, opportunity, seasona∣bleness. Oppresse, oppression. Oppressé, oppressed. Oppresser, to oppress. Opprobrier, to shame, to rebuke, to check; to cast in the dish, or twit in the teeth. Oppugnateur, an oppugnator, or as∣saulter. Oppugnation, oppugnation, assault; open resistance. Oppugné, oppugned, assaulted; o∣penly resisted. Oppugner, to oppugne, or assault; openly to resist. Opter, to chuse; also to wish. Opthalmie, for Ophthalmie in the N. D. Option, option, election, choice; al∣so a wish, or desire. Opulentement, for opulemment, opulently, richly, abundantly. Opuscule, a little work, a small Book, or Treatise. Oraculeux, Oracle-like, true as the Gospel, infallible. Orade, the Guilt-head (a Sea-fish.) Orager, a tempest to rise. Oraprimes, now at length. Oration, an Oration. Orbe, (Adj.) blinde, sightless; al∣so dark, without light. Coup orbe, a dry blow, a blow that neither makes overture nor fet∣ches bloud. Orbiculaire, orbicular, circular, round. Orbiculairement, orbicularly, cir∣cularly, globe-like. Orbiere, a blinding-board, or head-board, hung before the eyes of an unruly beast. Orbitaire, belonging, or like unto the Orbite. Orbité, Orphanism, lack of Parents; also want of Children; any lack, or want.
Orbite, the hole, or seat of the eye. L'orbite d'une poulie, the mor∣taise wherein the shiver of a pully runs. Orchades, great ships; also a kinde of great fishes, mortal enemies to Whales. Orchal, Wire. Orche, à orche, on the left hand. Orchenie, a transposing. Orches, as Orchades. Orchestre, the Senators or Noble∣mens places in a Theatre, between the stage and common seats; also the stage it self. Ord, filthy, nasty, foul. Ordelot, sullied, stained. Ordement, filthily, nastily, dirtily. Ordi, as Ourdi in the N. D. Ordinateur, as Ordonnateur in the N. D. Ordinatif, ordering. Ordir, to defile, or as Ourdir in the N. D. Ordisseure, a defiling; or as Our∣dissure in the N. D. Ordon, a sloven, a nasty fellow; al∣so the rank or row which a Rea∣per hath undertaken to go on in. Ordonnément, orderly, fitly. Ordonneur, an ordainer, appointer, or commander; also an orderer, or disposer of things. Ordonques, seeing then. Ordoyer, to defile. Ordre de vay, the name of a very small apple. Oré, prayed unto, besought, implored. Le Jeudy & Vendredy orez, Holy-thursday, Good-friday. Oreiller, (a Verb) to hearken, to listen. Oreillere, an Earwig. Oreillet, an Ear-ring; also the ear, piece of an Helmet, &c. the flap or piece that covers the ear. Oreillette, a little ear; also an ear∣ring, or small toy to hang at the ear. Oreilleur, a hearkener, or listener. Oreilleure, an Ear-ring. Oreillier, for oreiller, a Pillow. Orendroit, now, about this time. Orer, to pray. Ores, now, at this time. Orfanité, Orphanism, the state of an Orphan. Orfanté, as Orfanité; also want of Children. Orfaverisé, Orfavrisé, as Orfevrisé in the N. D. Orfavrerie, for Orsevrerie, the Gold∣smiths trade. Orfenin, for Orphelin, an Orphan. Orfevré, for orfevrisé, wrought with Goldsmiths work. Orfevresse, a Goldsmiths wife, a Woman-goldsmith. Orfevreux, furnished with, or work∣ing Goldsmiths work; also full of Goldsmiths. Orfevrie, for Orfevrerie, the Gold∣smiths trade. Orfres, buds. Organique, organical, instrumental, used as a means. Organiste, (Adj.) as organique. Orgasme, an extream fit of anger. Orgée, Barley-greel. Orgeol, for orgelet, a long wart resembling a barley-corn, and growing on the edge or corner of an Eye-lid. Orgie, a fathom. Orgies, the sacrifice of Bacchus. Orgoose, as Licisque orgoose, a salt bitch. Orguilleux, as orgeol. Orgueilli, grown proud, or state∣ly. s'Orgueillir, to grow proud, or stately. Oribus, as Compere d'oribus, a superficial, or hollow-hearted friend. Pouldre d'oribus, pow∣der of projection, or of the Philo∣sophers stone; any cousening, or jugling powder. Orichal, for archal, Wyre. Oriere, as orée. Oriflam, Oriflambe, as Oriflame in the N. D. Oriflant, an Elephant. Orige, the Orix, a fierce and cruel wilde beast. Originalement, Originellement, o∣riginally. -Orillier, for oreiller, a pillow, Orillons, as oreillons in the N. D. Orin, golden, of gold. Orine, for origine, origine. Oriol, as oriot. Orion, for horion, a great blow up∣on ones head or neck. Oriot, a highaw, or witwall. Oripeau, base (leaf, or false) gold, Painters gold, such gold as is laid on hangings of leather, &c. Oripilation, as horripilation. Orizon, for horizon, the Horizon. Orlement, a hemming, or selvedging. Orlet, a little hem, or selvedge. Ormaire, for armoire, a Cupboard. Ormeteau, for ormeau, a little, or young Elm-tree. Orne, the furrow made by a Plough, the deep rut or track made by a Cart-wheel in the ground. Il con∣duisit sourdement cette orne, he carried this business very closely. Ornément, neatly, finely. Orneomantie, divination by the mo∣ving of birds. Ornier, full of ruts, worn by many tracts. Ornithogalon, star of Bethlehem, (an herb.) Oroer, for oratoire, an Oratory. Orologeur, for horloger, a Clock (or Watch) maker. Oroscope, for horoscope, ones Na∣tivity. Orpeau, as oripeau, or as Orpel, silver and by-gold, a kinde of leaf-tin, used in the silvering over of trifles for children. Orphanité, as Orfanité. Orphe, a kinde of dainty Sea-ruff, or Sea-pearch. Orphée, as Orphie. Orphelinage, the state of an Orphan. Orphie, the Hornbeck, or Gar-fish. Orpigment, for orpiment, orpiment. Orpimenter, to mingle, or colour with orpiment. Orprimes, now at length. Orque, as Ourque in the N. D. Orthogoine, Orthogonal, right-cor∣nered. Orthopnoïque, one whose light-pipes are so obstructed that he cannot breath but when he holds his neck upright. Ortié, nettled, pricked, or stung with nettles. Ortier, to nettle, to prick or sting with nettles. Ortieur, a nettler. Ortigue, the Sea-nettle. Ortrail, a Privy. Orval, an inconveniency; also as Orvale, the herb Clary. Orvaris, for hourvari, the doubtings of a pursued Deer. Orver, Orvier, a Snake. Oscines, singing birds; those espe∣cially which presage ought by their singing. Oscitation, a gaping, or yawning; idleness, or negligence. Oseraye, a grove, or ground of O∣siers. Osereux, full of, made with Osiers. Oseur, a hater, loather, detester. Osiereux, as osereux. Osmonde, osmund. Ossailler, to set, or work with bone. Ossaillerie, bone-work; bone-stuff; also a working with bone. Ossas, a great thick bone.
Ossé, bony, made of bone. Ossee, as lossee. Osset, for osselet, a little bone. Ost, as host. Ostade, the stuff woosted. A demi ostade, cut in panes, &c. like a Spanish-leather Jerkin. Ostadine, sattin of Cypres. Ostage, for hôtage, hostage. Ostager, as hostager. Ostarde, a Bustard. Ostel, as hôtel in the N. D. Ostement, a removing, or taking a∣way. Ostenseur, the index, or hand of an Astrolabe. Ostension, a shewing. Ostentateur, an ostentator, a brag∣ger. Ostentatrice, a boasting woman. Oste-vent, a porch, or portal contri∣ved; a piece of cloth hung or set before a door to keep off the wind; also a Penthouse. Ostiere, a Spittle, or Hospital. Ostize, a rent-hen, &c. paid or deli∣vered in lieu of a dwelling house. Ostracisme, ten years banishment, wherewith the Athenian state allayed the immoderate power of their great men. Ostruce, for autruche, an Ostridge. Otarde, a Bustard Otardeau, a young Bustard. Otruche, Masterwort, false Pellitory of Spain. Ottelles, Ottels (in blazon.) Ouaille, a sheep. Ouaine, a sheath. Ouaire, a great leather-bottle for oyl or drink to be kept or carried in. Ouän, a glove; also the last year. Ouärir, for guerir, to cure. Ovation, a small Triumph granted to a Roman Commander that had got a bloodless victory. Ouäzon, as glazon. Oubier, the sap, white, or softest part of wood subject to worm-eat∣ing. Oublayerie, the making of wa∣fers, Oublayeur, a Wafer-maker. Oubliages, certain annual rents due unto some particular Canons of Nostre Dame de Gracay en Ber∣ri. Oubliance, oblivion, forgetfulnes. Oubliant, oblivious, forgetful. Oubliette, a dungeon or close room under ground for hainous Male∣factors. Oublieur, a Wafer-maker; also as oubliant. Oublition, forgetfulness. Ouche, the name of a fertile Vine; a notch; a spot of ground reser∣ved near to a house, for the sowing of Beans, Pease, or Hemp in. Oudre, as ouaire. Ouë, for oie, a goose. Oueille, a sheep. Ouëlle, the River-smelt. Ovent, a penthouse. Over, to lay an egg. Ouëre, as ouaire. Ouïdire, a report, or hear-say. Ouïltre, as ouaire. Ouïr, for ouïe, the sense of hear∣ing. Ouldre, as ouaire; also the Ork (a Sea-monster, and the Whales natural enemy.) Oule, a surge, or great wave of the Sea; also a great Earthen-pot. Oulme, for orme, an Elm. Oulot, a kinde of brass, or copper, fit to make Ordnance of. Oulque, a Hulk. Oultragement, an outraging, wrong∣ing, abusing. Oultrageur, an outrager, wronger, abuser. Oultrebord, exceedingly, beyond the bounds of. Oultrecouler, to surround, or over∣flow. Oultrecuidamment, over-weening∣ly, or presumptuously. Oultrecuidance, an over-weening, presumption, pride, arrogan∣cy. Oultrecuidé, over-weening, presum∣ptuous, self-conceited. s'Oultrecuider, to over-ween, to pre∣sume, or to think too well of him∣self. Oultréement, through and through; also extreamly, exceedingly, beyond all measure. Oultrefendre, to cleave asunder. Oultrefendu, cloven asunder. s'Oultremarcher, to over-reach in pacing. Oultre-naturel, supernatural, beyond nature. Oultrepasse, an excess, or transgressi∣on; an eminency, or eminent thing; a surpassing. L'oultre passe des Advocats, the best or most eminent Lawyer. Oultrepassement, a surpassing, ex∣ceeding, excelling; an eminency; overpassing, outgoing; also a proceeding, or marching for∣ward. Oultrepercé, pierced, thrust, or struck through. Oultrepercer, to pierce, thrust, or strike through. Oultreplus, a surplusage, or over∣plus. Oultreplus, (Adv.) furthermore, moreover. Oultrepreux, extreamly vali∣ant. Oultrer, to pierce, thrust, or strike through; to run through and through. Oultrer une journée, to fight from morning till night, or to fight a battle out. Ourague, the channel, or conduit, whereby the urine of an unborn Infant hath passage. Ourche, the game at Tables called Lurch. Ourlé, for orlé, hemmed. Ourler, Ourreler, to hem. Ourlet, a hem. Oursal, of, or belonging to a Bear. Oursé, as Dehouse. Ourseau, Ourselet, Ourset, a little, or a young Bear. Oursette, a young or little She∣bear. Oursillon, a very little Bear. Oursin, the Sea-bear, a kinde of Tunny. Oursin, (Adj.) bear-like, of or be∣longing unto bears. Oursonne, as Oursette. Ousclage, that which a contracted man gives to his affianced or fu∣ture wife. Ousteron, Outeron, a Reaper, or Mower; a Hinde, or Hireling, onely for the Harvest-time or work. Outillemens, moveables, houshold-furniture or implements. Outin, as Autin. Outre, (Subst.) the Ork; (a Sea-fish) also a Borrachoe; or as ouaire. Outre, (Adj.) over-ripe. Ouvré, wrought, Ouvrée, the eighth part of a Bur∣gundian Journau. Ouvrer, to work, do, act, or endeavour. Il ouvre sagement n cet affaire, he carries him∣self discreetly in this business. Le temps ouvre, time works (or wears) out every thing.
Ouvreur, an opener. Ouvroir, a Work-house, or shop to work in. Ouystre, for huitre, an oyster. Oxicrat, as oxycrat. Oxiderrique, sharpening, or clear∣ing the fight. Oxirrhodin, a liquid medicine of vinegar and Rose-water, apply∣ed to the heads of frentick peo∣ple. Oxisacre, syrup made of vinegar and sugar. Oxugone, sharp, angled. Oxycedre, the crimson, or prickly Cedar. Oxycrat, a potion of vinegar ming∣led with water. Oyard, a gander. Oye, grand'oye, great store. Oyon, a green (or young) goose. Oyre, an oyl-budget. Oyseille, for oseille, sorrel. Oyzeau, for oiseau, a bird. Oyzelerie, as Oyselerie. Oz, for os, a bone. Ozane, the name of an apple. Ozene, a stinking sore, or Ʋlcer in the Nose; also a kind of rank smelling Percountrel fish, that feeds on oysters, and is fed on by lampreys. Ozer, for oser, to dare. Ozeraye, a Grove of oziers. Osereux, full of oziers; also of ozi∣er, of wicker. Ozier, for osier, the ozier, or water-willow tree. Oziere, a withy twig. Ozme, a kind of sink, or pipe, ser∣ving to convey away filth. Ozymel, as Oximel in the N. D. P. PAccages, pastures, or pasture∣grounds. Pace, as mettre en pace, to bury. Pache, a bargain, or contrall. Pacifiement, an appeasing, or pa∣cifying. Pacifiquer, a peace-maker. Pacifiquement, peaceably, quiet∣ly. Pacquette, honey-wort. Pact, for pacte, a bargain or con∣tract. Pactieux, covenanting, contract∣ing. Pactionné, covenanted, bargain∣ed. Pactioner, to covenant, to bargain. Padane, a kind of open bit which gives much liberty to the tongue of a horse. Padoën, Padoënce, Padouën, a common Pasture. Padouir les uns sur les autres, Neigh∣bours to lead their beasts each in∣to others Pastures, or to common one upon the other. Paduentage, Common of pasture in one or divers Parishes. Paellerée, a shovel full. Paellette, a little shovel. Paellier, the landing place of a half∣pace stair, every broad step thereof. Paellonet, a small pan, or skillet. Pageat, Pageau, Paget, Pageot, a little ruddy sea-bream. Pagerot, a little Page. Pagnon, the pinion of a Clock, the nut in whose notches the teeth of the wheels do run. Pagnotte, one that hath neither wit nor courage. Pagre, a kind of Sea-bream. Pagrure, Pagul, Pagure, a Grampel, Grit, or Pungar. Païnisme, Paganism. Paignon, a little loaf of bread. Pailerée, as Paellerée. Paillace, for Paillasse, a straw-bed. Paillarde, a Whore. Paillé, a stack of straw; also a straw-colour; also a Bishops Pall. Droict du paillée, the Priviledge of the Pall, or of wearing a Pall, due only to some Bishops. Paille-maille, as palemaille. Pailles, spangles; also the flakes or sparkles that fly from hammered and red-hot iron. Pailleux, strawy, chaffy; also full of flaws. Paillisson, a small frying pan. Pailliz, a heap of straw, or of chaff. Pailloté, as terre paillotée, earth mingled with chaff or straw. Paincture, for peinture, painting. Paindre, for peindre, to paint. Paineux, full of bread. Paintre, for Peintre, a Painter. Paisibleté, peaceableness, quietness. Paissage de bestes, the pasturing, or feeding of Cattel. Paisse solitaire, a mountain-bird like a Throstle or Owzel. Paissemment, as paissage. Paissiere, a bank or causey held up, or in, by stakes. Paisson, the herbage of Woods or Forrests; the feeding for Cattle therein. Paissonner, to feed, or brouze in Woods, &c. Paissu, fed on, grazed, eaten by Cattel. Pal, a stake, or pole; also a putting to death by a stake thrust long∣ways through the body; a way much used amongst the Turks. Palabre, as parole in the N. D. Palabreur, a pratler, an idle talk∣er. Paladin, a Knight of the round table. Il sait bied de son Paladin, he swaggers very much. Palalalan, the sound of the French March. Palamide, a young Tuny; also the Bonito fish. Palamie, the bloody rifts; a disease or impostumation in the roof of a horses mouth. Palatin, as lettres palatines, such letters as are pronounced by the help of the palate, as, g, t, r, &c. Palemaille, a Game wherein a round box or bowl is with a mallet struck through a high arch of iron (standing at either end of an alley one) which he that can do at the fewest blows, or at the number agreed on, wins. Palene, the pennant, a rope which helps to hoise up the boat, and all heavy merchandise aboard a Ship. Palerée, a pail full of. Palerons des espaules, the shoulder∣blades. Paleter du chanvre, to bruise hemp with a pestle or beetle. Pal-fer, an iron-headed shovel, spade, or stake, used by Gardeners. Pali, a pale, or thick lath; a stack, pole, or pile. Paliatif, cloaking, biding, colou∣ring. Medecines paliatives, me∣decines which ease for a while, but heal not altogether. Paliation, a cloaking, hiding, or colouring. Palicer, as palisser. Palier, for pailier, to palliate, cloak, or disguise. Palifié, impaled, defended with a Palissado. Paligenesie, regeneration, or diver∣sity of generation. Palinotode, diversity of birth. Palis, as Pali. Paliser, to publish. Palisse, for palissade, a palissa∣do. Palissé, palissadoed, paled about. Palisser, to inclose with pales.
Palisson, a flat iron or shovel to bake a cake on. Palicure, the shrub called Ram of Lybia, or Christs thorn. Pall-allant, a strutting Braggado∣chio, or as Palalan. Pallamente, part of the Orelop, or upper deck of a Galley. Pallares, a kind of Indian pulse. Palle, for pale, a shovel; also as palletoc; also the beazil, or head of a ring. Palle, for pale, pale. Palle, party par-pale, (in Heral∣dry.) Pallemail, as palemaille. Pallement, palely. Paller, for parler, to speak. Pallerons, as palerons. Palleter, to scuffle, or fight with. Palletie, a scuffling, or fighting. Palletoc, a long and thick pelt or cas∣sock; a garment like a short cloak with sleeves. Palletoqué, that weareth a palletoc. Pallette, for palette, a little shovel. Palleur, for pâleur, paleness. Palliatif, Palliation, as Paliatif, paliation. Pallier (Subst.) as Palluyer; also the landing place of a half-pac'd stair. Pallir, for pâlir, to grow pale. Pallis, as pali. Palisade, for palissade, a palissado. Pallissement, paleness, or a grow∣ing pale. Pallonneau, as palonneau. Palluyer, an Officer who with a sho∣vel unlades or lades the Salt which is for the Kings store. Palmaire, belonging to, or being in the palm of the hand. Palmant, he that bids most rent for a Lease, or money for an Inheritance which is to be let or sold. Palmée, an out-bidding of all for a Lease, or an Inheritance. Palmer, to stroke, smooth, or lay down with the palm of the hand. Palmer les chevaux des Orgueil∣leux, to abate the huff of the proud. Palmier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to the Palm-tree; also a bearing a branch of Palm. Heritage pal∣mier, an Inheritance exposed unto sale. Palmite, the low or little wild date-tree. Palmule, a date. Palon, the broad end of a wooden shovel; or as masserotte. Palonneau, a piece of a strong rope doubled, and having a knot with an eye in the middle of it, where∣by it serves to fasten draught-hor∣ses unto the thill of a Cart or Carriage. Palot, as tenir palot à, to hold tack, or keep even with; also a dunce. Palouäde, a kind of Spanish fish. Palper, to handle gently, to stroak, or touch gingerly; also to sooth, or flatter. Palpitation, a panting, or often beat∣ing. Palpiter, to pant, or throb; to beat, move, or stir very often. Palte, a soft, and delicate Indian fruit like a great pear. Palthoc, as palletoc. Paltoquier, as palletoqué. Paltret, a Cleaver. Palu, a fen, or marsh. Paludement, a Coat-armor, or horse∣mans coat, a jacket reaching to the knees. Paludeux, as palustre, or full of mar∣shes, fens, or moors. Palvesate, a Targuet-fence, under which the Souldiers that make approaches, or are upon entring of a breach, be shrowded. Palumbe, a ring-dove, stock-dove. Palustre, fenny, marshy, moorish. Paluyer, as palluyer. Pam, for empan, a span. Pamp, for pampre, a vine-leaf. Pamphage, eat all, devouring all. Pamphedron, a hornet, or ox-flie. Pampier, of, or belonging to a vine∣leaf; also, bearing only leaves. Pampillettes, spangles. Pampré, full of vine-leaves. Panaillon, as penaillon. Panax, as panais in the N. D. Pançart, a great gut. Panceron, a great belly, or paunch; the full stuffed belly of a doublet. Pancerotte, Pancetre, a little paunch. Panchaïque, as odeur panchaïque, the smell of Arabian Frankin∣cense. Panchement, for pante, a bending, leaning, or bowing forward; an inclination. Pançu, as pançart. Pand, as pan in the N. D. Pandectaire, containing, or belong∣ing to all manner of books; or books that intreat of all matters. Pané, of bread. Eau panée, a panado. Panegyric, for Panegyrique, a Pa∣negyrick. Panerée, a basket full. Paneron, Panerot, a little basket. Panes, red pimples, or freckles in the face. Paneté, made into bread. Panets, as Panais in the N. D. Paneux, full of bread. Panice, a sudden and madding fear. Panicle, a little loaf. Paniere, as panniere. Panifice, bread-making; also bread. Panifier, to make, or bake into bread. Panil, for panic, panick. Panilliere, the grine. Paniz, for panic, panick. Pannader, a horse to prance, curvet, or bound. Pannades, the curvettings, praun∣cings, or boundings of lusty hor∣ses. Pannoye de soye, plush. Panneau, a young Peacock; also as paneau in the N. D. Pannicule, a little clowt; also the skin wherein a Child lies wrapt in the womb. Panniere, as pain de panniere, a great white loaf yielded by the Tenants of S. Gondon sur Loire, to their Lords yearly, and besides their Cens. Pannilliere, as panilliere, Pannoyer un baston, to wield, or toss a stick. Panomphée, of all Nations and Speeches. Panoplique, compleatly armed. Panosse, vicille panosse, an old hag. Panouere, a little basket, or dosser. Panoye, le Jeu de la panoye, a game, or kind of Wrestling. Pans, a kind of large Imposthumes. Pansard, as pançart. Panser, as penser in the N. D. Pansotte, a small paunch. Panseron, as Panceron. Pansu, as Pançart. Pantagone, for pentagone, five-cor∣nered. Pantagrueliste, a good fellow. Pantagruellion, hemp. Pantais, a difficulty of breathing in hawks, &c. Pantarbe, a certain black stone which resisteth fire. Pantarque, as Pancarte in the N. D. Panteine, a great Net, or Toil, used for the catching of wild beasts. Pantharbe, the name of an artificial Heaven, devised by one Joachas, an Indian Magician. Panthelement, a panting, or puffing. Pantheologie, the whole sum of Di∣vinity.
Pantherien, of a Panther, or like a Panther. Panthiere, a great drawing net. Panthois, for pantois, short-winded. Pantiere, as panthiere. Pantime, a bundle of raw silk. Pantiser, to breathe very fast. Pantodiables, all, or whole Devils. Pantoiment, a panting, or often blowing. Pantoiment tourmen∣ter, to vex one so, as to make him scarce able to draw his breath. Pantoiser, to be short-winded, or be out of breath. Pantomime, an Actor of many parts in one play. Pantoufleux, full of, or fit for slip∣pers. Pantoyer, as pantoiser. Panurge, an old Fox. Pao, for par, by. Paonneau, a young Peacock. se Paonner, to take a pride in him∣self. Paonnesse, a Pea-hen. Paonnien, of, or belonging to a Pea∣cock; peacock-like. Paour, for peur, fear. Paovre, for pauvre, poor. Paovret, a poor sneak. Paoureusement, fearfully. Paoureux, fearful. Papacité, Popedome, Popery. Papafigue, a gnat-snapper, or fig-eater. Paparot, pap, or a poultice. Papechieu, a Lapwing, a black Plover. Papefigue, as papafigue. Papegau, as Papegay in the N. D. Papelard, a dissembler, a flatte∣rer. Papelarder, to dissemble. Papelardie, Papelardise, hypocrisie, flattery. Papeligosse, the Country of Butter∣flies. Paperassé, rifled, or often tossed o∣ver, as the papers of a Student. Paperasses, old papers. Paperat, a Paper- (or Note-) book. Papet, as papin. Papetasié, as papetassé; also much fumbled, as a bundle of written papers. Papetassé, patched, or poorly made up with paper. Papetasser, to patch, or stop up with paper. Papieter, not to eat heartily, to dally with his meat. Papifigue, a scorner of the Pope. Papille, the Nipple of a womans breast. Papillot, a little Butter-fly; also a Plague-sore. Papillotage, a spatling; also the twinkling of spangles, &c. Papilloté, as papillotté. Papilloter, to glisten, or to shake like spangles, to set with span∣gles; to bespattle. Papillotte, for papillote, a spangle; also thistle-down, or the soft down blown from the tops of flowers by the wind. Papillottes de bouë, spots of dirt. Il croid que les estoiles sont papillottes, he thinks the Moon is made of green Cheese. Papilotté, bespangled, or set off with spangles; also bespattled. Papillottement, a bespangling; also a bespaiting. Papillotter, as papilloter. Papilloteux, all bespangled. Papimanes, Papists, or doters on the Pope. Papimanie, Papistry. Papin, pap for children. Papoage, Inheritance by kindred, or ancient descent. Papoal, as Biens papoaux, an estate coming from an Ancestor, or by descent. Papon, pap for children. Papoter, as papieter. Pappe, Thistle-down; also the soft down which grows on the leaves and stalks of some herbs. Paqueter, for empaqueter, to pack up. Paquette, as pasquette. Parabande, the rail that runs along on a rank of Ballisters in a Ter∣race, &c. Parable, easie to be got, or come by. Parabrin, a gratulation, or wel∣come. Paraclitique, that hath an ill name. Paradoxique, against common opi∣nion. Parager, a copartner, or as Para∣geau in the N. D. Paragon, for parangon, a paragon, or peerless one; the most compleat piece in any kinde whatsoever; a pattern, or touch-stone, whereby the goodness of things is tryed. Paragonner, to paragon; to match, or compare with; to try the good∣ness of a thing by comparing it with others. Parin, for parrain, a God-father. Paralellogramme, a long Square. Paralogizer, to reason captiously, to argue deceitfully. Parangonneux, full of comparisons. Paranniser, to perpetuate. Parapel, as parapet in the N. D. Parasangue, as parasange in the N.D. Parasceve, a preparation. Jour pa∣rasceve, Good-friday among Chri∣stians, & among Jews any Friday. Paraseline, as paraselene in the N. D. Parastrates, the conduits or passages whereby the seed goes from the Kidneys in the act of generation; or two Kernels which grow at the end of the Bladder, and re∣ceive the seed brought unto them by Vasa deferentia; also stones set to, or about a pillar. Paravant, heretofore. Parcage, a Park, or Inclosure, a Pound. Parcellé, peece-mealed. Parchage, as parcage. Parcheminerie, a parchment ma∣king; also the street or place wherein parchment is sold. Parcheminier, a parchment-maker. Parciere, as Terres baillées à par∣ciere, land set out for part of the crop. Parcion, a Copartners portion. Parcité, parcity, scantness, frugality. Parçon, as parcion. Parçonnier, for parsonnier, a part∣ner. Parcoulé, strained through. Parcouler, to strain through. Parcours, custome, usage; ancient proceedings in point of commerce between the Towns or Countries of several Lords. Bourgeois de parcours, Freemen of the Juris∣diction of Sens in Champagne, who by a bare challenge, may ad∣vow themselves to be also the Kings Freemen. Parcreu, as parcru. Parcroissant, ripening. Parcroistre, to ripen, or make an end of growing; to come to its full pitch; also, to grow among. Parcru, full grown, throughly ripe, come to perfection; also grown, or sprung up among. Pardigoince, the name of a great and delicate plum. Pardil, a dark-spotted gray colour of a horse. Pardonnement, a pardoning. Pardonnigere, a Pardon-bearer, one that carries and makes sale of the Popes Pardons up and down  country.
Pardormir, to sleep soundly; to fi∣nish or sleep out his sleep. Pardurable, as perdurable. Pareade, a certain fiery-coloured, quick-sighted, and wide-mouthed Serpent, not very venomous. Pareatis, the Conclusion of a perem∣ptory Warrant or Injunction, like unto our Hereof fail ye not, &c. Parecoup, a ward-blow; or any thing that serves to put by a blow. Parefrenier, for Palefrenier, a Groom. Parence, a Livery. or Suit. Parénnité, as perenneité. Parensus, an overplus. le Parensus, the before-named. Parentelle, affinity, consanguinity. Parergue, an addition, or appendix; any thing that is beside the prin∣cipal question, point, or purpose in hand. Paresser, to loiter, to live idly. Paresseusement, slothfully, lazily. Paret, a wall. Paretoine, a certain fatty Painters white. Pareure, as parure. Parfaire, to perfect, to finish. Parfaiseur, a perfecter, or finisher. Parfiler, to spin all. Parfin, as à la parfin, at length, at last. Parfondeur, for profondeur, depth. se Parforcer, to do his utmost. Parsournir, to furnish, or make up. Parfumatoire, used in, or for per∣fumes. Pargoys, cousteau pargoys, a little childs knife. Parguarir, to cure perfectly. Parietaux, the name of two bones in the upper end and forepart of the Scull. Parité, parity, equality. Paritoire, for parietoire, Pellitory of the wall. Parjurement, for parjure, a perjury, or forswearing. Parlementerie, a parley, a confe∣rence. Parleresse, as langue parleresse, a pratling tongue, a tongue that never lieth. Parlerie, a pratling, Parlier, a Pleader, an Attorney. Parlier, (Adj.) speaking; of, or be∣longing unto speech. Parlire, to read over. Parloer, for parloir, a Parlour. Parloire, a pratling, or idle discourse. Parlouer, a Parliament, or Assem∣bly of the States; a publick Con∣ference. Parlouer aux Bour∣geois, an Assembly, Meeting, or common Council of Citizens. Parmentier, a Taylor. Parnage, pawnage. Parnombrer, to tell all out, to rec∣kon all over. Paroccir, to kill outright. Parodelle, a kinde of Cheese-cake. Paroice, for paroisse, a Parish. Paroir, (Subst.) a Farriers paring Knife, or paring Iron. Paroîr, for paroître, to appear. Parolette, a little word, but a word or two. Parolle, for parole, a word, or speech. Paron, a dam, an old one that hath young ones. Parronnel, the name of a pear. Parons, for parens, kinred. Paronychie, Whitlo-grass, or Nail-wort, (a weed.) Paroximique, of, or in the sit of an ague. Paroxisme, the return, or fit of an ague. Parpaigne, a pillar, buttress, or sup∣porter of stone-works, serving to bear up a beam, or summer in a wall. Parpaillon, as parpillon. Parpaing, Parpeine, as parpaigne. Parpillon, a Shrimp. Parpillottes, spangles. Parpin, a great lump of stone un∣squared, or newly cut out of the Quarry. Parquage, as parcage. Parquoi, therefore, wherefore. Parrasme, Stone-rosin. Parricider, to murder his own fa∣ther; also to commit any hainous or unnatural murder. Parrin, for Parrain, a Godfather. Parrodelle, as parodelle. Parroquet, for perroquet, a Par∣rat. Parservir, to serve throughly. Parsimonie, parsimony, or thrift. Parsoy, à parsoy, by himself; al∣so from him, by his intreaty or means. Part, for naissance, a birth. Partageable, fit to be divided. Partiaire, in parts, for parts, of parts. Partiali, to be partial. Participial, of, or belonging to a Participle. Participalement, as a Participle. Partiment, Partissement, a parting, or dividing; also a departing. Partisseur, a parter, or divider. Partizant, Part-prenant, a par∣taker. Partroublé, extreamly troubled, mo∣lested, or perplexed. Partroublement, an extream trou∣ble. Partuer, to kill outright. Parvenche, for pervenche, the herb Perwinkle. Parvité, smalness, littleness. Parure, a decking, or trimming; an apparel, a suit. Pascage, a grazing, or feeding of cattle. Paschal, for pascal, of, or belonging to Easter. Paschier, a pasture ground. Pascrit, faded, dried, out of season. Paslement, palely, bleakly. Pasmaison, for pâmaison, a fainting fit. Pasqueages, pastures. Pasquenade, a Parsnip. Pasquerages, Pasqueraiges, pastures. Pasquerette, a little dairy. Pasquil, and Pasquille, for pasquin, a Pasquil, a Libel clapt upon a post. Passadoux, an arrow. Passager, for passer, to pass, to go on; to remove often. Passager & varier la voix, to warble, or divide in singing. Passageur, a ferryman. Passagier, for passager, a passenger. Passature, a straining; also the thing that is strained. Passe, time, accidents, occurrences, or things past; also a Hen-spar∣row; the rack of a Cross-bow; the iron goal or arch of a Mâll. Passe de Canarie, a Canary-bird. Passefilé, curled. Passe-filons, small ear-locks, or cur∣led locks drawn out on either side; any tufts of hair. Passéfillonné, curled. Passe-fin, excellent fine cloth. Passemarrel de temps, a merry sport or pastime. Passement, for passage, a passing; also a straining through, Passe∣ment de Tesmoings, an exami∣nation of Witnesses. Passe par tout, a resolute fellow. Une passe par tout, a double Key that opens all the doors in the Court. Passe-passée, a juggling trick. Passe-pied, a caper; also a kinde of dance peculiar to the Youth of the higher Brittany.
Passe-poil, a snipped, or jagged welt of Tassata and the like in a garment. Passe-porte, a Bill of lading. Passe-prouesse, exceeding valiant. Passerat, a Sparrow. Passerelles, Passerilles, raisins of the Sun. Passerin, Sparrow-like; of, or be∣longing to a Sparrow. Langue passerine, the fruit of the Ash, called Ashen-keys. Passe-rose, the name of a rose. Passe-vent, swifter than the wind. Passeur, a Ferry-man. se Passioner, to grow passionate. Passionnerement, passionately. Passon, a posset. Passules, small raisins. Pastenague, Pastenaille, parsenip. Pastenaque, the Fork-fish; also a parsnip. Pasteux, full of dough; clammy, as bread which is dough-baked. Pasticerie, for pâtissierie, pastry. Pasticier, for pâtissier, a Pastry-Cook. Pastilles, little lumps of wood. Pastin, past, a little piece of past or dough. Pastinage, past-meat. Pastis, a pasture-ground not inclo∣sed; also pasture, or feeding for cattle. Pastissage, a making or baking of pyes or past-meats. Pastisser, to make pies or paste-meats. Paston, a mash of meal for a horse; also a certain paste, or mealy oyntment that comforts or streng∣thens his hoof; also the piece of leather wherewith the toe of a shooe is lined. Pastophores, sacred Priests among the ancient Egyptians. Pastorat, a Pastoral office. Pastoreau, Pastoureau, a young, or mean Pastor. Pastourelle, a Shepherdess. Pastre, a Shepherd. Pasturable, which may be turned in∣to, or put unto pasture; which may be fed on. Pasturement, a pasturing, grazing, or feeding. Pasturer, to pasture, graze, or feed. Vain pasturer, to turn his cat∣tle into, or let them run in grounds held Vaine pasture. Pasturier, a Grazier. Pasturon, as paturon. Patact, a tack, dap, or knock. Patafle, the size of bread allowed by Authority. Pataflerie, foppery, foolery. Pataque, a Neapolitan coyn worth 200 Quadrins. Patarasse, as petarasse. Patart, a Low-country-coyn worth a Stiver, five whereof amount to six pence Sterling. Pataut, gross, corpulent, big, fat. Pate, for patte, a paw; also a plate or band of iron, &c. for the strengthening of a thing. Paté, pawed, broad-footed. Pateade, as pareade. Patelion, for patelineur, a cogger, a flatterer. Patelle, the ball, or whirl-bone of the knee; also the little shell-fish called Lympine. Pateller, to chatter, to warble. Patellette de la testiere, the head-dag, the broad piece of leather that runs through the top of a head-stall. Patenostrages, beads. Patenostrier, a maker, or seller of beads; also an hypocrite; also a string of beads. Patent, patent, evident. Patepelue, hairy-handed, rough-footed. Paterliquer, to be fatherly. Pathologie, that part of Physick which intreats of the causes, qua∣lities, and differences of Disea∣ses. Pathologique, of, or belonging to Pathologie. Pathonomique, a necessary and un∣doubted signe. Patible, passive, sufferable. Patibulaire, of, or belonging to the gallows, deserving the gallows. Fourche (signe) patibulaire, a gibbet, or gallows. Justice pa∣tibulaire, high Jurisdiction, power to hang offenders. Paticier, for pâtissier, a Pye-maker. Patientie, for patience, herb pa∣tience, Monks-rhubarb. Patine, the cover of a Chalice. Patiner, to handle rudely, or care∣lesly; to toss and turn a brittle thing often between the fingers. Patinostres, beads. Patinostrier, as patenostrier. se Pationner, as se passionner. Patouil, a dabbling, or slabbering. Patouillard, a dabbler, a slabber∣er. Patouillas, a plash, or puddle. Patouille, for Patrouille, a still night-watch in War. Patouillé, dabbled in with the feet, slabbered. Patouiller, to dabble in with the feet, to slabber. Patriarchie, Patriarkship. Patricotage, a wrangling, or bran∣gling. Patriot, a Father, or Protector of the Country or Commonwealth; also as Patriote, ones Countryman. Patrociner, to protect, or support. Patronal, of, or belonging to a Pa∣tron; done in remembrance of a Patron. Patronner, to take into protection; also to make or frame by a pat∣tern, to imitate. Patronymique, derived of the Fa∣thers, or Ancestors names. Patrouillé, besmeared; also swept, or made clean. Patrouillement, a besmearing; also a sweeping with a maulkin; al∣so a padling in the water. Patrouiller, to besmear; to deprave; to sweep, or make clean with a maulkin; to paddle or pudder in the water. Patrouilleur, a besmearer; also a malicious carper, or depra∣ver. Pattepelue, as patepelue. Pattiner, as patiner. Pattouquis, the pelting sound made by anvil-beating hammers. se Pavaner, as se pavonasser. Pavanier, a Pavine-maker; a dan∣cer of pavines. Paucher, as pocher in the N. D. Paucité, paucity, fewness. Pavesade, for pavoisade, a Target-fence. Pavescher, to shelter. Pavide, fearful. Pavidité, fear. Pavigeade, as pavesade. Pavis, a nectarin. Paulcer, as pocher in the N. D. Paulé, staked, or set with stakes. Paulle, an Italian coyn worth about 11 d. sterl. Paulmelle, Beer-barley. Paumée, a clap, stroke, or blow with the hand. Paumiere, a woman that keeps a Tennis-court. Paumon, the navel-gall (a horses disease.) Paumoule, beer-barley. Pavoisier, a Targeteer.
Pavoiseux, as pavoisier. se Pavonasser, se Pavonner, to take a pride in himself. Pausément, leisurely, fair and soft∣ly. Paute, for patte, a paw. Pautoniere, as Pautonniere. Pautonnier, a lewd, stubborn, or saucy knave. Pautonniere, lewdness, sauciness. Pauzade, a pausing or resting; also a resting seat or place. Payelle, a little round pan; also a little frying pan. Payennerie, Paganism. Payenneté, Heathenishness. Payennie, Paganism. Payrastre, a step-father. Peageau, as Chemin peageau, a Road wherein Toll may be ta∣ken. Peagier, for Peager, a Toll-gather∣er. Peaucier, a Skinner, a Fell-mon∣ger. Peaucier, (Adj.) skinny; of, in, or belonging to the skin. Peaultre, as peautre. Peaussu, skinny, or thick-skinned; also limber, or slaggy, like the loose skin of a withered body. Peautraille, scrapings, or offals of skins, a serue of scoundrels. Peautraillerie, scurvy old stuff of skins or leather. Peccadille, a little sin. Peccant, sinning, offending, trespas∣sing; also offensive. Peccatrice, for pecheresse, a woman sinner. Pece, as perrot. Pecile, a pide, or skude colour of a horse. Pecoul, the tail, or arse; the stalk of any fruit. Pect, the breast, or udder. Pectoncle, a Cockle, or small Cal∣lop. Peculateur, one that robs the publick Treasure, or converts it unto his private use. Peculativement, by robbing of the Prince's, or publick Treasure. Pecule, a stock or substance gotten by private industry or toil. Pecune, coin, money. Pedagogisme, an instructing, or teaching; the office of a Teacher; also Pedantism. Pedales, a horses kickings, or fling∣ings out with the heel. Peder, for peter, to fart. Pederotte, an opal. Pedicule, the stalk of a leaf, or of fruit. Pedieux, the name of a certain Muscle. Pedion, the part of the instep that's next unto the toes, and contains five bones answerable unto them. Pegade, a glass full. Pege, pitch. Pegé, pitched, bepitched. Pegmate, a stage, or frame whereon Pageants be set, or carried. Pegouse, a kinde of Sole-fish, that hath Eye-like spots on her back. Pehoulle, Sea-coal. Peignarre, Peignerre, Peigneur, Peignier, a Comb-maker. Peignoir, Peignouoir, a Comb-case. Peincturer, to paint. Pejorer, to impair; to make, or to grow worse. Peis, for poisson, a fish; also the breast. Pel, for peau, skin; also lime, or plaister, for the walls of an house. Pelain, ners lime-pit. Pelard, a round stick pilled, or bar∣ked. Pelasse, the pilling of the skin; also the paring of an apple; also the rind or bark of a tree. Peldure, the name of a certain hard-skinned sig. Pele, the boult of a lock. Pelegrin, for pelerin, a Pilgrime. Pelerinant, going on pilgrimage. Pelerine, a Pilgrimess. Pelerine de Venus, a Whore. Pelet, a little hair. Pelication, a depilatory, or pitchy Plaister, serving to pull off hair. Pelice, for pelisse, a skin of fur. Pelicé, furred. Pelicieux, wanton, lascivious. Pelis, short wool. Pelisson, a furred petticoat, or frock; also a kinde of white meat much used in Poictou Pellage, the colour of the hair. Pelle, the bolt of a lock; also a shovel. Pelle-bosse, herb-willow. Pellerelle, the falling of the hair. Pellet, the 24 part of a Prime (an exceeding small weight.) Pelliculeux, full of little skins, or thin rinds. Pellucide, bright, shining. Pelon, the outmost rugged husk of a green Chesnut. Pelorde, a little and thick-shelled Cockle, that lives and lies al∣together in the mud. Pelosses, bullace, or little wilde plums. Pelourde, as pelorde. Peluette, the herb Mouse-ear. Pelusse, the paring of fruit; also the pilling, or white and inner rinde of trees. Penade, a bounding, or praun∣cing. Penader, to bound, or praunce. Penaillous, rags, tatters, pat∣ches. Penal, penal, inflicting penalties. Penancier, as penencier. Penard, a melancholy old-man; a poor wretched fellow; also a feather, or plume of feathers; also a mans yard. Penates, houshold-goods. Penault, a Burgundian measure con∣taining 12 Quarts. Penaut, (Adj.) ashamed, out of countenance. Pencer, & Pencher, for pancher, to bend, or lean downward. Penchon, a declining, or weighty inclining; a stooping. Pendage, a hanging. Pendante, a label pendant. Pendardeau, a little Crack-rope. Pendement, a hanging. Pendentif, the Key or Scutcheon of a Vault, that which hangs di∣rectly down in the middle thereof. En pendentif, steep down. Pendereau, as pendardeau. Penderie, a hanging. Pendesyllable, of five Syllables. Pendiculation, a stretching in the approach of an Ague. Pendille, a thing that hangs dan∣glingly. Pendiller, to hang danglingly, loose∣ly, or but by hales. Pendileches, Pend-oreilles, pen∣dants. Pene, the bolt of a lock. Peneau, a flag, or streamer; also a rag, or tatter; also a slut. Peneliere, as penil. Penencier, he that after confession made, or a notorious offence com∣mitted, enjoyns the Confessant or Offender his penance. Pener, to take great pains; also to trouble, ex, or molest. Penusement, defectedly, in a dump. Penide, a pee, the little wreath of sugar taken in a cold.
Penidial, as sucre penidial, fine white Sugar whereof Pennets be made; also the Pennets them∣selves. Penil, a mans, (or most properly) a womans groin. Penillier, belonging to the groin. Penillons, as penaillons. Penit, French wheat. Penitencieux, very penitent. Pennache, a bunch, or plume of Fea∣thers; also a hat or cap after the old French fashion. Penna∣che de boeuf, a fair pair of horns. Pennache de mer, a certain crea∣ture which is neither fish nor plant, at one end resembling a feather, and the uncovered nut of a mans yard at the other. It shines by night like a star. Pennade, as penade. Pennader, as penader. Pennarol de Chirurgien, a Surgeons Case, the box wherein he carries his Instruments. Penneton d'une clef, the bit, or neb of a key. Pennon, a pennon, flag, or strea∣mer. Les pennons d'une fleche, the feathers of an arrow. Pennonceau, Pennoncel, a pennon on the top of a launce; a little flag, or streamer. Pennule, Penon, a small piece of flesh, or of our body, not altoge∣ther separated from the whole. Pensement, a thought, a thinking; a physicking of. Penseresse, Penseuse, a woman that thinks. Penseur, a thinker. Pensil, slightly hanging. Pensioniste, a Pensioner. Pensionné, hired by pension, that takes a yearly stipend. Pensiveté, cark, thoughtfulness. Pent d'un rets, a whole pane, piece, or fold of a net. Pentaphylle, five-leaved grass. Penteur, a Penant, the name of one of the ropes which pass over the top of a mast. Penthiere, as panthiere. Penture, the hinge of a door. Penule, a long Cloak, fit to be worn in rainy weather. Penurie, penury, scarcity, want. Pepelon, the nipple of a dug. Pepetiller, to crackle. Pephage, as pamphage. Pepiement, Pepier, for pepie the pip. Pepier, (the Verb) to peep, cheep, or pule, as a young bird in the nest. Pepier de soif, the tongue to peel by reason of an extream thirst. Pepieur, a peeper, cheeper, puler. Pepinerie, for pepiniere, a seed-plot. Pepin-percé, the name of a certain dry sweet apple. Pepon, a Pompion, or Melon. Pepré, peppered. Pequatille, a peccadillo, a small sin. Peque, a mare. Per, for Pair, a Peer, a Paragon; also a mate, match, or companion; also a certain Game at Cards. Peragration, a wandering about. Peramese, a ninth, in Musick. Peratre, a step-father. Perattendre, to wait for an opportu∣nity. Perce-fueille, Through-leaf, (an herb.) Percele, blue-bottle, corn-flower. Percellé, struck, beaten down. Perce-pain, an Ear-wig. Percepceux, taken, gathered, recei∣ved. Perceptible, for percevable, percep∣tible, receivable. Perception, a perceiving; a gather∣ing, taking, or receiving. Percet, a Peach; also a piercer. Percheux, belonging to, or full of pearches. Perclorre, to benum, to take away the use of the limbs. Perclusion, a numness. Perdable, sit to be lost. Perdement, a losing. Perdeur, a loser. Perdigonne, the name of a plum. Perdriau, for perdreau, a young Partridge. Perdrisur, a Partridge-taker; al∣so an Officer that hath the com∣mand of that Game in France. Perduellisme, Treason against Prince or Country. Perdurable, perdurable. Perdurablement, for ever. Peré, for poiré, Perry. Peregrin, a stranger, a foreiner. Peregrin, (Adj.) forein, outlan∣dish. Faulcon peregrin, a pas∣senger. Peregrination, peregrination, long travel. Peregriner, to take long Journeys. Peregrineux, as peregrin (Adj.) Peregrinité, forn speech, habit, cu∣stom, behaviour, &c. Peremptorisé, Heritage perempto∣risé, an Inheritance whose Challen∣gers having after summons made default, are no more admitted to prosecute or continue their claim. Peremptoriser, to peremptorise, to grant, or pass away peremptorily; or to exclude a Challenger after a default made by him. Perenne, Perennel, perpetual, conti∣nual. Eau perenne, water con∣tinually running, never dry. Perenniser, to perpetuate. Perennité, perennity, eternity. Perequant, an equal rater, or as∣sessor of others; (Adjectively) e∣qualling, rating equally. Perequation, an equalling, or ma∣king even; an equal rating. Perfique, a Pear-plum. Perfiquier, a Pear-plum-tree. Perflable, which may be blown through. Perfoliate, through-leaf, (an herb.) Perforatif, boring, piercing, or thru∣sting through. Perfum, Perfumer, &c. See par∣fum, parfumer in the N. D. Perger, to proceed, or go on. Pergude, perished, lost. Periapte, a medicine hanged about any part of the body. Pericharie, excessive joy. Periclimene, the Wood-bine, or Ho∣ney-suckle. Pericliter, to jeopard, hazard, en∣danger. Pericraine, for pericrane, the Peri∣cranion, the whole skin of the skull. Perier, the gisern of a hen, &c. Periller, to be in some peril, or ha∣zard, to perish. Perilleusement, dangerously. Perimer, to spoil, abolish, over∣throw. Perinée, the seam, or line that runs between the fundament and the cods. Periodic, for periodique, periodi∣cal. Perioste, the skin wherewith the ribs be covered; or the thin skin wherein any bone is covered. Peripherée, the circumference, edge, or border of a circle, &c. Peristile, a Cloister, a walking-place set about with pillars. Perjure, forsworn. Perlette, a small pearl. Perlon, a Rotchet, or Gurnard-fish.
Permanable, permanent. Permeable, quickly running, or pas∣sing through. Permistion, a mingling together. Permutateur, a barterer, exchan∣ger. Permutation, a bartering, or ex∣changing. Permuter, to barter, or exchange. Pernis, as perpins. Perons, startups, high-shooes; fishers boots; also bags, or fatchels of leather. Peroration, the conclusion of an O∣ration. Peroximes, fits of an ague. Perpaigne, as parpaigne. Perpetrer, to perpetrate, act, com∣mit. Perpetuation, a perpetuation. Perpetuller, to tickle. Perpetuons, perpetually begging Friars. Perpins, Perpenders, or Perpent-stones; stones made just as thick as a wall, and shewing their smoothed ends on either side there∣of. Perplex, perplexed, intricate. Perplexement, perplexedly, intri∣cately. Perprendre, to seize, or take into his hands ground that lies waste or common. Perprlnse, Perprison, a seizing, or taking into his own hands (with∣out leave of Lord, or other) ground that lies waste or com∣mon. Perpuce, for prepuce, the foreskin. Perquisiteur, a diligent searcher. Perresine, rosin. Perrie, a Peerdom. Perrier, the ship-Artillery called a fowler. Perriere, as perrier; also a quarry of stone. Perrot, an Oak which hath been (or might have been for the age there∣of) twice lopped. Perruqué, wearing a Perruke; long-hair'd. Perruquet, one that wears an effe∣minate lock or frizled tuft of hair. Perserutation, a through search, or diligent inquiry. Perse, the piercing of a vessel. Perseguier, as persiguier. Perse-pierre, as perce-pierre in the N. D. Perser, for percer, to bore, to pierce. Persin, for persil, Parsley. Persoir, a piercer. Personat, a place or title of honour enjoyed by a beneficed person, with∣out any manner of Jurisdiction in the Church. Personate, the clot, or great bur. Personier, as personnier. Personnage, for personne, a per∣son. Personnerie, a partnership; a sha∣ring, or enjoying with ano∣ther. Personnier, a partner; a joynt Te∣nant, or Tenant in common; al∣so a contributer with others in the payment of Taxes, or other pub∣lick duties; also one that joyns in an Action or Suit with ano∣ther; also a Complice. Personnier, (Adj.) joyning, or enjoy∣ing with another. Moulin per∣sonnier, a common mill. Perspicacité, perspicacity, ready ap∣prehension. Perspirable, which may be breathed through. Perspiration, a perspiration, or brea∣thing through. Perspiré, sprinkled, moistened. Perstraindre, or Perstreindre, to wring, or squeeze hard; also to check, or chide. Pour le per∣streindre en un mot, to be short. Persuadeur, a perswader; an indu∣cer unto. Persuasoire, perswasory. Il Pert, it appeareth. Pertroubler, to trouble. Pertuis, for trou, a hole. Pertuisanon, a little Partisan. Pertuisé, full of holes. Pertuiser, to make a hole, to bore full of holes. Perturber, to trouble, or to di∣sturb. Perversion, perversion. Perversion de bouche, a convulsion whereby the mouth is drawn awry. Pervertissement, a perverting, or depraving. Pervis, as parvis in the N. D. Pes, as peis. Pesade, as posade. Pesart, the disease called the Night∣mare. Peschage, a fishing, or place to fish in. Pescheable, which may be fished in. Pesche-amande, the almond-peach. Pesche-coing, the quince-peach. Peschement, a fishing. Pesche-noix, the nut-peach. Pescher, for Vivier, a fish-pond; also a Peach-tree. Pescheresse, a Woman-fisher. Gre∣nouille pescheresse, the Sea-frog, or Sea-toad. Pescheteau, the Sea-frog, Sea-toad, or Sea-devil. Pescheux, full of fishing. Peschier, for pécher, a Peach-tree. Couleur de fleur de peschier, a peach-colour. Pesle, the bolt of a lock. Il fait le doux Dieu dessous une pesle, he behaves himself gently, he is a fair-conditioned man; or he minces it too much. Pesle-meslé, confusedly mingled. Pesles, thrums, or that which hangs at the end of a piece of cloth like fringe. Pesne, the bolt of a lock. Pesqueur, a Fisherman. Pessaire, a pessary, a great supposito∣ry made of soft wool, and fashio∣ned like a finger. Pesseau, for Paisseau, a stake. Pesson, as paisson. Pesteil, a Pestle. Pesteux, plagy, pestilent, infe∣ctions. Pestifere, pestious. Pestilentiel, pestilential. Pestiller, to paddle, to crackle; to beat thick and short. Pestrissure, a kneading. Petacé, pieced, be patched. Petalisme, a form or sentence of ba∣nishment among the old Syra∣cusans, writing his name whom they would be rid of in an Olive-leaf. Petarasse, a clap, or stroke on the but∣tocks; the farting of a lusty horse. Petas, a mole, or wart; also a kinde of Rouncival-pease. Petasite, lag-wort, butter-bur. Petaud, Petault, a farter; also a footman. Petauristique, tumbling, vaulting, going upon ropes. Petelement, as petelis. Peteler, to stamp, trample, or tread hard upon. Petelis, a stamping, or trampling upon. Petereau, a little fart, or squib. Peteuse, the name of a fish. Petillages, the Orders and Customs observed by Merchants in their trading and custom-paying. Petiot, very little.
Petiteur, for petitesse, smalness, mean∣ness. Petitose, the garbage of fowl. Peton, a little foot; also the slen∣der stalk of a leaf or fruit. Petonner, to pat, or tread down the earth by often trampling on it. Petrar, a wilde Sparrow, less than the tame one. Petrarquifer, to write like a passio∣nate lover. Petreux, Os petreux, the bone of the temples, one of the eight bones whereof the skull consists. Petrification, petrification. Petrinal, a Petronel, or horsemans piece. Petrol, petrole, or petrolle, naph∣ta. Petteler, as peteler. Petulance, petulancy, sauciness. Petum, Tobacco. Peucedane, Horse-strong, Sulpher∣wort. Pevier, as Canon pevier, a Cannon pevier. Peuille, Peulle, part of a new piece of coyn amongst Mint-men, speci∣fying the quantity, weight, allay, and day of delivery out of the coyn. Pevoesne, or Pevoisne, for pivoine, peony. Peuplaye, a grove of Poplar-trees. Peuple, for peuplier, the Poplar-tree. Peupleraye, as peuplaye. Peuresie, for pleuresie, Pleuri∣sie. Pezar, a whole Pease, or Bean∣stalk. Pezart, as pesart. Pezze, the Pitch-tree. Phagediane, a kinde of ulcerous Canker. Phagoue, as fagoue. Phaisander, as faisander in the N. D. Phalange, the name of a most ve∣nomous spider; also a four-square Troop, or Battalion of eight or ten thousand men, ranked so as they may incounter the Enemy e∣very way. Phalene, a small Butter-fly, or moth, which in the night loves to be flattering about candles. Phaleré, trapped, as a Souldiers great horse. Phalerer, to furnish with trap∣pings. Phaleres, Horse-trappings. Phaleuces, verses of eleven sylla∣bles. Phalot, and Phanot, for falot, a cres∣set-light. Phanal, for fanal, the lanthorn of a galley, or ship. Phantasié, fancied, or conceived in minde; also fantastically made. Phantosme, as fantôme in the N. D. Pharasse, a cresset. Pharien, high, or light, as a Watch-tower on the Sea-coast. Pharique, a kinde of dangerous poi∣son. Pharmacie, a curing with drugs. Pharmakeutie, Physick which much cureth by drugs or simples. Pharmaque, a simple, or drug. Pharol, pharot, as Phanal. Phaseoles, Phasiols, and Phasioles, French-beans. Phavier, a Ring-dove. Phée, a Fairy, or one of the Desti∣nies. Phée, fatal; inchanted, bewitched. Phelandrion, Small-burnet, Saxi∣frage. Phengite, the name of a certain bright stone. Phenicé, crimson, scarlet. Philactere, and Philacterie, as phy∣lactere. Philadelphe, a lover of his brother. Philargirie, love of silver, covetous∣ness. Phillyrée, Mock-privet. Philocrise, love of gold. Philogrobolizé du cerveau, that hath got a worm in his head, crack-brained. Philologue, a lover of learning, stu∣dy, or discourse. Philomesse, a lover of the Mass. Philophanes, a lover of light. Philosophalement, philosophical∣ly. Philotheamon, a lover of our Gods. Philotime, ambitious, affecting ho∣nour. Philotome, a lover of Passions. Philtatodelphe, an excessive lover of his brother. Phiphre, a Fife, or small pipe. Phisicalement, naturally. Phissane, a certain tumbling trick; or a licentious way of dancing or singing, used in some places by Buffoons, or Vices in Plays. Phlebotomer, to let bloud. Phlebotomie, bloud-letting. Phlegmagogue, a medicine that pur∣geth flegm. Phlegmon, a certain inflammation of the bloud which causeth a hot and red swelling; also a little and long wart breeding among the hair of the eye-lids. Phlegmoneux, swelling with inflam∣mation; also full of flegm. Phlegmonné, swoln with hot bloud; or troubled with a phlegmon. Phlomie, Phlymouse, physiogno∣my. Phoebe, the Moon. Phoenicoptere, a certain crimson-winged bird. Pholade, as Pelorde. Phoque, a Sea-calf. Phogue, for fougue, a sudden pas∣sion. Phrene, the midriss. Phrigie, as Phrygie. Phrontiste, the first rank. Phrontistere, the front of a building. Phrygie, Phrygian melody; a kinde of tune or musick wherein there seemed to be a divine fury. Phryllelimeuse, Phryllelimouse, phy∣siognomy. Phrymeuse, Phrymouse, the same. Phryson, a Friezland-horse. Phthiriase, the lousie evil. Phthise, for phthisie, phthisick. Phylaciste, Phylacte, a Goaler. Phylactere, a Prison; or as Phylacterie, a scroll of parchment with the ten Commandments written in it, worn by the Pha∣risees about their heads and arms. Phylomie, and Physonomie, for physionomie, physiognomy. Physetere, the Whirl-pool, (a huge fish.) Physiognomie, for physionomie, physiognomy. Physiologie, a reasoning out of the nature of things; also anatomi∣zing physick, or that part of Phy∣sick which treats of the composi∣tion or structure of mans bo∣dy. Physis, nature. Piaffard, Piaffeur, a braggard, a vain-glorious man. Piaffeusement, braggingly, proud∣ly. Piailler, for pioler, to cry like a chick; to scold, to tipple, or drive away time by drinking. Piailleur, a scolding man; also a sipper. Piaison, a tippling, or immoderate drinking.
Pialet, Dodder, (a weed.) Pian, as marcher pian, to march leisurely, to go fair and softly. Pianelle, a Night-slipper. Pianelleux, wearing, or full of slip∣pers. Piat, a young Pie. Piaux, newly hatched chickens, or birds. Pibale, a young Lamprey. Pible, the pizzle of a beast. Pibole, a kinde of Bag-pipe. Piboleur, a Piper. Picadilles, as piccadilles. Picardent, as piquardant. Picardiser, to speak, or do like a Pi∣card. Pication, a pitching, or bepitching. Piccadilles, the several divisions or pieces fastened together about the brim of the collar of a doublet, &c. Piccon, a prickle, or small prick. Picé, pitched, or full of pitch. Piceastre, the wild Pitch-tree. Picée, the Pitch-tree. Pichier, a pitcher. Picmart, a Woodpecker. Picorer, to forrage, rifle, or ran∣sack. Picoreur, a boothaler, a ravening Souldier. Picotage, a pricking here and there; also a spotting, or speckling. Picote, the small pox. Picoterie, a nipping, a dispute. Picoteure, Picoture, a prick; a spot; a freckle, or pimple. Picquamment, piercingly. Picquois, a Pick-ax. Picquot, a prickle, or small prick. Picte, a French farthing, the fourth part of a Denier. Pictre, the breast, bosome, or stomack. Picts, the bulk, or pitch of the body. Pie, for boisson, drink, liquor. C'est un Croque la pie, he is a notable Toss-pot. But pie signifies besides a Goose, the broyled thick skin of a piece of beef, the monstrous ap∣petite of Maids and big-bellyed Women unto coles, ashes, paper, and other such unnatural meats. Pie, for pieux, pious, godly. It sig∣nifies also merciful, black and white as a Magpye. Pieça, long ago, a great while since; also heretofore, in times past. Piecette, a little bit, or piece. Pied-bornier, a Tree that serves to divide several Tenements or In∣heritances. Piedfief, a Fief dismembred, which a Vassal may for his benefit alien to whom he list. Pîed-gris, a clown, a boor. Pied-leger, as pied-viste. Pied-poul, the round-rooted Crow∣foot. Pieds-corniers, certain trees marked out for limits unto the sale of Wood; also as pied-bornier. Pied-sonnant, trampling, or making the ground ring again with his proud steps. Pied-terre, an alighting, or setting foot on the ground. Pied-viste, light-footed, swift of foot. Pienne, rose de pienne, peony. Piepou, as pied-poul. Pier, to sip. Pierigot, as manganese. Pierrerie, for pierriere, a quarry of stone; also stone-work. Pierrette, a little stone. Pierriz, heaps, or walls of dry or un∣mortared stones. Pierron, as perron in the N. D. Pierrotte, a small stone; also a sto∣ny, flinty, or gravelly soil. Pierrou, the name of a certain base Coyn. Piesante, a path, or small way, some two foot and a half broad. Piesette, a piece, or compartment; the joynt whereat the players are hanged in the port, or upset of a bit. Pietaille, a footing, or footman∣ship; also a footman; or a com∣pany of footmen. Piete, a kinde of spade, or digging tool. Pietonner, to fetch thick and short steps. Pietonneux, treading thick and short. Pietre, in bad plight, beggarly, nee∣dy. Pietrement, poorly, wretchedly. Pietrer, to tread down, or to trample under the feet. Pietrerie, wretchedness. Piette, a Pewet. Pieuler, for pioler, to cry like a chick. Pieumart, as piemart, a Wood-pecker. Pieur, for pire, worse. Pige, as pis, or as pinge. Pigeassé, pied, party-coloured. Pigeonnade, a billing, or Pigeon-like bussing. Pigeonelle, a very young Pigeon. Pigeonner, to catch pigeons; also to bill, or kiss like a Pigeon; also to cheat, or cousen a silly fel∣low. Pigeonnerie, the billing of Pigeons; a long and lascivious kissing. Pigeonnet, a young, or little Pi∣geon. Pignaresse, a flax-woman. Pignates, pots, or balls of wilde-fire. Pignaux de Collier, the nails, or prickles of a bandogs Collar. Pigne, for paigne, a comb. Pignes, the griftly parts of the eye-lids. Pignolat, the preserved kernel of a Pine-apple, or conserve of Pine-kernels. Pignoratif, ingaging by suretiship, or with a pawn. Pignoration, a straining, or distrain∣ing; a seising, or taking for a distress,; also an impledging. Pignore, a distress, or a thing that's taken Damage-fesant. Pignorer, to distrain, to seize or take for a distress, or in respect of damage done; also to im∣pledge. Pignouer, a comb-case. Pilée, Pilement, a beating, or brui∣sing in a mortar. Pilette, a little ball; pile; body of a tree; funt; or mortar. Pilettes, pimples about the nose or chin. Piliforme, one of the smallest Mem∣branes of the Eye, before whose glassy humour it stands. Pillard, a pilserer, filcher, purloi¦ner. Pillemaille, as palemaille, a Christ∣mas-box. Pillement, Pillerie, a robbing, or rifling. Pillier, for pilier, a pillar. Pillolet, wild, (running) Tyme. Pillorier, Pilloriser, to set on the Pillory. Pillot, a small pile, or heap. Pillotage, a pile-work, or driving down of piles; a foundation, causey, or water-work made of, or strengthened with piles. Pilloter, to pick, or take up here and there; to gather one by one. Pilloterie, a picking, or taking up here and there, a gathering one by one; also a robbing, or ri∣fling. Pilloti, for piloti, pile, or piles. Piloir, for pilon, a pestle. Pilorier, as pillorier. Piloselle, pilosella, mouse-ear.
Pilot, for Pilote, a Pilot. Piloter, as pilloter; also as Pilotier, to do the part of a Pilot, to sound the depth of water with a line and plummet. Pilotiser, to pile, or strengthen with piles. Pilure, a pill. Pimard, as picmart, a wood-peck∣er. Pimbesche, a subtil Quean, a cun∣ning Drab. Piment, Oak of Jerusalem, or Oak of Paradise (an herb;) also a kind of wholsome pear. Pimente, spurge-olive, widow-wail (a shrub.) Pimer, to crawl, move, or stir. Pimpé, spruce, curiously pranked up. Pimpenauder, to prank up. Pimpenelle, for pimpinelle, bur∣net. Pimper, to make spruce or fine. Pimperneau, a Grig, or Spitch-cock. Pimpernelle, for pimpinelle, bur∣net. Pimpompet, a kind of Game where∣in three it each other on the bum with one of their feet. Pimpreneau, as pimperneau; also a knave, or rascal. Pimprenelle, for pimpinelle, burn∣t. Pinard, Pinart, an exceeding small piece of money; also such a title as is our fellow, &c. Pinastre, the wild pint-tree. Pinatelle, a copper-coyn, having some small quantity of Silver in it, and worth about five liards. Pinatellier, a Coyner of pinatelles. Pinates, as pignates. Pinaux, the name of a kind of grapes. Pincersi, Pincervin, the Linden-tree. Pinces, for pincettes, pincers, tongs. Pinceter, to pinch thick; to nip, or twitch often; to touch a Lute, &c. nimbly; to pull off hairs, or moats with small pincers. Pinche, as pine, in the latter sense. Pinchon, as piochon. Pinçotter, to pinch, or i often. Pine, a pi, a kail, a prick, mem∣ber, bable. Pincau, the seed or kernel of a grape; also a kind of white and longish grape. Vin pineau, excellent strong wine. Pinet, hogs sennel, sulphur-wort. Pinette, a kind of Cider made of water mingled with the juice of Crabs; also a grove of pine-ap∣ples. Pineux, of, or belonging to pine-trees; also full of pine-trees. Pinge, a pillock, member, bable, &c. Pingres, aux pingres, a womanish play with ivory-balls. Pinguereaux, a kind of sweet cher∣ries. Pinhadar, a young, or little wild-pine. Pinier, the rosen-tree, or any other whose fruit resembles a pine apple, as the great Cedar, Cypras, &c. Piniolat, as pignolat. Pinne, the shell-fish called a Naker; also the sin of a fih; also the broad and grislly part of the ear; also as pinge. Pinne du nez, the gristle of the nose, the bone where∣by the nostrils are divided. Pinneux, full of sins. Pinnophylace, a kind of little sea-fish. Pinnothere, a little shell-fish of the kind of Shrimps. Pinnule, a little sin of a fish. Pinnules, the sights belonging to the albidada of an Astrolabe. Pinocque, the name of an Indian fruit of the higness of a Cherry. Pinon, for pignon, the piion of a clock. Pinot, the name of a red-stocked and round-leaved Vine. Pinsegreneur d'Amadis, a Phrase∣monger, a spruce discourser. Pinses, as pinces. Pinsoir, certain Engine (made of iron headed stakes) wherewith fish is caught. Pinteler, to tipple, or ply the pot. Pintelette, a little pint. Pinteur, a tipler, a pot-companion. Pintier, a Pewterer. Pinton, as pinteur. Pinules, as pinnules. Piocher, to dig, or break up the earth with a pioche. Piocheur, a labouring man, one that breaks up the earth with a pioche. Piochon, a little pick-ax. Piolé, sputted, speckled. Piolé riolé, gaudy, st out with sundry colours. Piolement, the cheeping of young birds. Piolet de Caille, a Quail-pipe. Pioleur, a cheeper, or chirper. Pionnier, (Adj.) made by, or belonging to a Pioneer; Pioneer-like. Piorioler, to diversify with variable colours. Pioter, to cheep, or chirp; also to tipple. Pipeau, an oaten pipe; a bird-call. Piperelle, nigella, Bishops-wort. Pipet, a small pipe, Fowlers pipe, or bird-call. Pipette, the little knot, or tuft, on the top of a cap. Pipeusement, deceitfully. Pipeux, deceitful. Pipion, a Spanish Coyn, worth about eighteen pence Sterling. Pipis, for pipy, the chirping of small birds. Pippeau, as pipeau. Pipper, as piper in the N. D. Pippis, as pipis. Piquant, for pointe, the point of a dart, spear, &c. the prickle, or sharp top of some kind of leaves, as of the holly, &c. also the nose, beck, or stem-end of a ship; also a kind of prickly thistle. Piquardnt, the name of a grape that yields an excellent ite wine. Piquassat, a speckled gilliflower. Pique-boeuf, a clown, a boor. Piquement, a pring, or stinging; also a quilting. Piquenaire, a like-man. Pique-papier, a Scribe, a Scrivener. Pique-poul, the name of a certain grape. Piqueton, a prickle, as of a thorn. Pique, a prickly thistle. Piquoter, to prick, or sting often; al∣so to spot, or speckle all over. Piquotement, Piquoteure, a frequent pricking or stinging; also a spot∣ting, or specking. Piquoteure de bran de Judas, red pimples ri∣sing in the face. Piquotte, small wine, servants wine. Piramidal, broad beneath and sharpe∣ning upwards, like a pyramid. Piratique, Piratical, Pirat-like; of, or belonging to a Pirat. Pirauste, a fire-fly, or a worm bred and living in the fire. Pirette, bastard-pellitory. Pirevollet, a whirligig. Pirole, wild beets, or the herb Pirola. Piromantie, divination by fire. Pirope, as Pyrope. Pirot, the Pirot, or hag-fish; a kind of long shell-fish. Pirou, a green Goose. Pirouëtteux, whirling, or turning swiftly about.
Pis, (Subst.) the breast, bosome, or stomack of a man; the dug or udder of a cow, ewe, she-goat, &c. the brisket of an ox or beef, the navel of a dog. Pisay, as pizé. Piscantine, a kinde of small and well-watered Vine. Piscine, a fish-pond; also a pool to water Horses, or to keep Ducks in. Pissasphalte, pitch mingled with bi∣tumen. Pisse-chaude, for chaudepisse, a clap. Pissement, a pissing. Pissenez, as Serfs pissenez, the ba∣stards of Villains or Slaves. Pisseux, pissing much and often; also full of piss. Pissolaire, the sheath or skin of a horses yard. Pisson, a pipkin. Pissoter, to piss often. Pissotiere, the pissing tool; or the receptacle of piss; also a pissing place; also the running of a buc∣king tab. Pistace, for pistache, a pistachoe. Pistacher, the pistacho, (or fistick-nut) tree. Pistaulendrier, a mans yard. Pisté, stamped, pounded, brayed. Pisteau, a pestle. Pister, to bray, pound, or stamp; also to go where one would have him. Pistolade, a pistol-shot. Pistolandier, as pistaulendrier. Pistolier, a Horseman that serves with a pistol. Pistolochie, a kinde of long Birth-wort. Piston, a pestle. Canon à piston, a certain Bit, which gives the tongue liberty without a port. Pistrine, a hake-house, or a house wherein, before the invention of Mills, the Romans caused their Slaves and unruly Servants to bray all their corn in mortars. Pit, as pis. Pitance, any thing that one eats with bread. Pancier, the Mancipler, or Distri∣ter of Victuals in a Monastery. Pier, (Adj.) of a pittance, or ng for a pittance. Pder, to behave himself rude∣. Pe, rudeness, clownish∣. Pa, a clown. Pitel, the pan of a close-stool. Piteux, pitiful, merciful; also wretched, or in pitiful case. Vous nous la baillez bien piteuse, you tell us but a sorry tale. Pitois, the vermine (or beast) called a Fitch. Piton, as piston; also an eye for a curtain-rod, &c. Piton à vìs, a serue with an eye. Pitroy, dirt, mud, mire. Pittasse, as elle saisoit chere pitasse, her behaviour was full of discon∣tentment. Pittouer, a Bittern. Pituitaire, flegmatick. Pituiteux, full of flegm. Pityocampe, a venomous worm that breeds in Pine-trees. Pive, the fruit of the pine, or pitch-tree. Piugarreau, as bigarreau in the N. D. Piuler, to pule, or chep, like a little Chick. Pivoesne, for pivoine, Pny. Pivotter un huis, to hang a door on pivots. Pizé, as murailles de pizé, earthen walls. Placardé, fastned, or pasted, as a Si quis, &c. on a post. Placcar, as huis qui se serment à doubles placears, doors which are shut with double locks. Placide, milde, peacble, i. Placidement, mildly, peaceably, qtly. Placitre, a fair large Court before a C  great House. Plasagourde, a made word, of some affinity with our Gixy, Punk, &c. Plagiaire, one that steals, or takes free people out of one Country, and sells them in another for slaves; a saler, or shorner of mens Chil∣dren or Servants, for the same or like purpose; also a Book-thief, or one that fathers other mens works upon himself. Plagie, stealth, or subornation of mens Children and Servants, with an intent to sell them. Plaict, as plect. Plaidasserie, a wrangling, or liti∣gious pleading. Plaidereau, a litigious Brangler, one that is never out of Law. Plaideresque, Lawyer-like. Plaiderie, a pleading; a Sute in Law. Plaidoirie, a plea, an argument; the Pleading, or opening of a Cause. Plaidoyer, for plaider, to go to law, to plead. Plaidoyeur, for plaideur, a Pleader, or a Lawyer. Plaineure, the superficies; the plain, level, or flat ground of. Plainte, (m.) a Plaintiff. Plaisanter, to jest, or quip merrily. Plaisanteur, a jester, a buffoon. Plait, for plaid, debate; a plea, or pleading. Faire du plait, to make a deal ado. Il me tient plait, he holds me tack, he findes me chat enough. Plameuse, a fifty-cuff. Plan, for plane, the Plane-tree. Plan, for bellement, softly. Planare, a Plane-tree. Planchage, a planking, boording, or flooring. Planchayé, planked, boorded, floo∣red. Planchayer, to plank, boord, or floor. Plancheer, Plancheter, as plan∣chayer. Planchette, a womans stirrup; also the plate or bottome of a stirrup wheron the foot resteth; also a busk. Planchier, for plancher, a boarded floor. Plane, (f.) a Joyners plane; also a plaice. Planer, for applanir, to make smooth, or even; also to raze, blot, or put out. Planetaire, of, or belonging to the Planets. Heures planetaires, 12 hours for the day, and as ma∣ny for the night. Plani, for applani, smoothed. Planier, (Adj.) plain, flat, even, smooth. Planier, (a Verb) to shave, as a Tanner doth his ides. Planir, to level, even, or make smooth. Plant, for plan, the ground-plot of a building. Plantage, a planting, or setting. Plantail, as plantal. Plantaire, the least of the six hinder Muscles of the leg, ending in the sole of the foot. Plantal, a plant or set, the cions of a tree, or slip of an herb, set or planted. Plantars, Willow-plants, or great branches or poles of water-trees lopped off, and reserved to be set.
Plantas, a planting, or setting; also a place to plant, or set trees in; also as Plantat, a Plant, and particularly the branch of a Willow, or other water-tree fit to be planted. Planté, for abondance, plenty, store, abundance. Planteau, a young plant, or as plan∣tal. Plantemalan, a caltro. Plantier, in, or belonging to the sole or bottom of the foot. Planton, a young plant, or stock transplanted, and kept to be graf∣ted on. Plantureusement, largely, plentiful∣ly. Plantureux, abundant, plentiful. Planure, a plain; a large, open, and even piece of ground. Plasmateur, a Potter, or a maker of earthen Images, &c. Plasmation, potters work; or the making of Images, &c. of clay or earth. Plassage, a fee paid in some Towns by Merchants and Tradesmen, for the shewing of their Commodities in the Market-place, or publick Streets. Plastras, rubbish; clods, or pieces of old and dry plaister. Plastronné, breast-plated. Platane, for plane, a plane-tree. Plateaux, flat and thin stones, flakes of stones, &c. Fumées en pla∣teaux, flat grattiching, fewmish∣ing, or dung of a Deer. Platelée, a Platter (or dish) full. Plat-escuelle, a deep dish, or plat∣ter. Platin, a flat near the Sea. Platin de fer, a cart-clowt of iron. Platis, a flat shelf, or shallow place in the water. Platte, a Bleak-fish. Platteaux, as plateaux. Plattebande, a flat band. Plattiz, as platis. Platuse, a Plaice-fish. Plau, the South-wind. Plauton, for peloton, a clue, or bot∣tom. Playé, wounded. Player, to wound. Playt, as plait. Plect & cheval de service, due in some places and cases from the Vassal to the Lord feudal, as un∣der-service. Plectre, the quill, or bow, wherewith a viol is plaid on. Plegerie, suretiship. Plegeur, a Plaintiff in an Action. Pleinfoncé, wide, or spacious. Pleintisse, Pleintithe, the full scope, or whole compass of. Pleïon, long straw softened in wa∣ter, thereby to be pliant, and sit for the binding of Vines, &c. Plejure, a pledging, or suretispip. Homme de plejure, a pledge, or surety; or a Vassal who may be a Bail for his Lord. Plenté, plenty. Pleonasmique, superfluous. Plessé, plashed, as young boughs. Plesser, to plash, to bow young bran∣ches one within another; to thic∣ken a hedge, or cover a walk, by plashing. Plessis, the plashing of trees; also a hedge, or walk of plashed trees. Plet, as plect. Plethore, fulness, or abundance of good humours in the body; also head-ach by the superfluity there∣of. Plethorique, fat, corpulent, ever full of good humours. Plevi, warranted, assured, whose goodness or sufficiency is underta∣for. Fille plevie, a Virgin pro∣mised in marriage. Plevine, a warrant, warranty, or undertaking for the goodness or sufficiency of. Pleviner, Plevier, to undertake, or promise for, to be surety. Pleurable, fit to be wept for. Pleurard, a weeper, or whiner. Pleure, a thin and smooth skin where∣with the inside of the rib is cover∣ed. Pleurement, a weeping, or shedding of tears. Pleure-pain, a niggardly wretch, a miser. Pleuretique, sick of, or subject unto a Pleurisie. Pleureux, full of tears; also ever weeping. Pleuvi, as plevi; also quit, absol∣ved, released. Pleuvine, as plevine. Pleuviner, as pleviner; also as plouviner. Pleuvir, as pluvir. Pliage, Pliaison, Plicature, Pliement, a folding, or plaiting. Plie, a Plaice (especially a great one.) Plieur, (Adj.) folding, bending. Muscles plieurs, two muscles (a great, and a little one) whereby the toes are bowed. Plion, a kinde of stiff Osier. Plionner, to wrinkle. Plomant, plumming, or trying the straightness of work by a plumb-rule. Plombagine, pure lead turned almost into ashes by the vehemence of the fire. Plombasse, lead-like, lead-colour∣ed. Plombature, soder of lead or tin. Plombeau, a Plummet, or weight of lead. Plombelé, leaded, sodered (or co∣vered) with lead; bearing lead. Plombement, a leading, or tinning; a sodering, a marking of wares with lead a sounding with a plummet. Plomberie, a leading, or the leads of a Curch, house, &c. Plombet, as plombeau; also the plumb-line used by Archit Plombeure, as plombement a∣phes de fer à plomb iron-hooks fastened, or sodered together with lead. Plombier, (Adj.) lead-like, of lead. Pierre plombiere, Lead-oar, or lead-stone before it be tried. Plomeau, a plummet, or little ball of lead. Plomer, to plum; a Mason to try or judge of the straightness of his work by his plumb-rule. Plommée, for plombée, the leaden weights of a Clock. Plommer, as plomer; or as plom∣ber in the N. D. Plongement, a plunging, diving, or ducking; a thrusting far in∣to. Plonget, for plongeon, a ducker. Plorer, for pleurer, to cry, or to weep. Plot, a block. Plote, Ploter, Ploton, as pelote, pe∣loter, peloton in the N. D. Plourer, as plorer. Ploustre, a rowler; also a harrow. Ploustrement, a levelling of ground, or breaking of clods with a row∣ler. Ploustrer, to level ground, or break clods with a rowler. Ploustreur, a clod-breaker, or one that breaks clods with a row∣ler. Ploutroer, a rowler; the rowling instrument wherewith ground is levelled, and clods broken.
Plouvier, a plover. Plouviner, to mizzle. Plouvoir, for pleuvoir, to rain. Ploye, an arch, or vault; a bending, or bowing. Pluau, the South-wind. Plucquoter, to pick nicely. Plumaceau, a soft fold of linnen laid next above the plaister on a wound; also a bunch of fea∣thers. Plumage, feathers, a bunch of fea∣thers. Plumement, a plucking the feathers from; also a fleecing. Plumeteur, a Scribe, Clark, or Pen∣man. Plumetis, a summary, or short rela∣tion of the substance of a Cause de∣livered in writing unto the Jud∣ges; also short notes and instru∣ctions for the draught of a plea∣ding or evidence taken from the mouth of a Client (or otherwise) by a Clerk or Notary publick. Plumette, a little feather, a small pen. Plumeux, full of pens, or feathers. Plure d'une voulte, the ent, or compass of a Vault. Pluserois, Plusieur, the name of a prohibited fish-net, or fish-destroy∣ing engine. Plus-valeur, an over-value, surplu∣sage, overplus, or remainder. Pluvial, for pluvieux, rainy. Pluvine, a Salamander, or Deaf-worm; also as plevine. Pluvir, Pluir, for pleuvoir, to rain. Plye, for plie, a Plaice. Poacre, a kinde of scab about the nose or muzzle of a sheep; also as pouäcre. Poale, a stove, or hot-house; also a frying-pan; a little pan. Poalon, for poilon, a skillet. Pocheculier, a shoveler. Pochée, a pocket full. Poçon, as posson. Podagre, (Subst) the gout in the legs or feet. Podagre de lin, the weed Dodder. Podagreux, full of the gout. Poderaste, a Sodomite, a boy-bugger∣er. Podimetrie, foot-measure, or mea∣suring by the foot. Poeslier, a Tinker, or Brazier. Poeste, homme de poeste, a Yeo∣man. Poëtastre, an ignorant Poet. Poëterie, for poësie, poetry. Poëtiser, to make verses. Poëtride, a Poetess. Poëtrie, Poetry. Poëtrons, ordinary yellow plums. Poevrette, for poivrette, the herb Gith. Poge, ou Pogge, the sheat, or cable which fastens the main yard on the right hand of a ship. A poge, at or on the right hand. Naviger à poge & à ourse, to hold an un∣certain course at Sea by reason of contrary winds. Pognard, for poignard, a poniard, or dagger. Poictrail, for poitral, a poitral. Poictreux, as piece poictreuse, a piece of coyn that rises or bears out in the middle, and is flat or thin about the edge. Poictrinal, a great and heavy petro∣nel, shorter (but of a wider bore) than a musquet. Poictrinal, (Adj.) belonging to the breast or stomach; also stomachal, or comforting the breast. Poictrinalier, one that serves with, or uses to shoot in a great and heavy petronel. Poictrinette, a little breast. Poictrineux, as poictrinal (Adj.) also as poictreux. Poictron, the fundament. Poifaict, sloth, negligence, idleness. Poifaifant, a negligent, slothful, or idle fellow. Poignalarde, a stab, or thrust with a poniard. Poignalarder, to stab, or thrust into with a poniard. Poignastre, the Viver, or little Sea-dragon. Poiler, for peler, to pill; also to rew; to die, or colour uneven∣ly. Poillu, for pelu, hairy, rough with much hair. Poinçonner, as poinsonner. Poinçonnet, a little bodkin, or pun∣cheon. Poinçonneux, pricking as a bod∣kin. Poincté, pointed, sharpened at the point; also stitched, quilted. Poincteler, Poincter, to prick, or point often; to bud, or shoot out. Poinez, as c'est un poinez raclé, tis a thing resolved on. Poinrée, a Pear-tree. Poinsonnade, a prick, or hole made with a bodkin; also a stamp, or mark set on with a pun∣con, &c. Poinsonner, to prick with a bod∣kin; to stamp, or mark with a puncheon, &c. Pointade, a prick, thrust, or stitch; a sting. Pointure, a prick; also a pricking; also a shooting, as of pain in the body; also the gout in the joints. Poipre, the purples. Poirasine, rosin. Poirée, Beets. Poisamment, for pesamment, heavi∣ly. Poisée, Poisement, a poising, or weighing; also weight, or hea∣viness. Poisillons, a kinde of small pease, or pulse. Poislé, smeared with soot, or with the touch of a sooty Skillet, &c. Poisler, to smear with soot, or with the touch of a sooty skillet, &c. Poislier, a Brsier, or Tinker. Poisliers, the posts which uphold the screw of a Vine-press. Poislure, a smearing, a besoot∣ing. Poisonneux, poisonous, full of poi∣son. Poissage, a pitching, or bepitch∣ing. Poissard, a filcher, a pilserer; one whose fingers are as so many lime-twigs. Poissement, as poissage. Poisseux, pitchy, or full of pitch. Poissillon, Poissonnet, a little, or a young h. Poissonneux, full of, or abounding in fih. Poissonnier, (Adj.) abounding i, or belonging to fish. Poissure, as poise. Poisteau, a little bird like a i∣rt. Poistrir, fr prir, to kad. Poitron, the tail, ase, or bum; al∣so a kinde of H-plum. Poixement, as oiage. Poixer, for poier, to pit h, to be∣pitch. Poizer, for pser, to weigh. Pol, for pole, a pole. Polaine, the  it  of  in the Prw of a  as poulaine. Polemoine,  also the shrubby , called Make-at. Polican, for polican, a Plia.
Policier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to Government. Poliément, for poliment, smoothly, neatly. Polieul, Pell a mountain, or Polly, (an herb.) Poliot, for pouliot, Penny-royal. Polipragmon, a busie-body. Polisyllable, for polysyllabe, of ma∣ny Syllables. Polpe, for poulpe, the pulp, or fleshy part. Polsonnets, two buttons with hooks at their ends, passing through the branch, and holding the water-chain of a bit. Poltronesque, cowardly, faint-hear∣ted; lazy, idle. Poltronesquement, cowardly, faint-heartedly; lazily, idly. Poltronie, for plotronnerie, cowar∣dise, faint-heartedness; laziness, idleness. Poltroniser, to be a coward, to slug it. Polygraphie, a divers manner of writing. Polymixe, a candle having many wicks. Polypeux, that hath a Noli me tan∣gere in the nose. Polyphilie, affection divided, love unto many. Polypus, as polype in the N. D. Polytric, Polytricon, black Venus hair, our Ladies hair. Pomardiere, an Orchard of Apples. Pomcirade, for poncirade, Balm-gentle, herb Balm. Pomelée, Bear-foot. Pommé, Cider. Pommelaye, Pommelée, as pomelée. Pommelette, a little apple; also a daple. Pommelle, the pommel of a sword, &c. Pommelu, plump, or round as an apple. Pommelure, plumpness, roundness; also dapleness. Pommer, to grow round, or apple-like. Pommeraye, an Orchard, or Apple-yard. Pommette, a little apple; also the ball of the cheek. La pommette du nez, the tip, or end of the nose. Piece à Pommette, a little plea∣sant rowl in the mouth of a bit. Pommeux, full of apples. Pomon, for poumon, the lungs. Pompes, bosses; pully-pieces for the knees. Pompette, a pimple on the nose or chin. Pompholige, the light oar, or foil of brass. Pompile, a kinde of Pourcontrel fish; also a kinde of Tunny which follows ships while they are in the Main, and leaves them when they draw towards the shore. Pompon, a pumpion, or melon. Pomponne, the longest and smoo∣thest kind of pumpion. Ponceau, Poncel, for petit pont, a little bridge. Poncer, to polish with a pumice-stone. Ponceure, a polishing with a pumice-stone. Poncille, the Assyrian Citron. Poncire, a Pome-citron. Ponçon, half a tun. Ponderamment, heavily. Pondereux, heavy. Ponderosité, heaviness. Poneau, a close-stool. Poneropole, the Town of the wicked. Pongneor, as piqueur in the N. D. Ponhete, a kinde of Vine. Ponneresse, Ponneuse, as geline ponneresse, a laying hen. Pontage, Bridge-work; also Pon∣tage, or Bridge-toll. Pontail, as pont volant. Pontanage, as pontage. Ponte, a laying of eggs. Ponté, bridged, that hath a bridge over it, or belonging to it. Pontenage, as pontanage. Ponteux, full of bridges. Pontif, for Pontife, a chief Bishop, or Prelate. Pontille, a prick, or little point. Pontique, of Pontus. Pontis, a little bridge. Pontonnier, a Ferry-man. Popin, spruce, neat, or fine. se Popiner, to trim up himself. Popisine, the smacking sound where∣with Riders incourage or cherish their horses. Poplitée, Poplitique, a large Vein in the middle of the Thigh; also a Sinew near to the gartering place, and serving to turn the leg inwards. Populaire, for le peuple, the common people, the vulgar. Populeon, Popilion, an Oyntment made of black poplar buds. Populeux, populous, full of people. Populo, a Roll or List of the Fees, or augmentation of Fees, accruing to the King by the Chancery-Seal; also a pretty plump-faced and cherry-cheekt boy; or a picture of such an one. Populosité, abundance of people. Populotier, the Clerk of the Chan∣cery, who in his turn is to make and keep the Populo. Popyle, the fish Pourcontrel. Porcausou, sowsed hogs-flesh. Porcelette, a kind of shell-fish; also a kinde of little Sturgeon. Porche, for parce que, because. Porchereau, a Sea-hog. Porcherie, a hog-sty. Porchet, a stake, or pole. Porchier, for Porcher, a Swine-herd. Porchin, of, or like a hog. Taisson porchin, a hog-badger. Porcille, a Sea-hog. Porcin, as porchin. Pain porcin, the herb Sow-bread. Porcorau, Liverwort. Poreau, a wart; also any corn or hard skin coming by labour on the hands or feet. Porée, Beets; pot-herbs; also pot∣tag made of beets, or with other herbs. Porfil, and Porfile, as pourfil in the N. D. Porfiler, as pourfiler in the N. D. Porion, wild onion, or wild leek. Porositez, for pores, pores. Porque, a Sw. Porque, (Adj.) hoggish, or Sow-like. Porquet, Porquette, a young pork. Porracé, green as a leek; of, or like a leek. Porrée, as porée. Porriere, a bed of leeks. Porrion, as porion. Portache, as procace. Portage, carriage; also the custome, fare, or fee paid for carriage. Portatisse, portative, portable. Port'-aubans, chain-wales, pieces of wood nailed on both the Outsides of a ship, to keep them from being worn or galled by the shrowds. Porte-brandons, fiery, flaming. Ciel porte-brandons, the starry Fir∣mament. Porte-ciel, heaven-bearing. Porte-colle, as protecole in the N. D. Porte-eseritoire, a Notaries Boy, one that serves but to carry his pen and inkhorn after him. Porte-flambeux, as Ciel porte-flam∣beaux, the starry Sky. Porte-fleurs, flouri hing, flower-bear∣ing. L'Element porte-fleurs, the Earth. Porte-fraise, a supporter for a ruff
(wrought, or embroidered, and cut into divers panes.) Porte-guidon, an Ensign-bearer un∣to a Troop of horse. Porte-harnois, a Cross, the cross-like pearch whereon Armour is usually hanged. Porte-hanbans, as port-aubans. Portement, a carrying, or bearing; a wearing; a supporting, or up∣holding; also health, or likeing. Porte-mors, the cheek-piece, or cheek-band of a bridle. Portente, a prodigious, or monstrous thing. Portenreux, prodigious, monstrous, strange. Porte-panier, a basket-carrier; also a Pedlar. Porte-parole, a message-carrier be∣tween party and party. Porte-peine, laborious, painful, pains-taking. Porte-piece, a Shoomakers punch, or punchion. Porte-poche, a bag (or a pouch) bearer, he that carries the Scrip or Wallet for a company of Beg∣gars. Porte-poulet, a bawd, or carrier of Love-messages. Porte-queue, a Train-bearer. Portereau, a little or less Gate ad∣joyning unto a greater for a Pa∣lace or House of State; also a Floud-gate, or kinde of Sluce, whereby the course of a River is diverted into a Gut on the one side thereof, cut out for the turn∣ing of some Mill, &c. Porte-roolle, a prompter of one that makes an Oration, or acts a part, in publick. Porte-sac, as porte-poche. Porte-semelle, the upper leather of a Galoshe. Port-estrieux, the plate of a stir∣rup. Porte-tablettes, a Pedlar, or one that carries Table-books, &c. to sell. Porteure d'une semme, a womans burden, or Child-bearing. Portier, (Adj.) carrying, bearing. Brebis portiere, a bearing Ewe. Portinal, a portal. Portioniste, a Prebend in a Cathe∣dral Church. Portionné, rated, shared, measured out; also stinted. Portionner, to rate, share, or mea∣sure out; also to stint. Portiuncule, an Indulgence obtain'd (as some report) by S. Francis, of the Virgin Mary, for the remission of all the sins of those, who (en payant) came in at one, and went out at another, door of a Church, dedicated unto her in Angiers. Portoir des Vignes, the branch that bears the Grapes. Portoire, Portouoire, any thing that helps to carry another thing; and particularly a Vessel like a half Tub, wherein Grapes be carried on horseback from a remote Vine-yard. Portueux, full of Ports; also of, or belonging unto a Port or Ha∣ven. Portugaise, Portugalle, Portugaloise, a Portegue, a sort of Golden Coyn. Porture, a carrying, bearing, or wearing. La porture d'une bre∣bis, the little skin or film, where∣in a Lamb comes wrapped out of the Ewes belly. Posade, a lighting down of birds; a laying down of a burden; a resting place; a stop made by a horse. Etre à la posade, to rest him self, to sit still. Posement, a putting, s tting, or placing. Posément, staidly. Posque, a potion, or drink made of vinegar and water. Possesseresse, Possesseuse, a Woman that possesses, holds, or enioys. Possessoire, (Subsl.) a possession, or a thing possessed. Posion, the quarter of a Chopine; a little measure for milk, veri, and vinegar, not altogether so big as the quarter of our pins. Postelé, as poupelé. Poster, to ri post, to make he. Posteral, as posterol. Posteres, the posteriorums, or hinder parts. Posterieur, posteriour, hinder, infe∣riour. Posterol, the red Sea-nettle (an ugly and imperfect Sea-fish.) Posteux, hasty, or in post-haste. Postille, a postil, gloss, or compen∣dious exposition. Postilleux, much using, or loving to ride post. Postillonner, to ride post. Postiquer, to play the vagrant Im∣postor, or wandring Jugler. Postiqueries, jugling devices, tricks f legerdemain. Postiqueur, a wandring Impostor, a roguing Jugler. Postulation, a demand, sute, re∣quest, or supplication; also a com∣plaint, or expostulation. Postulé, demanded, required, sued for; also admitted, elected, a∣dopted; also joyned in office, linked in company with. Postuler, to sue, demand, or require; also to plead, or argue at the bar; also to sue, accuse, or com∣plain of. Postules, wheals, powks. Postuleux, full of wheals, or powks. Posturable, sequetrable. Potagé, made pottage, reduced into pottage. Potager, (Subst.) a by-place in a Country-house, instead of a Lar∣der, for the laying up of raw or cold meats; also a porridge-belly, or a great purridge-eater. Potager, (a Verb) to make pottage; also to have in his power. Se potager, to play the good hus∣band, or give himself wholly to husbandry; to apply his business at home. Potagerie, herbs, or any other stuff, whereof pottage is made. Potaif, pot-plying, tipling square. Pote, the great Sea-nettle; also swoln, or benummed with cold. Poté, plump. Potée, brass, copper, tin, pewter, &c. burnt or calcinated; also a pot full of any thing. Potein, naturally lame, or defective in a limb. Potelée, (Subst.) plumpness. Potentiel, strong, forcible, powerful in operation. Potentille, wild Tansey, Silver-weed. Poterne, a potern, or postern-gate, a back-door to a Fort, &c. Potes, a kinde of shining fish made somewhat like a Cap. Potestat, a principal Officer, or chief Magistrate. Potie, a knot in llen cloth; or a rotten thread or threads and rea∣dy to fall from cloth. Potié, as poupelé. Potieux, over-dainty, nice, cu∣rious; also peevish, froward, pet∣tish. Potingues, drinking exploits. Potiron, a Toad-stool; also a kinde of Dolphin-like fish. Potonnier, as pautonnier. Pottée, as potée. Pottein, broken pieces of metal,
or of old vessels, mingled one with another. Pottelé, for potelé, plump. Pottin, as pottein; also soder of metal. Potus, physical potions. Pouae, faugh (an Interjection, used when any filthy thing is said, or shewed.) Pouäcre, filthy, nasty, on that is ever spitting, or blowing his nose; also la, slothful, idle. Pouallier, as poalier in the N. D. Poucher, as pocher in the N. D. Poueiniere, as poulsiniere. Pouein, a Chicken. Pouctau, the wilde Poppy, or red Corn-rose. Poueyrade, the herb called Balm. Poudroyer, as pouldroyer. Poveau, the pan of a close-stool. Pouée, the ridge of a bed in a Vine∣yard. Pouelle, for poile, a Stove. Pouër, to go up; to hale against wind and tide; to pile, or heap up. Pouër la Vigne, to raise the beds of a Vineyard into rid∣ges. Pouillard, lousie. Poul, for pou, a louse. Poulaine, as Souliers à poulaine, old-fashion shooes held on the feet by single latchets running overthwart the inslep, which otherwise were all open; also, those that had a fashion of long hooks sticking out at the end of ther toes. Ventre à la poulaine, a huge belly. Poulainement, a foling. Poulainer, to fole. Poulcée, an inch, or inch-measure, the breadth of a thumb. Poulceon, the 24 part of a Cho∣pine. Poulcepied, the Pourcontrel, or ma∣ny-footed fish. Poulcier, as poulcée. Pouldre, and its Derivatives in use. See them without l in the N.D. Pouldrement, a powdering; a tur∣ning into powder. Pouldrette, fine powder, small dust. Temps de pouldrette, the sea∣son wherein a husbandman breaks the clods of his plowed land. Pouldreux, dusty, full of dust. Avoir les pieds pouldreux, to be of a nim∣ble or active constitution, or of a stragling or wandering disposi∣tion. Pouldroyement, a powdering, pul∣verising. Pouldroyer, to powder, to pulve∣rise. Poulemart, a weapon like a han∣ger. A fil de poulemart, with edge or dint of the sword. Poulener, as poulainer. Poulenne, as poulaine. Poulette, a young hen. Poulinement, a foling. Pouliner, a mare to sole, or bring forth a colt. Poullailler, for poulailler, a poulter, or keeper of pullen. Poullarde, the Sea-hen (a fish.) Poullart, bled poullart, St. Peter's corn. Poullaze, the Indian Raven. Poulle, for poule, a hen. Poullé, as bled poullé, the wall-barley called St. Peter's-corn. Poullier, for poulier, a hen-house. Poullion, for poulion, a little pul∣ly. Poulmelée, Bears-foot, Setterwort. Poulmonnie, for pulmonie, any in∣firmity of the lungs. Poulpelé, as poupelé. Poulpie, Poulpie, for pourpier, Purslane. Poulpre, as pourpe. Poulser, and its Derivatives in use. See them with an s instead of l in the N. D. Poulse-avant, any thing that thrusts another forward; an Overseer and forwarder of a work that re∣quires haste. Jeu de poulse a∣vant, lechery. Poulsier, for poussiere, dust. Poulsin, for poussin, a chick. Poulsiner, to hatch, breed, or bring forth chickens. Poulsniere, the seven stars. Poultis, a little gate or door accom∣panying a great one before, or be∣longing to a draw-bridge, &c. Poulx, for poux, lice. Poupart, an infant, or young childe; also a milk-sop. Poupe, the at of a woman; the dug of a ravenous beast; also pulp; also the cancrous disease of the nose called Noli me tange∣re. Poupes de chenilles, bunches, or clusters of caterpillars. Poupeau, a little teat, or dug. Poupelé, pithy, brawny, full of pulp; also plump, fleshy. Poupetier, a baly (or puppet) ma∣ker. Poupette, a little baby, a puppet. Poupier, of, or belonging to the Poop of a ship. Vent poupier, a full (or whole) wind at sea. Poupillons, little teats, or dugs. Poupin, as popin. Poupine, as pompon. Enter en poupine, to lodge a graft within a slit made into the top of a stock, and withal to hood it. Poupinement, neatly, sprucely, quaint∣ly. Pouple, a Poplar-tree. Poupon, an Infant, suckling, or young baby; also as pompon. Poupper, to dandle. Pourbondir, to bound, leap, or jump over; also to manage a horse, to make him leap, or bound. Pourbouiller, to parboil. Pource que, for parce que, because. Pourcelet, for porcelet, a young hog. Pourchaille, for pourpier, Purslane. Pourchas, eager pursuit, earnest chace after. Pouvret, somewhat por. Pourfendre, to cleave through. Pourfendu, cleft through. Pourfier, to affirm boldly. Pourfit, for profit, profit. Pourfiterolle, as profiterolle. Pourject, Pourjecter, as projet, projetter in the N. D. Pourmener, and its Derivatives. See promener, &c. in the N. D. Pourneant, in vain, for nothing, to no purpose. Pourparlement, Pourparlé, Pour∣parler, a Treaty, or Conference about an agreement to be made, or thing to be done. Pourpe, for poulpe, or polype, the fish Pourcontrel. Pourpens, great thought, care, stu∣dy. Pourpensé, seriously thought of. Pourpenser, to bethink himself, to think or consider of. Pourpied, for pourpier, the herb Purslane. Pourplanté, planted throughout, set all over. Pourplantement, a planting, or set∣ting all over. Pourplanter, to plant, or set all o∣ver. Pourpointerie, a Doublet-makers shop, or a Doublet-makers row, or street. Pourpointier, a Doublet-maker. Pourprendre, to hold, or take up all. Pourprins, fully held. Pourprinse, Pourpris, a Close, or In∣closure; or one inclosure of divers
rooms or closes. Le pourpris d'un Manoir, the Out-rooms, Courts, Gardens, Orchards, Park, Wood, or Warren, lying round about or near unto a Mannor; and being within one hedge, ditch, pale, or wall. Pourquerre, to search, or seek hard after. Pourquines, a kind of small black figs. Pourquis, searched, or sought hard after. Pourreau, for porreau, a leek. Pourris, a suppuration, a rotting, a turning out of blood into healing. Pourrissable, soon rotting, likely to grow rotten. Pourrisseur, a rotter; also the spot∣ted and short-tailed Serpent, no bigger than a little Viper, but presently rotting whatsoever part of the body is stung by her. Pourrissure, for pourriture, rotten∣ness. Poursaillir, to leap out of, to bound over. Poursemé, sowed throughout, or all over. Poursemé de rougeolle, full of the measles. Poursemer, to sow throughout, or all over. Poursuir, for poursuivre, to pursue, to prosecute. Poursuivable, pursuable. Poursuivir, Poursuyr, to follow; also to wander from Country to Country. Pourtoir, as portoir. Pourtraict, Pourtraicture, for por∣trait, a picture. Pourvende, a Prebendry, the place of a Prebend. Pourvoy, a provision, help, remedy. Pousade, as posade. Poussade, a push, thrust, or jouit. Pousse, as de pleine pousse, at once, at one ph. Pousse, (f.) short wind, pursiness; also the hinder part of a ows belly, or the parts whereon her hinder teats are. Pousse de bled, the chaff of corn. Pousse-avant, as poulse-avant. Poussepied, the Pourcontrel fish. Pousset de bronze, the scaly dust that falls from brass, after it hath been melted, or much heat∣ed. Poussier, for poussiere, dust. Poussoir, an impulsory Instrument used by Surgeons for the forcing through of a forked arrow-head. Poussouer, the Iron-pin wherewith Joyners drive out wooden pegs. Poustaignade, a brood, nest, or lay∣ing of eggs. Pousteau, for pôteau, a post. Poustelé, as poupelé. Poutie, & Poutieux, as potie, po∣tieux. Poutriages, beams; posts. Poux, for legume, pulse. Pouy, fy. Pouyr, as tout n'y sçauroit pouyr, all cannot go in. Pouzaranque, an Instrument where∣with water is drawn out of Gar∣den-wells. Poy, for pu, little. Poyle, a stone. Poytois, as putois. Poyvre, and its Deriatives in use. See them with an i instead of y in the N. D. Poivrier, the pepper-plant. Practic, for pratique, practical. Practicien, Pragmaticien, a Practi∣tioner in Law, a Sollicitor. Pragmatizer, to practice, to soli∣cite. Praguerie, league, faction, rebelli∣on. Prain, great with young. Prairier, of, or belonging to a Mea∣dow. Sergent prairier, a Mea∣dow-keeper, an Officer that looks unto Meadows. Pranchette, a womans stirrup. Prangeler, cattle to chew their cud in the afternoon. Praquerie, as praguerie. Prat, for pré, a Meadow. Preau, a little Meadow, or a green close; also a smooth green seat un∣der an Arbour. Preaux, the name of a white, small, and sweet apple. Prebender, to bandy, at Tennis. Prebstre, for Pretre, a Priest. Precairement, par precaire, by in∣treaty, request, or desire; also at another mans will and pleasure; or only for a while. Precellence, prllny, an excel∣lency, or surprising. Preceller, to excel, to surpass. Preception, a precept. Preceptorizer, to tutor, to go∣. Preceprice, teaching, instructing. Precesseur, a forgoer; also a Pre∣dssr. Prehantr, to sing before the rest; to begin a Song. Precipite, for precipice, a precipice. Precipiteux, headlong, fool-hardy, hair-brained. Preclare, excellent. Precogiter, to think of before-hand. Precognition, Precognoissance, fore∣knowledge, or former notice of. Precognoistre, to fore-know. Preconter, to abate, or defaulk part of a sum due upon a former rec∣koning. Precordial, belonging to the midriff; near to, or about the heart. Precordiaux, the midriff; also the heart-strings, or siln of the heart; also the parts which be near or about the heart; also the sides of the belly under the ribs; and sometimes also the whole num∣bles. Predestinée satale, fatal destiny. Predial, consisting of, growing in, belonging unto Meadows. Predicant, for Predycateur, a Prea∣cher. Predivination, a foreghessing, or pre∣saging. Prediviner, to ghess at before∣hand. Prée, for pré, a Meadow. Preer, to turn into Meadows. Pre-eslu, pre-elected, fore-chosen. Prefigé, prefixed, appointed before∣hand. Prefiger, to prefix, to appoint before∣hand. Prefim, determined, appointed, li∣mited beforehand. Prefinir, to determine, appoint, or limit beforehand. Pregnamment, pregnantly, forcibly, strongly. Pregnant, pregnant, forcible, strong. Preguste, a fore-ta ler. Prehster, to precipitate, to hasten extreamly. Preignant, as pregnant. Preigne, fall, or with young; also with child. Preignement, as pregnamment. Preigneur, a being great with child, or with young. Preïr, as preer. Prejudicier, to prejudice. Prejugé, (a Parti,) fore-judged. Prejugement, a fore-judgement, or former judgment, a Case ruled in Law; a prejudice or hurt doe to a Cause by a Precedent. Preluger, to fore-judge, to rule or direct the opinion of Judges by a former judgement.
Prelasser, to carry himself gravely, portly, pompously; to square it like a Prelate. Prelation, preferment before others in purchasing. Prelingant, a boasting ass, or proud coxcomb. Prematurité, forward or timely growth. Premesse, as presmesse. Premie, a reward, or recompense. Premisse, a fore-placing, a setting before. Premonstré, portended, or foretold. Freres de la Premonstrée, an Or∣der of Friars which wear white habits. Premourant, dying first, or before another. Prenoncé, foretold, or declared be∣forehand. Prenoncer, to foretell, or declare beforehand. Prent, as prent. Prenus, as & ubi prenus? and where will y take or find them? Preparatoire, preparatory. Preparement, a preparing, or pro∣viding. Prepatour, a Vineyard, or Vine-close for the best or choicest plants. Preplantement, a fore-planting. Prepostere, preposterous, or disor∣derly. Preposterer, to place, or set preposte∣rously, to put the cart before the horse. Presagier, to presage, or fore-tell. Presagieux, Presagiant, presaging, fore-telling; full of presages. Presbyteral, Priestly, belonging to a Priest. Presbytere, a Parsonage, Vicarage, or Priests house. Preschement, a preaching. Prescience, a prescience, or fore-knowledge. Preservatif, (Adj.) preserving. Presignifié, foretold, signify'd be∣fore-hand. Presle, as prele. Presme, a near kinsman by father and mother, or in a direct lie. Presme d'esmeraude, a base or course emerald. Presmesse, near kindred, the be∣ing next of kin, or the privi∣lege of recovery, or disinga∣ging of land, due unto the next kinsman. Pres-prenant, Crediteur pres-prenant, an hard or strict Cre∣ditor, one that will be satisfied to the utmost. Presseance, for preseance, prece∣dency. Pressier, the tree that bears the peach called presse. Pressif, for pressant, urgent. Pressis, cullises, or stained meats. Pressoirage, as pressurage in the N. D. Pressoireur, for pressurier, he that works at the Wine-press. Pressouoir, for pressoir, a Wine-press. Prest, for vîte, quickly. Prestable, which may be lent. Prestance, worthiness, or excellency. Un homme de belle prestance, a proper, or personable man. Prestation, a loan; also a lending; a paying of duties, rents, or ser∣vices. Preste-charitez, a back-biter. Prestement, as prest. Prestere, a tempest, or whirl-wind. Prestesse, readiness, quickness, or nimbleness. Presteux, lending, putting out un∣to loan. Prestiges, deceits, tricks, impostures. Prestigiateur, a Jugler. Prestitué, appointed. Prestolant, a Steward, or Overseer, a Surveyer over a Farm. Prest-oreille, attentive. Prestraille, paultry Priests. Prestraillerie, a pack of scurvy Priests; also the order of Priest∣hood. Prestral, Priestly, of, or belonging un∣to Priests; also Priest-like. Prestrot, a little Priest; an under-Priest or Curate; also a little bird something like a linnet. Presure, as pressure in the N. D. Pretendu, (Subst.) a thing pretended unto, or stood for. Pretente, a pretence, purpose, pro∣ject, or intent. Pretermettre, to pretermit, or omit. Pretermis, pretermitted, omit∣ted. Pretermission, pretermission, omissi∣on. Pretrot, as Prestrot, in the last sense. Preu, as preux. Prevalence, that which remains of the price of land sold for the pay∣ment of a debt. Preudefemme, a virtuous and dis∣creet Matron. Preudes gents, valiant, or honest persons. Preud'homme, a stout man; also an honest or discreet man; also the herb Clary. Preud'hommier, stout, valiant; ho∣nest, faithful. Preveil, an ordinary Meeting of Spin∣sters and Youngsters at a certain Place where they work and make merry together. Prevenement, a preventing. Prevenu, (Subst.) a preventing (in Law) of whatsoever may be ob∣jected. Prevostablement, by Martial Law. Prevostaire, Prevostal, Prevostel, of, or like a Provost; subject unto the Jurisdiction of a Provost; crimi∣nal. Preut, first, first of all. Preux, stout, valiant; also loyal, faithful, honest, worthy; also dis∣creet, skilful, ready. Les neuf Preux, the nine Worthies. Preyer, a kind of Linnet. Priapisme, a lustless extension, or swelling of the yard. Priement, a praying, an intreat∣ing. Prim, as presme. Prim, (Adj.) prime, first, forward; also thin, small. Prime barbe, the down, or a mossy beard on a young mans chin. Prime, as le prime des Chevaliers, a prime Knight, the flower of Knights; also the first hour of the day; also a small Goldsmiths weight, whereof 24 make but one grain. Soupes de prime, Monasti∣cal brewes; cheese and bread put into pottage; or chopped parsley stewed or laid together with the fat of th bs-pot on the bread. Prime, (Ad.) chiefly; nest. A prime, but just now. Retournez vous au prime, came you again but now? Primement, chiefly, expresly; also thinly, narrowly; also exactlly, curiously. Primerain, Primeroge Primerouge, early, timely, forward. Figues primeroges, the first figs that come, which being too forward commonly thrie not. Primes, Or primes, now at the last; only at this time, but now. Primeur, salness, slenderness; also primness, excellency; also for∣wardness.
Primices, for premices, the first fruits. Primicial, of, or belonging to first fruits. Primordial, first rising, beginning from. Prin, as prim. Principesque, Princely. Principié, begun, or in breeding. Principion, a petty Prince. Prinfief, as le Seigneur de Prinfies, the Lord Paramount, or immedi∣ate Lord of an Inheritance, char∣ged with Rent. Pringalle, a fashion of warlike En∣gine used in old time. Pringert, a kinde of small bird. Prins, for pris, taken. Prinsault, de prinsault, suddenly, out of hand. Prinsautier, a starter, a nimble um∣per. Prinsautier, (Adj.) sudden, quick, or nimble. Prinse, for prise, a taking, or sei∣g. Printaner, to spring, or flourish as the Spring. Pris, for prix, price. Prisage, Prisée, Priserie, a rating, or aluing, a rate, or aluation. Prisme, as prime. Priste, a kinde of Whale. Pristine, former, old, atient; wo∣t, accustomed; also late, or bt little past. Privaise, the place where the Privy is; also a pipe, or sunnel, for the avoiding of the ill air of a Privy. Privement, a depriving, or berea∣ing. Privoité, for privauté, privacy. Probaleté, for probabilité, probabi∣lity. Probation, a proof, an approbation. Probatique, as Piscine probatique, a Pond for the washing of the sheep that were by the Law to be sacri∣ficed. Probosce, a big snout, a huge nose. Proboscide, the trunk, or snout of an Elephant. Procace, the Post, or Carrier that goes weekly between Rome and Naples. Procerité, height, talness. Processeux, Processif, litigious, al∣ways in Sutes. Processional, Processional; belong∣ing to, or serving for a Processi∣on. Prochainement, nearly, next, or last. Prochaineté, for proximité, near∣ness, neighbourhood. Prochas, a purchase, a pursuit. Prochasser, for pourchasser, to pro∣secute, to pursue. Prochesief, the Fif, or Inheritance that's held of a Lord by a direct and immediate Tenure. Procidence, a falling down of a thing out of its right place. Proclameur, for proclamateur, a Proclaimer. Proclif, prone, apt, or inclining. Procours, as parcours. Procrastination, a procrastination, or delay. Procrastiné, procrastinated, or de∣lay'd. Proculteur, for Procureur, a Solli∣citor. Prodenou, a rope which compasseth the Sail-yard of a Ship. Prodigal, for prodigue, a prodigal. Prodigalisé, la hed. Prodigaliser, Prodiger, to lah. Proditeur, a Traytor, a traco fellow. Prodition, a treason, or treachery. Prodrome, the fore-runner, or news-bringer of another mans coming; a preparer of the way for ano∣ther. Prodromes, the Winds which rise a little before the Dog-days. Proé, for prouë, the sore-castle of a Ship. Proësme, a neighbour; also a Pro∣m. Profanement, a profaning, or pro∣fanation. Profanément, prophanely. Professoirement, by profession. Proficiat, a e or benevolence be∣stowed on Bishops in manner of a Welcome, immediately after their Installments. Profiterolle, as pourfiterolle. Pro∣fiterolles, Servants vails. Profondé, deepned; searched for into; pressed, or sank down into the bottom. Profonder, to sound, search, or go deep into; to dive, or sink unto the bottom of; to press down. Prosondité, for profondeur, profun∣dity, depth. Profuseur, a pourer out; a profuse, or lavish man. Progenié, progeny, off-spring. Progenier, to procreae, to propagate; to breed, or to beget. Progeniteur, a progenitor, ancestor, or forefather. Prognostication, for prognostique, a prognostication, an argument or sign of a future thing. Progreder, to proceed, or go for∣ward. Prohibeur, a prohibiter, a forbid∣der. Proisme, as presme. Prolation, an utterance, or delivery of Words. Prolectation, a pleasant enticement, a delightsom provocation. Prolepsie, a natural fore-knowledge conceived in the minde. Prolifique, fruitful, or breeding a∣pace. Prolixe, prolix, long, tedious; large, abundant. Prolixement, prolixly, tediously, at length, at large; liberally, a∣bundantly. Promarginaire, extended on the margent. Prome, a Butler, or Drawer; also a Yeoman of the Larder. Promenement, a walking. Prominence, a prominency, a jutting out; a pt-house. Prominent, prominent, or jutting out. Promiscue, promiscuous, indifferent; also confused, without order. Promiscuement, promiscuously, in∣differentr, confusedly. Promptuaire, a Store-house, a But∣tery. Pronateurs, certain Msles, whereby the hand is bent or bowed down∣wards. Pronau, a pulpit, or the place out of which the prone is delivered. Prone, (Adj.) prone, ready, apt, in∣clining. Prononçable, fit to be pronounced. Pronostique, a prognostication. Pronube, a Bride-maid. Juno pro∣nube, Juno the Goddess of Mar∣riage. Propelet, a sp or a quaint fellow. Propens, ensit, , or in∣ination. Prophyloctice, an antidote, a coun∣terpoison; or that part of Phy∣sick which concerns the preserva∣tion of . Propine, drinking money, or some∣what to drink. Propitier, to make propitious, to aoe, to pay. Proposeur, a propounder, a proposer. Propret, eat, spre. Proprictairement, in property, as an owner, his own.
Propugnacule, a Fortress, or strong hold. Propulsation, a driving back, or putting away. Proriter, to provoke. Prosenette, as Proxenette. Proserie, a Place appointed for the nourishment of poor people. Prosner, a Priest to pronounce the Prône. Prospective, the Perspective, or Op∣tick art; also a bounded Pro∣spect; a limited Vin or Survey. En prospective, openly, for a shew, to be seen. Prosperément, prosperously, happily. Prostates, certain Kernels in the neck of the Bladder. Prostration, a prostrating, a falling at the feet of. Prosyllognine, a second Syllogisme proving the first. Protelé, shifted off, put back; delayed. Proteler, to shift off, to put back; to delay. Proterve, froward, curst, snappish; also proud, saucy, impudent. Protervement, frowardly; also proudly, saucily, impudently. Protervie, Protervité, frowardness, curstness, peevishness; also pride, sauciness, or impudency. Prothocolle, Protocole, as Protecole in the N. D. Protodiables, the first, or chiefest of Devils. Protomartyre, the first Martyr. Prou, enough. Bon prou leur face, much good may it do them. Provateure, a kinde of green Cheese made in Italy, of the milk of Buf∣fels. Provect, well grown in age, or of good years; forward in the course of Arts. Provende, for Prebende, a Pre∣bendry; also provender. Provenir, to proceed. Proufit, and its Derivatives. See them without an u in the N. D. Proufiterolle, as profiterolle. Provide, provident, circumspect, wa∣ry, fore-casting. Providemment, providently, with good fore-cast. Proujecter, for projeter, to project, or design. Provignable, propagable. Provignage, for provignement, a planting (or setting) of Vine-sprigs for increase. Proviseur, a Purveyor, or Provider. Provisoire, provisory, conditional. Proumeu, for promeu, promoted, preferred. Proumouvoir, to promote, or prefer. Provocatoire, a provocatory, a wri∣ting whereby one is provoked; a challenge. Provoquement, a provoking. Provoqueur, a provoker, a challenger. Prouveu, Prouvoir, Prouvoyance, & Prouvoyant. See them with pour instead of prou in the N. D. Proxenete, a Broker, a Huckster, a man-dealer between party and party. Proyer, as preyer. Prunelat, the name of a Vine or Grape. Prunelette, a little plum. Prunier, (Adj.) bearing, or aboun∣ding with plums; of, or belong∣ing to plums; loving plums. Prurir, to itch, to tickle; to desire lustfully. Prurit, an itching, or tickling; a laful desire of, or affection un∣to. Pruver, as preyer. Psalme, for pseaume, a Psalm. Psaultier, for pseautier, a Psalter, a book of Psalms. Pseudonard, Lavender. Psilothre, Britony, Tettarberry; al∣so an Oyntment for the taking of hair away. Psoloente, a kinde of Lightning, whose flash destroys whatsoever it lights on. Ptoschalazon, a medler, a busie-body. Ptyade, a kinde of Serpent, which raising up her neck and head, spits venome at those whom she cannot reach with her teeth. Puantise, for puanteur, a stink, or stench. Puberté, youth, or the age wherein hair begins to grow about the privities. Publicain, a Publican, or Toll-ga∣therer; a Farmer, or Levyer of publick Revenue. Puceal, maidenly, or maiden-like. Puceler, for depuceler, to get a Vir∣gins maidenhead, to deflour her. Pucher, to take up. Pudibunde, shame-faced, bashful. Parties pudibundes, the privy parts. Pueille, as peulle. Puel, as Bois estans en puel, having been lately cut, or lopped. Puer la vigne, to cut a Vine; or as pouër. Puerilité, boyishness, childishness, simplicity. Puette, a peg in a hogshead of wine; also the peg-hole. Pugnitif, warlike, contentious, quar∣relsome. Puinne, Puisne, spindle-tree, prick-wood, prick-timber. Puitier, a Well-maker. Puits, for puis, a Well. Pulceau, the name of a Vine. Pulceaux, full of fleas. Pulcier, of a flea, or full of fleas. Pulciere, flea-wort; also fleabane. Pulçot, a little flea; a Vine-fretter. Pulege, Penny-royal. Pulluler, to bud, shoot, or spring out. Pulmonée, as poulmelée. Pulpe, the pulp, or pith of plants, &c. also the brawn, or solid and mu∣sculy flesh of the body. Pulpite, for poupitre, a desk. Pulsatil, knocking, beating. Pulsatille, pass-flower, flaw-flower. Pulsation, a knocking, thumping, or beating. Pulte, a poultice. Pulverin, the touch-hole of a piece of Ordnance. Pulvinaire, a bolster for a Princes bed; also a banquetting Bed made in the Roman Temples to the honour and for the ease of their Gods. Pulviné, furnished with cushions, or pillows. Pumice, pierre pumice, a Pumice-stone. Punaisie, stink, or stench. Punctille, as pointille in the N. D. Punction, a pricking, or stinging; also a pointing. Punctual, for punctuel, punctual. Punctuation, Punctué, & Punctuer. See ponctuation, ponctué, and ponctuer in the N. D. Punesie, Pleurisy. Pupe, the fish Pourcontrel. Pupilaire, pupillary, of, or belonging to a Pupil. Pupilarité, nonage. Pupine, the name of an apple. Puput, a Whoop, or Dunghil-cock; also a kinde of frog. Puputer, to whoop, or cry like the Whoop. Purer, for suppurer, to grow unto a head, or mattar; to yield mattar. Purge, a Purge; also a clearing, or justification, or the endeavour which a delinquent uses to purge himself. Purgement, a purging.
Purificatif, purifying. Puron, a botch, or blain full of or∣dure or filthy mattar. Pusillanime, pusillanimous, coward∣ly. Pusillanimement, cowardly. Pusillanimité, pusillanimity, coward∣liness. Pussons, the small green flies that lie cluttering under the leaves of herbs, and within a while devour them. Pustuleux, blistered, or full of bli∣sters. Putanier, as Putier. Putasser, to follow whores. Putasserie, a whoring, or wenching. Puteal, of a pit; deep as a pit. Puterbe, an Hermit (or any other) whose breath is tainted by much feeding on herbs. Puterie, as putasserie. Putier, a Wencher, a Whoremonger. Putoir, a stink, or rank smell; a Wencher; or as Putois, a Fitch, or Fulmart. Putput, as puput. Putredineux, full of rottenness. Putride, rotten, putrified. Putte, a Wench, or a whorish Lass. Puye, as appuye. Puyne, as puinne. Py, as pis. Pyafer, or Pyapher, for piaser, to be stately, to carry it proudly. Pype-pou, the round-rooted Crow-foot. Pygmé, little, of a small stature. Pyment, as piment. Pynthe, for pinte, a pint. Pyralide, a Fire-fly. Pyrate, & Pyraterie, as Pirate, Piraterie in the N. D. Pyratique, Pyratical; of, or belong∣ing to a Pirat. Pyronomie, the art of governing or ordering Alchymistical fires. Pyrope, a kinde of fiery-red Car∣buncle. Pyrotechnie, the making of Fire∣works. Pyrothique, caustick, and corro∣sive. Pyrouët, for volant, a shittlecock. Pyrouëtte, as pirouëtte. Pyvoine, for pivoine, Peony. Q QUadragenaire, of forty years. Quadragesimal, of, or belonging to Lent. Quadrain, for quatrain, a Stanza, or staff of four Verses. Quadrangule, quadrangular, four-square. Quadrannier, of four years, four years old. Quadraturé, square, well-grown, well-set, almost as thick as long. Quadré, squared; also sitted, or a∣greeing unto. Quadrelle, an arrow, a shaft. Quadrer, to square; also to suit, or be fit for. Quadrilettre, a word of four Let∣ters. Quadrille, a Squadron containing 25 (or fewer) Souldiers. Quadrin, a farthing. Quadrivie, a place where four sun∣dry ways do meet; also a way that hath several turnings, or partings. Quadrupe, four-footed. Quadruplement, a quadruplication. Quadruplique, a second rejoynder, or a third defence, or writing put into Court by a Defendant. Qu'a-hu qu'a-ha, well or ill, one way or another; also laboriously, pain∣fully. Quai, for Quay, the Key of a River, or Haven; also a pillar of mar∣ble, or stone. Quaisse, Quaissier, as Caisse, Cais∣sier in the N. D. Qualibre, as Calibre in the N. D. Qualibré, sit for (fitted unto) the bore. Quandoque, as Docteur de quan∣doque, a Dunsical Doctor. Quaneuse, a Mill-hopper. Quantores, albeit, though, although. Quantes fois, how often, how many times. Toutes & quantes fois, or Toutes fois & quantes, as often as. Quanton, as Canton in the N. D. Quaqueroles, the tawny Beetles which buzze about the flocks in Hay-time; also the shells of Snails, &c. Quaquet, or Quaquetement, Qua∣queter, Quaqueteur. See Ca∣quet, Caqueter, Caqueteur in the N. D. Quarantain, Quarentaine, for qua∣rantaine, a term of forty days. Quaresme, for Carême, Lent. Quaresmeau, as Jour quaresmeau, a Lenten, or Fish-day. Quarillon, &c. See Carillon in the N. D. Quarlet, the small Plaice, or fresh-water Plaice; or a kinde of broad and short Plaice. Quarme, the horn-beam, or hard beam. Quarneau, for creneau, a pinnacle, a battlement. Quarquan, for carcan, a carknet. Quarre, a square; also a corner. Quarrefour, Quarreler, Quarrelé, Quarrelure. See them with Ca instead of qua in the N. D. Quarrelet, as quarlet. Quarreleur, for Savetier, a Cobler. Quarrellage, as Carrelure in the N. D. Quarrément, squarely. Quarrer, Quarreure. See Carrer, Carrure in the N. D. Quarrier, as Quarrieur. Quarriere, a high-way, a quarry of stone; also as Carriere in the N. D. Quarrieur, a Quarrier, or Quarry-man. Quarril, the fourth part of a Spanish Real; a small Coin worth our three half-pence. Quarroy, a great and broad High∣way. Le grand Quarroy, the Kings High-way. Quartage, a fourth. Quartagé, a fourth part of the price whereof is paid, as a Custom, unto the King. Quartaire, the quarter of a pound; also a measure containing about 12 spoonfuls of liquid, and weigh∣ing about 5 ounces in dry things. Quartault, the quarter, or fourth part of a measure. Quartellee, a certain quantity of, or measure for, ground in Bourbon∣nois. Quartement, fourthly. Quarteranche, the eighth part of a Bichot (a measure for co.) Quarterée, a Bushel. Quarternier de Gensdarmes, an Of∣ficer having the charge or com∣mand of four Gensdarmes. Quassant, Quassation, Quassé, Quas∣ser. See them with Ca instead of qua, in the N. D. Quasette, for cassette, a little box. Quasseur, a breaker. Quasseure, for cassure, a bruise. Quaternaire, fourth. Quatir, as Catir in the N. D, Quatridien, of four days. Quatroillé, diversify'd, streaked with one colour upon another. Quatruplon, four Ducats in one piece. Quau, for corps, body.
Quayer, as Cayer in the N. D. Quayre, a little worm that breeds between the bark and wood of trees. Quecas, as quocas. Quemand, as Caimand. Quemilse, the principal overture of a melting furnace. Quemen, a way. Quemuletier, a Counter-charmer, a Wizard, or good Witch. Quenaille, for canaille, rascals. Quenaise, as Droict de quenaise, the Right of Escheatage, where∣by an Inheritance Roturier falls into the Lords hands, when the Tenant thereof leaves no Heirs of his Body behind him. Quenie, a certain old-fashion gar∣ment; or as Squenie. Quenouillée, a distaff full of. Quenouillette, a little distaff; also a kinde of small apple. Quens, a Count, or an Earl. Quercelle, Quercerelle, a Kastrel. Querimonie, a complaint, or moan∣ing. Queritant, seeking for, enquiring after. Querquois, for carquois, a quiver. Querre, for querir, to fetch. Quesne, for chêne, an Oak. Quesnoy, a Wood of Oaks. Quesse, for caisse, a chest. Questable, finable; (as some Tenants are at the pleasure of their Lords) also searchable. Questal, servile, holding by Villa∣nage; held by a servile Tenure. Questaux, Villanes, the property of all whose Estate is in their Land-lords; so that they can neither devise by will, nor alien by bar∣gain, any part of it. Queste-pain, a common beggar; or a begging. Questionnette, a small question, or a slight demand. Questionneur, a questioner, an in∣quisitive Companion. Questuaire, gainful, or profitable. Queu, for queux, a whet-stone. Queuäge, a certain Impost levyed in some parts of France, upon eve∣ry Queuë or Pipe of wine. Queué, tailed, that hath a tail. Queuëtte, a little tail, or stalk; the tip of a thing. Queus, for queux, a whet-stone. Queuse, a rude lump, or mass, as of iron, &c. coming from the furnace, or before it be wrought into bars. Queusser, as pren garde que ton car ne se queusse, take heed thy cart doth not overthrow. Queut, as queus. Queute, small drink, small beer. Queux, for Cuisinier, a Cook. Le grand Queux de France, the Kings chief Cook. Queymander, to beg from door to door. Quidam, a certain man. Quidditatif, doubtful, obscure, full of quirks; also contentions, li∣tigious. Quideau, a wicker engine whereby fish is caught. Quierchier, the name of a small bird. Quietin, as Theatin. Quietude, rest, or peaceableness. Quignet, a little corner. Quillard, for billard, billiard. Quillat, the refining, or touch of gold; also a carrat. Quillebandier, one that plays much at nine-pins. Quillela, a kind of Play like unto Cat and Trap. Quillevillis, skirret roots. Quillons de la garde d'une espée, the cross bars of the hilt of a sword. Quinaire, an ancient Roman Coyn. Quinaud, an ape, or monkey; an ill favoured creature. Je l'ai ren∣du quinaut, I have put him to a non-plus. Quinconcé, as Verger quinconcé, an Orchard whose trees are rank∣ed in equal distance asunder, and directly one over against the other. Quine, as faire la quine à quelcun, to make mouths at one. Quines, two fives on the dice. Quinette, a crutch; also a snipe. Quinquailles, old iron; also small iron ware. Quinquallier, for Quinquaillier, an Iron-monger. Quinquaneleur, a Bankrupt; one that procures or forces his Credi∣tors to give him five years day of payment. Quinquangle, having five angles, or corners. Quinque, as pain de quinque, deli∣cate bread made against the five solemn Feasts of Easter, St. Pe∣ters and St. Pauls day, the As∣sumption of the Virgin Mary, and Christmass. Quinquenaut, the name of a flie in Beausse. Quinquenelle, Quinquennelle, a respit or term of five years. Faire quinquenelle, to become bank∣rupt. Quinquennon, as Privilege de quin∣quennon, a Protection for five years granted by the Prince (or his Officers) unto a Debtor, who makes good proof of the loss, or extream diminution of his Estate, since the time of the making of the bargain, whereby he became indebted. Quinson, a Chaffinch. Quintain, as quintin. Quinte-feuille, cink-foyl, five-leaved grass. Quintement, (Adj.) fifthly. Quintessencé, exceedingly refined, or purify'd. Quintessencer, as quintessencier in the N. D. Quintessencieux, all quintessence, full of spirit. Quintil, a rash Judge, a hasty Cen∣surer of other mens writings. Quintin, French lawn; a course kind of lawn. Quinuneve, en ordre quinuneve, checkerwise. Quiquenelle, as quinquenelle. Quis, sought, looked, or searched for; fetched, gotten. Quitement, freely, or without hin∣derance. Quiterne, for guitare, a guitar. Quiteur, or Quitteur, a quitter, ac∣quitter, or discharger. Quittus, an acquittance, or quietus est. Qulocul, the last or youngest Child one hath. Quocas, shaled nuts. Quocquetier, a Huckster. Quolibet, a quirk, or quiddity; al∣so a jest, or by-word. Un vieux quolibet, an old saying. Quoquar, an egg. Quoquelicoq, for coquelicoc, wild poppy. Quoquemart, for coquemar, a bra∣zen pot, or chafer, with a cover. Quoté, quoted, marked, noted in the margent; also taxed, assessed, rated. Quoter, to quote, or mark in the margent; also to tax, assess, or rate. Quotidien, daily. Quotiens, totiens quotiens, very often, as often as he pleaseth. Quotient, the part, or portion, which
in the division of a thing among many falls unto every ones share. Quotizé, Quotizer, as Cotisé, Cotiser in the N. D. Quottité, an even assesment, or rate imposed; the laying on every one his share. Quouät, an underling. Quoüé, tailed, having a tail. Frou∣ment quoüé, tailed wheat, fox-tail. Quoy, quiet, still. Quoyement, quietly. Quoyeté, quietness, stilness. R. RAballe, a certain root, of whose juice (mixed with other simples) a pretty sauce is made. Rabalter, to rumble, rattle, or make a terrible noise, as (they say) spirits do in some unfortunate or unfrequented houses. Rabaniste, a dunce; also one that studies, or is cunning in the Works of the Rabbies. Rabans, rope-yards, the ropes where∣by the Sails of a Ship are ty'd un∣to the Yards. Rabaschement, a rumbling, or a ter∣rible ratling, such as (some say) is made by Hobgoblins in some un∣fortunate or unfrequented Hou∣ses. Rabascher, Rabaster, as rabalter. Rabat-joye, a bringer of ill-tidings, a teller of ill news (after the re∣ceit of good ones.) Rabavit, prickmadam, sengreen the lesser. Rabbe, as rabe. Rabbienné, reconciled. Rabbienner, to reconcile, to make friends again. Rabdomantie, divination by twigs, or small wands. Rabe, a turnep; a round Limosm radish. Rabiere, a plot, or bed of turneps. Rabilité, re-inabled, restored. Rabiliter, to re-inable, to restore. Rabillecoustrer, to patch, to mend. Rabine, a high-grown wood. Rabinique, Rabby-like; of the Rabbies. Rabioles, turneps. Rabitué, re-accustomed, setled again. Rabituer, to re-accustom; to settle again. Rablé, strong-backed. Rablette, a shrew-mouse. Rabobeliné, patched, or pieced again. Rabobeliner, to patch, or piece again. Rabobelineries, patches renewed, or patches upon patches. Rabolliere, a rabbets nest, the hole wherein a Doe-Cony keepeth her young ones. Raboteure, a smoothing. Raboudris, crooked or misgrown trees, which will never prove tim∣ber. Rabougri, a grub, a short-necked crook-back. Rabougrir, to grow crooked and low withall. Rabouliere, as rabolliere. Rabrouër, for rebrouër, to chide, to rebuke. Rabrouëur, a chider, or rebuker. Rabuser, to re-abuse. Raccamusé, squashed, or pashed down; beaten flat. Raccamuser, to squash, or to pash down; to beat (or to make) flat. Raccointer, to make once more ac∣quainted with, to reconcile. R'accoller, to embrace again. Raccorni, grown as hard as horn. Raccornir, to make as hard as horn; also to grow hard like horn. Raccueilly, for recueilli, gathered. Rachais, lean, scraggy. Rachalander, to get into trade again. Rachapter, for racheter, to redeem. Rachapteur, a redeemer. Rachassé, chased, or driven back again. Rachasser, to chase, or drive back again. Rachasseur, a chaser, or driver back again. Rachater, as rachapter. Rachetable, redeemable. Rachimburges, certain Judges of Causes which were determinable by the Salick Law. Racin, for raisin, a grape. Racinette, a small root. Racineux, full of roots. Racle, a scraper; a rasp, or grater; also the iron, ring, or hammer of a door. Racledenare, a scrape-good. Racleresse, a scraping woman. Raclet, the name of a fool, and therefore of little understanding in the Law. Racletorets, such as rub sweaters in hot Bathes, or hot houses. Racompter, for raconter, to tell. Racorny, as raccorni. Racourir, for recourir, to re∣course. Racquit, as raquit. Racrocher, to make of the form of a hook. se Racroupir, to gather close toge∣ther his hinder parts. Rade, (Adj.) quick, swift. Radial, of, or belonging to the up∣per and bigger bone of the arm. Radjancer, for ragencer, to put in order again. Radieux, radiant, shining, glitte∣ring, blazing, flaring. Radis, a raddish-root. Radis sendu, the double raddish, or many root∣ed raddish. Radot, as les arbres qui servent de radots aux maisons, trees which serve (or are good) for the repara∣tion, or mending of houses. Radoté, un vieux radoté, an old doating fool. Radoub, for radoubement, a re∣pairing. Radouëre, a strickle for the measu∣ring of corn. Radresse, a redress, reformation, amends. Radresser, and its Derivatives. See redresser in the N. D. Radvestir, to re-invest, to put again into possession. Radvestissement, a re-investing. Radveu, re-advowed, re-approved, taken into protection again. Raduné, assembled, or gathered toge∣ther. Raduner, to assemble, or gather to∣gether. Radvouër, to re-advow, to re-ap∣prove, to take into protection again. Raf, see rif. Rafaux, wild Bores of about two years of age, when first their tasks begin to peer out of their mouths. Rafe, a rifling. Faire sa rase, to make his hand, or make up his mouth, by many purchases or pri∣zes. Rafe, rifled, scraped, caught, or snatch∣ed; also slipped away. Rafer, to rifle, scrape, catch, or snatch; also to slip away. Raffarder, to rail, or scoff at. Rafflade, a gripe, grasp, or violent seisure. Par une rafflade, at once, at one clap. Faire une rafflade, to catch, or to snatch at.
Rafflater, for reflater, to flatter a∣gain. Raffoler, to hurt, or fall again; al∣so to besot again. Raffusté, new-stocked; fitted with a new stock, or staff, frame, or carriage. Raffuster, to fit or furnish with a new stock, staff, frame, or car∣riage. Rasreschir, and its Derivatives. See rasraichir, &c. in the N. D. se Ragaillardir, to grow merry a∣gain. Ragalice, for reguelice, lickorice. Ragats d'eau, a great flood, inun∣dation, or ravage of waters. Ragement, dalliance, wantonness, lasciviousness. Rager, to dally, or play the wanton. Rageux, wanton, lascivious, lastful. Raggrandir, to increase, or inlarge. Raguiser, to sharpen again. Raillard, jesting. Raillon, a kind of dagger which opens and shuts with a vice. Fer de flesche à raillon, a shoot-head, a forked or barbed head. Raim, a bough, or branch of a tree. Par raim de baston, or par raim & baston, a delivery, or quitting of land, by the delivery of a bough, rod, or stick that grows thereon. Rain, as raim, a bough. Rain de forests, the purlues, or skirts of forests; the places that be next, or near adjoyning unto them. Raine, a frog. Raine de buisson, the hedge-toad. Raine verte, the green-frog. Rainette, a little frog; also a pawn at Chesse. Rainseau, Rainselet, a little branch, or bough. Raiolé, as riolé. Raionné, furrowed, set or sown in furrows; digested into several ranks, rows, or furrows. Raipaire, as repaire in the N. D. Raire, to shave. Rais, for rasé, shaved. Raise, a path, or furrow between eds in a Garden, or in a tilled ground. Raisine, for resine, rosin. Raisnée, for raisiné, a thick con∣fion of grapes. Raix, full of grapes. Raiiere, the third membrane or skin of the eye, wherein the hole , by which we see; also the Ʋ∣ld. Raisinnée, as raisinée. Raiz, a net. Raiz, for razé, shaved. Raize, as raise. Rale de Cheval, the pastern of a horse. Ralette, as marcher de ralette, to tread but lightly. Ralle, as rasle. Rallement, a ratling in the throat. Raller, to rattle in the throat; also to return, or to go again. Raller à terre, to run fast and close by the ground. Rallion, an arrow with a forked, or barbed head; a broad ar∣row. Ralonger, to lengthen, to stretch, or draw out in length. Ramage, (Adj.) of, or belonging to branches; also wild. Ramaison, as ramoison. Ramancher, to set a new hast, or handle; to reduce to its former order; to put again in its former place. Ramar, the fih called the Sea-fox. Ramasse, for balais, a broom. Rambade, the bend or wale of a Galley. Ramberge, a fashion of long ship narrower than a Galley, but swift and easie to be governed. Rambure, the name of a sowrish ap∣ple. Ramentevoir, to put in minde of, to remind. Ramentu, remembred, called to minde. Ramerci, a certain forbidden Engine wherewith fish may be caught. Ramereau, Ramerot, a young Stock-dove. Rameure, a rowing. Rameux, for ramu, full of branches, or boughs. Ramieller, to use further enticements, to sweeten once again. Ramification, a branching, or spread∣ing into several branches. Ramifié, branched, or spread in branches. Ramifier, to branch, or spread in branches. Ramilles, small sticks, or twigs; little boughs, or branches. Raminagrobis, a counterfeiter of graviy, a severe outside of a flight inside. Ramingue, froward, peevish; also wandering, loytering, roving a∣bout. Cheval ramingue, an in∣constant moving horse. Ramoderé, moderated, qualified, tempered. Ramoderer, to moderate, qualifie, temper. Ramoisin, a seared, or dead branch cut from a tree. Ramoisons, loppings of trees, or the tops of branches lopped off. Ramoiti, moistened, soaked again. Ramoitir, to moisten, to soak again. Ramolles, Past-meats like Sausages. and made of the juice of herbs, the yolks of egges, cheese, and meal, seasoned with salt, and boyled with water until they float; when they are taken out of it, and served up hot. Ramonter, for remonter, to lift up again. Ramortissement, as amortissement in the N. D. Rampable, which may be crept on. Rampar, for rempart, a Rampier. Rampeau, as Droict de rampeau, a priviledge, or power to lecher. Ramplaige, for remplage, a filling up. Ramponne, a jest. Ramponner, to jest. Ramposne, as ramponne. Rampson, for rançon, a ransome. Ramuselé, as un nez ramuselé, a thick and short nose, a bottle-nose. Ran, a Ram. Rancade, as à rame ou à voile ran∣cade, with all their oars or sails, as fast as they can go. Ranche, hoarse. Rancin, the new hunting of dogs after a default. Ranco, trotter de ranco, to walk from rank to rank, from one to another. Rancoeur, rancor, hatred, malice, or inward grudge. Rancon, a Welsh-hook, or hedging-bill; also a triple-forked weapon about the length of a Partisan. Rançonneur, a ransomer; also an oppressor, or extortioner. Randonnée, a swift, or violent course. Randonner, to run swiftly, violent∣ly, as fast as he can. Rane, a frog. Ranglier, for Rangier, a Rain∣deer. Ranguillon, the tongue of a backle. Ranulaire, as Veine ranulaire, a Vein under the tongue, opened or let blod for the Siancy. Ranules, the Veins which are under the tongue; also the little Mascles of that part.
Ranulet, a painful swelling of the Veins under the tongues of Cattle. Ranuncule, the Crow-foot, or But∣ter-flower. Raouler, as rouler in the N. D. Rapaire, the dung of a Hare. Rapatrier, as repatrier. Rapeau, for rappel, a repeal, or cal∣ling back; also a return, or a se∣cond course, or hurl at keyles. Rapedenare, as racledenare. Rapel, a lure for a Hawk. Rapement, a rasping, a hard scra∣ping. Raper, to rasp, or scrape hard; also to knock at a door, &c. Rapetissé, diminished, grown less; also set in, as a piece of work. Rapetissement, a diminishing, or growing less; also a setting, or standing in a piece of work. Rapetisser, to lessen, to diminish; also to set in a piece of work, or a piece of work to stand in beyond its fellows. Rapeur, a rasper, or hard scraper. Raphan, a Horse-radish. Raphanelle sauvage, Dittander, Pep∣per-wort. Raphe, a beast shaped like a Wolf, and spotted like a Panther; also the name of a Saint. Mal de S. Raphe, a Leprosie, or the wilde Scab. Raphe, a radish; also a Lepers clic∣ket; also a handful of; also the game at dice called Raffle. Rapher, for raffer, to sweep all a∣way. Raphileux, rugged, rough, knotty; also full of seams. Raphine, as mal de S. Raphine, the wild scab. Rapiere, an old rusty Rapier. Rapille, a kinde of sand used in the cutting of marble. Rapineux, ravenous, greedy, cove∣tous. Rapoil, a Shaver, or Barber. Rapoule, the Bur-dock, or great bur. Rappe, a Game, or Exercise, where∣in the Actors, being armed with Gauntlets, busset one another. Rappé, for rapé, small wine. Brou∣er rappé, the broth of Chickes and Veal, with crums of white bread, livers of Pullein, ver, and white Ginger strained toge∣ther. Rappeau, as rapeau. Rappeçon, the Sea-fish called a Heaven-gazer. Rappes, the Pains, a disease in a horses leg. Rappetissement, as rapetissement. Rappez, a kinde of Grapes preserved in Must, and served to the table as great dainties. Rapporte-nouvelle, a News-bearer, or Tale-carrier. Raprecy, a re-valuation, or new price made of. Rapse, for rape, a rasp. Raptacer, Raptasser, for rapetasser, to patch. Raquaille, for racaille, rascality. Raque, dirt, filth, ordure; mud, mire; or as rasque. Raqué, as vin raqué. See rapé in the N. D. Raquedenare, as racledenare. Raquetier, a Racket-maker; also one that handles a racket well. Raquettes, the high-sided perwigs, or wires of hair, worn heretofore by Gentlewomen. Raquit, a discharge, a redempti∣on. Raquitable, redeemable. Raquoisé, quieted, appeased, paci∣fied. Raquoiser, to quiet, appease, or pa∣cifie. Rarefacient, making thin, or scant. Rarefaction, a making, or becoming thin. Rarefier, to rarifie, to make thin or scant. Ras, for sarge, Serge. Ras de Mi∣lan, the st kinde of bare serge, a Silk-serge. Rascas, as Dousin rascas, the great Sea-Ʋrci; or the Sea-Scorpion. Rasche, a sald, or a running srf, epeciall, in the heads of little children. Rascle, for perdrix, a Partridge. Rase, for rasement, a shaving, or shing; also a incursion into, or a raaging of  Enemies Cout. Rascau, net-work; also a great slat∣ted Boat, Barge, or Lighter; or as radeau in the N. D. Rase-poll, a Barber. Rasibus de, close to, even with. Ra∣sibus qui bouge, the word of a certain , wherein or with a feast strikes all  and up-standing  dw into it  i it. Raser de bld, a meare containing . Rasle, a ratling in the throat. Rason, a delicate red-scaled fish in the Seas about Rhodes and Mal∣tha. Called thus, because his back is fashioned like a rasor. Raspatoire, a rasp. Rasper, as raper. Raspeçon, as rappeçon. Raspeux, rugged, rough as a rasp. Rasque, the scurf of a scald head. Rassailler, to set on again. Rassel, arse-smart, water-pepper. Rasserené, made lightsome, chearful, clear, or calm. Rasserener, to make lightsome, chear∣ful, clear or calm. Rassoté, grown sottish; fallen into dotage. Rassotement, sottishness, dotage. Rassoter, to grow a sot, to dote. Rastelot, wild Chervil. Raston, a fashion of round and high Tart made of butter, eggs, and cheese. Rasue, as resue. Rasurier, a Shaver, a Barber. Rataconné, botched, patched. Rataconner, to botch, to patch. Rataconnerie, a botching, or patch∣ing. Rataconneur, a botcher, or patcher. Rataconniculer, to reiterate lechery. Ratatiné, grbby, shrank in, thick and short. Rateceler, to mend a bo, &c. Ratelle, for rate, the Spln. Ratelou, male (or long) Birthwort. Ratepenade, a Bat, a Rearmouse. Ratepenade de Mer, the flying fish. Ratepenades, as raquettes. Ratiocination, a discoursing, rea∣soning, arguing. Ratiociner, to discourse, reason, or argue. Rational, reasonable, indued with reason. Ratissé, scraped, gratd. Ratisser, to rape, to grate. Ratis∣ser le cerau, to x, or perplex the brains. Ratissouer, for ratissoire, a gter. Ratissure, a ping, or aping; al∣so the sranags of. Rat-liron, a Dormoase. Ratoir, a mus-trap, or a trap for rat. Ratoire, a Raptory, a skie-breaking  or . Raten, a itt rat, or mouse; also a raton. Ratrere, a pari-; also a rat-trap. Rattatiné, a ratatiné.
Ratte, for souris, a mouse. Ratte volage, a bat. Ratteinte, a reaching, or overtaking once more. Ratteloup, as ratelou. Rattendrir, to make soft again. Rattier, sullen, retired, unsociable; also belonging to the spleen. Rattierement, sullenly, retiredly, privately, in huggar-muggar. Rat-veul, a Dormouse. Raturé, razed, or scraped out. Ravacher, as ravasser. Ravaille, small fish sold one with an∣other. Raval, as ravallement in the N. D. Ravanel, the Raddish-root. Ravanille, a little raddish. Ravasser, to rave, to talk idly. Ravauderesse, for ravaudeuse, a woman-botcher. Ravayde, a coyl, or stir. Rauder, for roder, to wander up and down. Ravel, as bogne ravel, the name of a little Sea-fish. Ravenet, the raddish root. Raverdir, to wax green, or to can∣ker, as a brazen vessel that's ei∣ther not used, or ill kept. Ravestissement, a reinvestiture. Ravet, as ravenet. Ravette, a little turnep. La petite ravette, the garden-rampion, or wilde rape. Raveul, as rat-veul. Raviere, a plot, or bed of turneps. Ravigoré, recovered, restored unto vigour up again. Ravigorer, to recover, to restore un∣to vigour, to revive or cheer up again. Ravigotter, to revive, a half-dead man to return unto life. Ravineux, violent, impetuous. Ravivé, revived. Raviver, to revive. Raulet, the name of a certain great pear. Ravoire, for ravage, ravage, ran∣sack. Ravoirer, to recover, to have again. Ravolé, fled back. Ravoler, to fly back, to return fly∣ing. Rauque, hoarse, harsh, or of an un∣pleasant sound. Rause, sedge, sheer-grass. Rayant, for rayonnant, radiant, glistering. Rayaux, bars, or long and narrow pieces of metal. Raymolles de blanc de Chapon, the brawn of a Capon, raisins of the Sun, and marrow shred all toge∣ther; then made into little cakes or loaves, and fryed with seam, or hogs sewet, and served up with Sugar strewed on them. Rayolé, as riolé. Rayonneux, full of beams, full of furrows. Raze, the broadest part of the shoul∣der-blade, very gristly and ben∣ding towards the back-bone; al∣so as rase. Razeforts, Forts-razing. Razis, a kinde of white Oyntment used by Surgeons, for the drying up of Sores. Ré, shaven. Reachet, a redemption, or buying again. Reaffle, the Devil. Reaffranchi, made free again. Reagal, the right Aconite. Reaggravation, a re-aggravation, (and particularly) the last and most direful Excommunication of Offenders. Real, for reel, real, essential. Real, for Royal, Royal, Princely. Realement, as reaument. Realgar, the fume, or smoke of Mine∣rals. Realisation, a making real. Realisé, made real. Realiser, to make real. Realleguer, to alledge again. Realler, to return, to go again. Reant, braying as a Stag. Reaplani, new-levelled, made plain or even again. Reappoincté, new sharpened at the point; also newly (or again) a∣greed. Reau, a deep furrow. Reaudition, a second hearing, a hearing over again. Reaument, really, essentially, effectu∣ally, throughly; assuredly, cer∣tainly, indeed. Rebaillé, restored, given back. Rebailler, to restore, or give back. Rebailler forme, to bestow a new shape. Rebaisotter, to reiterate kissing. Rebanni, banished again. Rebannir, to banish again. Rebanqueter, to make (or to be at) a new or another banquet. Rebarbatif, grim, stern, sowr, fro∣ward. Rebarboter, to mutter, or mumble words often between the teeth. Rebarder un Cheval, to put on a horses armour, trappings, or fur∣niture again. Rebatement, a repulsing, or beating back. Rebatter, to tumble down. Rebeine, a rout, tumult, uproar, or rebellion. Rebellement, a rebelling. Rebeluter, to bolt over again. Rebenir, Rebenistre, to bless again; to hallow or sanctifie a holy (but profaned) thing. Rebetre, a Wren. Rebeyne, as rebeine. Rebigoter, to play the hypocrite, or superstitious noddy again. Rebindaine, turned upside down. A jambes rebindaines, with legs wide stradling, and upwards turned. Rebiné, eared, or tilled the second time. Rebinement, a second earing, or breaking up of land. Rebiner, to plough, till, or ear ground the second time. Rebineur des choses accordées, one that denies or calls back his word, that will not stand to con∣ditions before agreed on. Reblandi, re-appeased, pacified again. Reblandir, to re-appease, or pacifie again. Reblandir le bestail prins en dommage, to pay for the da∣mage done by Cattle. Reblandir le Seigneur, a Tenant upon the seisure of his Land, for non-pay∣ment of Rent, &c. to repair unto his Landlord, or to his Officer, and demand the true cause there∣of; or make him a reasonable and sufficient offer of satisfaction; or with good words, and in fair terms, to excuse his omissions, or defaults of payment, &c. and in∣treat him to bear yet a while with him. Reblandissement, a re-appeasing, or pacifying again; also an offer of satisfaction, or a request of for∣bearance, for Duties omitted, Rents unpaid, Wrongs done. Rebobeliné, patched, mended again. Rebobeliner, to patch, or mend a∣gain. Rebobelineur, a patcher, a botcher. Rebobiné, patched all over. Rebondonner, to stop with a bung again. Reborner, to make new bounds for. Reboté, booted again.
Reboter, to boot, or pull on boots, again. Reboucler, to buckle again. Rebouër, le bas rebouer, an engine wherewith fish is (forbidden to be) caught. Rebouffer, to puff up the cheeks a∣gain. Rebougié, feared again. Rebougier, to fear again. Rebouillement, a boyling once more, or over again, a second boyling. Rebouiller, to boyl once more, or over again. Rebouillonner, to bubble, or wamble over again. Reboulé, bowled again; also turned down, or in; shrunk in. Rebouler, to bowl again; also to turn down, or in; to shrink in. Rebousse, as rebours in the N.D. Rebout, for rebut, a repulse, or de∣nial. Reboutement, a repelling, or reject∣ing; a refusing, or denying; also a checking, or rebuking. Rebouter, to repel, or reject; refuse, or deny; check, or rebuke. Reboutonner, to bud again; also to button again. Rebransler, to shake again. Rebriché, a motive, or advertise∣ment in writing upon an Inquest. Rebricher, to make a motive, or advertisement in writing upon an Inquest. Rebride, bridled again. Rebrider, to bridle again. Rebrillement, a double glittering, or twinkling; a twinkling, or sparkling reflexion. Rebrisé, bruised, or broken again. Rebriser, to bruise, or break again. Rebrocarder, to retort a jest. Rebroïe, as rebroyé. Rebrosser, to return, to retire; also to bend; also to turn up the point, edge, or end of a thing. Rebros∣ser la terre, to break up the ground. Rebrousser, to browze, or nibble a∣gain. Rebroyé, stamped, or pounded a∣gain. Rebroyer, to stamp, or pound again. Rebruire, to resound, or to make a new rumbling. Rebugler, to low, or bellow again; also to ring, or resound. Reburé, (Subst.) a repulse, a denial. Recalcitrer, to kick, or strike back with the heels again. Recancelé, cancelled again. Recanceler, to cancel again. Recanement, the braying of an Ass. Recaner, to bray like an Ass. Recarder la laine, to card wool over again. Recarreler des souliers, to set new soles on shoes. Recassé, cassed, or abolished again. Recasser, to cass, or abolish again. Recavé, hollowed, or digged into again. Recaver, to hollow, or dig into a∣gain. Receindre, to gird anew. Recelation, Recelée, Recelement, a concealing, hiding, or keeping close. Receléement, hiddenly, closely. Receleresse, for receleuse, a woman that secretly receiveth stollen goods. Recensé, numbred, told, reckoned; also related. Recensement, a numbering, telling, or reckoning up of; a relating. Recenser, to number, tell, or reckon; also to relate. Recentement, for recemment, re∣cently, newly, lately. Recepé, cut off, or away; also re∣paired, mended; or underset. Receper tout le bois, to cut all the wood away. Receper une mu∣raille, to repair a wall, or mend it at the bottom. Recepicé, Recepissé, an acquittance, or discharge. Receptaire, a note of physical Re∣ceipts. Receptoire, a receptory, any peace or vessel that's fit to receive. Recerceller, to hoop anew; also to curl, or turn up, as the hair. Recerche, and its Derivatives. See Recherche, &c. in the N. D. Recez, recoilings, retreats, depar∣tures; also vacations. Rechaffaudé, set, or presented on a scaffold again. Rechaffauder, to set up, or to set on a scaffold again. Rechamailler, to hack, or slash a∣gain. Rechaner, to bray like an Ass. Rechange, as robbes de rechange, change or choice of Gowns, seve∣ral Gowns. Doré & argenté à rechange, interchangeably sil∣vered and gilt. Rechangement, a shifting, an ex∣changing, a changing again. Rechangeur, an interchanger, or ex∣changer. Rechargeouer, a spring; the ginn set for Snipes, Woodcocks, &c. Rechatouiller, to tickle again. Rechaucher, as rechausser in the N. D. Rechauffement, a heating again; also a heating, or putting into heat. Recheance, a possession in trust; the use, or custody of a thing on con∣dition, or with a Proviso, to re∣store it. Recheminer, to walk again. Recheoir, to return, to fall back or again. Rechevillé, pegged, or pinned a∣new. Recheviller, to peg, or pin anew. Recheuter, to relapse; to fall back, or again. Rechiffrer, to make new cyphers, to cypher over again. Rechignard, a frowning, or grim fellow. Rechignement, grimness, or frown∣ing. Rechignément, frowningly, grim∣ly. Rechiner, for rechigner, to frown, or to look grimly. Rechoir, as recheoir. Recidivé, relapsed. Recidiver, to relapse. Reciné, an afternoons nuncheon, or collation. Reciner, to feed between dinner and supper. Recise, herb Avens, Bennet, or Bles∣sed. Recitateur, Reciteur, a reciter. Recitement, a reciting. Reclaim, & Reclain, as reclam in the N. D. Recliner, to incline. Reclorre, to shut, or close up again. Reclos, shut, or closed up again. Recocquebillé, whose end turns up∣ward. Nez recocquebillé, a Nose whose bridge is flat or hol∣low in the midst, and turns up at the end. se Recoibler, to withdraw, or to retire himself. Recollationné, re-examined by the Original. Recollationner, to re-examine a Copy by the Original, or one wri∣ting by another; also to take a new Collation. Recombatre, to fight again. Recomfort, as reconfort. Recommandablement, comma∣bly.
Recomfort, as reconsort. Recommandablement, commendably. Recommandaces, funeral-prayers, or praises. Recommandatif, recommending. Recommandatoire, recommendatory. Recommanderesses, such Women as by commending and undertaking for Maids procure them services. Recommuniquer, to impart again. Recompensement, a recompencing, or rewarding. Recondit, hidden, concealed, kept secret. Reconduiseur, one that brings ano∣ther home again. Reconferer, to talk of the matter again. Reconfermer, for reconfirmer, to confirm again. Reconfesser, to confess again. Reconfiné, banished again. Reconfiner, to banish again. Reconfort, great comfort. Reconforté, much comforted. Reconforter, to comfort much, to cheer up exceedingly. Reconfronter, to compare once more together. Reconfuter, to confute again. Recongreger, to re-assemble, to ral∣ly. Reconjuré, conjured again. Reconjurer, to conjure again. Reconqueste, a second conquest. Reconquerre, Reconquestre, and Reconquestier, for reconquerir, to conquer again. Reconsé, hidden, concealed. Reconsement, a hiding, or concealing. Reconser, to hide, or to conceal. Reconsiderer, to consider again. Reconsolidé, reconsolidated, closed up again. Reconstruire, for rebâtir, to build up again. Reconsulter, to take new advice. Recontempler, to review. Recontester, to make new protesta∣tion of, or complaint unto. Recontracté, recontracted. Recontracter, to pass a new contract. Recontraindre, to compel again. Reconvaincre, to convince again. Reconvention, a new agreement; also the reviving of a Law-sute. Reconvertir, to convert again. Reconvier, to re-invite. Reconvoquer, to re-assemble, or call together again. Reconvoy, an attendance back. Reconvoyé, re-conducted. Reconvoyer, to bring back. Reconvoyeur, he that brings back. Recoquilleure, a curling; also a taking heart, or growing lusty. Recoquiner, to fall a begging again. Record, a record, a Witness that re∣members well the thing he witnes∣ses; also a testimony. Now by Records (in the Plural Number) are also meant two Persons, whom a Sergeant used heretofore to have with him, or call unto him, when he arrested, or served a Writ on a man. In the first case clapping them on the shoulders, he willed them to bear witness what he had done. In the second, they signed together with him the return of the Writ; or if they could not write, he sig∣nify'd in it their names and pre∣sence. These Records were to be sufficient and well-known Inha∣bitants of that Place, and nei∣ther Kinsmen, Allies, nor of the houshold of the Party that imploy∣ed the Sergeant. Recordation, a remembrance. Recordé, new strung; also testified, related, reported, notify'd, cer ti fy'd. Exploict recordé, an Exe∣cution done by a Sergeant in the presence of the Records, or two Witnesses. Recordeler, to string anew; also to twine again an untwisted cord, or string. Recorder, as recordeler; also to testify, relate, report, notify, cer∣tify. Se recorder, to remember, to call to mind. Recordeur, a Witness, one that was present at the deed doing, and re∣members it well. Recors, a witness, a record. Recors, (Adj.) remembring, mind∣ful of. Recouler, to run, or to glide back. Recoulourer, for recolorer, to give a new colour to. Recoupes, shreds, clippings, parings; also a middle sort of bran. Recoupler, to couple again. Recouronner, to crown again. Recourquebillé, as recocquebillé. Recourroucer, to anger again. Recourse, for recours, a recourse, or refuge. Recourser, for retrousser, to tuck up a garment. Recouseure, a new sowing, or stitch∣ing up. Recouvrance, a recovery. Recoy, rest, quiet, ease. Recrant, Recreant, tired, toyled, wearied, spent, out of heart. Recreativement, sportfully, delight∣fully, pleasantly. Recremens, excrements. Recrespé, crisped. Recrever, to burst again. Recrimination, recrimination, or re∣torting of a crime, an accusation of an accuser. Recriminer, to recriminate, retort a crime, accuse an accuser. Recrocu, as recocquebillé. Recroire, to believe again; also to re-seize, to re-arrest; also to re∣store, deliver, or give back. Recroist, a re-increase; a new, or second growth. Recroquebillage, a hooky bending, or bowing; a winding, or turn∣ing inwards. Recroquebillé, Recroquevillé, and Recroquillé, crooked, bent, bend∣ing, wound, or turned inwards. Recroquillement, a bending, bow∣ing, turning, or winding in∣wards. Recroquiller, to bend, bow, turn, or wind inwards. Recroquillonné, as recroquebillé. Recrudi, made, or grown raw. Recrudir, to make, or to grow raw. Recte, right, equity, justice, honesty. Rectificateur, a rectifier. Rectification, a rectifying, or recti∣fication; a correction, purificati∣on, separation of pure from unpure stuff, by a second distilling, &c. Rectorerie, for Rectorat, a Rector∣ship, a Vice-Chancellorship. Rectorial, Rector-like, belonging to a Rector or Vice-Chancellor. Recueilleur, a Collector, a reaper, or gatherer together. Recueiller, for recueillir, to gather. Recul, a recoil, or giving back; al∣so the hinder part of a thing. Reculade, a recoyling, a going, or giving back; also a by-hole, or secret corner. Reculée, as recul. Reculorum, à reculorum, backward, behind, or behind-hand; also for∣saken. Recupercuté, for repercuté, reflect∣ed. reverberated. Recurer, to cure, or to heal again. Recutir, to circumcise; to clip, or cut about. Recutit, circumcised; clipped or cut about; also new-skinned. Recuver, to tun, or put into a fat, again.
Redaigner, to vouchsafe once more. Redarder, to throw back a dart. Redargué, checked, reproved, rebu∣ked. Redarguer, to check, to reprove, to rebuke. Redargution, a check, reproof, or rebuke. Redater, to redate, to add a new date unto. Rede, for roide, stiff. Redebatre, to debate again. Redebvoir, for redevance, an obli∣gation. Redebvoir, (a Verb) to owe again. Redeclamer, to declame again. Redeclarer, to declare again. Redecliner, to decline again. Redecorer, to decorate again. Rededié, dedicated again. Rededuire, to deduct again. Redefaire, to undo, to defeat again. Redeleguer, to re-appoint, to give a new commission unto. Redeliberer, to deliberate again. Redemanger, to itch again. Redemener, to stir, toss, or tumble again. Redemeurer, Redemourer, to stay once more. Redemolir, to demolish again. Redenoncer, to denounce, or publish again; to threaten, or summon a∣new. Redent, a double notching, or jag∣ging, as in the teeth of a saw. Redesfermer, to open once more. Redesfier, to distrust again. Redesjuner, to eat a second break∣fast. Redespouiller, to strip again. Redevaller, to let, or put down again. Redevider, to make a new division. Redevoir, as redebvoir. Rediffamer, to slander again. Redifier, as reedifier. Redigerer, to digest again. Redimé, redeemed. Redimer, to redeem. Redins, redding cloaths. Redistribuer, to distribute again. Redition, for reddition, a restoring, surrendring, or yielding up. Redituaires, as Moines redituaires, a Sect of Franciscan Friars which have Lands and Revenues; therein differing from the Mendi∣cants, or begging Friars, who are to possess nothing. Redolent, fragrant, odoriferous. Redompter, to subdue, or to tame again. Redompteur, one that subdues, or tames again. Redon, a gift returned, or one thing given for another; also the re∣quital of an ill by a good turn. Redondage, gross, or course meal; grudgeons. Redondamment, excessively, super∣fluously. Redonner, for rendre, to give back, to return. Redonter, as redompter. Redormir, to sleep again. Redormissement, a sleeping again. Redouble, a double fold; a redou∣bling. Redoubleure, a redoubling. Redoubtillon, a scare-crow. Redoupier, a horse to turn divers times with one breath. Redoutillon, as redoubtillon. Reduite, for reduit, a block-house, a little fort. Ree, a faulty, or guilty person; one that is accused, or arraigned; a defendant in any sute. Reedification, a new-building. Reedifié, built again. Reedifier, to build again. Real, (Subst.) a manner of catching water-fowl. Réement, the braying, or bellowing of a red Deer. Reemeré, as remeré. Reentement, a new-grafting, a grafting again. Reenter, to graft again. Reenterrer, to re-inter, to put into the earth again. Reer, to bellow, to bray as a red Deer. Reestre, to be again, or to be re∣newed. Refaçon, a new fashion, a second form. Refaçonner, to make of a new (or another) fashion. Refaillir, to fail the second time. Refarder, to paint over again. Refascher, to anger again. Refect, for refait, repaired, mended. Refectouer, for refectoire, a Re∣fectory; or the room wherein the Friars eat together. Refente, a cleft, slit, or cut, (especi∣ally in the middle of a thing.) Bois de refente, cleft wood, such as pales, &c. are made of. Re∣fente de feuilles, the line or divi∣sion that runs along or appears in the middle of leaves. Referer, to relate, report, or recite. Referir, to smite, or strike again. Refesser, to whip, or scourge again. Refester, to make a new holy day. Refestier, Refestoyer, to fear a∣gain. Reffe, as une noix reffe, an hard-shelled nut. Reffiron, the third gate of the womb; or the mouth of the matrix, which is left across, and not lengthwise, as the hymen, &c. Reffonder, as refonder. Reffort, for raifort, a horse-rad∣dish. Reficher, to fasten again. Refier, to trust once more. Refiger, to clot, or coagulate a∣gain. Refiguré, figured over again. Refigurer, to figure, or to paint over again. Refiler, to spin again. Reflairer, to smell, or vent again. Reflamber, to retort, or beat back a flame; also to flame back. Reflateur, a great flatterer. Refleuter, to pipe again. Reflexif, reflexive, reflecting. Reflot, an ebb, or ebbing of waters. Reflourir, for refleurir, to flourish again. Refocillation, a refreshing, or revi∣ving. Refociller, to refresh, to revive. Refomenté, fomented, or cherished again. Refomenter, to foment, warm, or cherish again. Refoncé, headed again, as a Cask; also plunged, or gone down to the bottom again. Refonder les despences, to pay back the costs and charges. Refondrement, as renfondrement in the N. D. Refondrer, as renfondrer. Refort, for raifort, a horse-rad∣dish. Refouïr, to dig into again. Refouloir, the rammer head, where∣with pouder is rammed into a gun. Refournir, to furnish anew. Refourvoyer, to mistake his way a∣gain. Refraction, a rebound. Refraindre, as refreindre. Refrainte, a restraint, a bridling, or refraining. Refraischir,  rafraichir in the N.D. Refranchir, to leap, or skip over again. Refrappement, a striking again; also a reflecting, or a reverberating.
Refreindre, to bridle, to restrain, or keep under. Se refraindre, to re∣frain, or forbear. Refrenation, a refraining. Refrené, bridled, refrained, or kept under. Refrener, as refreindre. Refrequenté, frequented again. Refrequenter, to frequent again. Refreschir, Refreschissement, as rafraichir, rafraîchissement in the N. D. Refreschissoir, a small fountain. Refresoté, frizled, curled. Refreter un navire, to new-rig a Ship. Refrigerateur, a refresher, or cooler. Refrigere, coolness, refreshment. Refriquer, to rub again; to renew an old grief, to rb an old sore. Refriquer une chose jugée, to re∣vive, or set on foot an old adjudged Sute. Refrire, to fry again. Refrissonner, to quake, or to shiver again. Refroisser, to break asunder again. Refroncé, re-doubled, much gathered; also exceedingly wrinkled, or rumpled; also frowning. Refu, for resus, a denial. Refue, as resue. Refugieux, for refugié, fled to a place of refuge. Refuite, a flying back, an evasion. Refulger, to shine, to glitter. Refuseur, a refuser, or a denier. Regabeller, to double a tax, custom, or toll; also to impose a new one. se Regaillardir, as se ragaillardir. Regalement, royally. Regalice, and Regalisse, for regue∣lice, licorish. Regaliste, one that injoys, or stands for a benefice that is subject to the Droit de Regale. Regardement, a looking, viewing, beholding. Regardeur, a spectator, viewer, or beholder. Regardeure, and Regardure, a look, sight, or view. Regazouiller, to report, or to record, as birds do, one anothers warbling. Rege, a measure of three foot and a half, used by Surveyours in the Bourdelois. Regeance, for regence, Regency. Regeiner, to tortare, or to rack again. Regenner, to imitate, or counter∣fit nearly. Rejereer, as rejareer. Regetter, for rejetter, to reject. Regimbement, a kicking, or striking back with the feet or heels. Regimbeur, a wincer, or kicker. Regir, Regisser, to govern, or to rule. Registration, a registring, a recor∣ding. Reglisse, for reguelice, licorish. Reglure, as reiglure. Regnard, for renard, a fox. Regnardaille, the brood of foxes; also a crew of subtle knaves. Regnarde, a bitch-fox. Regnardeau, for renardeau, a young (or a little) fox. Regnardr, to play the fox; to steal aside upon a guilty conscience, or for fear of being taken; also to pervert a truth with shifts, tricks, or subtilties; also to spue. Regnarderie, sliness, or craftiness; also a stealing, slipping, or stink∣ing aside upon approach of danger, or guilt of conscience; also a per∣verting of the truth with shifts, or crafty lies. Regnardesque, crafty, or full of sleights. Regnardiere, a fox-furred gown, or garment. Regnardise, fox-like subtilty, sliness, or craftiness. Regnateur, a reigner, governor, ab∣solute Ruler. Regnatrice, a Queen, a Sovereign Governess. Regnaut, the language, or barking of foxes. Parler regnaut, to speak through the nose. Regnicoles, the actual Inhabitants of a Kingdom. Regnure, as renure. Regobillonné, merry, pleasant, in a merry mood. Regodronner, Regoldronner, to pitch a ship (for example) to make it tight; also to set a ruff-band again. Regorge, as je leur en bailleray à regorge, I will over-glut them withal, I will feed them (or cram it into them) until they spue again. Regoubillonner, to eat an after-supper, to eat late anights; also to be in a merry mood. Regouster, to tast again. Regrabellement, a curious and rei∣terated sifting of, or search into. Regrabeller, to sift a matter over and over, to search into the bottom of it. Regracié, thanked, or thankfully acknowledged. Regraciement, a thankfulness, or thankful acknowledgment. Regracier, to thank, or to acknow∣ledge thankfully. Regraing, for regain, the after-crop of bay. Regrateur, for Regratier, a scourer of old cloaths. Regratier, (a Verb) as regracier. Regravir, to climb, or creep up again. Regredillé, Regredillonné, crisped, curled. Regrediller, Regredillonner, to crisp, to curl. Regres, a resignation of a Benefice, upon condition, that if during the Resignors life it become void by resignation or death of the Resignee, it shall return without farther Induction or Institution unto him. But this conditional Resignation, heretofore in use, is not at this day allowed of in France. Regretable, fit to be lamented. Regrez, as regres. Regriffer, to claw again. Regringoté, chanted, or quavered again. Regringoter, to chant, or to quaver again. Regripper, to gripe, or snatch again. Regrissé, frowning, grim, fullen. Regrouvi, a starveling. Reguarir, for reguerir, to cure again. Regue, as rege. Reguerdonner, to reward plenti∣fully. Reguetter, to watch very narrowly. Regule d'antimonie, a kind of tin. Regurgitation, an overflowing. Regurgiter, to overflow. Rehabilitation, a re-establishing, or restoring unto former ability. Rehabiliter, as rabiliter. Rehabitation, a returning to a for∣mer habitation. Rehabiter, to re-inhabite, or dwell again in. Rehabiteur, to settle again; to ac∣custom, or inure unto again. Rehacher, to hack, or chop again. Rehaïr, to hate again. Rehaiter, to revive, rejoyce, or chear up exceedingly. Rehaler, to hale, or pull again. Rehanter, again to haunt, or fre∣quent. Reharceler, Reharier, to hurry, tur∣moil, vex again. Rehasarder, to venture again.
Rehaster, to hasten again. Rehennir, to neigh again. se Reherber, to get new grass. Reherser, to harrow over again. Reheurter, again to hit, dash, or knock against, Rehoché, shaken, or jogged again. Rehocher, to shake, or jog again. Rehonnir, to shame, or dishonour a∣gain. Rehouëment, a new digging. Rehouër, to dig again. Rehouser, to pull on breeches again. Rehousser, to cover with a horse-cloth again. Rehucher, to whoop, or call back from. Rehumecté, moistened again. Rehumecter, to moisten again. Rehumer, to sup up again. Rehurter, as reheurter. Rejalir, and Rejallir, for rejaillir, to spurt up. Rejalissement, a spurting up. Rejanner, to deride. Rejaper, to bark again. Rejarcir, to rive, or cleave again. Rejaser, to prate again. Rejauger, to gage a cask again. Reject, a rejection, a refusal; also a new putting forth, a casting out again; also as rejet. Reject de fossé, the bank of a ditch. Reject d'arbre, a young shoot, or sucker. Fueille de reject, the leaf that succeeds in the place of another leaf, which hath been pluckt or beaten down. Reject de femme, a putting away of his Wife. Rejection, a rejection. Rejet, the brim of the lover of a Dove-coat, whereon the Pigeons alight; also the jerk given by a horses legs, when he yerks out be∣hinde; also as reject. Rejettal, an Engine wherewith small birds are caught. Reifort, for raifort, a horse-raddish. Reigle, and its Derivatives in use. See regle, &c. in the N. D. Reigleure, and Reiglure, as regle∣ment in the N. D. Reimber, for redimer, to redeem. Reimportuner, to importune again. Reimposer, to impose again. Reimprimer, for r'imprimer, to re∣print. Reimprobrer, to upbraid again. Reimputer, to lay a new imputa∣tion. Reinciser, to make a new incision into. Reinciter, to incite again. Reincliner, to bend, lean, or incline again. Reinduire, to induce again. Reineux, strong-backed, lusty; al∣so of, or belonging to the reins. As maladie reincuse, the running of the reins. Reinfecter, to infect again. Reinformer, to inform again. Reingerer, to thrust in again. Reinhumer, to bury again. Reinjurier, to revile, or to wrong again. Reinnover, to innovate again. Reinser, for laver, to rinse, to wash. Reintegration, a re-establishment. Reinterpreter, to interpret, or to expound again. Reinterroguer, to examine again. Reinviter, to invite again. Rejouster, to just again. Reiponce, as raiponce. Reistre, a Reister, a German Horse-man; also a fashion of long cloak. Faict à la Reistre, made after the new fashion (especially if there be any grosness in it.) Rejudication, a re-adjudging unto. Rejurer, to swear again. Relabouré, tilled, or plowed over a∣gain. Relabourement, a second tilling, or plowing. Relabourer, to till, or plow again. Relaict, whay. Relaier, as relayer. Relaisser, to leave, or relinquish a∣gain; also a Har to squat. Relantir, to smell (or to grow) musty. Relaps, relapsed, fallen into an er∣rour which he had recanted, or sickness which he had recovered. Relasser, to weary again. Relaxation, a relaxation, discharge, or inlargement. Relayer, to succeed in the place of the weary; to refresh, relieve, or ease another by an undertaking of his task. Relayer coche & chevaux, to take fresh horses and coach. Relegation, a relegation, or exile∣ment. Reliage, a binding, or hooping of Casks, &c. Relicher, to lick over again. Relinquer, to relinquish, leave, or forsake. Relinqueur, a relinquisher, or for∣saker. Reliqua, rest, remnant, or leaving. Le reliqua d'une fiebvre, the re∣mains or grudgings of an ague, after it hath seemed to leave one. Reliquaille, an old remnant, frag∣ment, or monument. Reliquataire, in arrearages, behind∣hand, in whose hands there's yet somewhat to be paid; also left, remaining. Reliquateur, one that's behindhand, or in arrerages, one that hath yet somewhat to pay. Relivrer, to deliver again. Rellet, the name of a tart apple that hath party-coloured sides. Reloger, to lodge again. Relods, Relots, as Droict de Re∣lots, 20 pence upon every pound of Lods and Ventes due unto a Landlord in Purchases made of the Estates of his Tenants Cen∣suels. Relouër, to hire again. Reluicter, to wrestle, or contend a∣gain. Remailler, to piece a broken Coat of mail, or net, with new links, or mashes. Remaindre, as beaucoup remaint de ce que fol pense, much is be∣hinde of that a fool accounts of; a fool comes ever short of his in∣tentions. Remains, remnants. Remander, to send for back again. Remanent, a remainder. Remanoir, to remain, or rest, or stay behinde. Remantilles, remnants. Remassonner, to build anew. Rembade, as rambade. Rembancher, to put a thing into its right place again. Rembouer, an Engine wherewith fish is (forbidden to be) caught. Rembours, for remboursement, a reimbursing, restoring, or paying. Rembraser, to re-inflame. Rembre, to redeem. se Rembrider, as Cheval qui se rembride, a horse that arms or defends himself upon the breast, by clapping the branches of his bit against it. Rembrousser, as rebrousser in the N. D. Remediement, a remedying, redres∣sing, healing, or helping. Remembrance, a remembrance, or mindfulness; also a cause of re∣membrance; a resemblance, or image of; a thing that bears the form, or puts us in minde of an∣other thing.
Remembré, remembred, called to memory. se Remembrer, to remember, to call to minde. Rememoration, a remembrance, or remembring. Rememoré, remembred, recorded. Rememorer, to remember, to record, to call unto minde. Remenant, as remanent. Remenement, a bringing back. Remeré, a redeeming of things mor∣gaged, or sold. Grace ou facul∣té de remeré, a power of re∣deeming things morgaged, or sold. Remerer, to redeem, or buy back, a thing sold. Reminiscence, remembrance. Remissionaire, whose offence is re∣mitted. Remmalicer, to grow more spiteful, or malicious. Remocquer, to deride again; also to towe one Vessel at the stern of another. Remollitif, mollifying, softning. Remolquer, as remorquer in the N. D. Remonce, for remontrance, a re∣monstrance. Remontage d'Artillerie, Carriages for great Ordnance. Remore, the Suck-stone, or Sea-lamprey; a little fish, which clea∣ving to the keel of a ship, hinders the course of it. Remorfondre, to take cold again after much sweating. Remot, for éloigné, remote, or far off. Remouvoir, to remove, or put away. Remparer, to fortifie, to inclose with a rampier. Rempenner une flesche, to new-feather an arrow. Remper, as ramper. Remplacé, placed again; also set in the place or stead of another. Remplacement, a new placing; a laying, or setting in another place; also a putting in the place or stead of another. Remplacer, to place again; to take out of one place and set in ano∣ther; also to put one thing in the place of another. Remplier, to lay down a seam, to turn in a hem. Remplissement, Remplisson, a fil∣ling. Remploy, a re-imployment, as of mony made of one thing or another. Remployer, to reimploy. Remplumer, to feather anew. Je me remplume, I begin to recover my health, wealth, or authority; I pick up my crums again. Rempoissonner, to furnish again with fishes. Remprisonner, to cast into prison again. Rempson, for rançon, ransom. Remu, as Octroyer remu, to give, or agree unto a delay in a Sute. Remuance, a frequent moving, or stirring. Remucres, fustiness, or mouldi∣ness. Remue-mesnage, a turbulent, or te∣dious person; one that affecteth change, novelties, innovations. Remueur, a mover, or remover. Remugle, musty, or fusty. Remuneration, a recompense, or re∣ward. Remuneratoire, remuneratory. Remunerer, to remunerate, recom∣pense, or reward. Remusseau, a bottom, or clue of thread, yarn, &c. Renager, to swim back. Renaissement, for renaissance, a new birth; or a being new born. Renal, of, or belonging to the kid∣neys. Renaquer, as Renasquer. Renardaille, Renarde, Renarder, Renardesque, & Renardise. See them spelt with a g before n. Renardier, of, or belonging to a Fox. Renasquer, to be heartily vexed, to swear horribly. Renaviger, to sail back, to sail o∣ver again. Renavrer, to wound again. Renaut, as regnaut. Renche, for rang, rank. Rencheoir, to fall again. Rencheute, a relapse. Renchier, a Rain-Deer. Rencocher, to knock the second time. Rençon, and its Derivatives. See rançon, &c. in the N. D. Rençonneur, a ransomer; an op∣pressor, or extortioner. Rencontreur, a merry man, a face∣tious person. Rencuser, to detect, or betray. Rendable, restorable. Rente ren∣dable, a rent-seck or charge which may be extinguished, redeemed, or bought out. Rendage, Rendement, a rendring, or yielding, a restoring, or giving back. Rendenter, to set new teeth unto. Renditer, to frame a new Indite∣ment against; also to demonstrate, manifest, or point at again. Rendon, as randon. Rendouble, as redouble. Rendouer, a retribution; or the time, or vessel, of restoring. Renduire, to anoint, or besmear a∣gain. Reneau, as bocque. Reneger, to snow again. Renettoyement, a second cleansing. Renettoyeur, one that cleanses, or scoures a thing over again. Renfardeler, to pack up again. Renferrer, to lay new irons on; al∣so to strike, or thrust through a∣gain with a sword. Renfester une maison, to put new ridge-tiles on a house, to new-roof it. Renfierir, to make proud, stately, or furly again. Renflage, Renflement, a new-swelling. Renflamber, Renflammer, to re∣inflame. Renfoncé, new-headed as a Cask, whose bottom or head is new set in; also hollowed, or sunk in. Renfoncement, a new-heading of Casks; also (in Painting) hol∣lowings, sinkings, or shadowings. Renfondrer, to sink again; also to darken, obscure, or over-shadow. Renforcir, for renforcer, to reinforce, or strengthen again, to double the force. Renfourner, to put into the Oven again. Renfrongner, and its Derivatives. See refrongner, &c. in the N. D. Reng, Rengé, for rang, rank. Rengé, for rangé, ranked, set in order. Rengelet, the name of a yellow and sweet apple. Rengendré, re-ingendred, new-be∣gotten. Rengendrer, to re-ingender, to beget again. Rengendreur, a re-ingendrer. Renger, as ranger in the N. D. Rengette, as se laisser aller à la rangette, to give her self a whorish scope, to suffer her shooe to go awry. Rengier, for rangier, a Rain-Deer. Rengigner, to bewitch, or deceive again.
Renglacer, to congeal again as ice. Rengloutir, to swallow up again. Rengluer, to glue again. Rengouler, to devour again. Rengourmer, to curb, or keep in strait subjection. Je te rengour∣meray bien le groin, I will make thee hold thy head low. Rengregé, exasperated, grown worse. Rengregement, an exasperating. Rengreger, to exasperate, or make worse. Renhanter, to new-head a pike, &c. Renhardir, to reincourage. Renhaster, to put on the spit again. se Renherber, to get new grass, to become grassy again. Renhorter, to advise (or exhort) a∣gain. Renhuiler, to oyl over again. Renjabler, to new-rigol a piece of Cask. Renjanter, to put new spokes into a wheel. Renicher, to return home. Renitence, resistance, a hard-thru∣sting or endeavouring against. Renitent, resisting, endeavouring, labouring, or thrusting against. Reniveler, again to measure, or lay even with a level, again to sound with a plummet. Renn-fane, the Standard, or Coro∣net of a Troop of horse. Rennuyer, to weary again. Renogle, the little green frog, or toad. Renoiant, false of promise. Renoiser, again to brawl, or contend in words. se Renommer de quelqu'un, to give out that he belongs to one. Renoter, to mark again. Renouëur de vieilles Causes, a re∣newer of old Sutes. Renouille, for grenouille, a frog. Renouvée, for renouée, Knot∣grass. Renouvet, a soon-ripe apple that is no bigger than a Tennis-ball; al∣so the Cider made thereof. Renfaismer, to give new seisin unto. Rensemencer, to sow again. Rensevelir, to bury again. Rentamer, again to cut, open, or break up. Rentasser, to heap, or pack up a∣gain. Renter, for reenter, to graft a∣gain. Renteux, yielding Rent, charged with Rent. Rentonner, to tune again. Rentraicture, the laying in of a seam with the fingers; also a drawing of rent cloth, a dearn∣ing. Rentrainer, to trail, or to draw back. Rentreur, for rentrayeur, a dear∣ner. Renvahir, to reinvade. Renversément, inside outward, up∣side down, topsy turvy, back∣ward. Renvier, to revy at play. Il y ren∣vioit de sa reste, he ventured all upon it. Renure, as la renure d'une poulie, the hollow, or furrow of a pul∣ley, wherein the rope runs about it. Reosté, taken away again. Repairer, to lodge in, to repair un∣to. Repaissaille, a feeding, a repast. Reparée, for blette, the herb called Blit, or Blits. Reparement, a repairing. Repargner, as respargner. Reparoistre, to appear again. Je te le feray reparoistre, I will make thee pay soundly for it. Repart, a re-division; also a re∣ply. Repartement de debtes, an equal dividing, or sharing of a Debtors estate, or of the money made of it, among his Creditors. Repateliner, to flatter, or sooth up again. Repatrié, restored unto his own home; also reconciled, or made friends with. Repatrier, to restore to his own home; also to reconcile, or make friends again. Mais c'est le repatrier trop loing, but so we fetch his pedigree too far. Repensement, a serious considering, or earnest thinking of. Repentailles, repentance, or the ac∣cidents and fruits thereof. Repentin, sudden, unlooked for. Repentivement, penitently. Repercutif, a repercutive, a Medi∣cine that repels, or drives pain from the place whereunto it is ap∣plied. Repermis, permitted, or suffered a∣gain. Repertible, which may be found, or recovered. Repertoire, a repertory, or inven∣tory. Repetasser, for rapetasser, to patch. Repeyret, Feverwort, small Cen∣tory. Repigeonnement, a budding, or putting forth again. Repigeonner, Repionner, to bud, or put forth again. Replaindre, to complain again. Replantement, a replanting. Repletivement, fully. Repliement, Replieure, Replissure, a folding again. Replouvoir, to rain again. Reployement, a folding again. Repolon, the Souldiers manage. Reponce, rampions. Reponcer, to pound again. Reponchon, as raiponce. Repontique, as Rheupontique. Reposade, a rest, or a resting place. Faisons reposade, let us rest, sit down, or take our ease. Reposément, quietly. Repositoire, a Repository, or Store-house. Reposouer, for reposoir, a resting-place. Repost, as en repost, secretly, closely. Repoulsoir, as repoussoir. Repous, a paving; a pargetting, or filling with rubbish, &c. Repoussoir, a thing that driveth back, or pusheth out; the iron tool wherewith wooden pins are thrust out; also the top of a pit∣fal, or trap for foxes, &c. Repratiquer, to practise, or contrive again. Reprehension, a reproof, check, or rebuke. Repremiation, a rewarding. Reprenart, a rebuker, reprover, chec∣ker, or carper. Reprin, bra, or the cours st of meal. Reprins, Reprinse, as repris, re∣prise in the N. D. Reprovisionne, furnished with new provision. Reprouvable, blameable. Reprouver, to blame, or finde fault with. Repudiement, for repudiation, a divorcing, of putting away of his wife. Repue, as repeuë in the N. D. Repulluler, to bud out again. Requamer, for recamer, to embroi∣der. Requarreler, as recarreler. Requart, the fourth part of a fourth.
Requerable, requirable. Rentes re∣querables, Rents to be demanded on the ground, or at the place for which they are due; as are all Rents, not otherwise agreed upon. Requerre, for requerir, to require. Requien, a certain ravenous, rough∣skinned, and wide-mouthed fish, which is good meat. Requinqué, smugged up. Camus re∣quinqué, one whose flat nose is turned up. se Requinquer, to smug up himself. Requint, the fifth part of the fifth penny for which a Fief hath been sold (as of an hundred four) due, besides the said fifth, unto the Lord Feodal, and paid most com∣monly by the Purchaser. Requisitoire, a request, or sute unto. Requisitoire, (Adj.) inquisitive; also requiring, requesting. As Let∣tres requisitoires, Letters of re∣quest, or intreaty. Requoy, as recoy. Rere, to hellow as a Stag, to trout as a Buck. Rerefief, as Arrierefies in the N. D. Rere-Vassal, a Vassal to a Vassal, a Vassal that holds of a mesne Lord, or of a Vassal. Res, a net. Resailler, to start back. Resarcir, to repair, or to mend; also to make amends for. Resasser, to sift again. Resavourer, to tast again. Resauter, to start back. Resbaudir, to glad, or rejoyce. Res∣baudir un Chien, to incourage, or cheer up a Dog with clapping, whooping, &c. Reschal, yellow wire. Reschauffoir, for rechant, a chasing dish. Reschier, to shift, or take out of one thing to put into another. Rescindant, a Contract which hath been made void by Law. Resconcer, Resconser, to conceal, or to hide. Rescouäble, rescuable, recoverable. Reseant, resident, abiding. Resecouër, to shake again. Resection, a resection, cutting or pa∣ring off. Resée, a purse-net. Resemblement, for ressemblance, a resemblance, or likeness. Resequer, to pare, cut, or clip off. Reserener, to clear up again. Reservéement, sparingly, moderately. Resiliment, a leaping, skipping, or rebounding back; a going from his word. Resilir, to leap, skip, or rebound back; to go from his word. Resine, for raisiné, the juice of Grapes boyled to a consistence of honey, and given to Children, as our honey spread on bread. Resineux, full of Rosin. Resiniere, as raisiniere. Resipiscence, a repentance, or a∣mendment. Resisiesme, or Resixiesme, a sixth part out of a sixth. Resixiesmement, by way of a sixth part of a sixth. Resize, herb Avens, Benet, or bles∣sed. Resler, to thaw. Resoluble, resolvable; also dissol∣vable. Resoluement, for resolument, reso∣lutely. Resommeiller, to slumber again. Resommer, to sum, to summon a∣gain. Resomption, a repetition, assuming, or beginning again. Resonder, to sound again. Resonnamment, resoundingly, loudly. Resonnance, a resounding, or re∣flected sound. Resouhaiter, to wish again. Resource, as ressource in the N. D. se Resourdre, to spring, rise, or get up again; to mend, recover, or come to its former estate or vigor. Resours, raised, recovered, got up again. Resouvenances, memorandums, re∣membrances. Respandement, a spilling, or shed∣ding. Respardre, to scatter again. Respargnant, sparing, thristy, hard. Respargne, parsimony, sparing, thrift, hardness. Respargner, to spare, to save. Respectable, worshipful. Respectatif, Respectif, heedy, cir∣cumspect, discreet. Respi, for repit, respit. Respir, breath, or respiration. Respirement, a breathing, or draw∣ing of breath. Respireur, a breather, a respirer. Respiter, to respit; to prorogue, or put off for a time; to forbear, to delay. Resputer de mort, to reprieve, save, or deliver from death. Resplendisseur, for resplendeur, re∣splendency, splendor. Respoissir, to thicken again. Responce, for reponse, an answer. Respondement, an answering; al∣so a matching, or correspondency; a likeness, concurrence, equality. Respons, the Answers made by the Clerk, or People, in Service-time. Responsadoux, the Sea-fish called a Heaven-gazer. Responses, Rampions (a Sallad∣root.) Responsif, an Answer to a Law∣bill, or an Answer in Law. Responsif (Adj.) answering, gi∣ving, or making an answer. Responsion, a Surety, or Assurance. Ressasié, for rassasié, filled, glutted, satisfied. Ressasier, to fill, glut, or satisfie. Resseant, as reseant, resident, abi∣ding, dwelling continually in. Exoine de mal resseant, an essoin, or excuse for the absence, or not appearance, of one that lies sick. Resseantise, residency, a continual dwelling or abiding in one place. Ressemblable, much like unto. Ressemer, to sow again. Ressie, an Afternoons nuncheon, or drinking. Ressimer, to snuffle again. Ressiner, to make a drinking, or collation, in an afternoon. Ressize, as resize. Ressoigner, to aw, fear, or dread; also to care, cark, or take thought of. Ressoré, parched, scorched, dried, or burnt up by the Sun. Ressourdre, as resourdre. Ressuccer, to suck up, or in again. Ressuit, dry, or dry'd; hard, or hardened; without any manner of sap, or softness. Ressuivre, to follow again. Restablissable, re-establishable. Restaigner, to stay, or abide long in a place. Restat, a remainder, or overplus. Restaurant, a restorative. Resternuer, to sneeze again. Restibule, as retouble. Restifvé, as restivé. Restile, as Champ restile, a field that's sowed, or bears fruit every year. Restipulation, a waging of Law; a putting in of a Pledge for the assurance of his Answer unto an Action, &c.
Restipuler, to wage Law (as in Restipulation.) Restivé, made or grown resty; stop∣ped, or drawn back. Restivement, restily, stubbornly, backwardly, sloathfully. Restor, a recovery or remedy against a Vouchee, or any one by whom a man is damnifi'd. Restouble, as retouble. Restouper, to stop again. Restrainctif, for restrictif, restri∣ctive, or binding. Restrinction, for restriction, restri∣ction. Restringe, the Lentisk, or Mastick∣tree. Restuyer, to sheath, or shut up a∣gain. Resvanouïr, to swoon again. Resudant, sweating; also pithy. Resudation, a sweating, or sweaty dropping. Resude, sweated, sweat out of, come from in a sweat. Resue, an ancient Tax or Imposition of four pence in the pound for Merchandise, and ten sols Tour∣nois upon every pipe of Wine brought into, or sent out of the Kingdom. Resveillable, awakeable. Resveillon, a meal made late in the night, and long after supper. Resul, as reseuil in the N. D. Resultat, for resulte, a result. Resurgir, to rise, grow, or spring up again; to recover a former be∣ing; to lift up his head once more. Resuscitatif, reviving, raising up from death to life. Resusciteur, a reviver. Ret, a net. Retail, a shred, paring, or small piece cut from a thing; also half an Oxgang, or Oxgat of land. Retaillat, circumcised. Retaillé (Subst.) as retail; also a Taylors Vails. Retaillons, shreds, clippings, or the like. Retaindre, for reteindre, to die a∣gain. Retalionné, requited, satisfi'd with the like. Retapper, to bung again. Retargé, Retargement, Retarger, as retardé, retardement, retarder in the N. D. Retatiné, withered, shrunk in, de∣cayed. Reteinture, a dying over again. Retenail, an hold, or a thing to hold by. Reteneur, a retainer, detainer, with∣holder. Retenter, to re-attempt. Retentras, as il fait du retentras, he is deaf of that ear, or seems to listen somewhat else. Retentum Is when a Court pronoun∣ces not a full Arrest, but reserves somewhat to be afterwards or∣dered. Retenuement, sparingly; also ad∣visedly. Reths, a net. Retiaire, casling a net in sight, therewith to take an enemy. Retien (Subst.) a retention; a re∣straint. Retier, a Net-maker. Retiercement, by way, or after the rate of a third out of a third. Retiers, a third part of a third. Retiforme, fashioned like a net. Retinacle, a slay, or hold. Retirée (Subst.) a retreat; also a place of retreat. Retisser, Retistre, to weave a∣gain. Retombe, a false Cup, wherein drink falling into an odd corner, seems to be drank up; also a flat Vault, or a Room made Vault∣wise. Retombée, a falling back; also the crookedness of a Sickle tur∣ned backwards. Retombée d' humeurs, a running of humors, or a disease wherein the humors that grieved one place leave it, and get into another. Retondir de toutes parts, to ring, or to resound all over. Retorceure, Retordement, Retor∣dure, a twisting; a wresting back; a retorting. Retordeur, a twister. Retorquable, retortable. Retort, for retors, twisted. Retouble, a field, or ground sown every year. Retouiller, to mingle, puzzle, or confound again. se Retrahir, for se retirer, to retire, to withdraw. Retraicter, to revise, or run over; also to handle, or intreat of a∣gain. Retraintif, restrictive. Retransitif, reflective upon it self. Retrasser, as retraicter; also to mend, or to correct. Retroacte, a former act, proceeding, or dispatch in Law. Retroactif, retroactive, casting, or driving backward. Retroceder, to recoil, retire, or give back. Retrograde, a retrogradation. Retube, a flat Vault, or Vault made like the back of an Oven. Retumbée, as retombée. Reu, a brook, small stream, or little gullet of water. Revainquir, to subdue again. Revalider, to re-inforce, to im∣prove. Revaloir, as je te le revaudray, I shall requite thee sor't. Revengeur, a revenger. Revengeure, a revenging. Reve-grand, much-doting. Revelement, a revealing, disclosing, or discovering. Reveleux, wanton, lascivious, un∣ruly. Revendage, a retailing, or selling again. Revenderesse, for revendeuse, a woman that sells small things by retail. Revendication, a resuming of, or a re-establishment in a pretended right. Revengé, revenged. Revenger, to revenge. Reventes, as Venterolles, or as Reventons, a Fee due to a Lord Censuel (over and besides the Lods and Ventes) from a Pur∣chaser of Land charged with Cens, who hath undertaken to discharge the seller of the Lods, which he for his part should upon the bargain have paid. Revenue (Subst.) revenue, rent; also a return, or coming again. Revenue de bois, the new∣spring, or putting out of wood after it hath been lopped, or fel∣led. Reveoir, for revoir, to see again, to revise. Reverable, reverend. Reverberatoire, a Reverberato∣ry. Reverencer, Reverender, to reve∣rence. Reverential, reverent, full of re∣verence. Reverisier, to verifie, or make good again. Revers (Adj.) strange, uncouth, cross, harsh. Reversailles, the reversions of (or
drink left in) the Masters glasses, or draughts poured together into a pot for the Servants. Reversche, for revêche, froward, un∣ruly. Reversi, a kinde of trump, plaid backward, and full of sport. Reversure, the waining, or turning at the top of a piece of ground, where one furrow ends, and ano∣ther begins. Reversures, as reversailles. Revertir, to return, or come back. Revescherie, churlishness, froward∣ness, unruliness. Revest, a re-investiture. Revestiaire, Revestiere, a Vestry. Revifier, to revive, to quicken again. Revigourer, to adde new vigour, to give new strength unto. Revirade, a wheeling, or turning round; a back-jert, whisk, or thrust. Revirer, to turn again and again. Se revirer contre l'Ennemi, to wheel about upon the Enemy. Reviseur, a reviser, or reviewer. Revisit, a review taken by the King of his Officers Accounts. Revisitation, a revising, reviewing, or overlooking again. Revivisienne, a reviving, a return∣ing unto life. Reume, for rheume, a rheum. Revoguer, to sail back, or a∣gain. Revol, a flying back, a return upon the wing. Revoluble, sit, or apt to be turned a∣bout. Reupe, for roupie, the dropping of the nose; also a belch. Reupontic, as Rheupontique. Reuppe, as reupe. Reupper, for roter, to belch. Reystre, as Reistre. Rez, a flat, or level ground; the su∣perficies of a level piece of ground. Le mur est à rez de chaussée, the foot of the wall stands level with the ground that's about it. Rez à rez, Rez de rez, even (or level) with, close unto. Mettre rez pied rez terre, to make even with the ground. Rez, (Adj.) shaven. Rezueil, for reseuil, a sort of net∣work. Rhabarbe, for reubarbe, rubarb. Rhabituer, to accustome, or inure a∣gain. Rhagade, Rhagadie, a chap, or chawn, coming by cold, &c. in any part of the body, but especially in the fundament. Rhamindique, the Indian root called otherwise Mechoacan. Rhamne, the fruitful white bramble called Christs-thorn. Rhapontique, the least, or worst kinde of Rubarb growing in Pon∣tus. Rhatimburgs, select, or express Jud∣ges for the decision of all Cases that fell within the compass of the Salick Law. Rheteur, a Rhetorician. Rhetorique, (Adj.) Rhetorical, of Rhetorique. Rhetoriquement, Rhetorically, elo∣quently, Rhetorician-like. Rhetoriquer, Rhetoriser, to play the Rhetorician, to speak eloquently, to argue neatly. Rheupontique, as Rhapontique; also the root of great Centory. Rhomb, Rhon, a Turbot; also the shrub Sumack. Rhupontique, as Rhapontique. Rhus, the shrub Sumack. Riagas, Aconite. Riau, as reu. Ribaine. See ribon. Ribaudaille, a crue of Ruffians. Ribaudequin, Ribauderin, a fashion of huge Cross-bows. Ribaudine, Ribaulde, a whore. Ribaulder, to play the ruffian. Ribauldise, ribauldry, ruffianism, whoring. Ribault, for ribaud, a ribald, a ruf∣fian. Ribe, a coast, bank, or shore. Ribe taillade, a full-deep shore. Ribes, Ribettes, red Goose-berries, garden or bastard Currans. Ribier, the red Goose-berry plant; also a kinde of Vine. Ribler, to rifle, rob, or ransack. Riblerie, a boot-haling, rifling, or robbing; also a violent incursion upon an Enemy. Ribleur, a boot-haler, robber, or preyer upon passengers, &c. Ribon ribaine, by hook or crook, whether you will or no. Ricalde, a scold. Ricaner, Ricasser, to dally, to play the wanton. Ricaneux, dallying, or playing the wanton. Richereau, a wealthy Chuff, one that hath more wealth than wit. Ricochet, the sport of skimming a thin stone on the water, called a Duck and a Drake. C'est la chanson du ricochet, 'tis an idle, or endless tale or song; a subject whereof one part contradicts an∣other. Ricote, a kinde of milk-meat; or as Ricottes, curds made of whey. Ridde, a Flemish Coin worth about 5 shill. sterl. Ridde de Gueldres, is worth about 3 shill. sterl. Rié, Rie, a waste piece of ground. Rien-ne-vaut, a rascal, or base fel∣low. Riens, for rien, nothing. Riere, backward, behinde; also with, or among. Rierban, as Arriereban in the N.D. Rierefief, as Arrierefief in the N.D. Riere-filz, a grand-child. Riere-vassal, as Rere-vassal. Riets, as rié. Rieu, as reu. Rieulle, as ruille. Rif, a gullet of water. Il ne luy lairra ni rif, ni raf, he will leave him nothing, he will strip him of all. Rifage, a frowning huswife. Rifflade, a ravenous, or a rifling Drab; one that lives by the spoil of them she converseth with. Rifflandouille, a belly-god, a lover of good cheer. Rifle, fire. On n'y a laissé ne rifle ne rafle, they have left no man∣ner of thing behinde them, they have swept all away. Rifler, to rifle, ransack, sweep all away before him; also to eat greedily. Rigalisse, for reguelice, licorish. Rigaud, as à jambes rigaudes, with stradling and up-stretcht legs. Rigaule, a gullet of water. Rigle, for regle, rule. Riglet, for reglet, a riglet. Riglisse, for requelice, licorish. Rigolage, Rigolement, Rigolerie, a jesting, or laughing at. se Rigoler de, to jest, or to laugh at. Rigoleur, a jester, one that delights in laughing at others. Rigoreusement, Rigoreux, as ri∣goureusement, rigoureux in the N. D. Rillon de porc, as graton, or that part of a hogs entrails which is like the tripes in an Ox. Rim de vent, a puff of wind; also as rum in the N. D. Rimaille, paultry rhime. Rimarde, a paultry Poetess. Rimart, a paultry Poet.
Rimasser, to make sorry verses. Rimasseur, as rimart. Rimasseuse, as rimarde. Rimette, a little rhime, or small rhiming poesy. Rimonner, Rimoyer, to rhime. Rimoyeur, a rhimer. Rinceau, as rinseau. Ringer, as ruminer in the N. D. Rinseau, the stalk (or part of the stalk) of a plant; a little bough of a tree. Rioge, as mesentere in the N. D. Riolé, streaked. Riote, a scolding, brabling, or braw∣ling; also the band of a fagot, or baven. Rioter, to scold, brable, or brawl. Rioteux, scolding, brabling, braw∣ling. Riotte, as riote; also a flimflam, idle discourse, or tale of a tub. Riottement de chiens, the yarring, or whurring of dogs, dogs brab∣ling. Ripaille, pillage; also gluttony, surfeiting, idle expence of money, or of time, in pampering the belly. Riparographe, a writer of trifles. Ripeilleux, Ripilleux, craggy, rugged, rough, uneven. Ripope, as vin ripope, bad wine made a great deal worse by much water; or the droppings of wine taken out of the tub that stands under the spigot, and mingled with water for poor folks. Rippe, the small fish called a sharp∣ling, stickle-back, or back-stickle. Ripperie, a cheating, or cousening. Rippope, as ripope. Ripuaire, a certain Law agreeing with the Salick both in substance and date. Riquaner, as ricaner; or to bray like an Ass. Riqueraque, throughly, wholly. Feu de riqueraque, wild-fire. Risses chevreaux, fat Kids. Rissole, the browness of a thing fry'd. Rissolé, fry'd brown. Rissoler, to fry brown. Rissole, a Jews ear, or Mushrom that's fashioned like a Demi-cir∣cle, and grows cleaving to trees; also a small and delicate minced pie, made of that fashion. Rithmailler, for rimailler, to make sorry verses. Rithme, for rime, rhime, or meter. Rithmer, for rimer, to rhime, or to make meter. Ritual, of, or belonging to Rites. Rivager, belonging, or near unto the waters side. Rivagier, one that dwells near the waters side. Rive, for rivage, bank, shore, or wa∣ter-side. Riverau, a ferryman, a waterman; also a Welch hook, or hedging bill, made with a hook at the end; or as Rivereau, a bill-hook, or the pole with a fork of iron, &c. at the end, wherewith Watermen set for∣ward their Boats when they row not. Rivereux, full of, or belonging to, rivers; also that haunts Rivers. As faulcon rivereux, a river-hawk. Riverotte, a brook, a little stream. Rivet, the welt of a shooe. Tirer au rivet, to sow like a Shoomaker; also to pluck as much from one as from another. Riuler, to ravel out, like silk. Rivure, a riveting. Rob, the juice of black whurtle-ber∣ries preserved. Rob de ribes, the preserved juice of red gooseberries, or bastard currans. Robber, for dérober, to rob, to steal. Robberie, robbery, stealing. Robbeur, a Robber, a Thief. Roberge, a kind of long ship, where∣in both sails and oars are used. Robice, a robbing, robbery, or theft. Robille, as provision de la robille, the rings, jewels, and attire of a Widow, with as much other stuff as she can carry, adjudged unto her upon the renouncement of her deceased husbands Estate. Robineries, pleasant conceits. Robon, a short gown; or a side-cassock reaching below the knees. La sequelle au robon, mean Tradesmen, poor Merchants. Roboration, Roborement, a strengthening, or stiffening. Roborer, to strengthen, to stiffen. Roborin, le bas roborin, as rem∣boüer. Robre, the great oak, or great gall-tree, the most hard and durable Oak that is. Robusteté, strength, force, or might. Rocard, as un vieux rocard, an overworn sincaunter, one that can neither whinny nor wag the tail. Roce, for rosse, a jade. Roch, for roche, a rock. Rochaille, rocks. Rochau, a rock-fish, any fish that lives among rocks; and particu∣larly the Cook-fish, or Sea-thruh; as also the fish Coenus. Rocher, (Adj.) rocky, of a rock. Rocheray, as Colombe rocheraye, a rock-pigeon, a wild pigeon. Rochier, for rocher, a rock. Rocquer un enfant, to rock a child. Rodage, a certain Toll exacted by some Country-Lords upon every Wain that passes (though in the high-way) near to their Seignories, whether it be laden or no; and if it be, they will be paid both for the load, and for the cart. Rodanes, a kind of sweet cherries. Rode, the Dorce, or gold-fish. Rodelle d'un clou, the head of a nail. Rodemontade, as Rodomontade in the N. D. Rodibiliardique, fat, or larded with fat. Rododaphne, oleander, or the rose-bay tree, (a shrub very beautiful, and very full of poyson.) Roelle, as rouëlle in the N. D. Rogatons, Indulgences. Roger bon-temps, a mad rascal, a merry greek. Rogue, the mesenterium. Rogue, (Adj.) proud, saucy, arrogant. Roguement, proudly, saucily, arro∣gantly. Roigne, for rongne, scurf, scabbiness, the mange. Roigner, and its Derivatives. See them with an n instead of i in the N. D. Roigneux, for rongneux, scabby. Roisons, Rogation-week. Rolat, a roll, or list. Obligé en rolat, subject unto the rigor of the Court of a Baillif. Rollier, for Roulier, a Waggoner. Rollon, a roller, a rolling stone. Romaine, a Roman beam. Roman, so is called in the Confines of Germany, and Lorrain, the Language that is not German. Romanesque, Romish, Roman. Romans, beets. Romicole, one that affects or honours Rome, or the Romish Religion. Rommeler, to rumble, grumble, or grunt. Rommeny, the fur called budge. Romore, as remore. Rompable, apt to be broken. Rompeis, ground nwly ok up; especially such as have not within the memory of men been tilled. Rompe-pierre, Rompierre, the herb Saxifrage; also Samphire.
Rompture, for rupture, rupture, breach. Cas de rompture, an equal sharing of a Bankrupts Goods among his Creditors. In which case, if he had Land subject unto rent, the Landlord hath it the first year in lieu of his arrearages, and after him every one in his turn hath it his year. Rompu, as bon rompu, a good fel∣low, a boon companion. Rompue, a rout, a defeat. Rompure, a rapture, breach, fracture. Ronçay, a briar-plot, a ground or place full of briars. Roncé, hurled, or making a whur∣ring noise, as a stone cast with violence. Ronceux, full of brambles, or briars. Ronciere, and Ronçoy, as Ron∣çay. Rondace, for rondache, a round Target, or great Backler. Rondacher, one that serves with a rondache. Rondeler, to turn round. Rondole, the Sea-bat, or rere∣mouse. Ronfle, a hand-ruff, at Cards. Joüer à la ronfle, to play at hand-ruff; also to snore. Vous me remettez à point en ronfle veuë, you put me shrewdly to my plunges. Ronge, a gnawing, fretting, or nib∣ling. Cela luy revient tousjours au ronge, that doth still vex him. Rongeard, gnawing, fretting. Rongnette, a Farriers paring knife. Rongnonner, to pare, to clip by little and little; also to grumble, murmure, mutter. Ronsé, as raye ronsée, a thorn∣back, or rock-ray. Ronsiere, and Ronsoy, as ronciere. Ronson, for rondelle, a Target. Ronteis, as rompeis. Roole, for rolle, a roll. Roolet, In the Civil Wars 'twas a Watch-word among the French Clergy, signifying a Collection for the Pensions of those great Perso∣nages which had undertaken to protect them; also as rollet in the N. D. Roolle, for rolle, a roll. Roollé, for roulé, rolled up. Ropts, pot-shards. Roquan, a gluttonous Rock-fih, which makes of grass a nest in the Sea, and therein hatches her spawn. Roque, a Rock; a Fort, Castle, or Cit∣tadel. Roquette, for petit roc, a little rock. Roquille de vin, the quarter of a French pint. Rosage, Rosageur, Rosagine, the shrub Oleander, or Rose-laurel. Roseignol, for rossignol, a nightin∣gale. Rosetique, as vin rosetique, the best kind of Gascony Wine, growing within the Territory of Nerac, and there so called from its vermilli∣on hue. Rosiere, a bream-like fish, ever full-rowed. Rosillant, dew yielding. Rosin, rose-like; of, or belonging to roses. Rosmant, as rosillant. Rosmement, a bedewing, a falling of dew. Rosmer, the dew to fall, to distil or drop down as the dew; to be∣dew. Rosmeux, full of dew. Rosle, for rolle, a roll. Rosoyant, bedewing; also of a rosy colour. Rosoyer, to bedew. Une Vapeur qui rosoye, a drizling, or a mis∣ling rain. Rospe, a toad. Rosse, the roche-fish. Rossette, as marquote in the N. D. also the sea-cat. Rossignoler, to record, or sing like a Nightingale. Rossignolesque, Nightingale-like, harmonious, melodious; also dole∣ful, mournful. Rost, rost meat. Rostedon, one that requires, or takes back the gift which he had be∣stowed. Rostissiere, a rosting Cook Wife. Rotateurs, two muscles which turn about the eye. Rote, a great high-way in a Forest; also a tree growing thereon. Rotondité, rotundity, roundness. Rotte, the band of a faggot. Rotte de cire, five pound of wax. Rottée de bois, a certain measure or quantity of wood, (whether fagots or billets) laid together, eight or ten foot in length, about four in height, and having at either end two stakes to hold it in. Rotteur, an Officer that measures les rottées de bois, indifferently for the buyer and seller. Rottier, for routier, an old Traveller. Rottine, for routine, rote. Rotule de genouil, the ball, or whirlbone of the knee. Roturierement, basely, ignobly. Rouäble, as rable in the N. D. also an Engine wherewith fish is for∣bidden to be caught. Rouäille, a device or engine, where∣with fish is caught. Rouaisons, Rogations, Gang-days. Rouärt, a Marshal or Provost Mar∣shal, an Officer that breaks, or sees broken, malefactors on the wheel; also the wheel-fish. Rouce, for Ronce, bramble, briar. Rouche, a rush. Roucherole, the River-nightingale, or a kind of Kings fisher, that sings very sweetly. Rouchet, as rougette. Roucin, as rousim. Roucoler, for roucouler, to croo like a dove. Rouctement, a belching. Rouën, as Cheval rouën, a roan-horse. Rouër (Subst.) a wheeling about. Rouësse, the name of a certain great pear. Rouëter, to turn a spinning wheel. Rouëtte, a little wheel. Rouge d'avoine, a certain pear, whereof excellent perry is made. Rouge-bourse, for rouge-gorge, ro∣bin red-breast. Rougelet, the name of an apple. Rougement, redly. Rougette, the red fish. Rougnette, as rongnette. Rouhard, crying, or mourning, like a Wood-culver, or turtle-dove. Rouhastre, a scuffling, conflict, or contention. Rouiller, to pummer, or beat about the ears. Rouillons, vetches. Rouisse, the name of a great pear. Roul, the stay of a Weavers loom, having teeth of reed, &c. like a Comb. Roule, for rolle, a roll, or list; also the high way for Carts and Wag∣gons. Roulier, (Adj.) as Cheval roulier, a strong Cart-horse, a lusty tugging jade. Roulis, great round stakes, or piles. Roumarin, for rômarin, rosemary. Roupieux, snotty, whose nose is ever dropping. Il fut bien roupieux, he was mightily ashamed, or much deceived. Roupille, a cassock. Roupt, for rompu, broken, burst in pieces. Roupte, as route in the N. D.
Rouseau, a flower which flies away with the wind, like the down of a thistle; also the herb Water-torch, or Cats-tail. Poire de rouseau, a very tender and deli∣cate pear, good to make Perry of. Rousée, for rosée, dew. Rousoyer, to bedew, to wet gently. Roussable, the close Room wherein Herrings are smoaked until they be red. Roussau, the name of a fig. Rousselet, the name of a delicate small Pear. Rousser, to groan or complain like a grunting Woman, or overworn Jade. Rousset, a little ruddy Dog-fish; al∣so red wheat. Rousset. (Adj.) ruddy, inclining to dark red. Roussette, a Russetin-apple; also a little Dog-fish, whose ruddy skin is poudered all over with black spots; also a certain ruddy, or dun-red bird, no bigger than a Titmouse. Roussin, a curtal, or strong German horse. Roussin de service, a horse of arms, or for the war. Roussmer, to whinny after Mares, like a rammish or leacherous Jade; also to leap a Mare. Roussoyer, for roussir, to wax (or grow) ruddish. Rouste de bois, a wythe. Router, for roter, to belch, or break wind upwards. Routte, & Routtier, as route, rou∣tier in the N. D. Routure, as roture in the N. D. Routures d'eaux, ways made or worn out in rocks, by a continual running or beating of waters. Rouveau, as pomme de rouveau, the Redding, or Summer-golding. Rouvieres, the name of a kinde of Olives. Rouvraye, and Rouvroye, a Forest, Wood, or Grove of strong Oaks. Rouvre, for roure, the hardest kinde of Oak. Rouy, oversodden, and wanting li∣quour in seething; also steeped, or soaked in water, as hemp. Roye, a line, streak, or furrow. Royer, for rayer, to raze, or to blot out. Royes, the meazels. Roynette, a little, or a poor Queen; also the herb called Queen of the meadows. Royzelet, a Gin, or device to catch Wood-cocks. Rozelet, the name of a small and beautiful bird. Rozereaux, a kinde of Martins, whose skins are of much request. Ru, as reu; also a cast, hurl, throw, or swinge. Il entend le ru du baston, he is a cunning fencer, an old-beaten souldier. Rubarge, as roberge. Rubesié, made red. Ruben, for ruban, a ribbon. Rubenner, to set out wit's ribbons. Rubennier, for rubanier, a ribbon-maker. Rubette, a green earth-frog, or red toad; very full of poyson, and of great use among Witches. Rubicans, the white hairs that he scattered here and there upon the coats of some coloured horses. Rubicunde, very red, blond-red. Rubie majeur, ou des Teincturiers, the herb Madder, red Madder. Ru∣bie mineur, Claver, Goose-grass. Rubienne, the Red-tail, or Stark, (a small bird.) Ruble, an Italian weight of about 600 pound, after 12 ounces to the pound. Rubitelle, the half of a Ruble. Rubrication, a redness, or a ruddi∣ness; also a making, or waxing red. Rubriche, Oaker, red Lead, red chalk, or marking stone. Rubriché, made, or grown red; also marked with red Oaker, written or printed in red Ink. Son Ca∣lendrier est rubriché, said of a Woman that hath her months. Rubrificatif, a Plaister of so strong Simples, that it ulcerates, or (at least) makes red the place it is applied unto. Rucher, to make hives; to gather honey into hives. Ruchette, a little hive. Ruchot, a fashion of a cloak tied close about the neck, and thence falling down round about the body. Rudache, ondach e in the N. D. Rudenté, wreathed like a Cable. Rudenture, a wreath, wreathing, or wreathed work; a border that's wreathed, or of the form of a Cable. Rudepeau, a kinde of stinking Ad∣der, and full of scales. Rudoyement, hard usage. Rudoyer, to use one hard, to give him ill words. Rueur, a kicker, a thrower. Ruffage, dogged, churlish. Ruffienner, Rufienner, to play the ruffian. Ruffiennerie, or Rufiennerie baudry. Ruffisque, a ruffian. Rugiment, for rugissement, a roa∣ring, or bellwing. Rugine, the Instrument wherewith a Surgeon sc ileth bones. Ruginer un os, to scale, or scrape a bone. Rugisseur, a roarer, a bellower. Rugosité, ruggedness, roughness. Rugueux, rugged, rough. Ruin, the grunting of a hog. Ruïnement, a ruining, or undoing. Ruïr, to roar, like a Lion; also as rouïr in the N. D. Ruissement, a roaring like a Lion; also as rouïssement in the N. D. Ruit, the rut of Deer, or Boars; their lust; and the season where∣in they engender; also a herd of female Deer followed by the male in that Season. Ruité, as Venaison ruitée, Venison killed, or gotten in rut-time. Rumatique, for rheumatique, rhu∣matick, troubled with a rheum. Rume, a rheum. Runge, the chewing of the cud; or as ronge. Rupricam, a bay horse. Ruption, a breaking. Ruptoire, a Corrosive, or potential Cauter. Ruque, the name of an Apple that yields an excellent Cider. Rural, rural, rustical, Country-like. Fief rural, an igobl or bale Fief, which hath with ted hos, nor a other mark of An∣tiquity or Gentry belonging to it. Ruscher, as ruher. Ruséement, . Ruser, to use tricks, to  ∣ningly. Rustanderie, Rusterie, as rustrerie. Rustication, husbandry, or  work; also a dwelling in the Country. Rustiquer, to play the Clown, or Husband-man; to till the ground. Rustiquerie, husbandry, tillage, ru∣ral provision or staff. Rustrement, Roister-like, sauily. Rustrerie, a swaggering. Rutiler, to glitter, shine, or glare.
Ruyr, a Vicount. Ruyle, as ruile in the N. D. Ruyler du plastre avec de l'eau, to mingle, or moisten, plaster with water. Ry, a little brook. Ryde, Ryder, Ryme, and Rymer. See them with an i, instead of y, in the N. D. S SAbatique, of the Sabbath, keeping the Sabbath. Sabatisme, holy rest. Sabatizer, to rest, or keep holy the Sabbath-day. Sabe, new sweet wine half boyled away, and kept for sauces and seasonings. Sabe de coing, the Juice of Quinces half boyled a∣way, and good against a cough. Sabé, as haleine sabée, a fragrant, or sweet-smelling breath. Sabech, the little hawk, termed a Masket. Sabine, the shrub called Savine; also Hart-wort, or Birth-wort. Sablere, Sabliere, the Summer that compasses the top or upper part of a room. Saboir, for savoir, to know. Sabonner, Saborner, to agree be∣fore-hand, or to be at a certain rate. Saboté, turned, or whipped, as a top; also fashioned like a top. Saboter, to whip a top. Saboulé, rolled, tossed, tumbled. Saboulement, a rolling, tossing, or tumbling. Sabouler, to roll, toss, or tumble; also to scuffle with. Sabourré, balasted. Sabourrer, to balast. Sabrin, the spotted and scaly Ser∣pent Hemorrhois, whereof one be∣ing bitten, bleeds at all the natu∣ral pores, or passages of the body, to death. Sabuleux, sandy. Sacabribe, a Beggars wallet, an Almscrip. Saccade, a fall from a horse; also a flirt. Elle aura la saccade, she shall be turned over. Saccader, to throw, to cast down; also to overturn a wench. Saccageux, sacking, ransacking. Saccamenter, as sacmenter. Saccerelle, a Dock for a Horses train. Saccharin, of sugar; as white or sweet as sugar. Saccouter à l'oreille, to whisper in the ear. Saceller, to rub in bathing with little bags full of bran, &c. Sacerdot, for Prêtre, a Priest. Sacmenté, sacked, ransacked; also hacked, or hewed in pieces. Sacmenter, sacked, ransacked; also to hack, or hew in pieces. Sacotin, Feverwort, common Centory. Sacouter, as saccouter. Sacquement, a hasty drawing, a quick pulling out of a sword, &c. also a sacking, or ransacking. Sacquementé, as sacmenté. Sacquer, to draw hastily. Sacquer la main à l'espée, to clap his hand on his sword (with a pur∣pose to draw it). Il luy sacqua l'espée des mains, he snatched his sword out of his hands. Sacquerelle, a dock for a horses tail. Sacraire, a Vestry in a Church; also a private Chappel, or Oratory. Sacrificatoire, sacrificatory, belong∣ing unto sacrifice. Sadariege, the herb Savory. Sadayer, to handle gently, or stroke softly; also to flatter, or collogue with. Sade, pretty, neat, fine, or spruce. Sadément, prettily, neatly, finely, sprucely. Sadinet, as sade. Faire la sadi∣nette, to mince it, to be coy. Sadrée, as sadariege. Saffraniere, a Saffron-field, or plot; a ground sowed with Saffron. Saffrenier, a seller of Saffron; also a bankrupt, or one that owes more than he is worth. Saffreté, wanton dallying, lascivious toying; also a ravening, or gor∣mandizing. Saffrette, a wanton, lecherous, or lascivious quean. Safre, (Adj.) wanton, waggish, lascivious, lecherous; also rave∣nous, gluttonous, gormandizing. Safreté, & Saffrette, as Saffreté, Saffrette. Sagacité, Sagacity, or quickness of apprehension. Sagapen, Sagapene, Sagapin, the Gum, or the hardened and gum∣my juice of the bruised, cut, or broken root of Ferula, or Fennel-grant. Sagemener, as sacmenter. Sageraut, wise, wary, discreet. Saget, pretty wise. Sagette, an arrow, or shaft; also the Ditch-weed called Arrow-head, or Water-archer. Sagetté, shot with arrows. Sagetter, to shoot through with ar∣rows. Saggotter, to joult. Sagitale, as sagittale. Sagittelle, the Launcet wherewith a Surgeon openeth Veins and Im∣posthumes. Sagittale, as commissure sagittale, the seam which runs along on the top of the head, and distin∣guisheth the right side of it from the left. Sagmenter, as sacmenter. Sagnie, a bundle of the slender stalks of Sea-grass, or of other Sea-weeds wrapped close together and thrown by the working of the Sea upon the shore. Sagoin, Sagouin, a little Marmoset; also a knavish Wag, an unlucky Lad. Sahue, a Sallow-tree, the Goats willow-tree. Saiffe, the Dace, or Dare-fish. Saigneux, bloudy, full of bloud. Sailleur, a leaper, a jumper. Sailli, gone out, issued forth; also leaped on. Saillicoque, as Salecoque. Saillier, for saillie, a sally. Saillir, to go out; also to appear above, to stand out beyond others; to leap, jump, bound, skip, hop; to ride, or leap upon one another, as the male doth the female. Sain, (Subst.) seam; the tallow, fat, or grease of a hog, or of a rave∣nous wild beast. Sainctelot, somewhat holy, or Saint-like. Saincte n'y touche, an hypocrite. Sainct-foin, Medick fodder, Snail-claver. Sainne, as seine. Sainteur, a certain Rent paid by those that have been freed from bondage unto those that affran∣chised them. Saint-foin, as Sainct-foin. Saintre, as Droict de Saintre, a Right belonging to some Lords, who may thereby eat, with (only) their Cattle, all the waste, untilled stubble, or buhy grounds that be within their Mannors. Sais, certain pieces of iron, whereby the axlete is fastened unto the body of the Wain, &c.
Saitte, a kind of twopenny-broad Ribbon made of a very course silk. Saive, for seve, the sap of plants. Salace, lecherous, lascivious. Salacité, lechery, lasciviousness. Saladier, belonging to, or fit for a Sallad. Salarié, hired, fee'd. Salarier, Salariser, to hire, to fee. Salaude, as sale in the N. D. Salcoque, Salecoque, an uncased Prawn. Salet, somewhat nasty. Saleures, salt meats. Salez, the Burgundians (called so in old time by the French, moc∣king them for their controversies with the Germans touching their Salt-pits.) Salezart, a very sloven. Salfuge, a kind of Serpent that's poysoned by salt. Salicoque, as Salcoque. Salicor, Salicorne, the herb Salt-wort, or Frog-grass. Salicots, as Saligots. Salidure, a little push, or wheal. Saliette, Herb-sorrel. Saligot, a sloven. Saligots, Water-nuts. Salin, a garner for salt. Salisson, a sloven, or a slut. Salissure, a fouling, or soiling. Salival, slimy. Salivation, a continual having of much spittle in the mouth; or a drawing of humours to the mouth, and a delivery of them from thence in manner of spittle. Saliver, to slabber, to be full of spit∣tle. Saliveux, slabbering. Saliviere, the plate whereat a hits players hang, the flap to hang the players at. Sallebrenaut, a slovenly man. Sallebreneux, most filthily bewray∣ed. Sallisseure, as salisseure. Salloir, a Salting-tub, or table. Sallorge, a Cellar, or low Room to keep salt in. Salmandre, for salamandre, a Sa∣lamander. Salmigondin, as Salmigondi in the N. D. Salmille, the herb Chervil. Salmonde, herb Avens, Bennet, or Blessed. Salnitre, Saltpeter candied, or fined unto the colour and substance of white Sugar-candy. Saloir, as salloir. Saloppe, a sloven, or slut. Saloque, the South-east wind. Salorge, as Sallorge. Salouer, as Salloir. Salpestreux, full of Saltpeter. Salpestrier, a Saltpeter-man, or Saltpeter-maker. Salsature, as salsitude. Salseparille, the Indian herb or drug Sassaparilla. Salsitif, salt, or salt-making. Salsitude, saltness, brackishness. Salsugineux, smacking of salt. Saltereau, as sautereau. Saluade, a salutation, or greeting; a volley of great or small shot be∣stowed on a great person, or wor∣thy friend. Salvador, a Saviour. Salvage, as Droict de Salvage, a tenth part of Goods that were like to perish by shipwrack, due unto him that saves them. Salubre, wholesom, healthful. Salubrement, healthfully. Salubrité, wholesomness, healthful∣ness. Salue, as saluade. Saluerne, a great drinking-cup. Salus, as saluts; also a certain crafty Sea-fish which biteth away the bait, and medleth not with the hook. Salutaire (Subst.) the health, or pre∣servation of. Salutairement, healthfully, whole∣somly, comfortably. Saluter-libenter, one that salutes every one (but cares for none) he meets. Saluts, an old French Crown. Samarré, as chamarré in the N. D. Sambacin, as huile sambacin, oyl of Jelsomine-flowers. Sambregoy, as par le sambregoy, a foolish Oath, like our Gods bod∣kin, &c. Sambuchin, as huile sambuchin, oyl of the flowers or berries of the Elder-tree. Same, the Mullet-fish. Samoireau, a great black grape which yieldeth very harsh wine. Sampongne, a Bag-pipe, or Oaten-pipe; also the Bell hanged about the neck of a Sheep or Goat. Sampsue, the sweet herb Marjoram. Samy, a half-silk stuff, which hath a gloss like satin, and is narrower, but lasteth longer. Sanable, healable, curable. Sanchet, a black pudding; also an old Coin of gold worth above 2 shill. sterl. Sanctimoniale, a Nun. Sanctimonie, sanctimony, holiness; also the profession of a religious person. Sanction, a Law, Decree, or Sta∣tute. Sanctoron, an hypocrite. Sandalin, of, or belonging to a san∣dal. Sandarac, Sandarache, as Sanda∣raque in the N. D. Sandastre, a kind of carbuncle, or burning stone, wherein small gol∣den drops or sparkles that shine like stars appear. Sandeau, a link, or torch. Sandouille, the name of an apple. Sanele, wild mustard. Sanemonde, herb Avens, herb Ben∣net, or Blessed. Saner, to cure, to heal; also to geld, or spay a Sow. Sanes, Parliaments, or general As∣semblies; also two sixes at dice. Sanglamment, Sanglantement, blou∣dily. Sanglanter, for ensanglanter, to make bloudy, or to besmear with bloud. Sanglement, a girding of a horse. Sangleron, a young wild boar. Sangliere, a wild sow. Sanglotin, a boar-pig, or a little wild boar. Sanglout, for sanglot, a sob, or sigh. Sang-messeacute;, whose bloud is stirred, whose colour comes and goes through a great or sudden fear, &c. Sang-meslure, a stirring of the bloud. Sangoy, a rustical kind of Oath. Sangreal, part of Christ's most pre∣cious bloud wandering about the world invisible (to all but chast eyes) and working many wonders and wonderful Cures, according to King Arthur. Sangsuer, to suck bloud like a Horseleech. Sanguificatif, bloud-making, tur∣ning into bloud. Sanguifier, to convert, or turn into bloud. Sanguineral, the little fish called a Mnrow. Sangnité, consanguinity, kinred, parentage, nearby of bloud. Sanguinolent, bloudy, full of bloud. Sanguisorbe, Burnet, Pimpi. Sanie, purult matter.
Sanieux, full of purulent matter, of corrupt or filthy bloud. Saninier, as Savinier. Sannier, a Salter, Salt-seller, or Salt-maker. Sansonet, Sansonnet, a Starling; also a little pretty fart. Sansue, for sangsue, a Horseleech. Santal, as sandal in the N.D. Santonique, Wormseed, or Wormseed∣wort. Sanues blanches, the white wild Colewort. Sanut, as canus. Sanxi, decreed, enacted, ordained; also forbidden. Sanxion, as sanction. Sanye, as sanie. Saon, a challenge of, or exception a∣gainst a Witness, Juror, &c. Saonier, for Saunier, one that sel∣leth salt. Saonné, challenged, or excepted a∣gainst. Saonnement, a challenging, or ex∣cepting against. Saonner, to challenge, or except a∣gainst a Witness, Juror, &c. Saouleté, Saoulure, satiety, fulness. Sap, as bois de sap, Deal-plank, Deal-boards. Saphre, as safre. Sapine, an open tub, or vessel (of Fir-wood, &c.) wherein bottles of wine are usually set. Sapinette, a grove, or wood of Fir-trees. Sapineux, full of Fir. Sappin, a Chiappin, or Spanish Pan∣tofle. Saquer, as sacquer. Saquerelle, a dock for a horses train. Sarache, an Albanian fish very like to the Anchova. Sarazine, as sarrasine. Sarbacane, or Sarbataine, for Sar∣batane, a long trunk to shoot in; also the musical instrument called a Sagbut. Sarcable, fit to be weeded, or that may be weeded. Sarcasine, a bitter jest. Sarclet, for sarcloir, a Weeding-book. Sarcophage, a stone called Eat-flesh, because it consumes in 40 days the dead carcasses inclosed within it. Sarcoter, to swive. Sarcotique, breeding new flesh. Sarcueil, for cercueil, a Cossin for a dead Corpse. Sardaine, for sardine, a Sardin. Sardanapalisme, effeminate sensuali∣ty. Sarsoct, as sarsouette. Sarsouäge, a grubbing, digging, or cutting up of weeds. Sarsouette, an Instrument whose iron head, about a foot long, is forked on the one side, and sharp on the other, to grub, or cut up weeds, or noisom herbs. Sarsouïr, to grub, or cut up weeds. Sargette, a fine (or thin) serge. Sargon, the Gilthead. Sargoter, as sarcoter. Sarin, a certain Water-herb, which hath a hard rot necessary for Smiths. Sarisse, a long Spear, Launce, Pike, or Javelin, used by the ancient Macedonians. Sarlatan, for Charlatan, a Mounte-bank. Sarmenteux, full of twigs, or small branches. Sarmentin, of, or belonging to a small Vine-branch. Dragme sar∣mentine, a draught, or cup of wine. Sarrabouïte, as Strabouïte. Sarrasson, fleetings, or hasty curds, scummed from the whey of a new-milk-cheese, then thickned with a little milk, or the yolk of an egg, and boyled on a soft fire. Sarre, a small piece of Artillery, used in old time. Sarrer, as serrer in the N. D. Sars, Chichlings, yellow wild Fit∣ches. Sart, Sea-moss, Lungwort. Sarteau, the Bell-pear, or Gourd-pear. Sartie, a Ship-boat. Sartre, a Taylor, or Botcher. Sarvagnin, a sort of delicate wine of a dark-red colour. Sassefique, Sassefrique, as sassify. Sassement, a sisting, ranging, or boulting. Sasser, to sift, range, or boult. Sasseur, a sifter, ranger, or boulter. Sasseures, siftings. Sassisy, Goats-bread, Josephs-flour. Sassure, as sassement. Satellite, a Sergeant, or Catchpole. Satieté, satiety, fulness, plenty. Satisfactionnaire, a preacher of sa∣tisfaction. Satouilles, little Lampreys bred in small fresh-water-streams, into which the Sea comes not. Satrape, a great Ruler, or Com∣mander; the Lieatenant, or Go∣vernour of a Country. Saturige, the herb Savory. Saturité, saturity, fulness, plenty. Saturnien, sad, sour, lumpish, me∣lancholy. Satyriase, Priapism, a lustful exten∣sion, or swelling of the yard. Satyric, for satyrique, satyrical. Satyrium, for satyrion, Satyrion, or Rag-wort. Sau, for sel, salt; also an Ox-house, or the like, in a Country-Cottage. Savart, as friche in the N. D. Savate, an old shooe; also the play called Bob and hit, or Hideman-blind. Savaterie, a coling, or the trade of a Cobler; also a street, or place wherein old shooes be sold. Savatier, for Savetier, a Cobler; also the play called Hideman-blind. Savaton, a shooe; also a piece of an old shooe. Vieil savaton, the Millers thumb (a fish.) Saubanite, a sleeveless yellow coat, or gown, painted all over with representations of Devils, and put upon such as are found guilty by the Inquisition. Saucles, as melet. Saudenier, a Souldier that takes pay. Save, for seve, the sap of a plant. Savetier (Adj.) of, or belonging to cobling, or old shooes. Saveud, as Terres laissées en sa∣veud, grounds that lie unlabou∣red. Sauf-respit, respit of Homage, or a time granted by a Lord unto his Vassal for the doing of his ho∣mage. Saugé, seasoned with Sage. Sauger, the name of a sweet and tender apple. Saugrenée, a porridge, or meat of pease and broth half boyled, and put into a dish with sops, salt, saffron, sallet-oyl, and some ver∣juice, or vinegar. Sauldoy, branches of Willow cut e∣very third or fourth year, for props for Vines, &c. Saulgé, Capon-sauce made of Sage; also as saugé. Saulmone (for saumon) de plomb, a great sow of lead. Saulmonnier, of a Salmon. Saulmonniere, a Salmon-trout. Saulmurages, rubbish of stone, brick, &c. laid under the groundsil or foundation of a house.
Saulmuré, pickled. Saulnerie, a Salt-shop, or Garner for salt. Sauloye, a plot, or grove of Willows. Saulse, and its Derivatives in use. See them spelt with c, instead of ls, in the N. D. Saulserette, Saulseron, a little saucer. Saulsiere, a saucer. Saulsisse, for saucisse, Sausage. Saulsissier, a maker of Sausages. Saultelement, a skipping. Saultelle, the branch of a Vine left growing (when all the rest are lopped) for a future years in∣crease. Saultereau, a Locust, or Grashopper; also the Jack of a Virginal. Saulterette, a Shrimp, or Prawn. Saulx, for saule, a Sallow, or Wil∣low-tree. Saume, a She-ass. Saumée de bled, the quantity of four Setiers of corn, or the third part of a Parisian Muid. Sau∣mée de terre, a proportion of land containing in square 1600 reeds, and each of those reeds 8 spans in length. Saumonneau, a young, or little Sal∣mon. Saune, the herb called Blite, or Blites. Saunelage, as Droict de Saunelage, the tenth part of Goods which are saved from Shipwrack, due unto him that saved them. Savonnier, of, or belonging unto soap. Savorade, Savorados, a poor kind of pottage extracted only from the juice of bare and hollow bones. Saupe, the name of an unsavory and unwholesom Sea-fish. Saupiqueter, to give a sharp taste unto. Saupiqueux, sharp, or tart. Sauquene, a young or small Gilt-head. Saure, a Sorrel-colour; also a Sor∣rel-horse. Saurel, the bastard-Mackarel. Sauret, as saure. Saurer, Saurir, to make Sorrel, or turn into a Sorrel-colour. Sau∣rir les harengs, to redden Her∣rings. Saurisseur, a redder of Herrings. Sausssier, as saulsissier. Saussiere, as saulsiere. Sautelle, Sautereau, as sautelle, sautereau. Sautier, a leaper, jumper, skipper. Sautueil, for sautoir, Salteer (in Heraldry.) Sauvageau, for sauvageon, a wild plant, set, or stock fit to be graf∣ted on. Sauvageté, savageness, wildness. Sauvelage, as saunelage. Sauvément, safely, securely. Sauveté, safety, security. Sauve-vie, stone (or wall) Rue, white Maiden-hair. Sauvoir, a flat and close boot (bored full of little holes) for the keeping and feeding of fish in rivers, &c. Sauzin, a kind of Olive. Saxatile, stony, gravelly; breeding the stone; also living, or lurking among stones. Sayete, Sayette, the stuff Sey. Sayne, the large fish-net called a Seyn. Sayon, as saye in the N. D. Sbaraglin, an Italian Game at Ta∣bles, wherein one adds six to eve∣ry cast he throws; as, if he cast 12. he plays 18. Sbirre, as Satellite. Scabeau, Scabelle, for escabeau, escabelle, a joynt-stool. Scabie, the scab, or scabbiness. Scabieux, scabby. Scabin, a Judge. Scabreux, rough, rugged; also skit∣tish, dangerous to be dealt with. Scace, a scatch-bit. Scaïole, a kind of Allum. Scalene, a triangle, the three ends whereof are unequal. Scalenes, certain neck-muscles, where∣by the head is moved and bent. Scalle, a scale, a ladder, a pair of stairs. Faire scalle, to go up unto; also to land, or go ashore. Faire scalle en Espagne, to sail into Spain. Scalme, a thowl, the little peg whereby the oar of a skiff is stayed. Scalpelle, a Surgeons pen-knife, or launcet. Scameux, as suture scameuse, the seam whereby the bone of the tem∣ples is united with, or divided from, the scull. Scammes, scales; also the nails, or small plates of old-fashioned Ha∣bergeons. Scammonie, for scammonée, Scam∣mony. Scandebee, a kind of Oyster. Scapellaire, as Scapulaire in the N. D. Scaphe, a Skiff, or Ship-boat; also a Niche; also a hollow Dial cut into wood or stone in the form of a long bason, and having the hour-pin or needle in the middle thereof. Scaphoïde, as Os scaphoïde, a bone in the instep made somewhat like a skiff, or long bason. Scarbillat, as escarbillat. Scare, a delicate Sea-fish which cheweth like a beast. Scarificateur, a Scarifier, an Instru∣ment wherein there are 18 sharp wheels, the which let go at once do scarifie and make incision in as many several places. Scariotte, for scariole, scariol. Scarvine, a Pilgrims Cloak. Sçasser, as sasser. Scatophages, excrement-eaters. Sçavantement, for savamment, lear∣nedly. Scede, a wooden table, whereon in old time people writ with chalk. Scedule, as cedule in the N. D. Sceleré, wicked. Scelete, for squelette, a Skeleton. Scenicle, the little bird called a Siskin. Sceu (Subst.) knowledge, notice. Schalupe, for chaloupe, a Shal∣lop. Schede, Schedule, a cedule, or note in writing; also a writing stuck on a post; also the return made by a Sergeant upon an Adjourn∣ment or Arrest. Schelette, as Scelete. Schelme, a knave, a Devil. Schine, the linnen Cassock which Country-men wear, gathered in the neck like a Surplice. Scholarité, Scholarship. Scholiaste, an Expounder of, or Glosser upon, a Text. Sciage, saw-dust, or a sawing; also cleft wood, as boards, laths, &c. Scientement, for Sciemment, wit∣tingly. Scientifique, Scientique, most lear∣ned, of great knowledge. Sciette, a little saw. Scille, for squille, the Squilla, or Sea-onion. Scillet, the nut of a musical Instru∣ment. Scillitie, of the Squilla, or Sea-onion. Scinq, Scinque, the Skink; a kind of small land-Crocodile, divers parts whereof are of good use in Physick.
Scintillation, a sparking, or spark∣ling. Scintille, a spark, or sparkle of fire. Scintiller, to spark, or to sparkle. Sciomance, divination by Conference with the shadows of dead men. Scionneux, full of scions, or of shoots. Scipoulle, as scille. Scirre, a hard and almost unsensi∣ble swelling, a kernel bred be∣tween the flesh and skin by cold, or of thick and clammy flegm. Scismatique, for schismatique, a Schismatick, (and Adjectively) schismatical. Scismatiser, to play the Schismatick; to raise a Schism, or breed a Di∣vision, in the Church. Scisme, for schisme, a Schism. Scissile, that may be cut, or divided. Scissure, a cleft, cut, or crack. Scissuré, cleft, cut, cracked, broken. Scieure, for sieure, a sawing; also saw-dust. Sclavine, as esclavine. Sclirrolique. See Shiliroïque. Scoffion, a Coif richly set with Jewels. Scoletie, a kind of spotted spider. Scolopendrie, Spleenwort. Scopeterie, a Volley of small shot. Scordion, Scordium, Water-german∣der. Scorie, the dross, or scum of melted, or tried-metal. Scorpene, a little dark-green fish, having certain weak (but veno∣mous) prickles on her head. Scorze, a round Italian Corn-mea∣sure, 22 whereof go to the Ruble. Scorzon, a short black Serpent full of yellow spots, and very venomous. Scote, as la scote d'une voile, a sheat. Scotin, difficult, or intricate. Scotte, as scote. Scourgeon, Amel-corn, or Starch-corn. Scourre, as la terre ne se sçait scourre de cette herbe, the ground cannot overcome, or be rid of, this weed. Scousse, as secousse in the N. D. Scripteur, a Writer. Scriptule, for scrupule, a scruple, the third part of a dram. Scrofule, the Kings-evil, or a Wen under the throat. Scrophulaire, as scrofulaire in the N. D. Scrutine, for scrutin, scrutiny, or search. Scutiforme, fashioned like a Scut∣cheon. Scybale, a hard (or hardened) turd. Scylle, as scille. Scync, and Scynque, as Scine, Scin∣que. Scyomantie, as sciomance. Scyrre, as scirre. Scyrreux, kernelly, knotty. Scytale, a kind of Slot-worm; also the Shrew-mouse; also a little round or square stick full of Cy∣pbers. Seamment, decently, handsomly. Seas, as à Dieu seas, farewel. Sebe, an Onion. Sebelline, as Marte sebelline, for Zibeline, a Sable, the beast whose skin we call Sables. Sebeste, Sebestin, the Sebesten, or Assyrian-plum. Sebestier, the Sebesten, or Assyrian Plum-tree. Sebille, a wooden bowl used in Vintage-time for the lading or tunning of new Wine, and for the tasting thereof before it be tunned. Sebu, the Elder-tree. Sec (an Interj.) ware that. Secacul, an Indian Ginger-like root, which eaten preserved enables a man unto Venery. Seccer, to saw, or cut asunder. Sechabot, the little black vermine breeding in puddles, and termed a Bull-head. Secheron, a dry'd pear. Prez seche∣rons, high, or dry Meadows, such as are neither overflowed, nor moistened by any River. Sechot, a Powt, or Eel-powt. Secilienne, the watering-chain of a Bit. Seclus, secluded, deprived of. Secourable, helpful, assisting, ready (or willing) to relieve. Secourcer, to tuck up the coat, &c. Secourgeon, as Scourgeon. Secretain, for Sacristain, the Sex∣ton of a Church. Secretainerie, a Sextry, or Vestry. Secretariat, a Secretariship, the Of∣fice, or Place of a Secretary. Secrete, a thin steel-cap, or a close scull worn under a hat, &c. Secretion, a separation, or setting apart; also a thing separated, or set apart from others. Secretrice, of a separating faculty. Sectaire, a Sectary. Sectil, easily cut. Porreau sectil, the Cut-leek, or Maidens-leek. Sects, as Ceps in the N. D. Seculaire, as Jeu seculaire, a Game which is plaid but once every Age. Secularité, secularity, temporalness. Securidaque, the pulse Axseed, or Arwort. Sedatif, quieting, asswaging, easing. Sedenette, the Sea-monster called a Whirl-pool. Seder, to quiet, asswage, or mitigate. Sediment, a settling of dregs. Sedon, as Ceton. Sedulité, sedulity, diligence. See, for soie, silk. Seel, for seau, a seal. Droict de Seel, the priviledge of having a Seal, wherewith his Vassals are to stamp all their Contracts. Seellé (Subst.) a Covenant made, or Contract passed, between Party and Party, under Seal; also the sealing of a thing. Seelleur, a Sealer. Seelleure, a sealing. Seession, as faire seession, to break, to turn Bankrupt. Seeux, as soyeux. Segaline, a delicate pear ripe in August. Segnale, notable, famous. Segrarie, a Verderership, or such-like Office of account in Forests. Segrayer, a Verderer, or such a like Officer of some authority in Forests. Segrayerie, as Segrarie. Segregation, segregation, separation. Segregé, segregated, separated. Segreger, to segregate, to separate. Segrette, an iron-scull, or cap of fence. Segue, for eigue, Hemlock. Seguette, a cavesson of iron full of teeth, or having a sharp indented edge to the noseward. Sehu, the Elder-tree. Seiche-frite, for lechefrite, a Drip∣ping-pan. Seicher, and its Derivatives in use. See them without an i in the N. D. Seicheron, as secheron. Seicheur, for secheresse, drought. Seides, the bristles, or stiff-hairs of a horse, or hog. Seignée, Seigner, as saignée, sai∣gner in the N. D. Seigneuriage, Seigniory, Soveraignty Seigneurier, to domineer. Seillon, a little pail, or bucket; also as sillon in the N. D. Seillonner, as sillonner in the N.D. Seissete, a kind of pale-red Wheat. Seizain, a quarter of an ounce, or the 64 part of a pound-weight. Senelite, a light, white, and transpa∣rent stone, easily cleft into thin
flakes, whereof the Arabians make their glass, and glasen win∣dows. Selerin, as celerin. Selsir, the rotting Serpent Seps. Semainier, one that works by the week. Semainier, (Adj.) weekly; of, or belonging to a week. Semaises, a sort of great pots. Semaison, as semaille in the N. D. Semantiere, for Cimetiere, a Church∣yard. Semblance, for semblant, a shew, or appearance; also likeness. Semeler un soulier, to sole a shooe. Semencé, for semé, sowed. Semencier, of, or containing seed. Sementine, a certain Pear, so cal∣led, because it is always ripe a∣bout seeding time. Semestre, (Adj.) of, or for six months. Semidroict, base, or low Juris∣diction. Semillant, wantonly unquiet, or stirring, foolishly restless. Semillon, a wanton stirring. Seminal, of seed. Semoisson, for semaille, seeding-time. Semole, the fine flour of an ex∣cellent Italian wheat, ministred by Physicians in panadoes and broths. Semonce, a summons, warning, or inviting. Semondre, to summon, warn, or in∣vite. Semonneur, a summoner, or inviter. Semoule, as semole; also ground-wheat that's between meal and flour, or hath only the coursest of the bran sifted from it. Sempervive, Housleek. Sempiternel, Sempiterneux, ever∣lasting, perpetual. Senacle, a story in a building. Senaud, a knave, a rascal; a rich man that pretends to be very poor. Sené, for Synode, a Synod. Senedette, a kinde of great Whale. Senelles, heps, or bawthorn-ber∣ries. Senes, twelve, or two sixes, at dice. Senestre, sinister. La main senestre, the left hand. Sengle, for sangle, a girth. Sengle, (Adj.) single, simple, not double. Senglot, Senglout, for hoquet, the hiccock. Sengloter, Senglouter, to be trou∣bled with the hiccock. Sengloteur, one that hath the hic∣cock. Senicle, for sanicle, Sanicke; also the little Siskin-bird. Senné, for sené, the purging plant Sene. Sensouire, excessive saltness of soil, a fault in land bred by the noi∣som slime of salt marshes. Sente, for sentier, a path. Sentemeur, for sentiment, a feeling, a smelling, or tasting. Sentier, (Adj.) of, or in a path. Sentine mere, a little salt-boat, or bark. Sentive, the faculty of feeling, smel∣ling, &c. Sentrille, a kinde of fresh-water fish. Sep, as cep in the N. D. Separaison, for separation, separa∣tion; also a balk, or division be∣tween two lands. Separatoire, a Separatory, the Chi∣zel or Instrument wherewith Sur∣geons cut out the pieces of bones left between the holes which they have bored with a Trepan. Sepe, Sepadon, as Selsir. Sepmainier, as semainier. Septaine, the precincts, or liberties of a Town. Septantiesme, seventieth. Septembrin, of, or in September. Liqueur septembrine, wine. Septenaire, a seventh, a proportion of seven, the number of seven. Septenaire, (Adj.) containing se∣ven; in, of, or belonging to seven. Septerée, a setier full of. Septiémement, seventhly. Septimestre, of seven months, or at seven months end. Septinaire, as septenaire. Septique, putrefactive, corrosive. Septirage, as stirage. Septuagenaire, threescore and ten years old. Sept-virat, the joynt Rule, Govern∣ment, or Authority of seven men. Septuple, seven-fold. Sepulchral, of, or belonging to a grave. Sepulturable, sit to be buried. Sepulturer, to bury, to lay in the ground. Sequele, a sequel, or consequence; the issu, or success of a thing; also a great mans Train. La Sequelle au robon, mean, (pitiful) Trades∣men. Sequence, a sequence. Sequences, answering Verses, or Verses whereto answer is made in the Mass. Sequenie, a frock, or loose Jacket of Canvas, open before, and worn by Porters, &c. over the rest of their apparel. Sequent, following. Sequinant, the sweet-flowered rush, called Squinant, and Camels-hay. Ser de laict, whey. Ser montain, bastard Lovage. Serain, as serein in the N. D. Seraph, a Turkish Coyn of fine Gold, worth about a French Crown. Seraphiser, to sanctifie, consecrate; extol, or magnifie to the heavens. Serapin, as sagapen. Serargent, the penny father. Serat, as laict serat, milk boyled with garlick and onions; also sowr milk. Serbataine, as sarbacane. Serbin, the crimson, or prickly Ce∣dar; also the rosin that issueth from the great Cedar. Sercisi, as sassify. Sereler, and its Derivatives. See Sarcler, &c. in the N. D. Sereueil, for cercueil, a cossi. Serée, for soirée, the evening; also an evening-task, or work; also a gossiping of neighbours by turns at their own houses. Sereine, for Sirene, a Mermaid. Sereiner, to clear, as the weather; to look cheerfully, to make light∣some, or pleasant; also to calm, appease, or pacifie. Serencer, as serancer in the N. D. Serene, as la goutte serene, blind∣ness, or extream dimness of sight, caused by the obturation or stop∣ping of the Optick Sinew. Serennade, as serenade in the N.D. Sereux, serous, or waterish like whey; also loving the evening; being in, or near the evening. Serf, a servant, or a slave. Serfs fonciers, such as having been con∣quered by the antient French re∣ceived Lands of them, on the Condition of doing them any ser∣vice. These were by no means permitted to change the habita∣tion they first betook them to. Serss pissenez, the bastards of slaves, or villains. Serfoot, a weeding-book, or a weed∣ing-fork. Serfoué, weeded, grabbed, or eat up with a weeding-fork.
Serfouettes, the Instrument where∣with a Gardener grubs, or cuts up weeds. Serfs, an Order of Black Friars, which thus term themselves. Sergeanter, Sergeanterie, as Ser∣genter, Sergenterie. Sergeanteux, Sergeant-like, or using a Serjeant-like authority. Sergeantise, as Sergentise. Sergentaillerie, Sergeants, or a Company of them. Sergenter, to arrest, attach, or sum∣mon; to act the Sergeant any way. Sergenterie, Sergentie, and Ser∣gentise, Sergeantship, the Office, Place, or Duty of a Sergeant; also (in the Customs of Norman∣dy) a kinde of fief without Court or Jurisdiction; or that service, which in the English Law is termed grand or petit Sergean∣tie. Seri, Seriau, quiet, calm, still, fair, clear. Serie, the Eve of a Holy-day; also the Evening. Seriens, Souldiers that served on foot. Serin, of silk; also serene. Seriphie, Sea-worm-wood. Sermenteux, as sarmenteux. Sermonner, to preach, to make a Sermon. Sermonneur, a Preacher, a Sermon-maker. Sermontain, siler mountain, bastard lovage. Serourge, a Brother-in-law, one that hath married a mans own, or his wifes sister. Serpaut, Marriage-goods, any hous∣hold-stuff or moveables given in marriage with a Son, Daughter, or Cosin. Serpeger, to winde, or crankle in and out; to wave, or go waving, like a Serpent. Serpeillere, as Serpillere. Serpente, for serpent, a serpent. Serpigine, a redness of the skin with pushes and wheals. Serpiller, to pack up in canvas, &c. also to glean after Grape-gathe∣rers. Serpillere, for sarpilliere, a sarpler, or sarp-cloth. Serpillette, Serpillon, Serpillon∣nette, a small Vine-hook, or Gar∣diners hooded knife. Serpolet, for serpoulet, running Tyme. Serquify, the delicate root of the herb Goats-beard. Serrail d'un huis, the bolt of a door. Serran, a fish resembling, but some∣what less, than the Sea-perch. Serrant, a Green-finch. Serratan, as serran. Serratil, closing, or shutting up close together. Serrecrapiere, the close buttock play, lechery. Serre-front, a head-band, or fore∣head-cloth. Serrément, closely, compactly. Serre-nappe, a Cabinet, Room, or Chest for the keeping of Table∣linnen; also the basket wherein it is put up at the taking away. Serre-poignet, a covetous, or close∣handed wretch. Serre-teste, a border of Goldsmiths work, &c. worn by Gentlewomen upon their Coifs or Hoods. Serreure, for serrure, a lock. Sert, the first course at table. Serte, a kinde of flat-bottomed Boat used in old time. Servage, servitude, bondage, or sla∣very. Servans, as Serfs. Servant, for Esprit familier, a Hob∣goblin, a Ghost, or walking Spi∣rit. Servantin, the Sole-fish termed a kinde fool. Serve, a stue for fish; also a mue for fowl; also the herb Sage. Servément, servilely, by villenage, by a base or servile Tenure. Serviablement, serviceably, offici∣ously. Servicial, a glister. Servis, the Cens, and other small yearly Rights, or Duties paid by the Tenants of Inheritances unto the Lord of the Soil, in acknow∣ledgment of his direct Seigniory. Servitute, a Duty wherein one piece of ground, and the possessor there∣of, is liable, or subject unto ano∣ther. Hommes de servitute, a kinde of Villains, or servile Te∣nants, liable to their Lords Ta∣xations while they live: And when they die, their Sons must buy their possessions of him, or else he seizes and holds them: and their Daughters (if they had no Sons) must lose the Soil, and take such husbands and portions as he is pleased to allot them. Servivi, an Act, or Certificate of the actual Services performed by an Officer, who thereupon receives the Wages, and is allowed the Pri∣vileges due unto his place. Sery, the Shrew-mouse. Sesamin, of sesamum. Sesamoïde, bastard-woad. Sesamoïdes, certain little flat bones, wherewith the joynts of the fingers and toes are filled, setled, and strengthened. Sesne, the mother of wine. Sesquialtere, one and a half, or half as much again, as three in respect of two. Sesquin, a kinde of base coyn. Sesquitiers, as much, and a third part more. Sessile, sitting, or seeming to sit; easie to sit on; of a low stature. Verrue sessile, a kind of hard, broad, flat, and blackish wart. Sesterce, the fourth part of the an∣cient Roman penny, worth about three half pence farthing of En∣glish money. Sesterce de terre, the fourth part of a Saumée, a measure for land somewhat less than the ordinary Arpent. Sestine, a Stanza of six Verses. Sete, the Quitterbone, a round and hard swelling upon the cornet (be∣tween the heel and quarter) of a horses foot. Setier, (Adj.) bristly, rough. Seton, a rowel; the rowelling, or roping of a bruised or strained horse. Setton, as seton; also section. Setule, as sete. Seu, an Elder-tree. Seueil, for seuil, the threshold of a door. Seveux, sappy, full of natural moi∣sture. Sevir, to rage, to be mad at; to deal most cruelly with. Seule, for seuil, a threshold; also a groundsil, or the piece of tim∣ber which compasses the bottom of a room. Seulet, alone, solitary, or apart from others. Seulle, as la seulle d'une chartée de foing, as much meadow-ground as will bear a load of hay. Seur, for sureau, an Elder-tree. Seur, for soeur, a sister. Seur, for aigre, sowr. Seurat, as vinaigre seurat, Elder-vinegar. Sevronde, for severonde, the eaves of an house.
Sexagenaire, 60 years old. Sextaire, an ancient Roman mea∣sure containing somewhat more than our pint. Sextement, sixthly. Sexterce, Sexterée, as Sesterce. Sextier, as setier in the N. D. Sextule, a weight of four scruples, or the sixth part of an ounce. Seyette, serge or sey. Seynale, as salvatelle in the N. D. Seyeux, full of silk. Sezain, the toll, or fee due for grind∣ing; also as seizain. Seziesme, (Subst.) a sixteenth part. un seziesme d'aulne, three Inches. Shilithoïque, as Goutte shilithoi∣que, a kind of cold Gout. Sibi, as à son sibi, to himself. Sibille, a tunning and tasting dish in the time of Vintage. Sibilet, an ass, a fop. Sibylin, of a Sybil, or Sybil-like; prophecying. Sicap, as de leur sicap, of their own head, after their own fan∣cy. Siccité, driness. Siciliane, as ceciliane. Sicilique, a quarter of an ounce. Sicinnie, a dancing and singing to∣gether. Sicinnistes, such as dance and sing together. Sicnie, as sequenie. Sicot, as bricot. Sideration, as syderation. Siderite, the iron-like stone siderites, which (as some imagine) hath power to set men at odds; also the load-stone. Sienite, a kind of rich marble got∣ten about Thebes. Sieser, to become fit. Siette, a little saw. Sieu, the suet of Deer, wild Goats, the Roe, &c. also the grease of capons, and of such other fowl. Sieurel, the bastard-mackerel. Sieurie, for Seigneurie, Lordship. Sieuté, as poissons d'une sieuté, fishes of one size or goodness. Sifflantement, with a whistling sound. Sifflerie, a whistle, or whistling. Sifre, for chifre, a cypher. Sigillatif, sealable, or apt to seat; also made of wax. Sigillé, sealed. Signacle, a sign, seal, mark or cha∣racter. Signale, as segnale. Signamment, namely, expresly, espe∣cially, particularly. Signet, a signet, seal, stamp, or mark. Signeur, a signer, a subscriber; a marker, stamper; a crosser, or blesser. Signifiance, Significance, a signify∣ing, or signification; a declaring, or betokening; also an argument, sign, or token of. Silenes, Boxes in Apothecaries shops painted on the outside with divers odd figures. Silentiaire, a Patron, or Pattern of silence. Silentieux, very silent. Siler, the herb seseli, or hart-wort. Sili, a yellow earth (found in gold and silver Mines) whereof, being burnt, Painters do make a kind of vermillion. Siliquastre, Guinney pepper. Silique, the husk, or cod of beans, pease, &c. also a poise, among Physitians, &c. coming to four grains. Silure, the ravening sheat-fish, or Whale of the River. Sime, as la partie sime du foie, the massy part of the liver, that which hath no manner of hollow∣ness in it. Simier, as cimier. Simiotique, as medecine simioti∣que, that part of Physick which intreats of the significant marks of what is past, and what is to come, as well in regard of health as of sikness. Simme, for cime, the top of a tree or mountain. Simmiste, a Secretary, or Privy-Counsellor. Simpler, to cousen, to deceive. Simplesse, for simplicité, simplici∣ty. Simplette, a simple Wench. Simpliciste, simpliste, an Herbalist, one that understands, or professes to understand the nature of simples, plants, or drugs. Simploce, the ending and beginning of two next-adjoyning Verses with one word. Simulateur, a dissembler. Simulation, a dissembling, or dissi∣mulation. Simulté, a spite, or grudge. Sinalles, as senelles. Sinapiser, to revive a mortify'd place, and draw fresh humours and colour unto it, by a plaister of mustard-seed; to raise blisters, or bring smart by such plaisters; to strew over with sharp and smart∣ing powder. Since, a dish-clout, shooe-clout, or the like. Sincer, to wipe, rub, or make clean with a clout. Sincopé, cut off. Sincoper, to cut off. Sinelles, as senelles. Sineulle, the handle whereby some kind of wheels, or wheel-like en∣gines are turned. Sing, for signe, a sign, mark, or character; a spot on the face, or other part of a new-born Infant; also a bell, or the sound of a bell. Tu n'en as pas fait les sings son∣ner, thou hast not made all the world ring of it. Singeot, a little ape. Singeotte, an ill-favoured, or Mon∣key-faced wench. Singesse, a she-ape. Singeur, an apish mome, or a keeper of apes. Singlage, a sayling in the sea; also a Mariners hire, wages, or enter∣tainment. Singlant, as verge singlante, a switch. Voix singlante, a shrill voice. Singlée, Singlement, a sailing; al∣so a whisking, or lashing. Singlet, a whisk, or lash. Singleure, as singlement. Sinipion, a kind of disease peculiar to children. Sinissome, blessed thistle. Sintegne, a kind of bloody flux. Sinterese, a remorse of conscience. Sintre, as cintre in the N. D. Sinuosité, a hollow turning or wind∣ing; an intricateness. Sion, for scion, a scion or shoot. Sions, the boysterous incounters of two strong winds, either sidelong or across. Siphach, the inner rind of the belly, wherewith all the entrals are co∣vered. Siphon, the cock, or pipe of a con∣duit, the tap, or faucet of a hogs∣head; also a fannel, or tunnel; also a quill, or pipe to suck wine with. Siringue, for seringue, a syringe. Siringué, squirted, injected. Siringuer, to squirt, or inject with a syringe. Siroch, for siroco, a south east-wind. Sironne, a kind of fomentation. Sisalle, as grive sisalle, a field fare.
Sisame, as sesame in the N. D. Siserre, the throstle, or mavis. Sistolique, without intermission, in motion. Sit, a seat, or situation. Sitibond, extreamly thirsty. Siticines, that sounded Trumpets, or sung unto pipes, at Funerals. Sive, a broth, or sauce made of the entrals of a hog; also broth or sauce for the fore-part of a fried Hare, made of wine, vinegar, verjuice, herbs, and spices, and served with toasts, or sops; also seam, or swines grease. Du sive d'huistres, oyster-broth, or broth made of boyled oysters. Sive, a chibol. Sivele, a buckle. Sivette, for civette, civet; also a Civet-cat; also a chive, or small chibol. Sixener, to yield six for one; also to come forth by half dozens, or by six and six together. Sixte, for sexte, a sixth, or proporti∣on of six, in Musick. Sizement, a sitting. Skelete, as scelete. Smirge, lovage, or parsley of Mace∣donia. Sobressaut, for soubresaut, a tumb∣ling, or tossing up. Sobresse, for sobrieté, sobriety; also activity, or nimbleness. Sobriqué, pranked, or perfumed. Socque, a sock, or sole of dirt or earth, cleaving to the bottom of the foot in a cloggy way, or in a moist and clayie soil. Sodalité, fellowship, society. Soef, sweet; soft, smooth; mild, or gentle. Soef, (Adv.) gently. As le boeuf marche soef, the weary Ox treads gently or gingerly. Soefflairant, Soeffleurant, most fra∣grant, delicately smelling. Soefvement, sweetly, deliciously, smoothly, gently. Soefueté, sweetness, pleasantness, deliciousness, gentleness, mildness, smoothness. Soeil du Sanglier. See sueil. Soeurette, a little sister. Soeurorge, as Sororge. Sofistication, Sofistiquer, as sophi∣stiquerie, and sophistiquer in the N. D. Sogrenu, as saugrenu. Sogrenue, a jest. Soiage, for seyage, the reaping of corn, &c. Soier, for seyer, to reap, or to cut down corn. Soieur, a reaper. Soigner, to take care, to be diligent about. Soil de Sanglier. See sue. Soilure, a galling, or breaking of the skin by frequent use, or over∣much rubbing; a chafe-gall. Soiré, Soireux, of, or in the evening, towards night. Soitier, a Silk-man; also as setier in the N. D. Soitier, (Adj.) of, or full of Silk. Soiture, a reaping of corn. se Solacier, to be merry, to recreate himself. Solacieux, delightful, comfortable. Solage, as Solaige; also soil, or good ground. Solaige, a sunny place; also the force or power of the Sun upon a place. Solaire de la jambe, the greatest of the six hinder muscles of the leg, ending in the sole of the foot, the which it serves to extend. Solane, for solan, the herb night-shade. Solatre, Garden night-shade, petty morrel. Sold, for sol, a penny. Soldade, à la Soldade, Souldier∣like, bravely, valiantly, swagge∣ringly. Soldan, as souldan. Soldanelle, sea-bindweed. Soldatesque, (Adj.) of, or belong∣ing to a Souldier; souldier-like. Soldatesquement, Souldier-like. Soldatisé, made, or turned a Souldier. Soleillant, sunning, sunny. Soleillé, sunned, laid in the Sun; also warm, sunny, shining, or heat∣ing like the sun. Soleiller, to sun; to lay out, or to dry in the sun. Soleilleux, sunny, open unto, or lying full in the sun. Soler, to sole a shooe, or stocking. Solerets, as Sollerets. Solerre, the East-wind. Soles, les soles, the groundsel of a house. Soleyé, sunned, exposed unto the sun. Solfe, a solfa, a note in singing. Solfié, solfaed; also distempered. Solicitude, care, cark, perplexity, or anguish of mind. Solidaire, solid, whole; liable to the whole. Solidairement, solidly, soundly, surely; also wholly, for the whole. Solier, a floor; a cellar, or low garner; a shooe. Solifuge, a kind of Spider, or ver∣min like a spider, in the silver Mines of Sardinia. Termed thus, because it ever flies from light. Soliseque, sun-following. Solistime, Divination by a falling on the ground of bread given unto Chickens. Solle, as sole in the N. D. Sollerets, Armour for the feet. Solette, a little sole. La solette d'un esperon, the under-leather of a spur. Sollier, as solier. Sollouoir, a salting, or sowcing Tub. Soloir, as souloir. Sols, as sol in the N. D. Solsie, as soulsie. Solsticial, Solstitial, of, or in the Solstice. Solu, loose, free, careless. Oraison solue, prose. Solut, as solu, loose. Clere solut, a lay or secular Churchman, one that's not tyed unto the Church, nor bound to attend a Cure. Solutif, solutive, laxative, loosing, dissolving. Solz, as sol in the N. D. Som, for son, bran. Somate, a body. Somayer, as sommayer. Sombre-pres, dark-blue; also (of the sky) thinly darkened, or overspread with clouds. Sombrer, for obscureir, to darken. Sombriere, a broad-brimmed hat. Somiere, as sommiere. Sommade, a horse-load. Sommaige, the top of a Tower, &c. Sommaire, (Adj.) summary, chief, principal; full; succinct, compen∣dious. Un procez sommaire, a process wherein no formality or formal proceeding hath been used. Sommarer, to plow, or break up the ground. Sommation, a sum, or the summing of money; also a summoning, or denouncing. Sommayer, to put hoops upon hoops, or to hoop a Vessel with the hoops called Sommiers. Sommeillard, Sommeilleux, sleepy, drowsy, slothful. Sommette, a little sum. Sommier, for cheval de bât, a sumpter-horse. Sommission, for soûmission, sub∣mission.
Sommiste, a Summist, an imitator or understander of Thomas Aqui∣nas his Sums. Sommité, for sommet, top. Somne, for sommeil, sleep. Somnisique, causing sleep. Mortelle somnifique, deaths herb, sleepy, or deadly Nightshade, Somption, a taking, or receiving. Somptuaire, sumptuary, of, or be∣longing to cost, bringing in ex∣pence. Sondre, the Linden-tree. Songe-creux, one that is in his dumps, or in a brown study; also a dreaming, sleepy, or heavy-headed gull. Songner, as soigner. Songneusement, for soigneusement, carefully. Sonnaillerie, the tingling of a lit∣tle bell. Sonnaillier, Sonnalier, carrying a bell. Mouton sonnaillier, a bell-weather. Sonoreux, shrill. Sont, as Messieurs de non sont, im∣perfect, or prickless men. Sophie, wisdom; also the herb cal∣led Flixwort, or Flixweed; also the Dace, or Dare-fish. Sophisterie, sophistry. Sophistiquement, a sophisticating, adulterating, falsifying. Soporal, sleepy, of, or in sleep. Soporifere, soporiferous, sleep-pro∣curing. Soprefin, thread of gold or silver. Sor, as la pipée du for, the Season wherein the weather grows cold. Sorbition, a supping; also broth, or pottage. Sorceler, for ensorceler, to charm, inchant, or bewitch. Sorcellage, for sorcelerie, witch-craft, or sorcery. Sordidement, nastily, miserably. Sori, for souri, a mouse. Soriciere, a mouse-trap. Soringue, Eel-sauce made of fried Onions and toasted bread steeped in pease-broth, then strained with wine, vinegar, cinnamon, ginger, and other spices, all put into a pot with the eels cut into pieces, and (after a little seasoning with saffron and salt) throughly boyled. Soriser, to mouse, or hunt mice like a Cat; also as sorer in the N. D. Sorisseau, a little mouse. Sorissiere, a mouse-trap. Sorne, the evening. Sorner, to jest, sell bargains, speak merrily. Sornetteux, full of jests, or pleasant conceits; that loves, or uses to tell merry tales. Sororge, a brother-in-law, the hus∣band of a sister. Sororité, Sisterhood. Sorrat, a great, short-snouted, sharp-toothed, and most ravenous Hound-fish. Sortablement, fitly, or sutably. Sosmes, Vassals, Tenants. Sotart, a coxcomb, a noddy. Sotbriquet, for sobriquet, a nick∣name. Sotiner, to play the sot. Sottart, as sotart. Sottelet, a little sot. Sotterie, Sottie, for Sotise, folly, sottishness. Sottiner, as sotiner. Souäter, to partake with, or be a partner in; also to joyn together, after the manner of Country-Pea∣sants, who bring every one a horse or two for the making of a Team, which no one of himself can furnish. Souäton, a partner, or partaker with; also one that joyns or con∣tributes with his Neighbours to the making up of a thing for their common use. Souatter, as Souäter. Soubarbe, the part that's between the chin and the throat; also the throat-band of a
bridle. Endu∣rer une soubarbe, to indure an affront. Soubastement, a foundation, or ground-work; a low building within the ground, for the sup∣port of Rooms above the ground. Soubattue, Soubatture, a surbate, or surbating. Soubchanter, to sing under, or after another. Soubehantre, Soubcontroleur, Soub∣curateur, Soubdaine, & Soub∣dainement. See them without a b in the N. D. Soubdaineté, suddenness. Soubdespensier, an Ʋnder-cater, or an Ʋnder-Clark of a Kitch∣in. Soubdiacre, for Soudiacre, a Sub∣deacon. Soubelin, as un Chat soubelin, a great or mighty Cat. Soubeliné, high, lofty, haughty; extolled, lifted up, or set on high. Soubgardien, an Ʋnder-Warden, or an Ʋnder-Guardian. Soubhaiter, for souhaiter, to wish. Soubhastation, for encan, an Out-cry, or open Sale of things for∣feited, &c. Soubhaster, to make an Outcry, or open Sale. Soubject, Soubjection, as Sujet, Sujetion in the N. D. Soublevé, Soublevement, Souble∣ver. See them without a b in the N. D. Soublin, as oubelin. Marte sou∣blin, a Sable. Soubmaistre, for Soumaitre, an Ʋsher in a School. Soubmerger, for submerger, to drown, sink, or overwhelm. Soubmettre, for soumettre, to sub∣mit. Soubministration, a subministrati∣on. Soubministre, an Ʋnder-minister, an Ʋnder-servant. Soubministrer, to subminister unto. Soubmis, Soubmission. See them without a b in the N. D. Soubors, as sabors. Soubpendue, and Soubpeser. See them without a b in the N. D. Soubrecoup, a down-right blow. Soubresaulteux, a Tumbler. Soubride, a jerk given to a horse with his bridle; also as Soubar∣be. Soubriquet, for sobriquet, a nick∣name. Soubrire, & Soubris. See them without a b in the N. D. Soubs-acazement, Soubs-acazer. See Soubz-acasement, &c. Soubs-agé, under age. Soubs-aide, an Ʋnder-aid, the Aid which Tenants pay unto their mesne Lord, towards that which is due both by him and them un∣to the Lord paramount. Soubs-arrenter, to let out at an under-rent. Soubs-celerier, an Ʋnder-butler, or a Yeoman of the Cellar. Soubslevement, for soûlevement, a rising, a sedition. Soubs-majeur, is in some Towns a Magistrate of Authority, or Di∣gnity, next unto the Mayor. Soubs-maistre, for soumaitre, an Ʋnder-master, an Ʋsher. Soubs-manant, a Tenant, Vassal, or Subject unto a Lord. Soubson, Soubsonner, as soupçon, soupçonner in the N. D.
Soubs-poictrine, the flank-piece, or bottom of the brisket of an Ox, &c. Soubstenable, for soùtenable, tena∣ble, desensible. Soubstenance, as soustenance. Soubs-Tenant, an Ʋnder-tenant, a Tenant unto a Tenant, or to a mesne Lord; also as Soustenant. Soubstenement, as soustenement. Soubstenir, Soubtenir, for soutenir, to sustain, support, uphold, or bear up. Soubterrain, which is under the ground, or within the earth. Soubterrer, as sousterrer. Soubtraire, for soustraire, to with∣draw, or to take away. Soubtrayant, substracting, with∣drawing; also seducing, alluring, inticing away. Soubz, as soubs. Soubz-acazement, a dead Fief, rent seck, mesne (or under) rent. Soubz-acazer, to raise a new rent seek, new services, or new Cens up∣on the letting or aliening of land already so rented, or liable to services, or unto Cens. Soubz-acazeur, one that raiseth such a rent, &c. as in soubs-acazer. Soucens, Soucensier, as Surcens, Surcensier in the N. D. Souchette, a little stock, trunk, or log. Soucheux, full of slocks, stumps, or logs. Souchon, the stump of a tree, &c. Soucicle, Soucie, a little yellowish bird, hardly as big as a Wren, and called by some a Ninmurder. See Soulsie. Soucieux, careful, thoughtful. Soucille, the under-lid of the eye. Soudaineté, suddenness, haste, or great speed. Soudan, a King, Prince, or Sove∣raign. Soudard, for soldat, a Souldier. Soude, as soulde. Soudespensier, as Soubsdespensier. Soudie, an ancient Title for a great Lord or Nobleman. Soudre, (a Subst.) the Linden-tree. Soudre, (an Adj.) ugly, deformed. Souduire, for seduire, to seduce. Souduis, seduced. Souduiseur, a seducer. Souef, Souefvement, Souefveté. See soef, soefvement, soefveté. Souefflairant, as soefflairant. Soueffleurer, to persume, sweeten, or imbalm. Souër, to bring a boar unto the sow; also to gueld, or spay a sow. Souëvement, sweetly, pleasantly. Souffire, for suffire, to suffice. Soufflemboyan, a Pudding-maker. Souffleteux, Souffleux, blowing of∣ten, or pussing violently; also ready, or apt to puff. Souffreter, to be in great need. Souffreteux, poor, needy. Souffrette, poverty, need. Souillard, for Souillon, a Scullion, a Kitchin-boy; also the name of a Dog. Souillarderie, sluttishness, nastiness, greasiness; the habit, state, or of∣fice of a Scullion. Souillement, a soyling. Souillonne, a Drudge, or Kitchin-wench. Soulacier, as solacier. Soulas, solace, comfort, ease. Soulasser, Soulassier, as solacier. Soulcicle, Soulcide, & Soulcie, as Soucicle. Soulcieux, as soucieux. Sould, for solde, Souldiers pay. Souldan, as soudan. Souldart, for soldat, a Souldier. Soulde, Souldée, Salt-wort, Glass-wort, or Crab-grass; also Soul∣diers pay; or as soulte. Ils sont tousjours à la chasse des souldes, they are ever hunting after enter∣tainment. Souldoyer, for soldat, a Soldier. Souldoyer, for soldoyer une Ar∣mée, to keep an Army under pay. Soulet, alone, solitary. Soulfreux, Soulfureux, full of brim∣stone. Soulier, (Adj.) fit for, or belonging to a shooe. Souloir, to be wont, or accustomed. Soulphre, Soulphriere, as soufre, soufriere in the N. D. Souls, for sol, a French penny. Soulsi, the Marigold buds. Soulsi d'eau, Soulsi aquatique, the yel∣low Willow-herb, or Water-wil∣low. Soulsie, as soulsi; or as soucicle. Moineau à la soulsie, the Ring-sparrow. Soulte, for solde, Souldiers pay. Eschange de terre sans soulte, Land exchanged only for Land, without any thing to boot. Soul∣te mobilaire, a return, or amends in Moveables, or in Money, made by a Coheir or Coparcener, that hath a greater, to him that hath a less part in the Land than he should have. Soupape, the stopple of a Baloon; also the sucker of a Pump. Soupçonnable, that may be suspected. Soupendre, to hang on, or over; to jutt, or bear out; to stand, or lean beyond; also to build upon arches, pillars, vaults, &c. Soupoictrine, as soubspoictrine. Soupoultreau, an under-beam. Souppendre, as soupendre. Souppier, a sopper, one that is ever dipping his bread in the beef-pot. Soupple, & Soupplesse. See them with a single p in the N. D. Souppous, Substitutes. Souquenie, a canvas Jacket, Frock, or Gaberdine. Sourcé, sprung, begun. Sourcens, Sourcensier. See them without an o in the N. D. Sourcer, to spring, to begin; to issue, or draw its original from. Sourchelons, the Frounce (a hawks disease.) Sourcicle, as Soucicle. Sourcier, for sorcier, a Sorcerer. Sourcilier, of, or on the eye-brows. Sourciller, to move the eye-brows up and down. Sourd, for Salamandre, the Sala∣mander. Sourdant, springing up, rising, or arising from. Sourdastre, deasish, thick of hearing. Sourdault, somewhat deaf. Sourdement, (Subst.) a rising, or springing up. Sourdent, the stump of a broken tooth. Sourdesse, Sourdeté, for surdité, deafness. Sourdin, as sourdastre. Sourdise, as sourdesse. Sourdoyant, as sourdant. Souretier, a mouser, or catcher of mice. Sourge, as surge in the N. D. Souriceau, a little, or young mouse. Souricier, as Souretier; also (Adje∣ctively) of, or belonging to mice. Sourien, loving (or hunting after) mice. Sourisseau, Sourisson, as souriceau. Sourte, as soutte. Sousbarbe, as soubarbe. Souschambriere, a house-maid, or a drudge. Souschanter, as soubschanter. Sousclavier, under the Kannel-bone. Artere sousclaviere, the ascen∣dant branch of the great Artery.
Muscle sousclavier, one of the mus∣cles, which in fetching the breath dilate and stretch out the breast. Veine sousclaviere, one of the two main ascendant branches of the hollow vein, divided into six parts. Souscoeur, the Pericardium, or thin skin whereby the whole heart is covered. Sousgreve, the less bone of the leg; also the calf of the leg. Sousappe, as soupape. Souspeçon, and its Derivatives. See Soupçon, &c. in the N. D. Souspendement, a hanging, or lean∣ing over; a jutting, or bearing out. Souspendre, as soupendre. Souspendu, hanging, or hung over; juttied, or set out beyond. Une demarche souspendue, a stealing pace. Souspirable, worthy of moan. Souspiraillé, having holes, vents, or other passages for air to come in and out at. Souspiral, as soûpirail in the N. D. Souspirement, a sighing. Sousplié, bent, or bowed under. Soustenance, a prop, support, or maintenance. Soustenant de ballance, the cheeks of a ballance, the two upright pieces between which the needle playeth. Soustenant de bride, the check-piece of a bridle. Soustendrons, the sides of the belly under the short ribs. Soustenement, a sustaining, suppor∣ting, upholding, maintaining; an enduring, or abiding. Sousternery, she that gives suck to a new-born Child for two or three days, and until the Mothers milk is fit for it. Sousterré, put, laid, or buried under (or within) the ground. Sousterrer, to put, lay, bury under (or within) the ground. Soute, as soutte; also a hogsty. Soutest, the Pericranium. Soutre, Soutte, a binn to keep bread in; also the room of a ship where∣in the provision-bisket is laid. Souvendier, the herb Cichory. Soyer, for seyer, to reap corn. Soyes, Is in the throats of swine a disease that stifles them, if it be not presently cured; also as Sais. Soyeux, full of silk, or of bri∣stles. Soytier, of silk, or dealing with silks. Spaidaires, an Order of white Fri∣ars wearing on their habits a representation of two red swords. Spadasin, Spadassin, a swaggering fellow, a hector. Spalnier, to breem and grave, or make clean a Ship. Sparaillon, the Purple-fish. Spargirie, Alchimy; extraction of Quintessences. Spargirique, an Alchimist, or Ex∣tractor of Quintessences. Spargitide, terre spargitide, Lem∣nian earth. Spariée, a Sea-wreck; or as Va∣rech. Sparte, Sparton, Spanish-broom, or bastard Spanish-broom, whereof bands to tie Vines, and (as in old time) ropes for Shipping may be made; also Matweed. Spase, ou peis espase, the Sea-Fox. Spasmatique, Spasmé, troubled with a Cramp, or a Convulsion. Spasmeux, full of the Cramp, or Convulsive; also Cramp-breed∣ing. Spaze, as spase; also a sword. Speans d'une Vache, a Cow-dugs. Speautre, for épeautre, spelt, or spelt corn. Specifiquement, specially, particu∣larly. Spectable, visible; also worthy. Speculaire, clear, transparent; also helping the sight. Speltre, as speautre. Spengitide, as sphengitide. Spermatiser, to eject sperm. Spet, the name of a Sea-fish, by some called the Spit-fish, by others the Sea-pike. Sphacelé, mortifi'd by inflamma∣tion. Sphaceler, to mortify by inflamma∣tion. Sphatule, as spatule in the N. D. Sphengitide, transparent. Sphenoïde, as l'os sphenoïde, the cuneal bone. Sphicie, a kind of spider like a great Wasp. Sphinge, for Sphinx, the Sphinx (whose Description you have in the N. D.) Spicaire, Roman-spike, or Lavender. Spicquenard, the herb Spikenard. Spinal, of, or in the chine, or back∣bone. Spincile, a kind of very red Gurnet. Spineux, as espineux. Spinul, a splent in a horses leg. Spique, Spike, Lavander. Spiquenard, as spicquenard. Spiracle, a breathing hole; a hole to let air, breath, or smoak in and out; also a hole that evapo∣rates a strong or pestilent air; a damp hole. Spiracle, (Adj.) giving breath, breathing life, infusing spirit in∣to. Spire, a round, or circle; a turning, or winding compass; the coyling, or making up of a cable; also a Quadrant, or Square in the bot∣tom of a Pillar. Spiriteux, Spiritueux, giving (or breathing in) life; also quick, lively, vigorous. Spirolle, a kinde of small artille∣ry. Splanade, a plain, or champion Countrey. Splenitique, for splenique, troubled with the spleen. Spode, the heavier soil, foot, or oar of brass, gathered on the floors of melting houses. Spodizateur, one that makes spode, or gets foot, &c. from brass, by trying, or melting. Spodon de canne, artificial or counterfeit spode, made of the roots of reeds, and Ox-bones burnt. Spoliateur, a thief, a robber, a pi∣rate. Spoliation, a stripping, or depriving of. Spoliatrice, a Wench that lives on the spoil. Spolier, to ship, to rob. Spolin, a kinde of Gold or Sil∣ver thread. Spolentes. See Psoloente. Sponde, à sponde, side-ways, or edge-long. Spondilles, ou Spondyles, the knuc∣kles or turning joynts of the chine, back, or neck-bone; also the heads of Artichokes; also the unsavory or ill-tasting Oysters Gaiderope. Spongethere, a little Sea-fish like the Sea-spider, said to guard and govern the Spunge. Spongiosité, spunginess, or spungy lightness. Sponseur, a voluntary Promis, Ʋndertaker, or Surety for ano∣ther. Spontane, voluntary, of free-will;
natural, not forced; without help, or constraint. Spontanement, voluntarily. Sporte, a hand-basket, or frail with handles, used for Market-employ∣ments; also the load of a Camel, or Moil, coming to 375 pounds, after 16 ounces to the pound. Sportule, money, or meat given or∣dinarily by Princes to the people, or unto their followers; board-wages; also a Councellors fee; also a little Maund, or Hand-basket. Spouilleresse, as espouilleresse. Spurrie, spurry, or frank (a Dutch herb, and an excellent fodder for Cattle.) Spyrate, a kinde of flux in the fun∣dament; or (more properly) as Spyrathe, the dung of a Sheep or Goat. Squadron, for Escadron, a Squadron. Squaranchon, the smooth-shelled Cray-fish, termed a Pungar, Grit, or Grampel. Squenente, as squinant. Squenie, as souquenie. Squillin, vinegar sharpened by the Sea-onion, or Scallion. Squillitique, of, or seasoned with the Sea-onion. Squinade, as Cancre squinade, the long-legged and rough-coated Crabfish, termed by some a Fryl. Squinant, Squinant, or Camels-hay. Squinaude, as squinade. Squine, as bois de squine, the knot∣ty and medicinable root of an Indian or Chinean bulrush. Squiopetins, an Order of Augustine Friars. Stacte, as Myrrhe stacte, the best kinde of Myrrhe. Stafilade, for estafilade, a lash, or thwack with a stirrup-leather. Stagnant, as eau stagnante, standing water, as of ponds, pools, motes, and ditches. Stalle, a seat, or stall to sit on. Stanbouque, the wild Goat Ibex. Stangue d'une ancre, the staff of an anchor. Stanguette, the eye of the branch of a bit. Staphisaigre, Louse-wort. Statere, an Athenian Coin of Silver, weighing half an ounce; also a Coin of Gold worth about 16 shil∣lings 4 pence; also a Roman or Goldsmiths ballance; Troy-weight. Statif, standing, pitched, or set. Stationnaire, stationary, setled, standing. Stationné, setled in a place. Stationner, to settle in a place. Statuer, to establish, ordain, or ap∣point; to pitch, plant, settle, or set fast; to purpose, determine, judge, or think assuredly of. Statuaire, as Amende statuaire, a Fine imposed at the pleasure of the Court. Steatome, an Impostume whose mat∣ter is like fat or tallow. Steccade, a Place railed in for a Combat, or Lists. Stechados, Cassidonia, French La∣vander, or the flower thereof. Stellage, as Droict de stellage, Toll-corn, and Toll-salt; a dish-full upon every Septier of either, sod within Bouillon; due to the Duke thereof. Stellagier, a Toll-gatherer for the Duke of Bouillon. Stellingues, Libertines. For so did the Saxons, upon Liberty of Con∣science granted them by Lotha∣rius the Emperour, term themselves. Stellion, the spotted or starry Lizard; also an envious fellow, or one that cannot endure another should be the better by him. From the Stellio, which having cast his skin (a sovereign Remedy for the Falling-sickness) presently de∣vours it, to deprive mankinde of it. Stellionat, a cousening, or counter∣feiting of merchandise; an unjust, or deceitful gaining; a malicious or fraudulent bereaving of his mo∣ney, wares, due provision or bar∣gain. Stentorée, as Voix stentorée, a huge Voice, such an one as the Grecian Stentor had. Stercorin, excremental, turdy. Stereometrie, the measuring of solid bodies. Sternomantie, Divination by a mans breast. Sternutatoire, a sneezing Medicine, or Powder. Sterometrie, as stereometrie. Sterpi, as Courtilliere. Sticines, Fluters, or Pipers. Sticonomantie, Divination by words written on the barks of trees. Stier, as Setier in the N. D. Stigmatizé, branded, marked, burnt with a hot iron; defamed, infa∣mous. Stigmatizer, to brand, burn, or mark with a red hot iron; also to de∣fame openly, disgrace publickly. Stil, as style in the N. D. Stillatoire, stilling, distilling, drop∣ping. Stillicide, the dropping of a houses eaves. Stillitique, as Vinaigre stillitique, vinegar wherein the prepared Sea-onion hath been steeped. Stimulateur, an instigator, a provo∣ker. Stimulation, a spurring on, provok∣ing, or instigating. Stimulatrice, a stimulatrix, an in∣stigatrix. Stimule, a sting, goad, or spur; an instigation, urging, egging, or enticing. Stimuler, to instigate, entice, or spur on. Stinc, the Shin-bone; also a kinde of small fish. Stince, as scinc. Stipal, as Fief stipal, a Fief which descends to a direct heir, or still continues in the possession of those which are of the main stock of a family. Stipendié, a stipendiary, or hire∣ling. Stipendié (a Partic.) hired, enter∣tained with wages. Stipendier, to give wages to. Stipicité, costiveness, obstruction. Stipoule, the Sea-onion. Stippes, as Droict de stippes, & nobis, Is in some parts of Nor∣mandy, a penny Tournois, in o∣ther places three pence, upon every pound made of the Farms of the Kings Domaine muable, due to the Officers of the Court of Ac∣counts. Stiptique, restrictive, stopping. Stirage, Toll, or Custom due to the King, &c. upon every Septier. Stocfiz, stock-fish. Stoechados, as Stechados. Stole, a long robe, gown, or gar∣ment, reaching to the ankles, or heels. Stomacal, good for the Stomack. Mot stomacal, an earnest expression, coming from the heart; also ut∣tered in choler. Stomachique, of, or in the stomack; also sick at the stomack. Stomaqué, angry. Stoques, as faire stoques, to bor∣row, or take up money upon In∣terest.
Strabouïte, a squint-eyed fellow; also one whose actions, as well as eyes, are awry. Strambot, a Jig, a Catch, or Coun∣try-song. Strangulation, a strangling, stifling, or choaking. Strangulation de la matrice, the suffocation of the ma∣trix. Strap. See Seraph. Stratagematique, full of stratagems; of, or like to stratagems. Strepite, a noise, a rumbling, or rustling. Strette, a pinch, or twinge. Strident, clashing, creaking. Strié, chamfered, channelled, made full of gutters or holes. Strieure, a chamfering, channelling, furrowing in stone or timber. Strin, a bastard-diamond. Stropes, the loops whereby the oare of a skiff, &c. do hang, or hold to the Thowles. Strophe, a belly-ake, or fretting of the guts. Strophule, the Kings evil. Stropier, for estropier, to lame, or maim. Strumosité, a swelling of the throat. Stryge, a screech-owl. Stuc, a fine and shining Potters clay; also compounded mortar, or clay made of lime, sand, paper, and other materials; very sit for Imagery. Stupeur, for stupidité, stupor, num∣ness, unsensibleness. Stygial, Stygien, Stygieux, of, or be∣longing to the Stygian lake. Fem∣me stygienne, a devillish quean. Styl, as style in the N. D. Stylobate, the footstool of a Pillar, or the whole frame of the lower part thereof. Styptique, as stiptique. Styrax, for storax, storax. Su, the South; also an elder-tree; or like sus, up. Suader, to perswade. Suadeur, a perswader. Suages, sweatings, or things which cause sweating. Suais, as suays. Suaseur, as suadeur. Suasif, Suasoire, perswasive, able (or fit) to perswade. Suasion, a perswasion. Suave, sweet, pleasant, delicious; also meek, soft, or gentle. Suavement, sweetly, pleasantly, de∣liciously; also meekly, softly, or gently. Suavité, sweetness, pleasantness, de∣liciousness; also meekness, softness, gentleness. Suays, a kind of frogs. Subarbe, as soubarbe. Subaudition, part of a mans mean∣ing expressed, and the rest un∣derstood; or such an expressing. Subcostale, a thin and smooth skin which cloaths the inner side of the ribs, and covers the vital parts contained within the bulk. Subdial, all open, abroad in the air. Subelin, as marte subeline (for Zibeline) a sable. Subet, a lethargy. Subhastation, an Outery, or Portsale. Subhasté, sold by Outcry. Subhaster, to sell Goods by Outcry, or Portsale. Subjacent, subjacent. Subier, the Cork-tree. Subinfeudation, the creating of an undertenure in fee. Subjoindre, to subjoyn, to add (or put) unto. Subitain, sudden. Subjugation, a subduing, or bring∣ing to subjection. Subler, for sifler, to whistle. Sublet, a whistle; also a whistling noise. Sublim, and Sublin, for sublime, sub∣lime, high; also refined, or exquisite. Submersion, a submersion, or drown∣ing. Subministrateur, a subministrator, one that supply's under-hand. Subministration, a subministration, or under-hand supply. Subministré, supplied, or furnished under-hand. Subministrer, to furnish, or supply under-hand. Submirmilant, as submurmurant. Submis, for soûmis, brought under. Submurmurant, murmuring, mut∣tering, or mumbling to himself. Subrecart, an assistant, or associate; one whom a Judge calleth to sit with him; one whom Physitians for an important cure, or consulta∣tion, chus to joyn with them. Subredorade, a great Gilthead. Subreptice, Subreptif, subreptitious, foisted, or falsely crept in; indi∣rectly come by; supposed. Subreption, a subreption, a foisting or false creeping in; also a filch∣ing, purloyning, or stealing away. Subreptivement, subreptitiously, under-hand. Subricant, as subrecart. Subrogué, Subroguer, as subrogé, subroger in the N. D. Subsidiairement, subsidiarily, by way of subsidy. Subsidier, to lay subsidies on. Substancier, to sustain, feed, or nourish. Substanté, Substanter, as sustenté, sustenter in the N. D. Substantieux, Substantifique, sub∣stantial, or yielding substance. Substitu, for Substitut, a substitute; a Deputy, or Lieutenant. Substraction, substraction, a with∣drawing, or taking away from; a diminution of. Subterrain, that's under the earth. Subtil, (Subst.) a kind of small gold or silver thread. Subtiliation, a subtilizing, or sub∣tiliation. Subtilier, to subtilize, extenuate, make thin or fine; also to devise, to con∣trive. Subtilisement, a subtilizing. Subventané, windy, full of wind, that hath nothing but wind in it. Subverti, subverted, over-turned, rained, over-thrown, destroyed. Subvertir, to subvert, overturn, ruin, over-throw, destroy. Subvertisseur, a subverter, overtur∣ner, overthrower, destroyer. Succarin, of Sugar. Succelent, for succulent, succulent, juicy. Succentriné, very finely searsed. Succenturieux, supplying the num∣ber, filling up the place of one that is absent or dead. Succer, for sucer, to suck. Succeron, a little and long-nosed vessel of earth, whereby young Infants are suckled or fed. Succif, sucking, or which may be sucked. Succion, a sacking. Succocitrin, as cicotrin. Succot, full of juice. Sucçotte, sucked gently, and smack∣ingly; also kissed often. Sucçoter, to suck gently and smack∣ingly; also, to kiss often. Sucçotrin, an extraordinary fine searse; also, as Cicotrin. Succotriné, scarced very finely. Succrin, of sugar, mingled or seaso∣ned with sugar, sweet as sugar. Allun succrin, allum compounded of rose-water, whites of eggs, and roch-allum; used much by some Women for the cleansing, or white∣ning of their faces.
Succussation, a hard shaking, a joult∣ing, a violent jogging. Suceron, as succeron. Sucher, for sucer, to suck. Suçoter, gently, and smackingly to suck. Sucerée, as faire la succrée, to mince it, to show her self very coy. Sucrier, a Comfit-maker. Sucrin, as succrin. Suction, a sucking. Sudorifique, procuring, or causing sweat. Suée, a sweat, or sweating. Suerie, a sweating. Le Pais de sue∣rie, the pocky Country. Suest, for Sud-est, south-east. Suetolt, the lump, puddle, or sea-owl (an ugly fish.) Suette, the sweating sickness; also a kind of small Dace, or Dare fish. Sueur, qui sue, a sweater. Sueux, sweating; taking great pains. Sufflegan, for suffragan, a Suffra∣gan. Suffumigation, a smoaking, or fu∣ming under; the smoak which is from under a stool received into the body for the diseases of the guts, fundament, or matrix. Suggillation, and Sugillation, a black and blue mark by a blow; also the bloud-shot of an eye; also slander, or detraction. Suggillé, Sugillé, marked with black and blue spots; also reproved, taunted, blemished. Suggiller, Sugiller, to make black and blew with strokes; also to reprove, taunt, or blemish. Suier, for sureau, the elder-tree. Suil, for seuil, the threshold of a door. Suille, hoggish. Suin, for sureau, the elder-tree. Suineux, greasy, oily, or filthy, as the unwashed wool of sheep. Suinter, to sweat, as stones against moist weather. Suites, or Suittes, the cods of a wild boar. Suivamment, consequently, after∣wards. Sul, as suls. Sulphureïtez, sulphury things. Sulphureux, sulphurous, full of sul∣phur. Sulphurin, of sulphur. Suls, an elder-tree. Un canon de suls, a kex; a hollow stick, or branch of elder; or a pot-gun made thereof. Sumach, a shrub called sumack. Sumach de cuisme, the berry, or fruit of that shrub used heretofore instead of Salt, especially in sau∣ces. Sumelle, for semelle, the sole of a shooe or stocking. Sumerger, for submerger, to sink, submerge, or drown. Sumettre, for soûmettre, to bring under. Sumis, for soûmis, brought under. Sumptuaire, as somptuaire. Sumptuosité, for somptuosité, sump∣tuousness, costliness. Superabondance, superfluity. Superabonder, to super-abound. Supercedé, Superceder, and Su∣percession, as supersedé, superse∣der, supersession. Supereminence, super-eminence, pre∣rogative, excellency above others. Superengendrez, Children begot at several times by supersetation. Superer, to vanquish, or to over∣come; to pass, exceed, or excel. Supererogation, for surerogation, supererogation. Supereroguer, to do more than needs or is required. Superfetation, as superfoetation. Superficiel, for superficie, superfi∣cies. Superfoetation, a superfoetation, or second conceiving; a breeding of young upon young. Superfoeter, to conceive a second time, to breed young upon young. Supergurgiter, to overflow. Superimposer, to lay new impositi∣ons on things already taxed. Superimposition, an imposition upon an imposition. Superintendance, & Superinten∣dant, as surintendance, & su∣rintendant in the N. D. Superlativement, in the highest de∣gree; also loftily, in a huff. Supernater, for surnager, to swim over, or to swim upon. Supernaturel, for surnaturel, super∣natural. Supernaturellement, supernaturally. Supernel, high, above. Supernellement, on high, from above. Supernumeraire, for surnumeraire, supernumerary. Supersedé, superseded, surceased, left off, or given over. Articles super∣sedez, parts of an Accompt nei∣ther allowed, nor utterly rejected, upon the Accomptants humble suit for a farther day to bring in some principal Acquittances, or pieces of importance; which day if he slip, he falls into arrearage, and an Execution is presently awarded against him. Superseder, to supersede, surcease, leave off, or give over. Supersession, a surceasing, leaving off, or giving over; and in Ex∣chequer-matters, the suspension of an Accompt, &c. as under the word supersedé. Supinateur, a muscle in the wrist, serving to turn the palm of the hand upwards. Suppedité, throughly supplyed, or furnished; also fully subdued, van∣quished, or trodden on. Suppediter, to supply throughly, to furnish sufficiently; also to van∣quish, overcome, subdue, tread, or bring under. Suppied, a footstool, or any thing set under the foot, for the better setling or stay thereof. Suppied d'Orgues, the footstool, or pedals to a pair of Organs. Supplesse, for souplesse, suppleness, pliableness, activity, nimbleness. Suppliment, for supplement, sup∣plement. Supportation, a bearing, or helping up. Ce qui soit dit avec sup∣portation, by your leave, or under correction. Supposement, a putting of a thing under another; a suborning, foist∣ing, or forging; a thrusting of bad stuff among, or in lieu of that which is good. Sur, for Sud, the south. Sur, for aigre, sowr, sharp, or tart. Surachapt, an over-buying; a bar∣gain too dearly bought, or for which too much hath been given. Suracheter, to pay too dear, to give too much for. Suradjouster, to add, or to put more. Surâgé, for suranné, decrepit, over-old, grown far in years. Sural, sowrish. Surale, a great vein under the bend∣ing of the knee. Surandoillier, as surendouiller. Surannation, a growing old, or stale; a Cause not followed, or called on; a Sentence, Commission, or Command not executed within the year and day. Suranner, to pass, or exceed the com∣pass
of a year; to heap years upon years, grow stale, or very old. Suranter, to graft, or fasten upon. Surattendre, to go fair and softly before, to slack his pace that ano∣ther may overtake him; also to wait too long. Qui bien attend ne surattend, he does not over∣wait that waits to good purpose. Suravancer, to advance too far, or upon. Surbaigné, bathed, bedewed over. Surbaissé, as Voute surbaissée, a flat Vault, or Arch. Surbandé, bound, welted, or guar∣ded over. Surbastir, to build upon. Surbature, a surbating. Sur-belheur, the name of a certain tart apple. Surboire, to drink upon; or to drink too much after meat. Surceance, as surseance in the N.D. Surciel, the testern of a Cloth of state. Surconcevoir, as superfoeter. Surcot, an upper-kirtle, or a gar∣ment worn over a kertle. Surcottier, the Tenant unto a Cot∣tier, he to whom a Cottier hath left his land for a Rent or Cens. Surcottiere, Land, or an Estate in in Land, held of a Cottier by Rent or Cens. Surcouvert, covered over. Surcouvrir, to cover over. Surcrest, a crest upon a crest, an up∣per top or crest. Surcrez, for surcroit, an additi∣on. Surcroistre, to overgrow, to rise or spring upon. Surculeux, full of hard shoots, slips, or sprigs. Surdastre, deafish. Surelle, sorrel. Suremplir, to fill up, or to over-fill. Surendouiller, or Surentouiller, the Royal of a Stag, the Beancler of a Buck, the second branch on either of their heads. Surer, for sevrer, to wean. Sureté, for seureté, safety. Surfaiseur, one that overvalueth his ware. Surfaix, a sursengle, or long girth. Surflorir, to blossom upon the fruit, or to bloom or blossom after the first blossomes are faded. Surflot, the rising of billow upon billow, or the interchanged swel∣ling of several waves. Surflotter, to float, or swim upon. Surfondu, melted away; also pow∣red upon. Surfondre, to melt away; also to powr upon. Surfriser, to frizle over, to curl upon. Surgallion, a sloven, or slut. Surgeonner, to shoot out, or spring up. Surgermé, sprung up, spread abroad. Surgetté, over-cast. Surgidoir, Surgidoire, a road, gulf, or bosom of the Sea for ships to ride in; also a Cape, or Bay of land entring into the Sea; also the hole or hollow of an Impostume or mattary sore. Surgissement, a going ashore; a riding, or drawing near the shoar. Surguinder, to hoise up on high. Surhasté, precipitated, over-hastned; hastned unseasonably, or before its time. Surhaster, to precipitate, or over-hasten. Se surhaster, to make too much hast, to make more hast than good speed. Surject, a covering, or over-casting. Droict de surject, power to add unto the last price offered at an outcry. Surjectement, an over-casting, or casting upon. Surjecter, to over-cast, or to cast up∣on. Surillustre, most illustrious. Surimposition, as superimposition. Surjon, as rejetton in the N. D. Surlié, tied over, bound upon. Surlier, to tie over, to bind upon. Surluire, to shine, or cast a great light upon. Surmaçonner, to build upon, or over. Surmanger, to eat upon, or imme∣diately after, a meal; to eat more; to over-eat. Surmarcher, to tread, or go upon. Surmesure, over-measure, or too great measure. Surmeule, an upper Mill-stone. Surmontement, a surmounting, sur∣passing, or exceeding; a subdu∣ing, or overcoming. Surmonte∣ment des Jouës, a chuffy out∣standing, a swelling of the checks, beyond all due and comely propor∣tion. Surmoust, new, or sweet wine. Surmulet, a sore-mullet, or the great sea-barbel. Surnoyer, to overwhelm; to over-top, or over-grow. Suroest, for Sud-ouest, the South-west wind. Suroindre, to anoint upon, or over. Suronder, to float upon the waves. Surop, for sirop, sirrup. Suroreiller, to whisper in the ear. Suros, Surot, a bony and vicious ex∣crescence growing about the cor∣net of a horses foot (and then cal∣led a ring-bone) or upon his shin-bone (and then called a knot, or a knob.) Surpayer, to pay too dear for. Surpeau, an upper-skin. Surpelis, for surplis, a surplice. Surprendre, to hang up, over, or upon. Surpendu, hanged up, over, or upon. Surpendue, Surpente, a jetty; an out-jutting room, &c. also a room, or false floor, to lay wood in, gain∣ed between a Cellar (for that pur∣pose made the deeper) and the room which is next above it. Surpepon, a great melon, or pum∣pion. Surpoids, over-weight, or weight above just weight. Surpoil, as serpaut. Surpoinct, spech-grease, an oily grease scummed from pieces of li∣quored leather, sodden for that purpose in water. Surpoiser, to over-weigh, or weigh down a thing weighed with it. Surpoix, as surpoids. Surposte, a hurt upon the cornet of a horses foot, by crossing one foot over another. Surpreneur, a surpriser, an over∣reacher. Surprins, & Surprinse, as surpris & surprise in the N. D. Surquanie, as souquenie. Surquerir, to question too busily with. Surreptice, as subreptice. Surreption, as subreption. Surrester, to rest, or pawse upon. Surrogation, Surrogué, Surroguer. See Subrogation, subrogé, subro∣ger in the N. D. Sursaillant, leaping on, or over; springing, or spurting over. Sursaille, a leaping on, or over; also an overgrowing; also as sursaut in the N. D. Sursaillir, to leap on, or over; also to overgrow, spring, or spurt over; also to start up suddenly, as one awaked by a great noise. Sursangle, a sursengle, or long birth. Sursaulter, Sursauter, as sursail∣lir.
Surselle, the ridge-rope, a broad and great band (or thong) of strong leather, &c. fastened on either side of a thill, and bearing upon the pad or saddle of a thill-horse. Sursemeur, a sower, or strewer. Sursemeur de noises, a sire-brand of contention. Sursemeure, the measeldness of hogs. Sursis, for surcis, superseded, left off. Sursomme, over-weight, an over-heavy burden. La sursomme ab∣bat l'asne, an extream burden sways the silly ass. Sursoulte, too much boot given in exchange, &c. Sursoyer, for surseoir, to supersede, leave off, or lay aside. Sursueil, the upper-sil or head-piece of a door, the piece of timber that lies over a door. Surtaux, an over-sessing, or over-rating in the Subsidy-book. Surtaxé, over-sessed. Surtissu, woven, or whipt over with. Surtomber, to fall over, or upon. Survaleur, over-value. Surveille, the day before the Eve of a great holy-day. Survenance, Survenement, Surve∣nue, an accident, hap, chance, or unexpected occurrence; a step∣ping, or coming in unlooked for; a relieving, helping, or succou∣ring. Surverser, to powr upon. Survestement, an upper garment. Survestir, to cover over with a gar∣ment. Survoler, to fly over. Survoleter, to flicker, or hoer over. Survuidé, emptied out of one ves∣sel into another. Survuider, to empty out of one ves∣sel into another. Susan, a year and day past; or the passing of a year and a day with∣out performing that which should have been done within it. Susanné, for suranné, superannua∣ted, very old. Susat, of elder, or elder flowers. Susbarbe d'une bride, the nose-band of a bridle. Susbout, up, an end. Susceps, Suscet, a Subject, or one that lives under the protection of another. Suscitateur, a raiser, inciter, pro∣voker, or stirrer up. Suscitation, a suscitation, raising, inciting, stirring up. Susclavier, upon the kannel-bone. Veine susclaviere, the second main ascendent branch of the hollow vein. Suscouche, the Night-mare. Suseau for sureau, an elder-tree. Susespineux, resting upon the back∣bone. Muscle susespineux, a mus∣cle whereby the arm is raised or drawn upwards. Suslambris, the upper cieling of a house, &c. Suspection, for soupçon, suspicion, jealousie. Suspend, for suspens, suspence. Suspensif, suspensive, suspending, only for a time. Suspensoire, hangling, dangling, suspensory, in suspence. Suspensoires, certain cords or strings (hanging from the bed-stead) for a sick man to take hold of, and bear up himself with, when he would remove, or alter his ly∣ing. Suspied, up, a foot. Sustentifique, sustaining, feeding, maintaining, nourishing. Sus-test, the pericranion, or the skin that covers the skull. Susteste d'une bride, the head-piece of a bridle. Sus-ventre, as epigastre. Susuest, for Sud-ouest, a South∣west wind. Sutin, the sweating sickness. Suvereau, the great bastard-mac∣karel. Suyer, for sureau, an elder-tree. Suyn, as suin in the N. D. Suyne, a precious stone found in some serpents. Suyte, Suyvant, & Suyvre. See them with an i instead of y in the N. D. Suyvamment, successively, conse∣quently, afterward. Suzeau, as suseau. Suzerain, Sovereign, and yet subal∣tern; superiour, but not supream; high in Jurisdiction, though infe∣riour to the highest. Suzeraineté, the Jurisdiction or Power of a Suzerain. Sybilot, as sibilot. Sycomantie, divination by fig-leaves. Sycomore, the sycomore-tree. Sycophage, a fig-eater. Sycophantin, a sycophant, parasite, or smell-feast. Syderal, starry, of, or belonging to the stars. Syderation, Tree-plague, a blasting in trees by great heat and drought; also a sudden numness of a limb, followed by a total pu∣trefaction, and utter destruction thereof. Syderé, tempered and forged by the course and constellation of the stars. Syer, for fier, to saw. Syloatique, huge, mighty. Symmetrié, well proportioned, in just symmetry. Symmistre, a Secretary, or a Privy-Counsellor. Symniste, a fellow, or Colleague in a sacred Profession. Symphise, a natural and unmoving union of two bones. Symplegade, an imbracing, or clip∣ping; a whirlpool, or swallow∣ing gulf. Symposiarque, the Master, or over∣seer of a Feast; a Feast-ma∣ker. Syn, as suin in the N. D. Synanchie, the squinzy. Synanthrose, a close conjunction of bones without any visible moti∣on. Syncere, Syncerement, & Syncerité. See them with i instead of y, in the N. D. Syncope, Syncopization, a cutting away; also a swounding. Syncopizer, to cut away; to swound. Syneretisme, the joyning of two Enemies against a third person. Syncrisme, a thin and spreading oyntment, or medicine. Synderese, a remorse of conscience, or that part of the Soul which opposeth it self unto sin. Synderique, as Nerss synderiques, binding sinews. Synochite, a stone whereby (as Ma∣gicians affirm) the dead be rai∣sed. Synonimer, to make two words bear one sense. Synople, for sinople, sinople, or green colour. Synterese, as synderese. Syntre, as Cintre in the N. D. Syparathe, the dung of a Goat or Sheep. Syphon, as siphon. Syre, as Sire in the N. D. Syringue, &c. See Seringue in the N. D. Syroch, as Siroch. Syron, for ciron, a hand-worm.
Syrte, a quick-sand, or shelf of sand in the Sea, or in a River. Systole, the motion, or lifting up of the heart and arteries; also the shortening of a long vowel. Sytorpé, cut off. T. TAbarre, a long riding Cloak, or Garment. Tabellion, a Notary publick, or Scrivener, allowed by Authority to ingross and register private Contracts and Obligations. Tabellionnage, the Office of a Ta∣bellion, the place wherein he en∣grosses and registers private Con∣tracts. Droict de Tabellionnage, the Privilege of a Lord Chaste∣lain, or high Justicier, to make or keep him under a Notary for the ingrossing of ill Deeds and Contracts passed within his Juris∣diction. Also a half penny in the pound for Contracts of the sale of land, &c. exceeding the value of 15 l. Tournois, due to the King within the liberty of Sens. Tabellionné, the Office, Function, or Art of a Tabellion. Tabellionné, (a Partie.) drawn at large, ingrossed, registred, by a Tabellion. Tabellionner, a Tabellion to draw, ingross, or record a Deed. Tabian, as laict Tabian, the milk of Tabia, a place in Italy, very healthful for such as are in a Con∣sumption. Tabide, consuming, wasting, langui∣shing, pining away. Tabisié, wasted, consumed, rotted, putrified; also infected, poisoned, corrupted. Tabifier, to waste, consume, rot, patri∣fy; to infect, poison, or corrupt. Tablage, a tabling, or boording; also a table, or great boord. Tablature d'un Luth, the belly of a Lte. Tablée, a table full of. Tablier de Notaire, a Scriveners Shop or Booth. Tabouler, to make a great noise, to knock loud and fast like a Cooper in the hooping of a Cask. Taborlan, a mighty Prince. Tabour, for Tambour, a Drum; also a Drummer. Batre le tabour à coups d'offelets, to play at dice on a drums head. Tabourasse, a Drum, or Tabor. Tabourder, to play on a Drum, or Tabor; to rap, or knock. Tabourdeur, a Taburer, or Drum∣mer. Tabourement, a drumming; also a rapping, knocking, or thumping (as on a Drum) at a door, &c. also to strike on the back side. Taboureur, as Tabourdeur; also a thumper, or a knocker; a Whore∣monger. Tabourin, a Drum, a Tabor; also a Timpany in the belly. Tabourin des oreilles, a certain skin, or film within the ears. Tabouriner, to play on a Tabor; also to drum, or strike up a drum. Tabourinesse, a woman that plays on a Tabor, or strikes up a drum. Tabourinet, a little drum, or tabor; also a little Room contrived in the corner of a square Hall with tapestry or boards. Mener au tabourinet, to inveigle, or draw one to that one list. Tabourineur, a Taborer, one that plays on a Tabor. Tabourineuse, & Tabouriniere, as Tabourinesse. Tabourne, as tadorne. Tabouter, as tabuter. Tabureau, a mocker, or sssr. Tabut, trouble, turmoil. agoteur de tabus, a seditious, turbalent, or troublesome fllow. Ce Villain ne vaut pas le tabut, this Rogue is not worth the beating. Tabater, to trouble, disquitt, to molest. Tacconnet, as taconnet. Tachette, a little spot, or stain. Tacheture, a spot, or speckle; also spotting, speckling, or marking. Tacle, any headed shaft, or , whose feathers be no waxed, but glad on. Tacon, a little Salmon; or a sll and delicate Trout caught in a River that passes by Clermont i Auvergne. Taconne, Taconnet, colts-fnt. Taconner un soulier, to set a pat on a shooe. Tacroux, Sun-burnt; al extream∣ly covetous, or . Tadone, a blak  water∣fowl somew at  bigger than a Duck. Taforée, a fe-at. Tahon, for taon, a d-fly, or a brizze. Tahou, as poire de tahou, a small pear whereof excellent perry is made. Taïe, a great grand-mother. Taige, a kind of Vine. Tail, for taillade, a cut, slash, or gash. Taillandier, (Adj.) cutting, or shipping off. Taille-bacon, a clown, or boor, one that usually feeds on bacon. Taille-boudin, a great pudding-eater. Taille-bras, Taille-canton, an arm-slasher, a cutter, or swaggerer. Taillement, a cutting, slitting, or slashing; a notching; a carving, or ingraving; a gelding, or spey∣ing. Taillerin, a slice of. Taille-sebe, as Courtilliere. Taille-vent, a Wind-cutter, an idle (or fond) swaggerer. Taillon, a little slice, cut, or gash; also a great chipping-knife; also a kind of Tax, raised by Henry 2. Anno 1549. towards the in∣crease of the pay of the Gens∣darmes (who usually lay billeted in Villages) and to enable them to pay their Hosts for whatsoever th y had of them. Taillonné, cut by slices, bits, or parcels. Taillonneux, full of slices, parcels, little bits. Taillouer, as Tailloir in the N. D. Tainturier, for Teinturier, a Dier. Taïon, a great grand-father. Tairir, for tarir, to dry up. Tais, a potsheard; a scull: a s, or great scale. Taiser, to be silent. Taisible, still, silent, quiet, busht. Taisiblement, silently, quietly. Tal, oyl extracted from the berries of the crimson and prickly Cedar. Talaires, Mercury's winged shooes. Talare, reaing, or hanging down to the heels or ankles. Talemouse, as talmouse; also a cast or dash on the lips. Talemouser, to cast, or dash on the lips; also to x, trouble, or mo∣lest. Talenté,  upon, earnest after. Tales, di; also the Game termed C kall. Talle, as thale; also a shoot, sprig,  had. Tallemellier, a hedge-baker. Taller, the coin termed a Dollr. Taller, (a Verb) as thaller.
Tallevas, an old-fashion Targuet, having in the bottom of it a pike, whereby (when need was) it was stuck into the ground. Tallut, as talus in the N. D. Talmouse, a Cheese-cake. Taloché, rapped, or bobbed over the fingers ends. Talonnement, and Talonnerie, a treading on or down the heel, a striking with the heel. Talonneux, having, or using heels. Talque, for talc, Isinglass. Talu, sloping. Maison talue, a house whose bottom is senced from the rain that falls off the caves by water-tables or boards set off from the wall. Talvassier, a loggerhead. Taluer, to set, cut, or make a∣slope. Talure, the blue mark of a blow, or bruise. Taluzer, as taluer. Tam, Black Briony, our Ladies seal. Tamaridin, Tamarind, as tamarin∣de in the N. D. Tambrays, as estambres. Tambu, the bastard-pepper plant, called Betle, or Betre. Tamoulenant, pondering, musing, studying. Tançon, a chiding, checking, re∣buking, reproving. Tandiment, for tandis que, whilst. Tanée, the herb Feverfue. Tanelliere, the worm-fretter, a worm which makes holes in the sides of ships. Tanesie, for tanaise, tansy. Tangible, tangible. Tangueurs, as tanqueurs. Tanné, tawny, swarthy. Tannée, for tanaise, tansy. Tanquard, a tankard. Tanqueurs, such as carry ashore stuff or persons out of ship-boats. Tanson, as tançon. Tansonnier, apt to chide. Tantan, the bell that hangs about the neck of a Cow, &c. Tantiesme, as le tantiesme du mois, such a certain day of the mouth. Tantinet, a little, never so little. Tantouiller, to tumble, wallow, or welter in. Tapecon, the Heaven-gazer (a scale∣less Sea-fish) of the bigness of a foot, having a wide mouth and a great head, on whose top his eyes (wherewith he looks directly up∣ward) are placed. Tape-couë, a tail-knocker, a belly-bumper. Tapeinois, as tapinois. Taper, to tap, or strike; also to stop. Taphorée, as taforée. Tapinaudiere, Tapinet, a den, or lurking-hole. Tapineux, lurking, secret, hidden, close. Tapinois, en tapinois, lying close and still; also closely, secretly. Contenu en tapinois, held low, or kept under. Tapissement, a hiding of himself, a lurking, squatting, or lying close; also a furnishing with ta∣pestry. Tapon, for tampon, a bung, or stop∣ple. Taponnus, a dunce. Tappecon, as tapecon. Tapper, as taper. Tapper, as jouër au tapper, to play at span-counter. Tappir, as tapir in the N.D. Taquain, for taquin, a hold-fast, a covetous man. Taquain, Taquet (Adv.) suddenly, or at the same instant. Taquet, a brace, or piece of wood nailed against a post, &c. to keep another from shaking or slipping; also the clapper of a Mill. Taquette, as besongner à la taquet∣te, to work hard, or eagerly, to sit at it. Tar, a kinde of Weesel. Tarabin tarabas, pish-pish. Taraire, for tarelle, an augar. Tarande, a Buff. Tarantole, as Tarantule in the N. D. Taravelle, a Gardeners setting-i∣ron. Tarault, as taraire; also as Ta∣rots. Tarc, a kinde of Tar, wherewith Sheep are marked, and (for some scabby diseases) anointed. Tard (Adj.) tardy, tedious, lingring, long in coming. Tardance, a delay, or long staying in a place. Tardelet, somewhat slow, or te∣dious. Tardement, for tardivement, slow∣ly. Tard-fleury, a very sweet apple, of the bigness of a Tennis-ball. Tardité, for tardiveté, tardiness, slowness. Tardiver, to linger, slack, or de∣lay. Tardoune, as Tadorne. Taré, defective, wasting, drossy; worm-eaten, or full of holes; hurtful; whose use countervails not the charge one is at about it. Tarefranc, Tarefranche, as glo∣rieuse. Tarelet, a little augar. Tareronde, the Fork-fish, a kinde of Scate which hath in her tail an indented and venemous prick. Targé, covered with a shield or target; also tarried, staid. Targement, a shielding, or covering with a shield; also a tarrying, lingering, or delaying. Targer, to shield, or cover with a shield; also to tarry, stay, or de∣lay. Se targer d'une raison, to defend himself by a reason. Targette, a kinde of snacket, or hasp, wherewith Casemates, &c. are closed. Targon, the herb Tarragon. Tarier, the bird called a Bunting. Tariffe, waste paper to binde up small wares in; also Arithmetick, or the casting of accompts. Tarle, a Wood-worm, or Wood-moth. Tarlé, worm-eaten. Tarmées, thick magots; or short and hairy Worms, oftentimes breeding in the fundaments of horses; also Wood-worms. Tarots, a kinde of great Cards, whereon many things are figured; which make them much more in∣tricate than ordinary ones. Tarquet, a kinde of little dog, or hound, usually kept by Ladies and Gentlewomen Tarracier, as terrassier. Tarré, as taré. Tarse de l'oeil, the gristle whereon the hair of the Eye-lids groweth. Tarse du pied, the first part of the foot next to the leg, and answerable to the wrist of the hand, consisting of 7 bones. Tartaire, a Tartary Faulcon. Tartarasse, a Tortoise. Tartarin, the water-bird called a Kings-fisher. Tartarot, as tartaire. Tartelages, Tarts, or meats like unto tarts; also things that be∣long to, or are sit for tarts.
Tartelette, a little tart. Tartelle, Tartenelle, a whirligig. Tartinages, as tartelages. Tarton-raire, Gut-wort, a beautiful and extreamly purging French shrub, or shrub-like berb. Tarague, an Indian beast which hath hanging ears, lives alone among rocks, and breeds a kinde of Bezoar-stone. Taschement, an endeavouring, at∣tempting, or assaying. Tassé, heaped, piled, made up into trusses or bundles. Tasser, to heap or pile up, to make into trusses or bundles. Tassot, a Newt, or Ask. Tastement, a tasting, or essaying; also a handling, feeling, touch∣ing; a groping for. Taster, for gouter, to taste. Taste-vin, or Tâte-vin, a Wine-Cunner, a Broker for Wine-Merchants. Tastonnement, a groping. Tatin, a little, or a small quanti∣ty. Tatou, a kinde of long-tailed Hedge-hog, which instead of a prickly Coat hath a scaly one, whereinto (in times of danger) he draws up himself. Tavaillole, as Tavayole in the N. D. Tavan, a brizze. Tavan de Mer, the Sea-brizze. Taudir, to cover Booths in Fairs, &c. with canvas, or with raw cloth, &c. Se taudir, to cover, or shelter himself. Tavelle, a small edging lace, a crown-lace. Tavellement, a spotting, or speck∣ling, a marking with spots of sundry colours. Tavelliere, the little worm called a Wood-fretter. Taverdette, a kinde of plague. Taverneage, the Penalty inflicted on a Vintner, or Wine-drawer, that hath sold his Wine at a higher rate than was set him by the Magistrate. Taverneur, frequenting Taverns. Taverneux, loving Taverns; also full of Taverns. Taves, red pimples, or freckles on the face. Taulache, a little Target, or Buc∣kler. Taulpetier, a Mole-catcher. Taulpin, as un franc taulpin, a trained man or souldier made of an husbandman; also a boor, a clown. Tauné, as tanné. Taupiere, un Impostume, or soft swelling in the Head, wherein it makes a hole somewhat like to that which a Mole roots in the ground. Taure, small Lunary, small Moon-wort. Taureliere, a Cow that longs for the Bull. Taurillon, a young, or little Bull. Taute, Tautte, a Calamary, or Sleeve-fish; also a roller, or a round truncheon, laid under a great stone, &c. the more easily to remove it. Tauter, to lay a roller, &c. under an heavy thing, the better to re∣move it. Tayeux, full of skins, or films; also troubled with a pin or web in the eye. Tayon, a Grandfather; also an Oak of 60 years growth. Tect, the roof, or cover of a house; also a stie, or house to keep hogs or geese in. Tede, the fat pith, or heart of the Pine-tree, called by some the Torch-tree. 'Tis also (and most properly) the whole stock there∣of turned heart, or of so fat and rosiny a substance, that lights may be (and by the Clowns of Auvergne are) made of it. Teiller, for tillau, a Linden-tree. Teinter, to twang, like the spring of a hard-bent bow. Telamons, great ships; also sup∣porters, or supporting Images in building. Telant, as Vin telant, thick, or clammy Wine, Wine that ropeth. Tele, for toile, linnen-cloth. Teleniaban, Manna. Telephion, Orpin, or Livelong. Teller, a Linnen-weaver. Teline, Telline, as Flion. Telon, as tiretaine. Tember, Tembut, the bastard-pep∣per. Temeréement, for temerairement, rashly. Temperement, a tempering, or mo∣derating. Temperie, temperateness of Wea∣ther. Tempes, for temples, the tem∣ples. Tempestatif, turbulent, unquiet, seditious. Tempestativement, tumultuously, turbulently. Tempesteux, for tempêtueux, tem∣pestuous, blustering, stormy. Templettes, fillets, or head-bands for women; also Jewels hanging upon their foreheads by bodkins thrust into their hair. Temporal, of, or in the temples. Temporalles, Coat-armours, or He∣ralds Coats. Temporaux, the Muscles by which the temples are moved. Temporiseux, for temporiseur, time-serving, temporizing. Tempre, Temprement, quickly. Tempre-meure, as elle est tempre∣meure, she is full ripe, or mar∣riageable. Tenacement, fast, or surely; also tenaciously. Tenacité, tenacity, fast-keeping, sure-holding; also hardness, or niggardliness; constancy, sted∣fastness; also clamminess. Tenais, the slip of a plant. Tenaisie, for tanaise, tansy. Tenamment, as tenacement. Tenant, (Subst.) a hold-fast, or hard man; also the side, or limit on the side of a house or piece of ground; also a Defendant in a Just or Turnament; any one that withstands another, or holds and makes good a place against him; also a continual course, or unin∣termitted continuance of things; as Tout d'un tenant, all toge∣ther. Tenar de la main, a certain Muscle whereof the greatest part of the palm of the hand consisteth. Tencer, as tanser in the N. D. Tendelet, the tilt, or cover of the poop of a Galley. Tendineux, fll of tendons. Tendret, for tendrelet, somewhat tender. Tendreté, Tendreur, for tendresse, tenderness, or softness. Tendrieres, chaps, rists, or chawns on the nipple of a womans breast. Tendrillons, tendrels, little gri∣stles. Tendrineux, Tendronneux, full of tendrels, or of slender gristles. Tenebrions, Night-spirits, Hob∣goblins. Tenement, a Country, Territory, or Land, possessed, or held absolutely; also a Tenement, Inheritance, or Lands held in fief by Cens, or a chief Rent.
Tenementier, a Tenant, or Farmer. Tenesme, a great desire void of power to purge. Tenie, a filet, head-band, or hai∣lac; also a kind of brow, or jut∣tying in a pillar. Tenre, as tendre in the N. D. Tenser, for tanser, to chide. Tensis, bending, or stiff bent. Tentatoire, a proof, essay, offer, at∣tempt. Tentement, a tempting; a trying, or attempting. Tenteresse, a woman that tempts. Tenthredon, a kind of flie. Tentier, a Tent-keeper, or one that lives in a Tent. Tentissement, a tingling. Tenue, (Adj.) this, slender, sleight, weak, or little. Tennement, thinly, slenderly, sleight∣ly, weakly. Tenuité, thinness, slenderness, slightiness. Tenure, a Tenure, a hold or estate in land. Tenure brisée, a dislei∣sin; also as tenue in the N. D. Tenurement, as tenuement. Tenuret, somewhat thin, slender, or sleight. Tenureté, as tenuité. Tephramantie, Divination by ashes blown, or cast up into the ayr. Tepidité, for tiedeur, luke-warm∣ness. Terapeutique, as therapeutique. Terbenthin, the turpentine-tree. Terbenthine, for terebentine, tur∣pentine. Terçage, a third breaking, or dig∣ging up of the ground. Terceau, a quantity of wine taken by some Lords upon every vessel belonging to their Vassals; who, if they broach any before, or be∣fore notice thereof given to the Lord, or his Officers, lose 60 sols Tournois. Terceer, for tercer, to break, or dig up the ground a third time. Tercot, a little ash-coloured and long-tongued bird, called a wry∣neck. Terebinthine, as terbenthine. Tereniaban, liquid manna, of the colour and consistence of honey. Terges, little Images of Saints made on pieces of painted paper or leather, and worn like broo∣ches in the hats of the youths of the Parish at publick meetings, or on solemn days. Tergiversation, a shrinking back, a dodging, or paultry excusing; a Not in Law. Tergiversaeur, a shrinker back, a dodger, a parlterer; one that is not suted, or withdraws a sute, but with a purpose to begin a∣nw. Tergiverser, to shift off, or shrink back, to dodge, or paulter; to withdraw a sute; to run back, but not give over. Teriere, for tarelle, an augar. Teriz, a kind of long-heeled Lin∣nt. Termement, the appointing of a certain term or time. Termination, a determining, fini∣shing, ending; also a limiting, or bounding. Termoyer, to appoint a time, to set a day. Ternaire, of ree, or of a third. Ternenaire, a number containing many threes. Terner, to throw a tre, at dice. Ternier, a wall-pecker. Terrageal, as Terragé in the N. D. Terrager, to hold, or let out lands for which Terrage is due; also to sort or lay out the fruits be∣longing thereto. Terrageresse, as Grange terrageres∣se, a Barn for the receit or keep∣ing of Country-toll. Terragerie, field-rent; or the having of, or holding by, field-rent. Terrageur, one that hath Terrage, or field-rent. Terraignol, a horse that's hardly raised from the ground. Terrantole, as tarantule in the N. D. Terrassier, an ignorant or home∣bred Clown, one that never stir∣red off his own dunghill. Terrau, Terreau, mould, soil, fat earth; or as Terraul, or Terraut, a heap, or bulwark of earth; also a seat of earth in an Arbor. Terregarde, as matiere de terre∣garde, a Controversy about the meers or bounds of lands. Terre-né, born, begotten, or bred of the earth. Terreneusviers, new-found-land-men. Terre-plein, a plat-form of earth; or the earth which is rampired and filled unto the inside of a bul∣wark or wall. Terrer, to terrify, to affright. Terrestreté, Terrestrité, earthli∣ness, worldliness; also an earthly lust, or appetite. Terre-tremble, for tremblement de terre, an earth-quake. Terreux, earthy, earthly, of earth, full of earth. Terribler, to make terrible; to make a terrible shew. Terrier, (Adj.) of earth, or soil. Terriere, an augar. Terrin, as terrasse in the N. D. Terron, soil, manure, dung fully in∣corporated with the earth. Tertiane, a tertian Agae. Terue, thin, slnder. Terzerol, a mizzen, or poop-sail. Tesme, for theme, a theam. Tesniere, for taniere, a den. Tesseré, squared, or made four-square like a die. Tesson, for taisson, a badger. Tessonneau, a young, or little badger. Tessons d'un pressoir, the side-boords of a Press. Test, the skull of the head. Testable, testable, that can make a Will; also, that may be devised by Will. Testard, the pollard, or chevin-fish; also the little black vermin called a Bull-head. Testard, (Adj.) head-strong, obsti∣nate. Testarderie, obstinacy. Testelette, a little head. Testier, heady, ruling or possessing the head. Testimoniale, a testimonial. Testonné, curled, frizled, entra∣melled. Testonner, to curl, frizzle, entramel. Tests, as test; also a potsheard, or piece of a broken pot; also the hard shell of a Crab, Tortoise, &c. Testu, (Subst.) as testard; also the Cod-fish. Le testu d'un Masson, a Masons hammer. Tetard, as grand tetard, a great sucker, a child that sucketh much. Tetasse, a long, saggy, withered, and filthy dug. Avallé en tetasse de Vieille, hanging down like the wrinkled and ugly breast of an old hag. Tetassier, having great or long dgs. Tete, Tethé, a teat, pap, or dg Tethine, a ittle teat, pap, or Tethye, a certain deformed ex¦cence, bring neither fish nor  of the Sea. Tetin, the nibble, or nipple of  Du tetin en hors, from his info.
Tetineux, as tetassier. Tetrade, a quaternity, or mess, the proportion or number of four. Tetradique, of, or belonging to four. Degrez tetradiques, a Stair-case having between every four steps one broad one. Tetragnathe, Tetragnatic, a white, rough-legged, and most venemous Spider. Tetragone, quadrangle, or of four corners. Tetrahil, Tetrahit, Glidewort. Tetrasyllabe, of four syllables. Tetrique, rough, crabbed, unplea∣sant. Tette, as tete. Tettée, one sucking, a Childs meal, as much as it will suck at once. Tetthe, as tete. Tetther, for tetter, to suck. Tetthon, for tetton, the breast. Tevot, a cowardly Braggadochio, one that will say much more than he dares do. Teur, a lattice-like cover of horse∣tail hair, in many doubles, upon the narrow boord whereon Cloth∣workers do sheer their cloths. Textuel, of, or in a text. Juges qui sont bons textuels, learned Judges, such as can readily cite all the Books which are in a Case. Texture, a texture, or contexture; work, frame, or composition. Tez, as test. Tezez, shaven, or bald fellows: also younglings, fops, fondlings. Thacor, a scab or pile in the funda∣ment. Thagadie, as rhagade. Thairir, for tarir, to wither. Thalasié, sea-sick. Thalasse, the Sea. Thale, a green, or as Talle. Thalent, for talent, a talent; or a gift. Thaller, corn to bud, shoot out their tops, or begin to ear. Thamarinde, as tamarinde in the N. D. Thapsie, the stinking, or deadly Carrot. Tharir, for tarir, to wither. Thassot, a Newt, or Ask. That, a Salamander. Thaumaste, a wonderer. Theatins, the Theatins, a Sect of Priests in credit about Pope Cle∣ment vij time, and of more an∣tiquity, by some few years, than the Jesuits. Theatral, of or belonging to, or done in a Theater. Theïe, an Aunt. Theïon, an Ʋncle. Thelemite, a Libertine, one that do's what he list. Theologal, Theological, belonging to Divinity, or Divines. Vin Theologal, notable good and strong Wine. Theologalement, Theologically. Theologastre, a petty Divine, a smatterer in Divinity. Theomaches, Warriours against the Gods, as the old Giants are feig∣ned to have been. Theophaine, the Epiphacy, or Twelfth-day in Christmas. Therapeutique, Theraputrice, cu∣ring, healing. Therbenthine, for terebentine, tur∣pentine. Theriacal, of Treacle. Thermes, armless Images; also hot Baths, or Waters, which be natu∣rally and continually warm. Thesaurier, Thesoriser, for thesau∣riser, to treasure up. Theumulle, a Coat-armour, or Horsemans Coat, worn by a Prince or General on a day of battle. Theze, as tede. Thezoriser, for thesauriser, to trea∣sure up. Thie, as tede. Thielles, airy inflammations. Thilibié, whose stones be worn or wasted away. Thimbre, the herb Savory. Thimbrée, as thymbrée. Thinnicule, the fish Tnny. Thiphaine, the Epiphany, or Twelfth-day. Thiriaque, for Theriaque, Trea∣cle. Thoe, a kinde of Wolf said to be a great friend unto men. Thomas, for Estomac, the Sto∣mack. Thonneu, as tonlieu, or toulieu. Thonnieu, as Droict on Gabelle de Thonnieu, a certain Toll or Im∣post levied to the Duke of Bou∣illons use, upon every Tun and Hogshead of Wine, or other drink, sold in gross within his Dominions, or transported out of them. Thonnine, the back, or back parts of a Tunny. Thorachique, belonging to the breast, or stomack. Thore, a certain thick and round circle, or member about a Pillar; also the herb Wolves-bane; also Napellus, or Monks hood. Thouiller, Thouilleur, as touiller, touilleur. Thrasonien, boasting, proud, insolent, Thraso-like. Thresorillon, a little treasure. Thriacle, for theriaque, treacle. Thriacleur, a maker, or seller of Treacle; a Quack, a Mounte∣bank. Thriaque, as thriacle. Thringle, as tringle. Thrombes de sang, clots of con∣gealed bloud. Thrubal, a Trumpeter. Thun, for thon, the fish called a Thunny. Thunine, as thonnine; or as tun. Thymbre, Winter-savoury, Pepper∣byssop. Thymbrée, fish-(water, or brook-) mint. Thymelée, Spurge-flax, mountain Widow-wail. Thymique, as Veine thymique, the first branch of la Veine souscla∣viere. It goes unto the fag-piece or kernel under the Knnel-bone. Thymoxalme, a Composition of Tyme, Penny-royal, Rue, dy Bac∣ley-meal, Salt, Water, and Vin∣gar; good against the Gout, v∣tosities, and weakness of the Stomack, and a good eauator of gross and black humours. Thyn, for thon, the Tunny fish. Thynnuncule, a little Tunny fish. Thyon, a Bunting (a bird.) Thyphaine, Epiphany, Twelfth-day. Tiburon, a kinde of Sea-calf in the Indian-Sea. Tichous, little Cakes made of eggs and flower, with a little butter (and sometimes cheese among it) eaten ordinarily with Sugar and Rose-water. Ticq, as tiquet in the last sense. Tique torche lorgne, thwick thwack Ticquet, as tiquet. Tie, as tede. Tiedeer, Tieder, to warm, to make lukewarm, to give a little heat unto. Tiedeté, for tiedeur, warmness, luke-warmness. Tiedi, warmed, a little heated; also hathed in, or bedewed with tears. se Tiedir, to grow warm, or luke∣warm; also to bathe, or bdw himself in tears.
Tien-main, a stay for the hand a∣long the wall of a Stair-case. Tiens le bien, a Crians, the long lune or line which is tied unto a Hawks leg, to keep her from fly∣ing away at her first luring. Tierçage, as terçage. Tiercelin, as Plomb tiercelin, lead mingled a third part with white and fine, the other two with course and black stuff. Tiercelin, (Subst.) Sarcenet. Tiercement, (an Adv.) thirdly. Tiercerets, Tiercerons, certain cross-branches on the outside of a Vault. Tiercet, a Song of triple Stanza's, or a Stanza of three Verses. Tierciere, the vessel, or measure cal∣led a Tierce. Tiers-pied, for trepié, a trevet. Tiers-poinct, as Voute poinctue comme à tiers-poinct, a Vault raised a little higher than the hemicycle, or half circle. Tieu tieu Margot, the voice of Country-people calling their Kine unto them. Tieul, for tel, such. Tifé, for attiffé, pranked up, set off. Tifer, or Tiffer, to prank up, or set off; to busie the hands long about a thing, that it may be done well, or to his liking that doth it. Tigette, a little stalk, or stem. Tigname, red Stirax, an Aroma∣tical Indian wood used by Per∣fumers. Tigne, for teigne, scurf. Tigneux, for teigneux, scald-pa∣ted. Tignon, as tigne. Tigreau, a young, or little Tiger. Tigresque, Tiger-like, fierce, cruel, swift, savage. Accoustré à la Tigresque, horribly scratched or beaten, cruelly handled. Tigrin, Tigrique, of, or belonging to a Tiger; also as Tigresque. Til, for tillau, the Linden-tree. Tiles, the small motes of dust ap∣pearing, and roving up and down in the Sun-beams, which come into a Room at the holes of walls, &c. Tillet, a ticket, or little note. Tilier, as tilet; also as til. Tillaquer, to boord, or floor the deck of a ship. Tille, for teille, the rind, or pilling of hemp, &c. also the fruit of the Linden-tree; also a kinde of wimble. Tillé, & Tiller, as teillé, teiller in the N. D. Tillet, & Tilleul, for tillau, or til∣leu, the Linden-tree. Tilleux, rough, rugged, knobby. Tillier, as tillet. Timble, a Coat-armour, or Coat of armour; also as Timbre in the N. D. Timbon, a kinde of brazen drum. Timoré, frighted, or scared. Timpanisé, as Bastiment timpani∣sé, a Building having a gable-end. Timper, to tingle. Tin, as les oreilles me font tin, my ears tingle, or glow. Tine, for cuve, an open tub, much used in Vintage. Tiné, a cole-staff, or stang, a big staff whereon a burden is carried between two on their shoulders. Tinée, a stand full, a soe full. Tinel, a houshold, or family; also the Room wherein all the Ser∣vants of a family dine and sup; also as tine. Tinet, the Whale termed a Horlepool, or Whirlpool; also as tine. Tinette, a little stand, soe, or tub; a bathing tub. Tiniez, long white Rocks lying un∣der water in the Sea. Tinne, as tine. Tinole, and Tinon, as tinette. Tintalorisé, grim, froward. Tintamarré, crashing, jangling, or making a great noise. Tintillant, tingling. Tintimale, for tinthymal, the herb Spurge, or Wolves-milk. Tintin, the tinging, or towling of a bell; also the warble, or song of a Nightingale. Tintiner, to ting, or towl a bell. Tinton, the burden of a Song; a kinde of dance; also as tintin. Tintoner, to ting, or towl often; to glow, tingle, or dingle. Tintouin, for tintoin, a tingling in the ear. Il a beaucoup de tin∣touins en la teste, his head is full of proclamations, he is very much puzzled, or perplexed. Tintouiner, as tintoner; also to puzzle, or perplex. Tinture, red wine, or Aligant. Tiphaine, the Epiphany, or Twelfth-day. Tipher, as tiffer. Tiphoine, as tiphaine. Tipule, a Water-spider. Tique, the vermin called a tick. Tiquet, as tique; or a little tick; also the herb Kick; also a disease which on a sudden stopping a hor∣ses breath, makes him to stop and stand still. Pres du tiquet de la mort, near his last gasp, ready to breathe his last. Tiqueté, ticketted, or appointed by ticket. Tirace, as tirasse. Tiran, any string, lace, line, or cord, which pulled at one end closes at the other the thing 'tis fastened unto. Tirans, as trayans. Tirasse, a drag-net for Partridges, &c. also the strap of a boot. Tirassé, dragged, pulled, haled. Tirasser, to drag, pull, or hale. Tire-balle, an Instrument where∣with Surgeons draw bullets out of the body. Tirée d'oeil, the sight, view, look, or glance of the eye. Tire-feu, a Medicine, or Plaister, for the drawing of fire, or ex∣tream heat, out of a wound, &c. Tire-fiens, a drag wherewith dung is taken up, upon the remove of a dung-hill. Tire-fleiche, an Instrument where∣with Surgeons draw arrows out of the body. Tirelaines, Cloak-twitchers, Rogues which in the night-time lurk a∣bout the corners of streets, to snatch away the Cloaks of such as pass by them. Tire-laisse, a let-go; a speedy re∣storal, or giving back, of a thing seized as his own, but proving another mans. Tire-lardon, a greedy fellow. Tire-larigaud, as boire à tire-lari∣gaud, to drink lustily. Tirelire, a Christmas-box; also the warble, or song of a Lark. Tirelirer, to warble, or sing like a Lark. Tirelupin, a catch-bit; also a scur∣vy fellow. Tirelyre, as tirelire. Tirement, a drawing, pulling, pluc∣king, or stretching; also a shoo∣ting; a wresting, forcing, or ex∣acting from; a drawing of Pi∣ctures; a going along, or making towards. Tire-pance, as à tire-pance, till the belly crack withal. Tire-pied, a Shoomakers stirrup. Tire-pierre, a Surgeons Instru∣ment
made like a tooth-picker at the one end, and like a hook at the other; and used for the draw∣ing of stones out of the bladder, or bullets out of the body. Tire-poil, a hair-plucker; an In∣strument, medicine, or plaister, for the plucking away of hair. Tirin, as tarin. Tirofageur, a cheese-eater. Tirouér, & Tirauoir, for tiroir, a drawer; also a tiring, for hawks. Tirse, the dart, or javelin of Bac∣chus. Tisonner, often to stir the fire, or to lay the sticks close together. Tissier, or Tissotier, for Tisserand, a linnen-weaver. Tissiere, for Tisserande, a woman-weaver. Titanique, belonging, or like to the Sun. Force Titanique, Giant-like force. Titeller, to tingle, as a little bell. Titillation, a tickling. Titillé, tickled. Titiller, to tickle. Titrac, the fashion, or order of a thing. Titubant, tripping, stumbling, stag∣gering; stammering, wavering. Titubation, tripping, stumbling, or staggering; a faultering, or stam∣mering; a quivering, trembling, or wavering. Tochere, fearn, or a fearny ground. Tocqué, coised. Tocquement, a coising. Toffe, & Toffu, as touffe, and touffu in the N. D. Toge, Togue, a gown, or long robe. Tohu, confusion. Toillé, as touillé. Toliban, a Turbant, or Turkish hat. Tollart, an Executioner, a Hang-man. Tollere, a Turkish Coyn worth about four shillings sterling. Tollet, a thowl; or as Scalme. Tollieu, as toulieu. Tollin, the toll taken by a Miller. Tollir, to remove, to take away; to cancel, to abolish. Tollu, taken, removed, lift, or car∣ried away. Tolopan, for turbant, a turbant, or a Turkish cap. Tolte, as toulte. Tombe, a tomb; also a gurnard fish. Tombement, a falling, or tumb∣ling down; a lighting upon. Tomberel, for tombereau, a tum∣brel or dung-cart. Prendre les perdris au tomberel, to take Par∣tridges by tunnelling. Tomberelée, a tumbrel full, the load of a tumbrel. Tombier, a Tomb-maker. Tombir, to make a noise with stamp∣ing, or trampling. Tombissement, a stamping, or trampling noise; the rustling of running horses feet. Tome, (f.) a train with a lame and disarmed Heron, for the making of a young faulcon. Tomin, six penny weight, or the weight of a Spanish real. Tommer, for verser, to spill, or to run out. Tondailles, a sheep-shearing, or the feast made thereat. Tondelet, a fashion of bases for a horseman. Tonderesse, a woman that sheareth or shaveth. Tondoison, a sheering, or shaving. Tondu-ras, close shaven, levelled, or laid even with. Tondure, as tondoison. Tonlieu, Toll due unto the Lord of a Fair or Market, for the sale or standing of Cattle, and other Commodities in it. Tonneler, Tonneleur, as tonneller, tonnelleur. Tonnellieu, as tonlieu. Tonnelle, a tunnel, or stalking hors for Partridges; also a round Arbor, or a Walk covered round with the interlaced branches of a Vine, &c. Tonneler, to take Partridges with a tunnel or stalking horse. Tonnelles, the tender branches of trees plashed, or interlaced to∣gether as they grow. Tonnelleur, a Tunneller, or taker of Partridges with a tunnel. Tonnereux, full of thunder, thun∣dering, or thunder-like. Tonnine, meat made of tunny; or as Thonnine. Tonnoirre, for tonnerre, thunder. Tonsiller, certain kernels at the root of the tongue, subject unto in∣flammations and swellings, occa∣sioned by the falling down of hu∣mours from the head. Tonsture, as tondoison; also the Priests tonsure, or shaving of his crown. Tonsuré, sheered, clipped, powled; also shaven. Tonsurer, to sheer, clip, or powl; also to shave. Tonture, as tonsture, Topiaire, the making of Images in, or Arbors of, plants. Topiquer, as se topiquer, to be titchy, or apt to take offence at; also to oppose, or contest with. Topiquur, an acute arguer, or dispater, an inventer of Logical and probable Arguments. Toppe, as terre estant en toppe, waste ground. Toquement, the wearing of, or fur∣nishing the head with a sort of Cap called a Toque; also a clap∣ping, hitting, or knocking against. Toquer, to put on a toque; also to furnish one with a toque; also to clap, knock, or hit against; also to jumble a woman. Torasse, a low and little-bodied Cow, which covets the Bull more than other Kine, and neither gives much milk, nor brings many calves. Torce, as torse. Torche-bouche, as banquet à tor∣che bouche, a feast which costs a man nothing. Torche-culatif, tail-wiping. Torche-pot, the bird called a Nut-jobber. Il ressemble an torche∣pot, he is his Wises master, he dares school her when she doth amiss. So the cock Nut-jobber beats his hen, when she hath wan∣dered any long time from him. Torcheux, full of links; of a link; link-like; serving for a link. Torcionné, wrested. Torcis de vermillons, a wreathed bunch of small worms. Torcol, Torcollet, a wry-neck; also a top to play withal. Toreu, an unlucky bird of a brown, or (as in some places) of a white colour. Torculaire, belonging to the tunne of the brain. Veine torculaire, the second branch of the outward throat-vein, from which it ascends by the inside of the scull unto the brain, which it moistens and feeds. Tordement, a twisting. Tordille, a flea-bitten, or spotted colour of horses, dogs, &c. Tordoir, the bddr, or under-stone of an Oyl-mill, or press. Tore, broad-leaved Wolves-bane; or as thore. Toreau, for taureau, a bull.
Toret, a small wimble. Torment, Tormente, Tormenté, Tormenter. See them with an u before r in the N. D. Tormentille, Tormentile, Setfoil, (an herb.) Tormentine, for terebentine, Tur∣pentine. Tornadot, a return of dowry; the giving back of a womans por∣tion. Torné, for tourné, turned. Torne-dos, as tourne-dos. Torner, for tourner, to turn. Torne-rost, a turn-spit. Tornes, as tournes. Tornesol, for tournesol, Turnsol, (a flower so called.) Tornier, often to stagger, or turn round, like a Stag that's drunk with browzing in May; also to beat up and down, or flie round, thereby to deceive the Dogs that pursue him. Torpin, the Cramp-fish; also a wry-legged man. Torque, a small Grove, or Tuft of wood, growing by it self. Torqué, wreathed, wound in, wrap∣ped about. Torquer, to wreathe, winde in, or wrap about. Torqueure, a wreathe; a wreathing; a place, or a thing writhen; and particularly the wreath whereby the foot of a graft is preserved from the injury of weather. Torrefié, scorched, parched, toasted; dried by the fire, or in the Sun, and then done to dust. Torrefier, to scorch, parch, or toast; to dry, and afterwards do unto dust. Torrentin, belonging to, or abiding in torrents, or swift and violent streams. Torrillon d'un Canon, the middle of a Canon, the wreath, or band, about the middle part of it. Torrion, a great Tower. Torse, a wreath; also a wrest, or wrinch; a bending, wandering, or going out of the way. Torsement, a wreathing; a wresting, or wrinching; also as torse in the last sense. Torsion, a wringing. Torsionnairement, as tortionnai∣rement. Torsure, as torsement. Torteau, a pancake; or as tourteau. Tortellées, the curled toppings of the hair. Tortement, crookedly, wrily. Tortice, as Veines tortices, crooked, or crankling Veins. Torticoler, to wry the neck. Torti-colly, a wry-necked fellow. Tortillement, wreaths, wreathings, knots, curlings. Tortillon, a little wreath; also a curled lock of hair; also the twirling tendrel of a Vine; and generally any double thing wri∣then, twirled, wound, or twisted together, or one within another. Tortillonné, wreathed, wound up, curled, or twisted. Tortillonner, to wreath, twist, or curl. Tortionnaire, unjust, hard, cruel, severe. Tortionnairement, unjustly, hardly, cruelly. Tortionnier, an Extortioner. Tortipé, a splay-foot, or a splay-footed fellow. Tortis, (Adj.) crooked. Tortiz, lime, or loam which hath straw chopt into it. Torterelle, for tourterelle, a turtle-dove. Tortouëre, a hunting pole. Tortuement, a bending, or wind∣ing in and out. Tortuément, Tortueusement, croo∣kedly, wrily. Tortueux, full of turnings, windings, or crinkle-crankles. Tortugue, for tortue, a tortoise. Tortuosité, a crookedness, a ben∣ding, or winding in and out. Torty-colly, as torti-colly. Torve, grim, stern, having a cruel look. Tostée, a toast of bread. Totage, the whole sum, substance, or matter; the whole, all. Totene, the Sleeve, or Calamary fish. Totiens quotiens. See quotiens. Totinge, as totage. Totum, a kinde of Game with a whirl-bone. Touaige, towage, the towing of a Ship by boats, or at the stern of another ship. Touaïlle, a towel. Touässe, as un gros touässe, a clu∣sterfist, a lumpish, ignorant, and unmannerly fellow. Touässier, clownish, lumpish, igno∣rant, unmannerly. Touc, a sink, or filthy gutter. Touchement, a feeling, or hand∣ling; a hitting. Toucheur, a toucher, feeler, hand∣ler. Toucheur d'asnes, an ass-driver. Touchon, a little Touch-stone. Toudi, for toûjours, always. Touë, a little, long, shallow, and flat-bottomed boat. Touër, to tow a ship. Touffeau, Touffillon, a little tuft of trees. Touillaut, a lumpish fellow; also a troublesome man. Touillé, filthily mingled, or shuffled together; also dirtied, besmeared. Avoine touillée croist comme enragée, in miry ground Oats grow as if they were mad. Touillement, a filthy mingling, or shuffling together; also a dirtying, or besmearing. Touiller, filthily to mingle, or shuffle together; to dirt, or besmear; to pester, or intangle. Touilleur, a shuffling, or troublesome fellow. Touillon, a Scullion, a filthy, greasy, nasty, or slovenly fellow; also a dish-clowt, or a clowt to wipe shooes withal. Toulieu, as tonlieu. Toulte, an exacting, or extorting of Subsidies. Toume, a sort of cheese. Tounine, as thonnine, or tonnine. Toupeau, a tuft, or tassel of silk; a flock or lock of wool. Toupier, to turn a top; also to whirl about like a top. Toupil, for toupie, a top, to whirl about. Toupillon, a little top. Toupillonnet, a very little top; also a stopple. Toupin, a stopple for a bottle; also as tupin. Toupon, a stopple. Touraille, a Kiln to dry malt on. Tourban, for turban, a Turbant, or Turkish Cap. Tourbe, a crowd, or throng of peo∣ple crowding together; also a trouble, stir, or ruffling. En tourbe, by flocks, or multitudes; with confused voices. Tourbiginaux, wreaths of old ropes, dipped in grease and pitch, and to be burnt in cressets. Tourbillonner, to whirl about like a whirlwind; to deal boisterou∣sly. Tourbillonneux, full of whirlwinds, or like a whirlwind; boisterous, raging, outragious.
Tourchon, for torchon, a clowt, rag. Tourd, for grive, a thrush. Tourdelle, the great Thrush, or Fel∣disare. Tourdion, a turning, or winding about; also a trick, or prank; also the dance called a Round. Tourdre, as tourd. Touré, towred, full of (graced, or furnished with) towers. Tourier, the Keeper of a Tower; a Watch-man in a Tower; also a Goaler. Touriere, as tourriere. Tourillon, an inner verril, the round plate of iron whereby a piece of wood, often turned on, is pre∣served from wearing and burning. Tourillon du bras, the head or top of the arm where it is joyned with the shoulder-blade. Tourmentine, as tormentine. Tournaille, a crooked turning, or winding in and out. Tournay, a Tourney. Tournayer, for tournoyer, to turn round, or to wheel about. Tourne-bouler, to turn round. Tourne-bride, a turning back. Tourne-dos, a turn-back, a coward. Tournée, as par tournées, every one in his turn or course, rank, or place. Tourne-fol, for tourniquet, a turn∣stile. Tourne-main, the turning of the hand. Dans un tourne-main, in a trice, on a sudden. Tourneployer, to turn, bend, or bow which way soever one would have it. Tournerie, a turning; also Turners work, or ware. Tournerot, a turn-roast, or turn∣spit. Tournes en eschange, as Soulte. Tourne-soleil, for tournesol, a turn∣sol. Tournet, a small turning rundle, or ring, in the mouth of a bit, &c. Tournette, a rice, or yarn-wingle, to wind yarn on. Tourne-vent, a fashion of penthouse, or portal set before a door, for the keeping of wind out of a Room; also a moveable thing of mettal on the top of a house or chimney. Tourne-virer, to whirl about. Tourneure, a turning; also any thing that turns or makes a thing sowr, as leaven doth bread, runnet milk, &c. Tournoir, a Turners wheel; also the vice of a Press. Tournure, as tourneure. Tourrelé, incompassed with towers. Tourrier, as Tourier. Tourriere, the Nun which attends on the Tour or turning Box in the wall of a Nunnery. Tourrion, a small Turret. Tourte, for tourterelle, a Turtle-dove; also the made dish called a Florentine; also the trundle-head of a Mill. Tourtelle, as tortelle, Tourtillon, a small tourteau. Tourtoire, a hunting-pole; also an iron tool (with a wooden handle) wherewith a Cooper notches, and draws on, the principal hoops of a cask. Tourtourain, the nature of the tur∣tle. Tousé, shorn, clipped, pared round. Touser, to shear, clip, or pare round. Toussir, for tousser, to cough. Toustade, alezan toustade, a burnt sorrel, a dark-red colour like wood scorched, or metal burnt in the fire. Touton, part of a Womans privi∣ties. Touzelle, fine wheat, white winter-wheat. Toxant, for toisin, an Alarm-bell, or the ringing thereof. Toye de plomb, a web of lead. Tozelle, as touzelle. Trabe d'un ancre, the beam, or staff of an anchor. Trabée, a purple and embroidered Cassock, or Robe, worn by Kings, or great men, under their Man∣tles of state. Trabucher, as trebucher in the N. D. Trac, a track, or trace; also a trade, or course. Trac de bat∣taille, the train, provision, or fol∣lowers of an Army. Tout à trac, plainly, roundly, outright, altogether. Tracanard, as traquenard. Tracette, a little trace, tract, or footing. Traceure, as trace & tracement in the N. D. Traceux, tracing out, following the tract or footing of. Trache, a cluster of fruits (as of Apples, Pears, &c.) growing to∣gether. Tracher, for tracer, to trace out. Trachet, a little cluster of fruits. Trachiartere, the pipe of the Lungs, one of the three principal Arteries in mans body. Trachie, as trachiartere, or the wind-pipe. Tracouer, to run over. Traction, a draught, or extraction; a drawing out. Tradiment, for trahison, treachery, treason. Traditif, traditive, or of tradition. Science traditive, a Science deli∣vered by word of mouth from fa∣ther to son, or by tradition con∣tinued to posterity. Traditive, a method of teaching, or of speaking. Trafique, for trafic, trade, or traf∣fick. Traffiquerie, a trafficking; also merchandise, or ware to traffick with; also a cheating, or decei∣ving. Tragée, as dragée in the N. D. Tragelaphe, the great and blackish Deer called a Stone-buck, Deer-buck, or Goat-hart, because con∣ceived between a Buck-goat and the Hinde. Traget, for trajet, a narrow passage over Sea, or the like. Tragon, the herb Tarragon; also amelcorn, or starch-corn. Tragoncée, as tragon. Traguetter, as trajetter. Traiclou, the tool wherewith Shoo-makers pull their tacks out. Traictif, as nez traictif, a pretty long nose, a nose of a graceful length. Traictis, as mains traictisses, long and slender hands. Traictoire, as tourtoire, in the lat∣ter sence. Trajectaire, a Ferry-man; also one that tumbles through a hoop held up; also a Jugler, Impostor, or Couzener. Trajecter, to ferry over. Trajectoire, the cannon, or tail of a perfuming funnel. Trajectoire, (Adj.) passing, tran∣sporting, or conveying over. Traigne, the Sea-dragon, Viver, Quaviver. Traille, for treille, an Arbour. Trailler, to wind yarn; also to trail a Deer, or hunt him upon a cold scent, or with a Lime-hound. Trainacer, as trainasser. Tramage, Trainage; or a Right whereby a Lord of Tythe-grounds which have kept and wintered
Cattle, whose Owners work with them in the Tythe-grounds of an∣other Lord, may lawfully take half of those Tythes, when they are to be gathered. Trainard, as traine-gaine; also crawling, or creeping along close by the ground. Trainassé, dragged, or trailed a∣long. Trainasser, to drag, or trail along. Trainasserie, a train, tail, or long tail; also a trailing, or dragging along. Traine, the woof, or west in wea∣ving; a garment of course cloth; a plot, practice, or conspiracy; also the body of a tree cut off from the root and branches, and drag∣ged along in a cart; also a sledge; also a drag-net, or draw-net. Traineau à plommée, a Stelleer; Roman, or Venice-beam, for the weighing of things. Trainegaine, a lazy companion, a dull or heavy fellow; one that trails the scabbord of his sword after him, or wears it so low and so loosely, that it drags on the ground as he goes. Traineller, to trammel for larks. Traine-pieds, one that lazily or weakly trails his legs after him. Traineresse, as bonnettes traine∣resses, the drablers for a sail. Trainiere, common Trefoil, or three-leaved grass. Trainoir, for traineau, a sledge. Trainon, a Drag-net, or Dray-net for fish. Trainquenailles, base rascals. Traïon, the teat, or nipple of a Cows udder. Traïot, a milking-pail, or piggin. Traistreau, a young, or little Tray∣tor. Traistrement, Traistreusement, treacherously, persidiously. Traitif, as traictif. Traluire, as treluire. Tramail, a tramel, or net for Par∣tridges. Tramaillé, treble-mailed, woven or bound by treble mashes or mails. Tramblotis, a trembling. Trameau, a kinde of drag-net; also a trammel-net for sowl; also a sledge. Trameter, to continue a sute, or hold on a pursuit, Trameul, a mill-hopper. Tramillon, a little drag-net. Tramois, meslin of oats and barley mingled. Tramontain, Northerly, coming from, or dwelling in the North. Tranchaison, as tranchée in the N. D. Tranchelion, a notable trencher-man. Tranche-montaigne, a terrible Swaggerer, one that's ready to cut down mountains. Trançon, a truncheon; also a little piece of. Trangle, as tringe. Tranquiller, Tranquilliter, to calm, still, quiet, pacify, appease. Transailles, corn sowed in the Spring, as barley, oats, &c. Transanimation, for metempsycose, Metempsycosis, or the passage of the Soul from one body to ano∣ther. Transchangement, an alteration, or changing over into another qua∣lity or nature. Transcoulation, a running, or gli∣ding through; also a straining through. Transcoulé, run, or slid through; also strained through; let run out. Transcouler, to run, or slide through, to strain through, to let run out. Transcrivain, a transcriber. Transenter, to graft out of one stock into another. Transfondre, to pour out of one vessel into another, to transfer, to transpose. Transfretter, hastily to pass over, or along. Transfuyard, for Transfuge, a De∣sertor that sides with the Enemy. Transgloutir les morceaux, greedily to swallow down his meat half-chawed. Transissement, a swounding, or fal∣ling into a trance. Translaté, for traduit, translated. Translater, for traduire, to tran∣slate. Translateur, for Traducteur, a Translator. Translatice, transposed, transferred; also transitive, flitting. Transluire, to be transparent, to shine (or be bright) through. Transmarché, transported into for∣reign Countries. Transmarchement, a transporting into forreign Countries; also a removing, or shifting out of one Country into another. Transmarcher, to transport into forrein Countries; also to re∣move, or shift out of one Country into another. Transmigration, a transmigration, or shifting of abode. Transmigrer, to shift his dwelling place. Transmissible, transmittable. Transmontain, dwelling beyond the mountains. Transmontane, for tramontane, the North-star. Transompt, as transumpt. Transpasser, to pass, or go through. Transpirable, transpirable, easie to breath out, or through. Transplacer, to remove out of one place into another. Transplantation, for transplante∣ment, a transplanting. Transpontin, a ship-ladder; also a little bridge over a ditch. Transpontin, (Adj.) outlandish, over Sea. Transvasation, a pouring out of one vessel into another. Transversaire, Transversal, Trans∣versel, cross, or crossing. Musle transversaire, a certain Muscle which draws the head aside. Transumpt, an exemplification; the copy of a record. Trantaner, as trantraner. Trantin, a piece of Coyn worth a French penny, or better. Trantrac, Trantran, the sound of a Hunters horn. Trantraner, to winde a horn very loud, to make it rattle. Trapé, for trape, a well-set man. Trapelle, a little trap; a mouse-trap. Trapercer, for transpercer, to pierce, or to run through. Trapeze, figure trapeze, unequally sided and cornered, of unequal breadth. Muscle trapeze, the Muscle whereby the Shoulder-blades are drawn upwards. Trappan, a Stone-cutters drill, the tool wherewith he bores little holes in marble, &c. Trappe, for trape, a trap; also a certain trip, or trick in wrastling. Trappelle, as trapelle. Trappu, thick and short. Trapusse, a trap. Traquenard, a racking horse or guelding, a hackney. Traquenarderie, a racking, or shuf∣fling pace. Trascendant, for transcendant, tran∣scendent.
Trasle, a Thrush, or Feldifare. Traslier, a kinde of the barren scarlet-oak. Trasser, for tracer, to trace up; also to draw the first rude lines of a picture. Trasses, the slot, view, or footing of a Deer. Trasseure, a dash with a pen, or pencil; also a trace, path, or footing. Trastravat, a horse that's cross-tra∣versed, that hath two overthwart white feet. Trau, for trou, a hole. Travaillement, a toiling, moiling, or labouring; also a troubling, har∣rying, or molesting. Travat, as trastravat. Travelot, a double quarter, or small beam. Travelure, a frame of beams. Travers, (Adj.) cross, cross-wise; also ill-placed, out of order. Traversain, (Adj.) cross, lying or laid across, or sidelong. Traversan, a cross rafter, or quarter; an overthwart plank or board. Traverse, as oeil traverse, a leering eye, or leering cast of an eye. Traverseux, cross, froward. Traversier, (Subst.) a Ferry-boat guided by a rope fastened unto a post, &c. on either side of a Ri∣ver; also a cross beam, plank, or board; also the wine-vessel called otherwise poinson. Traumatique, any oyntment or salve that's fit or good for wounds. Travoison, as travaison in the N. D. Travonaison, an arched frame, cie∣ling, or floor of beams, &c. Travoniser, Travonner une mu∣raille, to arch a wall over with a frame of beams, &c. Travouil, rice, or a turning reel. Trayans, the wires which are placed in the forepart of an arched, or old-fashioned Organ, and serve to stop or open the pallats thereof. Traye, a kinde of thrush. Trayer, a milking pail. Trayme, & Traymeau, a kinde of drag-net for fishing. Trayne, as traine; also a great round post, or piece of timber, like to an apple-tree. Trayneau, for traineau, a sledge. Trayne-guain, as trainegaine. Trayons, the Teats, or Dugs of a Cow. Treau de saffran, a bed of saffron. Trebouset, a kinde of sweet wine. Trece, for tresse, a tress, or lock of hair. Treffond, Treffoncier, as trefonds, trefonsier in the N. D. Trefont de Tonnelier, a Coopers Turrel, the augar wherewith he makes holes. Tregenier, a Salter, or one that selleth salt (as some here) out of carts, &c. Trehu, as treu. Treillage, grates, cross-bars, lattice∣work; arbors; a railing. Treillé, Treiller, as treillissé, trei∣lisser in the N. D. Treine, as trene; also a dorman, or great beam. Trelis, for treillis, a trellis, or let∣tice. Treluire, to glister, or shine very bright. Tremaille, a trammel, or net for Partridges. Tremaillé, as tramaillé. Tremblaye, a grove of Asps. Tremble, for torpille, a cramp-fish. Trembloer, the sound-board of a Musical Instrument. Tremblotis, an often trembling, a quaking. Treme, as traime. Tremeau, as trumeau; or a leg of beef. Tremegiste, an excellent Master, or Philosopher. Tremeiller, to quake, to wag. Tremeur, a great fear or dread; a trembling, or quaking thereby. Tremeze, a kinde of Rye sowed in the Spring. Tremoise, the Seate called the Cramp-fish. Tremouille, for tremie de moulin, a mill-hopper. Tremoy, and Tremoye, as tremail in the N. D. Trempe, (m.) houshold-wine, or small wine made for the Ser∣vants, of water and the grounds or bottoms of good wine. Trempette, a sop, or sippet. Trempis, filthy water, wherein raw things have been dipped, steeped, or soaked. Trempoir, the pit wherein Tanners do soak their hides after they have been in their lime-pit. Tremue (for tremie) de moulin, a mill-hopper. Tren, an Instrument (somewhat like an Eel-spear) wherewith Mari∣ners do strike and kill fish at Sea. Trenchaison, a gripe, or a wring, as of the chollick. Trenchaisonner, to gripe, or wring like the chollick. Trenche-montaigne, as tanche-montaigne. Trencheoir, for tranchoir, a tren∣cher. Trene, a threefold rope, or twist, called by Mariners a Sinnet. Trenné, twisted, or made into a threefold rope. Trenou, a great ramp, or tomboy. Trense, as transe in the N. D. Trentain, a thirtieth, or the num∣ber of thirty. Trente-costes, a looby, a tall (but slim) fellow. Trepane, for trepan, a trepan. Trepanation, a trepaning, a round opening of the scull with a tre∣pan. Trepé, trampled on, trodden under foot. Trepelu, a poor tattered rogue, a beggarly wretch. Treper, to trample on, or tread un∣der foot; also to stamp, hop, skip, or trip. Trepidation, trembling, terrour, fear. Trepier, a place whereat three or four sundry streets or high-ways do meet ahead. Trepillard, skipping, hopping, stam∣ping, or trampling on. Trepiller, as treper. Trepiner, for trepigner, to make a clattering motion with the feet. Trepis de bestes, a trampling, or often treading on by the feet of beasts. Trepointe, as Souliers à trepointe renversée. Tresabonescient, most earnestly. Tresacertes, throughly, in great earnest, as much (or as far) as may be. Tresalé, scorched, parched, dried up, or drained of moisture by extream heat; also (Substantively) a scor∣ching, parching, or great drought by an extream heat. Tresaler, to scorch, parch, or dry up, drain, or be drained of all manner of moisture by extream heat. Tresarriere, exceeding backward, very far behinde-hand. Trescau, a eap of sheaves in a corn-field; also as trezeau in the N. D. Tresfoncier, & Tresfond, as tre∣sonfier, tresonds in the N. D.
Tresme, and Tresmer, as traime and traimer. Tresmousser, to bring forth abun∣dance of moss; also, as tremous∣ser, to shiver. Tresne, and Tresnon, as trene. Trespassant, for passager, a passenger. Trespecer, to pull, or tear into ma∣ny pieces. Trespercer, to pierce, or strike through. Tresque, exceeding much. Tresquer, to dance. Tressault, Tressaut, a start or start∣ing; also a leap, or leaping over. Tresseau, the name of a fertile Vine. Tressette, a little tres, or lock. Trestous, all, or every one. Treu, for trou, a hole; also the toll or custom paid unto Lords for Salt and other Commodities car∣ried along by their Dominions; and generally any Toll, Tax, or Imposition. Treuäge, as treu. Trevertin, a kind of marble, or marble-like stone. Treufle, for trefle, a club at Cards. Un nez d'az de treufle, a flat bottle-nose. Treuil, as trieule. Trevisaine, as la Danse Trevi∣saine, lechery. Treul, a Wine-press, or any Press. Treule, a little fish-net for Stues and small ponds. Trevongner, to pull, or tug. Trezain, a thirteenth penny piece; also a thirteenth. As le trezain du pain, vantage of Bread, the thirteenth loaf given by Bakers unto the dozen. Trezeine de bois, thirteen billets, or logs; or as much wood as a man can carry. Trezeler, to make up sheaves of corn into shocks; also to exclaim, or rail on. Triacle, for theriaque, treacle. Triaclerie, the making of treacle; also a cheat. Triade, a tre at dice; or a third. Tribaille, the poultry. Tribailleur, a Poulter. Triballer, to dangle, to go dingle dangle. Tribart, a short cudgel. Tribe, for Tribu, a Tribe. Triboler, to quake, to shiver; also to jog like a cart in an uneven way; also to jumble, or to set a thing out of order. Tribort, the Star-board, or the right side of a ship. Tribouil, trouble, or vexation. Triboule-mesnage, an ill, or un∣skilful husband, that confounds his own business. Triboulet, or Triboullet, a triblet, the tool whereon Goldsmiths and Clockmakers put rings and little wheels, when they file, or otherwise work them; also a slovenly fel∣low. Tribouller, as triboler. Tribule, a caltrop, or saligot. Tric, a word whereby Printers do signifie, that they give over wor∣king. Tridcondaines, as triquedondai∣nes. Trichard, cheating, cousening. Trichiase, a Disease coming unto Nurses paps, by drinking down a hair; also a small and invisible cleft about the back-bone, run∣ning out in length, and oftentimes causing death; also a vicious in∣version of the upper eye-lid, to the trouble of the under one, and torment of the whole eye. Trichoterie, as tricoterie. Tricon, a Gleek of Kings, Queens, Knaves, &c. three of them in one hand together. Tricot, a hard stick. Tricoter, to knit. Tricoter la pu∣reté de l'or, to alter, change, al∣lay, or imbase gold. Tricoterie, cheating, or cousenage. Tricoteur, a knitter. Tricoteur de procez, a crafty, or couzening Lawyer; a contriver, or can∣vasser of Sutes. Tricoteuse, a knitter, a woman that knits. Tride, as Carriere tride, a strong speedy moving of a horse in his carrier. Trie, for triage, a choice, culling, or picking out. Triege, strong, lusty. Tricule d'un puis, the round beam about which the cord of a Mill doth turn. Trifere, a certain compound and delicious Electuary. Trifourché, treble-forked, three-fold. Trigaut, an intangler, or perplexer of a business; one that is full of shifts or sleights. Trihoris, or Trihory, a kinde of Brittish and Peasantly Dance, consisting of three steps, and per∣formed by hobling youths, com∣monly in a round. Trikatiste, spitting fire. Triller, to put on a new shirt, &c. and wear it till it be grown easie or soft. Trillon, the ninth place in Numera∣tion, and a hundred millions in number. Trilly (for treillis) d'Allemaigne, sine buckram waved like a wa∣ter-chamlet. Trimestre, of three months. Trine, compounded, or made of three. Tringle, a curtain-rod; a piece of round iron or wire of the bigness of a curtain-rod, used for the joyning of stones or timber, and for the hanging up of things; also a flat stick, or lath-like piece of wood. Tringue, as tringle; also a drink∣ing. Trinquamaille, as trinquemaille. Trinqueballer les cloches, to jangle, or to ring bells untunably and too much. Trinquemaille, such a box as Play∣ers take money in at their doors. Trinquer, to drink much. Trinquerie, a stout drinking. Triochite, triple-stoned. Triolaine, a list, file, or series; also a continual clutter. Triole, a woful song. Triomphe, and its Derivatives. See them spelt with n instead of mp, in the N. D. Trion, choice or picked grain, clean corn. Trioule, as triole. Tripailleries, all kinde of tripes. Tripelle, as tripoly. Triper, as treper. Tripetter, to trip, or foot it nimbly in dancing. Triphere, as trifere. Tripied, for trepié, a trevet. Tripolion, Hogs beans, blue dai∣sies. Tripoly, a stone with the powder whereof Lapidaries do smooth or polish their jewels. Tripoté, tossed to and fro, as a ball at Tennis; also confusedly jum∣bled, or hudled together. Tripoter, to play at Tennis, to toss a ball to and fro; also confusedly to jumble, or huddle together. Tripoteur, a very bungler, one that doth huddle or shuffle things to∣gether.
Tripotier, a great haunter of Ten∣nis-Courts. Tripper, as triper. Triqué, severed from, or culled from the rest. Triquebalaridean, a trifle, a thing of no worth. Triquedondaines, all kinde of su∣perfluous trifles used, or usually bought, by women; any trash, or paultry stuff; also a crue of rascals. Triquehouse, a boot-hose, or a thick hose worn instead of a boot. Triquemadame, Prickmadam, Sen∣green the lesser. Triquenisques, trash, trifles, paltry stuff, things of no value. Argu∣mens de triquenisques, idle ar∣guments. Monsieur de trique∣nisques, a thread-bare Gentleman. Triquetrac, for tric-trac, the Game Tick-tack, at Tables. Triquetre, a Triangle. Triquette, a whirligig. Triquotter, as tricoter. Trisayeul, a great great grand∣father. Triscaciste, exceeding ill. Trissage, Germaunder, English trea∣cle. Trissyllabe, of three syllables. Tristeur, for tristesse, sadness, me∣lancholy. Trisulque, having three edges. Trituration, a breaking, or grinding small. Trituré, broken, or ground small. Triturer, to break, or grind small. Trivialitez, trivial (or slight) mat∣ters. Triule, as trieule. Trocanters, two bunches towards the top of the thigh-bone; a great one (and the greatest of the whole body) standing outward, a less and lower standing inward. Troché, as teste de Cerf trochée, a Harts troched head, or whose top is divided into three or four small branches. Trochelle, a certain Instrument of torture, used in the Inquisition-house. Trochet, as trochée in the N. D. also a kinde of small, white, and sweet apple. Trochile, a Wren; also a little Wa∣ter-fowl, which is said to pick the teeth of Crocodiles; also a little wreathed band, or member in Pil∣lars. Trochisqué, made like, or into a Trochsk. Trocisque, as trochisque in the N.D. also a stalk. Trosée, for trophée, a trophy. Trognic, scoffing, mocking, deri∣ding. Trognon, the stock, stump, or trunk of a branchless tree. Troignon, as trognon; also the core within fruit. Trokalazon, as ptoschalazon. Troiller, (for fouler) la vendange, to tread, or to stamp grapes. Troller, hunts to trowl, range, or hunt out of order. Trollerie, a trowling, or hunting out of order. Trombe, a round and hollow ball of wood, having a peak like a cast∣ing top, and making a great noise when it is cast, as a top. Tromble, for torpille, the Cramp-fish. Trompetteur, for Trompette, a Trumpeter. Tron, for trone in the N. D. also the piece of a thing. Troncation, a mutilation, or cutting off. Tronche, a great piece of timber, or as trone in the N. D. Tronchet, a truncheon, a little stock. Tronchou, a kinde of smooth flat fish without scales. Troncir, to cut off into pieces. Tronçonneur, a cutter of things in∣to truncheons, or lumps. Trondel, the trundle, or trundling of a ball, &c. Trondeler, to trundle as a ball; or as rondeler. Trongné, of the face; also from the teeth outwards; also working, mowing, or making faces at. Trongneux, making a sowr coun∣tenance. Trougnon, as trognon. Troppeler, to troop, or flock toge∣ther. Troq, for troc, a truck, or bar∣tering. Troquet, a kinde of small, white, and sweet apple. Trosseau, Trossel, for trousseau, a truss, packet, bundle, or fardle. Trosse-qucue, for trousse-queue, a dock for the train of a horse. Trosser, for trousser, to pack, or to tuck up. Trotier, trotting, or which trotteth; also gadding, or wandering much up and down. Trotiere, a gadding huswife. Trotigner, to trip it, to go thick and short; also to run much up and down. Trotteresse, as trotiere. Trottier, for troteur, a vagabond, or loytering fellow. Trottouer, a board in the lover of a Dove-coat for Pigeons to alight on; also the Seat, or Tribunal of a Judge; also babling, or prat∣ling. Trottres, low tresles, to heighten coffers withal. Trouée, a gap, or muset in a hedge. Trougne, for trongne, ones look, or countenance. Troupelet, a little troop, flock, or herd. Troupet, for toupet, a lock of hair. Trousse-Galant, Stoop-Gallant, a kinde of Plague, wherewith the richest and strongest are the soonest infected, and once infected dead within two or three days. Troussel, as trossel. Trousseure, as troussoire; also a truss used by such as are burst. Troussis, a tuck, or tucking up, in a garment. Troussoire, a belt, or girdle. Troussure, as trousseure. Trouvage, Trouvement, a finding, inventing, devising, lighting on. Trouverre, an ordinary Poet, Rhi∣m, Versifter, Ballad-maker. Tru, or Truage, a toll, custome, tax, or imposition. Truandaille, a rue of rasally beg∣gars, a company of lewd rogus. Truandeau, a young rascal. Truble, a little fish-net for Stus and small Ponds; also the water-fowl called a Shovelar. True, a blow, or thwack; also the popping, or sound of the tip, wherewith we use to encourage a horse. Je vous grupperay au true, I shall take you napping, or catch you as you go by. Truchemander, to interpret, to serve as an Interpreter. Trucheran, S. Johns-wort. Trucheter, for éternur, to sci. Truculent, cruel, or having a cruel countenance. Truege, the Dorce, or Gold-fish. Truecie, as truege. Truelleur, a Plaisterer, or any one that works with a trowel. Truette, as truege. Truseirande, female (great, or moun∣tain) Southernwood.
Truffant bourdant, between jst and earnest. Truffe, for raillerie, a jest. Truffer, to deride; also to nod, or shake the head, as those that ap∣prove not the thing they hear. Truffette, a jest. Truffeur, a jester. Truffler, as truffer. Trustle, as truffe. Truine, the fh Tunny. Trulle, as truble. Trumeau de boeuf, a leg of beef. Trumeau de veau, as rouelle de veau in the N. D. Trupelu, as trepelu. Trupet, as troupet. Truquer to knock or sight. Trut, (an Interjtion of Indigna∣tion) y man. Trut avant, a fart, no such matter, you are much de∣ceived. Truyette, a young, or very little Sow. Truyettes, the marks of shin-burning, the red scorches or spot on burnt shins. Trycher, and Trycherie, as tricher, tricherie in the N. D. Trye, as trie. Trygonne, a kinde of Scate-fih. Tu autem, as vous en sçaurez le tu autem, you shall understand the whole matter. Tube, a Conduit-pipe; also the hol∣low of the back-bone, or the pipe through which the marrow thereof doth run. Tubercle, the small rising or swelling of a wheal, or pimple; also a wheal. Tuberculeux, swelling like a push or wheal; also full of pushes, or wheals. Tubereux, swelling, bunchy, knob∣by. Tuberositez, swellings, bunches, knobs. Tubilustre, a day whereon the Trumpets dedicated unto Sacri∣fices were hallowed, and the Trumpeters purged with water. Tubule, a little conduit-pipe, or hollow reed. Tucquet, a little hill. Tue-chien, the h rb Dogs-bane; al∣so medow (or wild) Saffron. Tue-loup, the herb Wolves-bane. Tuement, a killing, slaying, mas∣sacring. Tuseux, covered with, or full of tuf. Tuffe, a Footman, or Souldier ser∣ving on foot; also as tuf in the N. D. Tuffeau, as tuf in the N. D. Tuffiere, a bed of tuf; the Ground, or Quarry wherein it is gotten. Tugnicien, as tunicien. Tugure, a cottage. Tugurion, a shed, or a little cot∣tage. Tuileur, for Tuilier, a Tiler, or Tile-maker. Tuileux, full of tiles. Tuilleau, Tuillette, a little tile; also a wedge of Gold or Sil∣ver. Tuilot, a broken tile, or piece of a tile; also a little tile. Tuition, tuition, defence, or protecti∣on. Tulbant, for turbant, a turbant. Tuleau, as tuilot. Tulebute, the pipe of a fountain, or gutter. Tulipan, for tulipe, a tulip. Tumbe, as tombe. Tumber, for tomber, to fall. Tumbereau, for tombercau, a tum∣brel. Tumesié, swoln, or made to swell, puffed up. Tumefier, to make to swell, or puff up. Tunal, the Indian fig-tree. Tunicien, a Barbary faulcon. Tunicis, as l'herbe de tunicis, frotly or spatling Pppy; also the herb that bears sweet Willi∣ams. Tuph, as tus in the N. D. also rub∣bish. Tupin, a pipkin, or earthen pot. Turaulx, old mole-hills, overgrow with grass. Turbateur, a troubler, disturber, disquieter. Turbation, a trouble, or troubling; a disturbance, disquieting, or mo∣lestation. Turbe, as tourbe; also a Troop (consisting at the least) of ten Witnesses; two such Troups be∣ing required to the approvement of an unwritten Custome, and for the exposition of a written one. Turbentine, for terebentine, Tur∣pentine. Turbet, the name of a little Ap∣ple, a graft whereof doth streigh∣ten the crooked stock whereon it is set. Turbin, the shell-fish called a Welk, or Winkle. Turbine, a tempest, whirlwind, or boisterous weather. Turbiné, fahioned like a top, sharp at the bottome and broad at the top. Turbulenter, to bluster, to storm; to vex, turmoil, or disquiet. Turcée de raisins, a Cluster of grapes. Turci, a causey, or bank for the keeping back or holding in of waters. Turcie, as turci; or the raising of such a caus y, or bank. Turcot, the bird called a Wyneck. Tureaux, as turaulx. Turelureau, as mon turelureau, my pretty knave. Turgent, swelling, rising, puffing up. Turgon, a kinde of red bts which have with r st nor saour. Turguet, a little wimble; also amel-corn, or search-corn. Turlupin, a grub, mushrm  of no value. Turme, for truse, Swi-bread. Turonde, a round pllt (or piece) of dough, ae, or bread, where∣with fowl is crammed; also a hawks casting. Turpe, foul, ugly, filthy, dishonora∣ble. Turpot, a certain piece of timber (whereof there be four, two in the Forecastle, and two in the Stern of a Ship) fastened unto the Va∣rengues, and serving among other things to keep the Ar∣tillery from recoyling too far back. Turquet, as turguet. Turrement, a violent shock, or joult, as of an engine of Battery against a Wall. Turse, as turcée. Tursie, as turcie. Turturelle, for tourterelle, a Turtle-dove. Turumber, an ancient Arabian word, signifying the finest sort of Sugar. Tusé, pounded, brayed, beaten, or bruised in a mortar. Tute, a hole, or berry made by a Co∣ney. Tuthie, a Medicinable stone, or dust, said to be the heavier foil of brass cleaving to the upper sides and tops of brass-melting-houses. Tutsan, Park-leaves (an herb.) Tutuyer, for tutoyer, to thou one. Tutye, as tuthie.
Tyberiade, a topography, the mode or draught of a place. Tymbre, and Tymbré, as timbre, timbré in the N. D. Tymbrée, fish (water, or brook) mint. Tympane, as tympanne. Tympaner, Tympaniser, to play on a Tympan, Timbrel, or Taber; also to desame, slander, tra∣duce. Tympaniste, a Tympanist, a player on a Tympan, &c. also one that hath a Tympany. Tympanne, the pannel, or flat square on the top or head of a Pillar. Tyn, the herb Tyme. Tyne, as tine. Typhaine, as tiphaine. Typhe, Water-torch, or Cats-tail. Typher, as tiffer. Typholope, a kinde of a hard-skinned blinde worm, or Sloe-worm, which is not very venomous. Typhones, great, or violent whirl-winds. Tyranneau, a petty Tyrant. Tyrasser, as tirasser. Tyrepet, a great farter. Tyrer, as tirer in the N. D. Tyromantie, divination by a cheese. Tyrouer, the flat piece behinde the bridge of a Violin, whereto the strings be fastened; also as tirouër. Tyrse, as tirse. Tyrsigere, Ivy-bearing, or decked with Ivy. V. VAcabond, for vagabond, a Vaga∣bond. Vacant, (Subst.) the revenue of a Benefice during vacancy. Vachelette, a very little Cow. Vacherie, a herd of Kine; also a Cow-house, or Stable for Kine. Vachette, a little Cow. Vachier, for Vacher, a Cow-herd, or Keeper of Cows. Vacillation, a reeling, tottering, or staggering. Vacillé, reeled, tottered, stagger∣ed. Vaciller, to reel, totter, or stag∣ger. Vade, pass. Vagabonder, to wander, or loiter up and down. Vageux, as vagueux. Vagine, a Sheath, Scabbard, Case, or Covering; also the husk, or cod of Corn. Vagir, to cry like a little childe. Vaguer, as vagabonder. Vagueur, and Vagueux, full of waves. Vaillantise, for valeur, valour. Vaineté, for vanité, vanity. Vainqueresse, a vanquishing or vi∣ctorious woman, a Conqueress. Vairie, as Vavrie. Vairole, for verole, the Pox. Val, for vallée, a vale, valley, dale. Valdimonie, a day of appearance, or a promise (or bond) for ap∣pearance at a certain day. Valence, for vaillant, stort, vali∣ant. Valentianes, as par valentianes, by sits, by turns, but slowly for∣ward. Valeriane, and Valerienne, for va∣lerine, Garden-valerian, Capons-tail, Setwall. Valetaille, a company of Grooms, or meaner Servants; a ras ally crew of camp-following boys or drudges. Valeter, to perform the part of a drudge, to stoop, or submit too much. Valeton, a Bar-servant. Valetté, made very common, prosti∣tuted unto the u of Grooms and meaned sort of Servants. Vileure, value rate, or price. Valureusement, for vaillamment, valiantly courigiously. Valeureux, for vaillant, valorous, valiant, . Validation, a ngtig, or con∣firming; an establishing, or ra∣tifying. Vali-dir, for Valet-de-pié, a Foot-man, or Servant onely for Er∣rands. Valitude, health, strength, or wel∣fare. Vailant, for vaillant, valiant, Valletaille, Valleter, Valleton, and Vallidation. See them with a single. Vallois, a kinde of Net wherewith fish as (forbidden to be) caught. Valoir, (Subst.) value, worth, rate, or price. Valois, as vallois. Valve, a folding (or two-leaved) door, or window. Value, value, worth, goodness. Vandanger, as vndanger in the N. D. Vandoise, the Dace, or Dare-fish. Vanereau, a young Lapwing. Vangeron, a little red-finn'd-fish in the lake of Geneva. Vanier, as vannier. Vanné, Vanneau, Vanner, and Vanneur. See them with a sin∣gle n in the N. D. Vannerie, for Venerie, hunting. Vannet, for vaneau, a Lapwing. Vanneure, a winnoning; also a chiding; also a scoffing, or de∣riding. Vannier, a Sieve-maker; a Basket-maker. Vannures, winnowings, or fistings of corn. Vanoyer, to vanish, to disappear; also to be vain, or play vain parts. Vantance, for vanterie, a vaunting, boasting, or bragging. Vanterolles, as venterolles. Vanteux, full of ostentation. Vapide, wasty, or wasted; that sends up an id sume, that yields a stinking vapour. Vaquance, and Vaquant, as va∣cance, and vacant in the N. D. Var, as bar. Varandé, well dri'd and seasoned, as a herring ready to be barrell'd up. Varander, to dry, and season br∣rings for the barrel. Varaville, the name of a green sweet apple fashioned like an egg. Varenne, a reddi h ati, whereof the Mds of Founders and Gs of Ptters be ordinarily . Varennes, lean and dry grounds, st onely to br Oats and Rye. Varenneux, dry, lean, or barren. Variqueux, the veins of whose Temples, &c.  swoln with cor∣rupt loud; also stradling, go∣ing wide asnder. Varig, sag, Sword-grass, Corn-slag. Varin, a wooden Engine consisting of two vices and a screw, and serving to list up great pieces of Timber, or of Artillery. Variner, a little Varin. Varioles, the Small-pox. Variqueux, as varicqueux. Varlet, for Valet, an ordinary man-servant; also a youth, or striling. Varletaille, Varleter, and Varle∣ton, as Valetaille, Valeter, Va∣leton.
Varre, a certain long Italian mea∣sure. Vasche, for vache, a cow. Vasois, a shore, or place often over∣flowed with water, and thereby full of owze or mud. Vasquine, a petticoat; also a Spa∣nish Vardingale. Vasquinier, a maker of petticoats, or Spanish Vardingales. Vassaudie, for Vasselage, Vassalage, or subjection. Vassausie, the Right which a Sove∣raign, or Landlord, pretends to have over his Vassal, or Tenant. Vasseur, a Vassal; also a Villain. Vastadour, a Pioneer, or digger; also a mnder of high-ways. Vastation, a wasting, spoyling, or ransacking. Vastibousier, a loggerhead. Vastines, waste grounds. Vaticinateur, a Soothsayer, Diviner, or Foreteller of things to come. Vaticination, a soothsaying, divi∣ning, or foretelling. Vaticiner, to soothsay, divine, or foretel. Vatton, the latch of a door; also a lever. Vau, a Vale, or Valley. Vavassoire, Vavassourie, the estate, land, or territory of a mesne Lord, or under-Vassal. Vauche, the herb called Perwinkle. Vaucrer, to wander up and down; to float, or wave up and down, to hold an uncertain course at Sea. Vauderoute, as s'enfuir à vaude∣route, to run headlong along. Mettre à vauderoute, to put wholly to flight. Vaudeville, a Country-ballad, or Song; also a vulgar Proverb. Vaudre, a kinde of Vessel for Rhenish wine. Vauldeville, as vaudeville. Vauldrée, a maulkin. Vaulneant, an idle fellow, a rascal. Vaultrait, Vaultre, a mungrel be∣tween a hound and a mastiff (fit for the chase, or hunting of wilde bears and boars.) Vaultrer, to hunt with a Vaultre; also, to wallow as a swine. Vaultrey, a kennel, or hunt of Vaul∣tres. Vaultroy, a wilde boar; or a lime-hound for the wilde boar. Vayer, Vayrie, as Voyer, Voyerie. Ubir, to rear; to make thrive, or grow by good usage, or good fare. Uce, the Eye-lid. Veaurre, the fleece of a ram. Veautreur, a wallower, or tumbler in the dirt. Veautroir, a puddle, or slough where∣in hogs use to wallow. Vedat, as bedat. Vedeau, for Bedeau, a Verger. Vedel, for veau, a calf. Teste de vedel, a silly fellow. Vedille, a sucking Calf. Vedet, a blockhead. Vedelle, the Navel-string of a new-born Infant. Vée, labour, toil, or pains. Veé, forbidden. Veeurs, Witnesses, or Assistants in a view or survey of land. Vef, Vefvage, and Vefve, as Veuf, Veuvage, and Veuve in the N. D. Vegade, a draught, a bout, once, or one time. Vege, a kinde of water-tree, or shrub. Vegetal, vegetal, budding, or grow∣ing. Vegetation, a giving of life, increase, or growth unto; a quickning, re∣frehing, or comforting. Vegeter, to give life, increase, or growth unto; to quicken, refresh, or comfort; also to grow, bud, or put forth, as plants. Vegettes, vegetative, or growing parts. Veguade, as vegade. Veguer, as beguer. Vehementement, vehemently. Veher, as Juge Veher, a Judge of mean, or base Jurisdiction. Veherie, mean, or base Jurisdicti∣on. Vejete, lively, or full of mettle. Vejetter, as vegeter. Veillement, a waking, or watching. Veillere, Bindweed, or Hedge-bells. Veillottes, the best and sweetest kinde of acorns, or mast growing on the small Oak Esculus. Veiné, veined, or full of veins. Veinelette, Veinette, a little vein. Veineux, Veinu, full of veins. Vejove, a wicked Spirit, a God that can do no hurt, and will do no good. Veirat, the Mackerel fish. Vela, as voila in the N. D. Velar, the herb called Bank-cresses. Veleure, hairiness, nappiness. Velin, for venin, venome. Veller, for voiler, to vail, to cover; and, for veeller, to calve. Vellication, a plucking, pulling, or lugging; also a carping at. Velocité, speed, quickness, nimble∣ness. Veloux, for velours, velvet. Veluate, as veluote, Veluette, Pilosella, Mouse-ear. Veluote, Speedwel, female fluellin. Veluté, for velouté, made velvet-like. Vendengeoire, the basket, or pan∣nir whereinto Grapes are ga∣thered. Vendengeret, belonging to, or ser∣ving for Vintage. Venderesse, for vendeuse, a woman that selleth. Vendible, for vendable, to be sold. Vendiquer, to vindicate; to claim, or challenge. Vendition, for vente, a sale, or sel∣ling. Droict de Venditions, the Tll which Lords of Markets and Fairs take for the Sale of Wares and Merchandises therein. Vendoise, a Dace, or Dare-fish. Vendue, for vente, a sale, or sel∣ling. Vené, as veiné. Venefique, venemous. Venelle, for ruelle, a narrow lane or yard. Venenosité, venomousness. Vener, for chasser, to hunt. Vengeron, a Dace, or Dare-fish. Venise, for ceruse, ceruse, or white lead. Venne, for vesse, a fizzle. Venneur, for vesseur, a fizzler. Vennier, a kinde of Pedlar, or sel∣ler of old iron-stuff. Venredi, for Vendredi, Friday. Ventail, a childish toy of a Card cut cross, like the sails of a Wind∣mill, and put with a pin unto the end of a stick, and so held into the winde, which makes it to twirl very fast about. Ventau, as ventail; also a fan. Venteler, to blow a soft gale; to waver; to air in the wind; to fan, or winnow corn; to toss, or canvas to and fro; to turn out of one hand into another. Ventelet, a little wind, a gentle gale, a cool blast of wind. Ventelle, for ventaille, the breathing part of a helmet. Venteroles, as Droict de Vente∣roles, a certain Fine due to the Landlord from the Purchaser that undertakes to discharge his selling Tenant of all Fines.
Ventilation, a gentle blowing; also a waving, or hovering in the air; a winnowing, or airing in the wind; also an estimation, valu∣ation, or prizing. Ventiler, as venteler; also to ga∣ther wind; also to estimate, prize, or value. Ventoir, as ventail. Ventolin, a very small wind. Ventose, & Ventoser, as ventouse, ventouser in the N. D. Ventrelet, a little belly. Ventresque, the entrails of an edible creature; the belly-part of a Tun∣ny. Ventriere, a belly-band for a draught-horse. Ventripotent, having a huge belly. se Ventrouiller, for se veautrer, to wallow in the dirt. Venture, for aventure, an adven∣ture. Veoir, for voir, to see. Veracée, the fulness, or full measure of a certain vessel (somwhat like a porrnger) wherein Caillebotes are usually put. Veraire, the herb called Hellebore, especially the black one. Verangenes, mad (raging) apples. Verart, & Veratre, as veraire. Verbalement, verbally, by word of mouth. Verbasce, Longwort. Verbe, (Adj.) stout, haughty, sto∣machful. Verbenique, vervine, pigeons cross, holy herb. Verdales, a kinde of grapes. Verdalle, for verdon, a Dunnk, or Hedge-sparrow. Verdement, for vertement, briskly. Verdere, Verdereule, the little bird called a Yellow-hammer, or Youl∣ring. Verderie, the Office of a Verderer in a Forest. Verderis, or Verdet, for verd de gris, verdigrease, or Spanish green. Verdeureux, somewhat green. Verdillon, an unripe, or sowr grape. Verdondaine, Verdonille, two in∣significant oaths. Verdot, greenish, a little green, young, raw, or not yet ripe. Verdrier, as Verdere. Verducade, a closet, a hiding hole, or corner. Verdun, the little rapier called a Tuck; also as verdere, and as verdon in the N. D. Verdurer, to make, or become green. Verdurier, an herb-man, one that furnishes a house with such green things as be in season. Verduriere, an herb-woman. Vere, as voire. Verecond, demure, shamefaced, bash∣ful. Veresque, for varesque, a wrack of the Sea. Veret, a little worm. Vergadelle, a Pond-fish like unto (but less than) the Saupe. Vergaland, a lusty Younker. Vergay, as brouët vergay d'anguil∣le, broth made of eels boyled in small pieces with parsley, toasted bread, saffron, and ginger. Vergaye, a kinde of dance. Vergé, made of rods, or twigs; al∣so streaked with long and rod-like rays; also worm-eaten. Vergée, a yard of, the length of a yard in; also a yard-land, or a rood of land. se Verger, to be streaked all over. Vergeteux, as vergeux. Vergettons, small twigs, or sprigs. Vergeux, full of rods, of, or like a rod. Vergier, for Verger, an Orchard. Vergilies, the seaven Stars. Vergne, the Alder-tree. Vergobert, a Mayor, or Burgo-master. Vergongne, shame, bashfulness, blu∣shing; also the privy parts. Vergongner, to shame, or make ashamed, to dash out of counte∣nance. Se vergongner, to blush, or be ashamed at. Vergongneux, shame-faced, bashful; also shameless, or brazen-faced. Veridique, truth-telling. Verjettons, as vergettons. Verin, as varin. Verineux, full of (or gnawn by) worms. Verisimilitude, for vraisemblance, likelyhood. Verm, for ver, a worm. Vermeillon, for vermillon, vermi∣lion. Vermeler, a little worm. Vermeniers, vermine. Vermerie, worms. Vermet, a little worm. Vermiculaire, wild prick-madam, worm-grass. Vermiforme, fashioned like a worm. Vermiformes, two worms, resem∣bling parts of the Cervelet. Vermineux, full of vermine. Herbe vermineuse, moth-mullein. Vermineux, (Subst.) the name of a certain Spider, whose body is full of spots. Verminiere, a worm-hill; or a place near a Country-house, wherein worms are bred on purpose for pul∣lein. se Vermoulir, to grow worm-eaten, mouldy, rotten. Vermoulisseure, a being worm-eaten, or full of worm-holes; rottenness, or mouldiness. Verne, as vergne. Vernedé, a certain charm, or charm∣ing prayer for the tooth-ach. Vernicer, for vernisser, to varnish. Vernillage, as ce n'est que ver∣nillage, this is but a pidling. Vernilles, trifles, things of no va∣lue. Verny, for vernis, varnish. Veroleux, for verolé, pocky. Verolique, of, or belonging to the pox. Verrate, a sow. Verretre, a mans yard. Verreux, for vereux, wormy, or full of worms; also worm-eaten, cor∣rupted, putrified; also hot, cho∣lerick, hasty, hair-brained. Faire le pois verreux, to play the hypo∣crite, to seem more honest than he is. (So many worm-eaten pease do seem a great deal founder than they be.) Verri, shining, or transparent like glass. Parchemin verri, clear, (or virgin) parent. Verrin, glassy, or of glass. Medi∣cament verrin, a blackish Medi∣cine, or Sale, made of burnt glasses, and good against the Stone. Verrine, a glass-window. Verrueux, warty, full of was. Ci∣chorée verrueuse, yellow Gum-succory. Verrugue, for verrue, a wat; also a hillock, or t kp of a ill. Verry, a mouldy Ch when it is green, or any liquid thing which gathers a mouldiness. Versal, as lettres versales, text (or great) letters. Versane, a division, or part of a plowed ground, amounting to some 2 paces in length. Versatil, quickly turning, easily turned, or poured out. Verselet, a short, or little verse. Versure, the taking up of money to pay debts with. Faire versure, to borrow of Peter to pay Paul.
Versures, the remainder, or leavings of draughts poured out of cups or glasses late drunk in, into some vessel standing under the Cup∣board, &c. for that purpose. Vertaper, to stop with a bung. Vertau, a stopple, or bung; also as vertoil. Vertemoulte, as Droict de verte∣moulte, a certain Duty, or Fine, payable unto Lords in Norman∣dy by their Tenants that inne their corn out of their Mannors. Vertevelles, the great hinges of a ga. Vertigieux, Vertigineux, giddy, dizzy, troubled with the swim∣ming of the brain. Vertiginosité, a giddiness, dizzi∣ziness, or swimming of the head or brain. Vertigné, worm-eaten. Vertiller, to swell, or increase, as a womans breasts do, when the Matrical veins are stretched by the mtrual bloud. Vertillons, the whirling, or round turning of a water. Vertir en quelque lieu, to haunt, frequent, or be conversant in a place. Il n'y sçauroit vertir, he cannot fadge with, he can't frame himself to it. Vertius, for verjus, verjuice. Vertoeil, a kinde of greenih brass, whereof great Ordinance is made. Vertoil, the whirl of lead belonging to a spindle. Vertugadin, a little Vardingale. Vertugalle, a Vardingale. Vertugoy, (an idle kinde of oath.) Vertumal, changeable at pleasure, to be altered at will, or when one list. Vervaine, for vervene, Vervein, or Holy-herb. Veruë, a brawling, jangling, or jarring; also an odde humour in a man, a worm in the head, or brizze in the tail. Il luy a pri∣une verue, the magget iles . Verveil, a Sweep-nt or Dag-n t. Verveleux, moursum, fantastical, hair-brained. Verveul, as verveil. Ver-volant, a ing-worm, or ar. Vesé, as veé. Vesialere, as Fmance Vsalere, a kinde of Oficer or Magistrate, within the Jurisdtio of la Solle. Vesicatif, blistering, blister-raising. Vesicatoire, a Vesicatory. Vesner, to frizzle. Vesperies, evening Exercises, or Disputations, among the Sorbo∣nists. Vesperisé, chidden, checked, re∣buked; also reviled, railed on, derided. Vesperiser, to chide, check, or re∣buke; also to revile, rail on, or deride. Vespertin, of the evening, done in an evening. Vesprée, the evening-tide, or sea∣son. Vessaille, a sizzling; also a crue of sizzling slovens, or sluts. Vesseron, for vesceron, the wilde Vetch. Vessié, full of blisters. Vessier, for vesseur, a sizzler. Vessier, (the Verb) to blister. Vessiere, for veseuse, a sizzling woman. Vessiette, a little blister, or bladder. Vessifier, to make break wind, or let a fizzle. Vessigons, windgals in a horses legs. Vessir, for vesser, to sizzle. Vest, a Livery and Seisin made un∣to a Purchaser, in some places by the Seller, but in most by the Lord Foncier or Censier of whom the Land is held. Droict de Vest, power to make such Livery and Seisin. Vesteure, for vêtement, garment. Vestiaire, the Vtry in a Church. Vesture, a cloathing, or attiring; also a vesting, investing, or put∣ting into possession of. Vetade, the siletted Cokle, (smooth, broad, and exceeding hard-shel∣led.) Veterinaire, an old-beaten Soul∣dier. Vettoine, for betoine, Betony. Veu, for vu, a w. Veull,  clasping tendrels, or sall twining sprigs of a Vine. Veue, for foible, weak, faint, in∣firm; oertoiled with heat, and labour; also hollow, loose, or light about a thing. Vexateur, a vexer, or tormenter. Vexation, texation, or torment. Vexé, vexed, tormented. Vexer, to vex, or to torment. Vezarde, a great fear, dread, hor∣rour. Vezé, gros vezé, a gorbelly, fat∣guts. Veze, a Bag-pipe. Jouër de la veze, to play on the Bag-pipe; also to fizzle. Vezeur, a Bag-piper. Vezei, a carbuncle, or blain-sore. Vezon, the breech. Vi, for vin, wine. Viable, likely to live. Viage, as un viage, once, or one time. Viager, (a Verb) to enjoy during life, to have an estate for life in. Viagerement, during life, only for life. Viaige, a Tenant for life. Viaire, look, aspect, countenan; also an annuity, or yearly pension for life. Viandier, of, or belonging to meat. Viateur, a traveller, a way-faring man. Vibrequin, for virebrequin, a wim∣ble. Viburne, for viorne, the wild Vine, or bend-with; or only the way∣faring tree. Vicarier, to run up and down a Country. Vice-conte, for Vicomte, a Vicount. Vice-conté, a Vicounty. Vicié, vitiated, marred, corrupted; blemihed, imperfect, unsound. Vicier, to vitiate, marr, or corrupt; to blemish, or make imperfect. Vicinité, neighbourhood, nearness. Vicon, as mon petit Vicon, my lit∣tle pilliock. Victimaire, one that sold a beast for a Sacrifice, or one that assisted the Sacrificer in the killing and dressing thereof. Victorial, of, or belonging to Victory. Victorien, for Vainqueur, an over∣comer. Victorienne, a victorious woman. Victuailles, victuals. Vieugne, a horn-less wilde beast in Peru, of whose wool the Indians make excellent Coverlets. Vidimé, confirmed, approved, rati∣fied, the goodness whereof is (af∣ter examination) warranted. Vidimer, to confirm, approve, or warrant the goodness of a thing after an examination thereof. Vidimus de lettre, an Examination of a Copy by the Original, signed by a Secretary, Register, Notary, or Clark. Viduité, for Veuvage, Widowhood. Vie, for parti, gone. Vie-vie, get you gone. Viedazer le nez à quelcun, to make a fool of one, to baffle, or abuse him.
Vieillement, Vieillessement, oldly, antiently. Vieillot, elderly, somewhat old. Vieuté, as vileté. Vif-argentin, of Quick-silver. Vif-gage, a pawn of land, for the profits whereof he unto whom it is pawned is accomptable. Vifs, les Vifs, the entrails, or guts. Vighier, as Viguier in the N. D. Vigle, for bigle, squinting, or look∣ing askew. Vignages, as Droict de Vignages, a certain Toll or Fee taken (by Lords) of Merchants, or Drovers, who with their Commodities, of Cattle, pass by their Territories. Vignettement, Vignetterie, a bor∣dering, or flourishing with bran∣ches, leaves, flowers, &c. Vignol, Vignot, a kinde of great Shell-fish. Vignotte, & Vignotter, as vignette, vignetter in the N. D. Vilainer, as vilener. Vilbrequin, for virebrequin, a wim∣ble. Vilein, as Vilain in the N. D. Vilenaille, a pack of Rascals. Vilené, defiled; also abused, or dis∣graced. Vilener, to defile; also to abuse, or disgrace. Vilenot, a little Villain; a churlih man; a clown. Vileté, for vilité, viness, seness, n worthiness; also capne. Vilipender, to despise; also to slan∣der, or traduc. Villanelle, a Country-dance, Round, or Song. Villanie, for vilenie, nastiness, for∣didne s. Villaquerie, villany, or roguer. Villatique, Country-like; of, or be∣longing to the Country, Villebrequin, as vilbrequin. Villein, as vilain in the N. D. Villenage, Villanage, or any eas and servile Tenure. Villenaille, and Villenot, as Vile∣naille, Vilenot. Villes de la Vigne, the tendrels, or twining sprigs of a Vin. Villiere, as veillere. Villon, a nimble Knave; a pleasant Thief; also a kinde of weed, wherewith bands to tye Vines are made. Villonner, to play the cunning or witty Rogu, the nimble Knave, or the pleasant Tri. Villonnerie, a witty or cunning ro∣guery, nimble knavery, pleasant or merry thievery. Villote, a Cock of hay. Villoter, to range, or wander from one Town to another. Villoteur, Villotier, a Vagabond. Villotier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to the Town only; also home-bred. Villotiere, a gadding huswife; a gossipping woman; also a bawd. Vilonage, as Villenage. Vimaires, Vimeres, storms, tempests; inundations, or breaking out of waters; ruines of buildings, and the like, by earthquakes or thun∣der-claps; any such fearful and fatal Accidents which no reason can foreset, no forsight prevent. Viminal, apt to wind, or bind, as twigs or oers; also a belonging thereto. Vimpilon, a holy-water spinkle. Vinade, Droict de Vinade, t u and work of two yok of On, or of a Cart, all the time of Vin∣tage. Vinage, a physical wine, or a d∣coction of herbs in wine, to be drunk for the ing of Ʋlrs and Wounds. Droict de Vinage, 12 pence due to the Offis of  Court of Aides, upon a nd coming in for Wine ( Cas; also the portion of  due ot of a Vineyard unto a Lord Censier, in li of  Cn∣sive, and to be allow,  head of the Vat, before the  can lawfully draw any wi  of it. At Angiers, and in o places, this Duty is turned into a pecuriary and yearly Cns. Viaigrette, Sorrel-se. Vinaigrettes, sallt, or f s, whi h be sasond with  ingar;  herbs, or fruits in pickle. Vinatier, a Barberry-tree, or Bar∣berry it self. Vineibosse, woodbind, ho ersckle. Vindice, or Vindicte, for venge∣ance, revenge. Vindiquer, to rdeem, deliver, ex∣mpt, or save from; also to re∣venge. Vindoer, a kinde of long hook, or cramp-iron full of not s. Viné, seasoned with, or for the old∣ing of wine; also tund, as wine. Vinenotte, as vivelotte. Viner, to season with, or for the holding of wine; also to tun wine. Vinetteux, a Vintner. Vineux, of, or full of wine, pro∣ceeding from wine. Vingeron, as vengeron. Vinoble, for Vignoble, a plot of ground consisting of Vineyards. Vinot, for vinet, small wine, or hedge-wine; also a kinde of little pear, the perry whereof doth tast like wine. Vinotier, a Vintur. Vinotier, (Adj) of, or belonging to wine; also bringing, or yielding wine. Vintain, a twentieth, or the 2th part of. Vintenier, the Corporal to a foot-Company. Vin-verjus,  ma of wilde or a ipe grapes. Vioge, lusty, crank. Violable, io. Violant, as le gri violant, mellow-lower-colour, or a colour between a gr y and l. Violat, of violets. Violentment, for violemment, . Vilier, a Fild; also a violet rt, or plan; a a flower-pot; also the crwn of or, &c. which  or ts of Gilli∣st r, to strengthen the stalks of. Violier des murailles, t plant tat rs the Wall∣r, o Wr-gflowers. se Vioner,  vautrer, t wallow . Vionche, of long li; or as Vige. Viperre, Vi . Viperillon, a . Virin,  of a vi  viperin,  Hy nd , and with  and earthe pot, and  in a furace unt a conlnce of coals. Viquerie, Vi. Virade, a whiing,  abut. Viraire, as veraire. Vire, the arrow called a Qu, of o for the Cross-ow. Vireot, litl les,  kts of grapes , and there . Virela, a r, . Virelis, a  as Ns. Virelon, one of  and  r∣ctacles for the Sea-water, whof  made.
Vire-soli, a Turn-sol; also a Mari∣gold. Vireson, a little Vire, or a fashion of arrow-head like a scrue. Virevoulte, for Virevolte, a wheel∣ing about. Virevoulter, for virevolter, to wheel about. Virevouste, as virevoulte. Vireur, a whirler, or turner of things often about. Vireux, rank, rammish, smelling strong; also poysonous. Virgeal, or Virgineux, for virginal, maidenly. Virgulte, a bunch of young and ten∣der shoots. Viridique, as veridique. Virlis, as virelis. Virolet, as ventail; also a shittle-cock, an arrow-head; a sword with an indented edge; a piercer; a mans yard. Virollé, bound about with an iron ring, or hoop. Virollette, a Sword with an in∣dented edge. Viron, for environ, about. Vironner, to turn, go, or wind about. Virulence, stench, rankness, ram∣mishness, poyson, venemousness. Vis, for visage, the face. Au vis le vice, our faults may be read in our faces. Visadmiral, for Vice-Amiral, a Vice-Admiral. Visc, misseldine; also bird-lime. Visceral, inward, of, or from the bowels. Viscide, clammy, or cleaving like bird-lime. Viscidité, sliminess, or clamminess. Viseneschal, an Ʋnder-Steward. Visme, a willow, or wicker-twig. Viste-courant, swift, or light of foot, that seems to flye when he runs. Vistempenard, a duster made of a fox tail fastened unto a staff. Vistempenardé, dusted, or flapped with a fox-tail; also raggedly attired. Visual, visual, of, or belonging to the sight; also carried by the sight, or extending as far as the eye can carry it. Visum visu, for vis à vis, over against. Visure, the side between the upper leather, and the sole of a corked shooe, the rand of a shooe. Vitailler, to handle, or play with a mans yard. Vitault, a great tool, or one that hath a good tool; also a flattering word for a young Boy, like our, my pretty Pillicock. Vite, for la nature d'une femme, a Womans privy parts. Vitellin, of, or belonging to the yolk of an egg. Cholere vitelline, a kind of Choler bred by a rotten or unnatural heat, and resem∣bling, both in colour and con∣sistence, the yolks of eggs. Saulx vitelline, the cane-withy, or yellow-harked willow. Vitette, a very little member, a bau∣ble. Vitez, the Shrub Agnus castus, Abrahams balm, chast (or hemp) tree. Vitier, as vicier. Vitrage, glass, or glass-work. Vitreau, a glass-window. Vitrée, the bird called a Whittail. Vitreole, small withywind, hedge∣bells, or bindweed; the black purging bindweed. Vitrerie, a glazing, or glass-making. Vitreux, glassy, of glass, full of glass; clear, transparent, or brittle as glass. Humeur vitreuse, the glassy humour in the hinder part of the eye. Vitrice, a step-father, a father in law. Vitrification, the making of glass. Vitrifier, to turn, or make into glass. Vitriole, as vitreole. Vitriolique, like vitriol, or copperas. Vitte, as vite. Vitulos, as tu auras du miserere jus∣ques à vitulos, thou shalt be sound∣ly whipped. Vituperable, blamable. Vituperation, a dispraising. Vitupere, dispraise, discommendati∣on, disparagement; blame, or re∣prehension. Vituperé, blamed, dispraised. Vituperer, to blame, dispraise, or discommend; to disparage, or find fault with. Vitupereur, a dispraiser, discom∣mender, disparager, disgracer; blamer, fault-finder. Vitus, as mal S. Vitus, a pleasant disease wherein the patient leaps, dances, and laughs all the while his fit is on him. Vivace, lively, lusty, strong, full of mettle. Vivelle, a huge kind of Whale in the Indian Seas. Vivelote, as Droict de Vivelote, the dower which is due to a Wid∣dow of a Cottier, or Tenant of Main-ferme. Vivenote, as Vivelote. Viz, as vis. Ulceraire, crowfoot, also hore∣hound. Uligineux, wet, plashy, soaked, or grown soft by a long abode in wa∣ter. Ulmeau, a young elme. Ulne, an ell, or fadom; also a cu∣bit. Ulophone, a venomous glue, or clammy substance, made of mis∣seltoe-berries. Ulpie, great, or wild garlick. Ultime, last, final, the farthest. Ultion, a revenging, or taking ven∣geance of; a punishing. Ululement, a howling, or yelling. Umbelle de fenouel, the round tuft, or head, wherein fennel-seed grows. Umbilic, the navel, or middle of. Umbilical, belonging to the navel. Umble, the Geneva trout, or sal∣mon. Umble Chevalier, the big∣gest sort thereof. Umbragé, Umbrager, as ombragé, ombrager in the N. D. Umbre, for ombre, shade, or sha∣dow; also a fish called an Omber, or Grayling. Umbrette, a little Omber, or Gray∣ling fish. Umbrine, a kind of Sea-fish. Umbroyer, to be in the shadow; also to cast, or yield a shadow. Unde, & Undé, as Onde, Ondé in the N. D. Undecimestre, of eleven months. Undiculation, a waving, or water-work, in Imagery, or Carving. Undimie, as Oedeme. Unguent, for onguent, an oynt∣ment. Unguenteux, full of oyntment, or salves; oily, greasy, fatty. Uniement, an evening, or making level with another. Uniément, equally, evenly, plainly, smoothly. Uniment, (Subst.) an uniting, joyn∣ing, or knitting together. Unipare, breeding, or bringing forth but one at once. Unisonnant, sounding alike, of one and the same sound. Unisonnement, all with one sound, voice, or accord, in good harmony. Unisson, for unité, unity, singleness, loneliness, or being alone.
Univoque, simple, of one only sense or signification. Unziesme, for onziéme (Subst.) an eleventh, a rate or proportion of eleven. Unziesme, (Adj.) the eleventh in number. Voarre, for verre, glass; a glass. Voarrerie, a Glass-house. Voarrier, a Glass-maker. Voarriere, a glass-window; also a Glass-house. Vocable, a word, a term. Vocal, vocal, belonging to, or con∣sisting in the voice; also well tu∣ned, that makes a distinct sound. Vocale, for voyelle, a vowel. Vocalizé, made a vowel. Vociferation, a loud crying. Vociferer, to cry out, to cry aloud. Vociter, to call often. Voguement, a sailing forth, or for∣ward; a parting, or passing along under sail. Voilier, (Adj.) of a sail; or having sails. Voir, for verité, truth, a true tale or matter. Voire, but, nay. Voirement, surely, certainly, verily, forsooth, indeed. Voirie, for Justice, Jurisdiction. Voirifier, as allez voirifier, trust to it if you will (a Parisian Equi∣vocation for allez vous fier, and used in detestation of a filthy, or dunghil-like thing.) Voirre, for verre, glass. Voire dor∣mant, as fenestre à voire dor∣mant, a close glass-window with∣out any casement, a standing win∣dow not to be opened. Voirré, glassy, of glass. Voirrier, a Glasier. Voirriere, glass-work, a glass-win∣dow. Voirrin, glassy, of glass; also trans∣parent. Voirrine, as voirriere. Voirrinier, a Glasier; a glass-ma∣ker, a worker in glass. Voise, as qu'il s'en voise, let him go. And in the Plural, qu'ils s'en voisent, let them go. Voisinal, neighbouring, or neigh∣bourly. Voisinance, nearness, or neighbour∣hood. Voisiné, as ceux du voisiné, the Neighbours. Voisiner, to be neighbour; also to gossip it, or to go visit neigh∣bours. Voistrer, for se veautrer, to wallow in the dirt. Volagement, lightly, giddily, fickly, rashly. Volageté, lightness, giddiness, fic∣kleness, rashness. Volante, a loose Jerkin, or Cassock, a mandilion. Volatiliser, to fly, flicker, flit, wa∣ver. Vole, the palm, or hollowness of an half-open hand; the joynt, or muscle under the thumb. Volement, a flying. le Voler, a certain trick used in prisons for the drawing of drink∣ing mony from new-come Guests. Voleuse, a woman that flies; also a woman-robber. Volier, for voliere, a great Cage, wherein Birds have room enough to flutter. Vollatiliser, as volatiliser. Voller, to get never a trick at cards. Volonteux, wilful, or wedded to his will. Volter, to vault, or tumble; to bound, or corvet; also to turn, or make turn. Voltoline, the name of a Vine. Voluble, voluble, easily rolled, turned, or tumbled; fickle, in∣constant, wavering. Voluble, (Subst.) withi-wind, bind∣weed, or roap-weed. Voluntaire, Voluntairement, Vo∣lunté. See them with an o, in∣stead of u, in the N. D. Vomique, a secret and dangerous Impostumation full of mattar. Vomique, (Adj.) as noix vomique, the vomiting nut, or fruit. Vomitaire, for Vomitif, that pro∣vokes vomiting, apt to make one vomit. Vorace, ravenous. Voracité, voracity, gluttony, ex∣cessive or greedy feeding. Vorage, a gulf, whirlpool, quag∣mire; a swallowing, or unsatiable depth. Vortillemens, Vortillons, the round turnings in a stream. Vote for voeu, a vow. Vou, a daughter in law, a sons wife. Vouade, as bouade. Vouchement, a vouching in law. Voucher, to vouch; to call unto aid in a suit. Vouërie, as voirie, Jurisdiction. Vouëur, a wooer, or sutor. Voulant, as bien voulant, friendly, or well-wisher to one. Voulceure, a vaulting, or arching; also a vault, or an arch. Voulenteux, as volenteux. Vouloir, for volonté, will, mind, fancy, desire. Voulrie, the authority which a fa∣ther and mother have over their Child; also the house, or dwelling of a father. Voulsure, as voulceure. Voulteur, a maker of vaults, or of arches. Voultis, the cieling of a room. Voulture, a vaulting, or arching. Voussé, vaulted, arched. Vousure, as voulture. Voutoyé, vaulted, arched, bowed. Voutrer, for se veautrer, to wallow in the dirt. Vouture, as voulture. Voyable, visible, perceivable. Voyagement, a travelling. Voyagere, a travelling woman. Voy-cy, for voici, here, see, look, behold. Voyer, as Voyeur in the N. D. Voyerie, as Voirie. Voy-là, for voila, there is, that is. Voyrement, as voirement. Voyrie, as Voirie. Voyture, Voiturier. See them with an i, instead of y, in the N. D. Upe, for hupe, the bird called a Whoop, or dunghill-cock. Vrac, as hareng vrac, a herring well seasoned, and seasonably im∣barrelled. Uranopetes, goers to heaven. Uraque, the pipe, or passage where∣by a womb-infants urine is carri∣ed from it. Uraques, the name of certain ropes or tacklings which belong unto sails. Vraybis, Vraybot, Vrayement, for vraiment, verily, indeed. Urbanie, Urbanité, urbanity, or civility. Urbec, the Vine-fretter, or Devils gold-ring (a worm.) Ure, the Ʋre-Ox. Ureder, to run hastily. Urelepingue, a drink-spiller. Ureniller, to piss, or void urix. Urge, for urne, an urn. Vrille, a gimblet, or piercer. Vrilles, hook-like edges, or ends of leaves, sticking out in the upper parts of pillars, and of other pieces of Architecture. Vrillonner un cable, to coil a cable, to wind it up round, or lay it in a ring.
Urinaire, Urinal, of, or belonging to urine; also urinal-like. Urineux, full of urine; savouring, or smelling of urine. Urinier, a Conduit passing to the middle of the navel, and carry∣ing away the urine of an infant, while it is in the womb. Uris, a rime, or white frost upon trees. Vroesne, the herb wood-bind. Ursin, the Sea-urchin. Ursin, (Adj) of, or belonging to a Bear; or Bear-like. Usager, (Adj.) common, for every body's use. As smme usagere, a common whore. Usages, common Pastures, Woods, or underwoods. Usagier, as Usager in the N. D. Usance, for usage, use, or usage. Usement, as usance; also a wear∣ing out, wasting, or consuming. Usucaption, three years possession in a Movable (which in Law coun∣tervails a prescription) or more generally, any prescription, or long possession, or the winning of a thing thereby. Usuelles, pastures, and woody grounds, belonging in common unto divers Townships. Usufruictier, for Usufructuaire, one that hath the use, and reaps the profit of a thing, whereof the property resteth in another. Utagues, as Uragues. Utensilé, as bien utensilé, well fur∣nished with utensils. Utopie, an imaginary Place, or Coun∣try. Utrin, for uterin, of one belly, or born of one mother. Vuaine, for gaine, a sheath. Vuan, for gan, a glove. Vuaranion, as garagnon. Vuard, Vuarder, as gard', garder in the N. D. Vuaresque, as Varesque in the N. D. Vuarisons, Advestures & Vuarisons, corn, grass, or other fruits grow∣ing or standing, uncut, ungot, ungathered. Vuarloque, squint-eyed, looking askew. Vuaudrée, a maulkin, or the clowt wherewith an Oven is made clean. Vuayves, waists, casualties, things left, abandoned, escheated, or un∣owned. Vuedde, woad, garden (or tame) woad. Uvée, as membrane uvée, the grappy-membrane of the eye. Vueil for volonté, will. Vuel, as venel. Vuerp, a delivering, or giving over unto; also a Duty of 12 d. Paris. paid by a Purchaser unto the Sheriffs, far their presence, when possession is by the seller delivered unto him. Vuerpi, delivered, yielded, or gi∣ven over unto. Vuerpir, to deliver, yield, or give over unto. Veuil, for volonté, will. Vuidangier, emptying, voiding, eva∣cuating. Vuide-main, a quitting, yielding, rendring, or giving up of. Vuideté, emptiness, bollowness, va∣cuit. Vuideure, an emptying, or draining. Vuiho, a Cuckold. Vuilles, as villes. Vulgal, as vif argent vulgal, the basest kind of quick-silver, made of dung and hay. Vulneraire, vulnerary, healing wounds, belonging unto wounds. Vulpin, of, or belonging to a fox; or fox-like. Vulterne, the North-east wind. Vulve, the womb-pipe, or privy pas∣sage; the way or entrance into the womb; also the matrix, mo∣ther, or womb it self. Uvule, the uvula, or palate of the mouth. Vuydange, Vuyde, Vuydé, Vuyde∣ment, & Vuyder. See them with an i, instead of y, in the N. D. Vuydeté, as vuideté. Vyt, for vit, a mans yard, or prick. Vitaut, as vitault. Vyte, as vite. Uz, for coûtume, custom. X. XIlaloe, lignum aloës. Xilobalseme, the wood of the balsam tree. Y. YEble, for hieble, wall-wort, or Dane-wort. Yf, for If, the Yew-tree. Ymagé, as imagé. Ypreau, the elm-tree. Yraigne, for aragnée, a spider. Ysard, the Shamois, or wild Goat of whose skin Shamoy-leather is made. Yssé, hoised, lifted up. Ysser, to hoise, or lift up. Yssir, to issue, to come forth. Yssue, for issue, an issue. Yve, as ive; also water. Yver, for hiver, winter. Yvernade, a wintering. Yvernal, sit for, of, or belonging to the winter. Yverner, for hiverner, to winter, to spend or pass away the winter; also to dig, or dress a Vineyard in winter. Yvoirin, of ivory, or like ivory. Yvraison, drunkenness, or the act of drunkenness. Yvraye, for yvroie, darnel, tares. Yvrongnet, fuddled, or somewhat drunk. Z. ZAffre, a kind of exceeding dry sand, or gravel; or as Safre. Zagaye, Zaguilles, a fashion of slen∣der, long, and long-headed Pike, used by the Moorish horse-men. Zain, a horse that's all of a dark colour, without any star, spot, or mark about him, and thereby commonly vicious. Zanit, a Vice to a Tumbler, &c. or in a Play. Zarzeparille, the medicinable plant called Zarzaparilla, or Sassapa∣rilla, and rough bind-weed of Peru. Zebedée, a double damask-rose. Zec, reed to thatch houses with. Zecchin, as Sequin in the N. D. Zein, as Zain. Zelateur, a zealous, or jealous per∣son. Zelatif, zealous, or jealous. Zeler, to be zealous, or jealous of; to emulate, or envy; to affect ex∣treamly, or desire eagerly. Zelote, Zelotype, jealous, or zea∣lous. Zelotypie, jealousie. Zigome, the outward part, or end of the cheek-bone, towards the ear. Zimicch, a kind of Eagle which preys upon the Crane, and other less fowl. Zin, or Zint, the twang, or twang∣ing
sound of the string of a hard∣bent bow. Zinzembre, for gingembre, ginger. Zinziberine, powder of ginger. Zivette, for Civete, a Civet-cat. Zizanie, ray, darnel. Zizolin, gingioline colour. Zoette, an Owl. Zon, the whisk, or sound of a switch, rod, or wand; also a jert, lash, box, or blow. Zoophore, a painted (or carved) girdle, or border, about a Porch or Pillar. Zoophytes, such things as be partly plants, and partly living crea∣tures, as spunges, &c. especially a plant that feedeth upon all others near it. Zoucet, a didopper. Zubeline, for Zibeline, a Sa∣ble. Zummach, the Eagle that hath on her head, or back, a kind of whiteness, which is a certain sign of her perfect goodness. FINIS. Lately Published A New French Grammar: or, a new Method for Learning of the French Tongue. To which are added, for a help to young Beginners, a large Vocabulary, and a Store of familiar Dialogues. Besides four curi∣ous Discourses of Cosmography, in French, for proficient Learners to turn into English. By Guy Miege, Author of the New French Dictionary, Professor of the French Tongue, and of Geography. Sold by Thomas Basset, at the George neer St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet-street.
