M2492B P2094 12027880 52686
MONTELIONS PREDICTIONS, OR THE Hogen Mogen FORTUNETELLER. Discovering as plain as a Pike-Staff, the Dark INTRIGUES, and Grand CATASTROPHES, carri∣ed on, or Designed in most parts of the WORLD. With Allowance, May 11. 1672. LONDON, Printed by S. and B. Griffin, for Thomas Palmer, at the Sign of the Crown in Westminster-Hall, 1672.
MONTELIONS PREDICTIONS, OR The Hogen Mogen Fortuneteller. ALthough we have ever been of Opi∣nion, that the best of our Modern Prophtes have been only the most Lucky Guessers, and find the Press already opprest with Swarms of Prophetick Pamphlets, no less nume∣rous, than Impertinent. Yet that the Blind World may see our Skill, either in Astrology, or Coski∣nomancy (that more Mysterious Art of the Sieve and Shears) is not a whit inferiour to the busiest
of our fellow-Students, we have resolved on the Question to oblige the Publique (we mean Hawkers, and Coffee - Houses) by delivering our Sentiments on the present Conjuncture of Af∣fairs, induced hereunto; for that not only our Brother, the Apollo of Clerkenwel Green, hath for some time disappeared to Mortals, being (as we are credibly informed) gone to Visit his Nurse at the Antipodes, but also because the heretofore active Gosequil of our beloved Pupil, the renowned Poor Rbin, is of late grown Dry and Stubbed, yield∣ing little more than the Dregs of Red-Lettice Wit, or nauseous Repetitions. These Considerations we hope will be Apology enough (even in a Critick Conscience) and to offer more Reasons for Wri∣ting a Single-sheet Pamphlet, would be Absurd and Unmodish, since many of our great Authors now a dayes can shew none at all for their more Vo∣luminous Scriblings, we cannot (to deal Candidly with or Readers) pretend to any Visions, Appa∣ritions, Revelations, or strange Voices, though per∣haps that excellent new Invention of, The speaking Trumpet (subtlely manag'd) might put not a few Giddy Heads on that account, into a Dotage be∣yond Tom in the Wood's. Angels either Coelestial, or Golden, we dare not boast Familiarity with; Comets they say are Generated above the Orb of the Moon, and so are too high for the Jacobs-Staff of our groveling Understanding, to find out their particular portents. The old new Star in Cassiopeia we shall not medle with, though we have heard our Nodding Grand-Mother in a Winters Evening, discourse thereupon so profoundly, till she fell a
sleep; not trouble our self with any Oppositions that may happen between Saturn and Jupiter, as not de∣siring to Interpose in a Quarrel 'twixt Father and Son: Nor yet shall we put our selves to the un∣necessary Charges of Building up Twelve Houses (meer Castles in the Air) in an Ill favoured Schem, not but that we Ken the Knack of those Coelestial Scotch-Hoppers too, as throughly as the most Huffing Taylor ith' Town: But out of pure Aversion to those Hackney Roads of Figures and Characters wherewith some pretend to Score out the Fortune of a Year, and Fate of Empires, in Terms so un∣certain and ambiguous, that they may be Verified in any future Contingency whatever, we decline all those Amuzing Parades of Art, and without Clouds and Amphibologies, in plain English, and in Rhyme too, that I may appear the more Pro∣phetick, do declare, The Time's now come must bring to pass, What Fates have Wrote with Pens of Brass. That Rebel Rout, whose swelling Pride, Princes Contemn'd, and Kings defi'd: Before bright Sol his Journey take, Three times a round the Zodiake, Shall be Reduc'd to more Distress, Than in the dayes of Royal Bess. Great York, the Neptune of the Main, Their Insolence shall once again Chastise, until they are become, Poor suppliant States of Belgium: And at his Brothers Royal Feet, Submissively begg, as 'tis meet.
That he would lay his Thunder by, And take them to his Clemency. But because (according to the Grand Method we have alwayes pursued in our Writings) a more particular Account of the grand Matters impend∣ing may be expected, we proceed in the Stile of the most celebrated Sons of Art, and with all Caution and Sincerity, say: That from the vast preparations, both at Land and Sea, the Declarati∣ons of War lately Published on either Side, seve∣ral Lowring Aspects of disaffected Planets, their Quarrelsome Positions at their vernal Ingress, and diverse other Secrets in Art, we may (on good grounds according to the Doctrine of the Antients) Prognosticate: That some Ruptures are at hand, or Acts of Hostility designed, or ready to break forth into Action in some parts of the World. And since Cancer is the Horoscopical Sign of Holland, and that none loves Butter'd Crabs better than a Dutchman; we are indued to believe those very United Provinces may much be concerned in the formidable Catastrophes, whereof these Phenomina are the Indubitable Prodomt. Not that we find by the abstrusest Rules of Geomancy, that the Hogen States are any more likely this year to Establish the Fifth Monarchy in an Universal Common-Wealth, than Saothy Levy, to Revive and Recollect the Ten scattered Tribes, for taking Possession of the Holy Land: Yet are we more than Confident, that Sage Aphorism of the late Deceased Plagiary Tres∣megus in his Temple of Wisdom, will shortly be uied to a hairs breadth, viz. That wherever
contrary Fleets, or opposing Armies happen to meet, Contests will be apt to arise, and that several Persons by means thereof, may chance, against all Rules of Physick, to be Let Blood ith' Dog-days. About or ra∣ther much before which time we also discover, There will be heard strange and unusual Noises at Sea, to the great Affrightment of the Dolphins, and spoyling the Musick of the Syrens: The Planets startling from their Orbs with wonder, To hear our Guns below out-roar their Thunder. Immediately after which, the long contested So∣veraignty of the Narrow-Seas shall be decided by a most equal Distribution, the Surface remaining in the Possession of his Majesty of Great Brittain (the undoubted Proprietor) and his Valiant Subjects, whilst the Bottom falls to the share of his usurping Enemies, as the just Reward of their unparalled Ingratitude; thereby replenishing the hungry Sto∣macks of Neptunes Scaly Inhabitants, who now Exercise Lex Talionis, and by Devouring their De∣vourers, produce of Metempsychosis of Bodies, that Pythagoras never dream'd of. For whereas a Dutch∣man is little more than Stock-fish, and Red-herring Fleshified, our Crabs and Fresh-Cod, will now be only Dutchmen Fishified. Thus a Ravenous Shark unnaturally Feasts on the fat Paunch of his own Brother, an overgrown Burgomaster, whilst Margery the Cook-maid startles to find the Finger and Seal∣ring of Myne Heer, in the Belly of a Mackril, and the Rotterdam Frows deluge themselves in Tears for the loss of their Swil-Bottles.
We further find by the Hermetick Learning, (For so of late our Quacks do call, All Tricks if Strange and Mystical.) That Coffee-Houses (the Mint of Intelligence, and Forge of Lies) shall bee much frequented; and many a Pragmatick Fop spend his Six-pence there over Night, to hear News, that knows not where to get a Dinner next Day; who then with folded arms and croaking Guts, does Pennance for his foolish Curi∣osity. To supply these Randevouse of Idleness, with continual Novelties, the Press Spawns abortive Pamphlets, that swarm Abroad as thick as Flies in Autumn. And Fame sets up a Cheating Lotery, where for a Prize of Verity, you  forty Blanks of Falshood, and in a whole Volley of News scarce meet a true Report: We do not find his Holinesse much Inclinable to entertain thoughts of Marriage, but rather that if his Fancy should grow a little Rampant the Cho∣lick and Stone, would mainly Obstruct his De∣lights in the Caresses of an Olympia. And seeing he Labours under so many Crosses, we cannot but reprove the uncharitableness of some Gifted Brethren, who in their Little Conventicles, Rail so despe∣rately at a Civil Grave old Gentleman, whom they know no more than the Pope of Rome: The Grand Seignior may yet in spight of some foolish Prog∣nosticators (who seven Years have threatned him with a Peck of Troubles) Live a long time as merry as a Fiddler, if the Mufty will but grant him a Dispensation to Drink now and then a
Glass of Sack, but his Viziers Corn cutter will pro∣bably be hurried with multiplicity of Business: His Mightinesses Toes being sorely afflicted by reason to tedious Marches towards Hungary. The Crym Ta∣ter in the midst of his Triumphs, is Tipt into his Grave by a Surfeit on Stew'd Truans. And may the Guardian-Angel of Green-Aprons, protect some emi∣nent Senators nearer Home, from being choakt with Custaras, or admitted Knights of the Noble Order of the Bull-Feather, at a Masquerade: Stephen Ratzins, Brother Stenko, seems Instigated by Venus, Lady of the Seventh, in his Radix Retrograte, to send an Envy Extraordinary to the States General, to demand in Marriage the most Illustrious Bessabel, Daughter of the much Celebrated Van-Cobler-Hewson, that they may make a prudent provision for Futurity, and pro∣pagate a pretious Seed of Rebels and Boutefeus, to di∣sturb the Peace of the next Generation. Munsterus that Hermaphrodite of State, who with his Crosses in one Hand, and Sword in th'other, looks like a Royston Crow of two Colours, parte per pale, Ingrail'd, Lay and Clergy, hovers with a wary Subtlety over the Heads of the furious Combatants▪ till Fortune declare on whose Crests she intends to Plant the Laurels of Victory, or takes up the Swissers Trade, and Cries, Who bids most for 30000. But Manet alta mente repostam, There is no playing one Game over Twice. Quo teneam Vultum mutantem proce a Nodo? What shall restrain him from the Breach of 's Vows, That to no Altar, but 's own Interest Bows.
If the Forces of the most Christian King chance to set down before Maestricht, that unhappy Town will be in some Danger of a Seige, and rare it will be to see there so much Belly-Timber for a Break∣fast, as is Confounded at a Guild-Hall Dinner; but a dried Sprat is excellent Commons for those in a Strait, that in their best Days thought a Red-Herring a Feast. Holland Cheese we confidently pre∣dict, will be a dear Commodity, but Butterboxes never so Cheap and Contemptible, it being but just all Nations should Bandy to Exterpate them, who have Confederated to Abuse all the World. If they have any Assistance, it must be from beyond the Line: For what Christian will be a Second to such Insolents? Nor can they appear Formidable since the Brandy that was wont to Inspire them with Valour is now prohibited. To conclude, Englands Genius soars high, the Lillies flourish, and may they ever retain their Colour; the Em∣blem of Integrity, the Justness of our Cause, the Conduct and great Example of our Leaders, con∣spire with our native Courage to bespeak a Victory. And though we know the Innate Valour of our No∣ble Seamen, and others concerned in this Expedi∣tion, needs not to be raised up by Hobling Rhyms, of a sorry Bard, yet to fill up their other Sheet, and that the Reader may be sure to have enough for his Two-pence, we have thought very fit to add this Ballad Loyal.
A BALLAD LOYAL. I. YOu Sons of Honour, that dare die! To serve your Native Land, And for your King and dear Country. The Shock of danger stand, Now prepare For the War, Shew the world your glories, Do such deeds As must needs Live in future Stories. 2. Go on brave Hero's! you can't misse The Road to Victory. Where Mighty York High Admiral is, That Soul of Gallantry, He whose Name Rides on Fame. And must still more prevail, Till it make Flemmings quake, And humbly strike their sail.
3. Our Ships like floating Castles ride, The Waves are proud to bear 'm They deafen Thunder each Broadside, The Dutch or Devils must fear 'm, No place can boast, Besides our Coast Vessels so great and good, So many too, That Strangers do Think al'our Downs a Wood. 4. Then pray what mean these Hogen States? (It passes our Construction) Insolently to dare their Fates, And tempt their own Destruction, On Shore and Sea Ruin they'l see On every side surrounding Brave Monmouth's hand Wasting their Land, Great York their Fleets confounding. 5. Dull Dutch! can you forget when we, In three Fights quell'd your pride, Not long since when our Brittish Sea With your base blood was dy, d,
And dare you then Fight us again: What honour can it be To beat a new Such Slaves as you, Whom we before made flee. 6. If Rebell Noll could make you bow, And 'fore him trembling stand, How think you fools to resist now, The mighty Charles's hand, Can it be said Against our Head You'r likely to prevail, Who heretofore, Were glad t' adore, And cringe unto our Taile. 7. Wherefore Brave English Seamen all Rouse up your valours fire Couragiously upon them fall Make the dull World admire, Let not your breast Harbour a Guest, That treats of fear or flying, Let not a thought Centre in ought, But conquering or dying.
8. So may you vanquish still and take Rich Prizes every day: May no tempests your Vessels shake, Nor Rock lie in your way. So may you bring To our Great King A compleat Victory. And he bestow Again on you, A fit Gratuity. 9. If any of you Sacrifice, Your hearts at Cupids Shrine. May no Coy Wench your Love despise, Nor to you prove unkind; But may they all Before you fall, As 'tis indeed their duties: 'Tis reason such, As conquer Dutch Should Triumph over Beauties; 10. May all your Wives prove Chast and be, As deaf to Gallants charms, Whilst you are out, as Penelope, When her Lord was in Arms.
Thus will we pray Each night and day, Till homewards you are bound Your deeds with praise Your Heads, with Baise, In glorious manner Crown'd. The POST-SCRIPT: SInce Mr. Lillies Predictions in his admired Alma∣nack for the Year 1654. have made so much noise in the World, we cannot but think it con∣venient to transcribe from that celebrated Author a Short Prayer, which we think as pertinent to the pre∣sent conjuncture of affairs, as any of the rest, which follows in the said book in these word,, God grant us Vnity in the Church and give the Presbyterians so much love unto their Native Countrey, as to rejoyce when we worst the Dutch, and not to flag down their heads like sorrowful Rabbies at our Successes. FINIS.
