14045.7 99899166 150644
I would you neuer had said so, To the tune of vpon the Meddow brow. TWo louing Friends once meeting by chaunce vpon the way: In kindnesse gaue each other, the good time of the day: And the one desir'd the other, along with him to goe: The other denayd, and to him said, I would you had not said so. Beeing demaunded why, that he that wish desir'd? Why sir quoth he my reason is, because I am almost tyr'd? And are you tyr'd quoth he, tis more then I did know? Then truely since with all my hart, I would you had not said so. But seeing you are weary, now let vs take repose: Heere let vs sit and rest vs, and to you Ile disclose: Some Vices in the Country, amongst vs dayly grow: If youle attend good Sir quoth hee, I would you had not said so. For truely in the Citty, from whence I came are more: More hatefull vices, name you one, Ile name you halfe a score: Ist possible (quoth he) the Citty so should flow? With Vice in such abundance, I would you had not said so. But now sir for the Country, because I must begin? Ile first speake of the Mizer, that lump, that heape of sinne: This vrchin is a Farmer, whom many men doe know: He scrapes and hoards the Diuell and all I would you had not said so. Though Barnes and Racks be full, though Chists be cram'd with Coine: And though he nothing wanteth, yet must he needs purloyne: His Tennants Rents heele raise, his Neighbors heele vndoe: By remouing of their Land markes, I would you had not said so. And if a Neighbour hath, neere him a pee of ground: Heele neuer leaue by right nor wrong, till it to him be bound: If true meanes cannot get it, he then to Law will goe: And wrong a poore man for his owne, I would you had not said so. The Second part. To the same Tune. THere are some in our Parrish, that too much are to blame: For in a yeere scarse once, they to the Church ere came: But doth the Alehouse haunt, and so themselues vndoe: O Lord sure quoth the other againe, I would you had not said so. O sir I could reueale quoth hee, of truths a number more: Which shame makes me conceale, but yet I greeue therefore: For many doe offend, which heare I may not show: Truely replide the other then, I would you had not said so. Then heare me (qv.) the Townesman for fearelesse Ile begin: Apparantly to tell you, now of the Citties sinne: There's all the acts of Rogarie, or ought that longs thereto: Fore tend it quoth the Countryman, I would you had not said so. The Courtiers proud, and Lawyers, doth knauish cunning vse: The Trades man by his bying, doth many men abuse: All the Informers are turnd knaues, they little good do do: The Sargeants cruell, sir quoth he, I would you had not said so. The Broker in the Hundred takes: good man but Foure score: His Conscience is so vpright, he will not aske for more: The Bawd she will turne honest, when whores she doth forgoe: That will be neuer, sir quoth hee, I would you had not said so. The Curtizus shall vertious prooue, when all their faults are fled: And Punckes shall surely honest liue, when Panders all are dead: The Taylour he ll steale no more, when he hath no worke to doe: He cannot then the other said, I would you had not said so. The Brother gainst his brother, and Father gainst the Sonne: The sonne against the Father goes, till they are all vndone: And Wiues against their Husbands, doe make to much a doe: Sir this quoth th'other grieues me most, I would you had not said so. Most men so impious are, that they deuise all euills: And in their dealings worser prooue, then doe incarnate Diuells, The Citty Wiues phantastick proue, yet make a modest show: Their wiles theyle haue the other said, I would you had not said so. Their Scycophanting Parrazites, their Mistris humours smooth, And eke the cheating vasse Decoy, poore country men doe sooth: Till by their Cheating tricks, they quite doe them vndoe: Quoth he this case is pittifull, I would you had not said so. Thus haue you heard what newes, is now within the Citty: How all doe practise villanie, without remorse or pittie: Let vs now hauing rested, vpon our Iorney goe, Where to, though loath hee greed, yet said I would you had not said so. Trust me it is great pitty, to heare this bad report: Of Country, and of Citty, how all men doe extort: I would they would reforme, and thinke whats best to doe: That Countryman nor Cittizen, Might neuer gainst them say soe. FINIS. Printed at London for T.L.
