16758.3 99900284 150692
Londons Ordinarie, OR Euery Man in his humour. To a pleasant new tune. THrough the Royall Exchange as I walked, where Gallants in Sattin did shine: At midst of the day, they parted away at seuerall places to dine. The Gentry went to the Kings head, the Nobles into the Crowne: The Knights went to the golden Fleece, and the Plow-man to the Clowne. The Cleargie will dine at the Miter, the Vitners at three Tunnes: The Vsurers to the Deuill will goe, and the Fryers vnto the Nunnes. The Ladyes will dine at the Feathers, the Globe no Captaine will scorne: The Huntsmant will goe to the Greyhound be∣low, and some Townesmen to the Horne. The Plummer will dine at the Fountaine, the Cookes at the holy Lambe: The Drkards at noone, to the Man in the Moone, uckolds to the Ramme. The Rorers will dine at the Lyon, the Watermen at the old Swan: And Bawdes will to the Negro goe, and Whores to the naked Man. The Kéepers will to the white Hart, the Mariners vnto the Ship: The Beggers they must take their war, to the Egshell and the Whip. The Fariers will to the Horse, the Blackesmiths vnto the Locke: The Butchers vnto the Bull will goe, and the Carmen to Bridewell Docke. The Fishmongers vnto the Dolphin, the Bakers to the Cheat Loafe: The Turners vnto the Ladle will goe, where they may merrily quffe. The Taylors will dine at the Sheeres, the Shoomakers will to the Boote: The Welshmen they wil take their way and dine at the signe of the Goat.
The second part, to the same tune. THe Hosiers will dine at the Leg, the Drapers at the signe of the Brush: The Fletchers to Robin-hood will goe, and the Spend-thrift to Beggers Bush. The Pewterers to the quart Pot, the oopers will dine at the Hoope▪ The Cobler to the Last will goe, and the Barge-men to the Scoope. The Carpenters will dine to the Axe, the Colliers will dine at the Sacke, Your Fruterer hee to the Cherry Tree, good fellowes no liquor will lacke. The Gold-smiths to the thrée Cups, for money they hold it as drosse: Your Puritan to the Pewter Can, and your Papists to the Crosse. The Weauers will dine at the Shuttle, the Glouers will vnto the Gloue: The aydens all to the Mayden-head, and true Louers vnto the Doue. The Saddlers will dine at the Saddle, the Painters will to the greene Dragon: The Dutchman wil goe to the signe of the Froe, where each man madry inke his Flagon. The Chandlers will dine at the Scales, the Salters at the signe of the Bag: The Porters take paine at the Labour in vaine, and the Horse-courser to the whie Nag. Thus euery man in his homour, from North vnto the South: But he that hath money in his purse, may dine at the signe of the Mouth. The Swaggerers will dine at the Fencers, but those that haue lest their wits: With Bedlam Tom, let there be their home. and the Drum the Drummers best fits. The Cheter will dine at the Checquer, the Pick-pokets in a blind Ale-house: Till taken and tride▪ vp Holborne they ride, and make their ends at the Gallowse. Printed at London for Iohn Wright dwelling neere the Old Baily.
