3515.5 B4156 S91179 99900322 150804
A DISCOVRSE of the SINNE against the Holy Ghost. Grounded upon Matt. Chap. 12. vers. 22.-23. Tending to the comfort of such Per∣sons as, being afflicted in conscience for their sins, are, by the delusions of Satan, brought to the brinke of Despaire, through feare that they have fal∣len into that unpardona∣ble Sinne. Written some space of time since, by that godly and judicious Divine M. William Bradshaw, sometime Fellow of Syd∣ny Colledge in Cambridge; and publish'd by his sonne Iohn Bradshaw. 1 Thes. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. LONDON, Printed by R. H. for Iohn Rothwell, and are to be sold at the signe of the Sunne in Paul: Church yard. 1649.
The Preface to the READER. AS the Portall is to the house in Architecture, so should the Preface to a Treatise be an∣erable and sutable. The Dis∣urse, here set forth, is neither rge, nor yet quaint, or floscula , no more is this Introduction. nd indeed when should plain∣sse of speech, and expression be ed, but then when darke things e to be made plaine? The end  Rhetoricke is to cloath; of Lo∣icke, to make bare or naked;
therefore in matters of difficult we are to make use of the latte and lay by the former. Thebe Rhetoricke in discourses polem call is to use expression most liv¦ly and naturally setting forth o notion, with a cleare kind of br¦vity. Not so long as to tyre,  so short as to unsettle the Reade neither to starve his expectati with brevity, nor to surfet it wi a confused prolixity. Hor. l. 1. Ser. Sat. 1. est modus in rebus, &c. Senec. Oe∣dip. Act. 4. sata si liceat mihi singe∣re arbitrio meo, tempe∣rem zep y∣ro levi vela &c.The ancient Schoolemen avoiding of Elegancy in dispu have observed the rule afo said thorowly, and a little t much, for they have runne a so farre from unseasonable ¦gancy, that in many words th have fallen into flat Barbaris And I beleeve (reserving all  praise and respect to their cle and strong abilities joyned wi indefatigable study) that if t Latin and Greeke tongues
been better knowne to some of them, they might there have found variety of fit words by which to expresse their notions, without adding to the Latin a Dialect of their owne. It is pit∣ty, I confesse, any notion, especial¦ly in divine things should be lost for want of an expression, and yet withall it's pitty to shape words of our owne, when languages may affoord them. For it is an undoubted rule in humanity, that seeing thingsNam cu mn ex e & ver∣bis conste ratio ne{que} erba se∣em habere oossint, si em sub∣raxeris, atque res lumen, si verba Ci¦le ora∣or. lib. 3. are made known by words, the words them selves ought to be well knowne; which they cannot be, if they be out of use, and they must needs be out of use, if they be new coy∣ned. I desire also to be short and succinct as this Treatise is, and I could wish it were more in use then it is in things published: when the world had nothing but
a few manuscripts, Bookes wer scarce; & thē the more large wr¦tings were, the more they were ac¦ceptable. But since, by that happ Art of Printing, Bookes have multiplyed, swarming continua¦ly out of the Presse, tanqua ex equo Trojano, conciseness is more approveable, which me might better effect, if they woul with judgement cull out th choycest of their readings an other their labours, and so ten¦der them to the world. In this subject of the sinn against the Holy Ghost, there ar foure maine difficulties, i which satisfaction is desi∣red. 1 What kinde of sinne this is, and how it differs from other sinnes. Now because the diffe∣rence is grounded much upon the unpardonablenesse of it; 2 The second difficulty is,
how this sin is unpardonable, and in what sense. And because the unpardonablenesse seemes groun∣ded on, 1 Iohn 5.16. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. & Heb. 10.26-29. 3 The third is whether this sinne in Matth. 12. Mark. 3. and Luke 12. be of the same nature with those in 1 Iohn 5. Hebr. 6. and Hebrewes 10. Moreover, because those places speake not directly, or expresly of any sinne against the Holy Ghost. 4 The fourth inquiry shall be, why, and in what sense it is called the Sinne against the Ho∣ly Ghost. Of these foure, as briefly and clearely as God shall enable me, and that without any coincidence with, or contradicti∣on of what is contained in the en∣suing Treatise. What kinde of sinne this is, and how it differs from other
great sinnes,Pet. Lomb. lib. 2. di∣stinct. 43. Aquinas 2. 2. qu. 14. artic. 2. Antonin. sum part. 2 it. 8. cap. 8. and others. that seeme like to i or the same with it. The School∣men have made sixe species or kindes of it: first, desperation; secondly, presumption; thirdly impenitency; fourthly, obstinacy fiftly, Veritatis agnitae im∣pugnatio, fighting against truth that wee acknowledge sixtly, envie at our brother graces and sanctification. Which as it appeares are all or most grounded upon severall places in Saint Augustine. If there∣fore they meane that these are, or may be consequences and proper∣ties of that sinne, we yeeld to them, but not that they are kindes of that sinne. 1 For desperation, a man may despaire, and yet not commit this sinne, although he that com¦mits this sinne must needes de∣spaire, if before death his consci∣ence be awaked.
Many have despaired for a time, and after beleeved, and so obtained pardon. Yea, a man may possibly despaire finally, and yet not sinne this sinne: because despaire doth not necessarily im∣ply any scorne, hatred, or malice, against the mercy and favour of God, which is the maine in the sinne against the Holy Ghost, Therefore despaire in this life, is so farre from being a kinde of this sinne, as indeed it is but a separable adjunct of it. 2 For presumption;Antonin. sum. part. 2 Tit. 8. cap. 8. ut supra. they thus describe it: it is that where∣by a man, that he may commit sinne, refuses the thoughts of Gods Iustice in punishing sinne, and strives to smother, and stifle any such thoughts. This indeed is an evill very dangerous to the soule, but yet not that great Sin against the Holy Ghost, which thus I prove: It may be forgi∣ven;
therefore it is not that sinne: it may be repented of, therefore it may be forgiven; it shall be repented of, therefore it may be repented of: Deut. 17.13. And all the people shall hear and feare, and doe no more pre∣sumptuously, that is, shall re∣pent of their former presumpti∣ons. The Hebrew word is  Iezidun, which properly signi∣fies, to waxe hot, and boyle over, and by a Metaphor, to swell against another; and here, to stop the cres proudly and stubbornely against the sentence of the Priest whose sentence was Gods: Even this may be repented of, as those words shew, they shall heare and feare, and by the words  lo gnod, not againe; Presumption may be the way to it, but is not the same with it. 3 Concerning impeniten∣cy, either it must be for small im∣penitency,
or that which is finall also; if formall impenitency, as it is such, then all impenitency is irremissible, for a quatenus ad omne valet consequentia; and then who could be saved? if fi∣nall impenitency, it is granted indeed, that is a property of him that sinnes that great sinne, but yet it is proprium imperfe∣ctum, because it doth agree, omni & temper peccanti in Spiritum Sanctum, but not soli. 4 Concerning Obstinacy, it is all one with hardnesse of heart, and is a cause of impeni∣tency, and is a property; as is a∣foresaid: of that great evill, but not that sinne, and so I conceive,Epist. 50. circ. finem —hoc est autem da∣ritia cordis usque ad finem hujus vitae; quâ homo recu∣sat in uni∣tate corpo∣ris Christi, quod vivi ficat Sp. Sanctus, re∣missionem accippere peccato∣rum. Augustine is to bee under∣stood. 5 The resisting of a truth knowne and acknowledged by the person resisting, may easily
lead him to this sinne,Acts 26.11 xceeding mad a¦gainst them. but is not the same. For Peter in denying Christ, resisted a truth acknow∣ledged, yet was not guilty with these Pharisees. 6 To envy at the Graces of another, to fret that the Gospel is preached, that beleevers in∣crease, that souls are converted, when mens spirits boyle up against Gods Ordinances, and the good successe of them in the world, it is a neare degree to this fearefull sinne, but not necessari∣ly that sith all this may be out of ignorance, as in Saint Paul before his conversion, or out of other aymes, and not out of any rancour or despight to the grace it selfe. To the consideration of these six vices how farre they dffr from that sin aforesaid. I thinke it not amisse to adde somewhat that I meet within aRaphael Eglino de peccato in Sp. S. Re∣movetur primum ab hoc pecca∣ti genere quicquid legi contra∣rium pro∣priè & per e est, cujs modi est primo. pa∣rn. origi∣ale, &c. hesi bus 21 22, 23, 24. GermanFirst, (saye he) we must remove and exmp from th sin what∣soever is pro∣perly and in t selfe con∣trary to the lw, as the o∣riginall sine of our first parents, and of our selves, also all actual sins of omissi∣on and com∣missiō against the first and second Tble, so that they be not joyned with this. And after shewes that there is a broad dif∣ference be∣tween the sins committed against the Law directly, and against the Spirit of Grace, and the distinctiō is clerely lad dow in the o of the Hebrewes 28.29 The said Writer adde, moreo∣ver, that sinne committed against Christ the Son of man, ether o ignorace  in Paul, or out of sudden fear, as  Pe∣ter cano be sd to be this sin. Writer:
The second Difficulty. FOr the not pardoning it must be understood in one of these three senses. 1 That though happily it may be, yet it never was, nor shall be pardoned in event. Those that so understand it, give this reason. Our Saviour (say they) sayes not, it is impardonable, but shall not be pardoned: Those that goe to hell for other sinnes, their sinnes were unpardoned, but not unpardonable. So that their meaning is, that there shall ne∣ver be any instance, example, or experience of any in whom this foule act is pardoned. But to this I answer, that this very thing, that there nver shall be any instance or example, makes it unpossble, in some sense, to be forgiven. For frustra est po¦tentia
quae nunquam produ∣citur in actum. It is a vain possibility that is never brought to effect: and a vaine possibili∣ty is as good as no possibility, and therefore no better then an im∣possibility. Besides, Saint Iohn, 1 ep. cap. 5. v. 16. sayes it shall not be prayed for; which yet it might, if there were any possibi∣lity of forgivenesse; and Heb. 6.4. sayes it is impossible to re∣new them againe to repentance, speaking of the same sinne, or one not so bad. The second Sense that some give, is, that our Saviour means it may be pardon'd, but with a great deale of difficulty. But this may not passe for sound. There are two amongst the Ro∣manists, men of great judgement (setting aside their affections and voluntary engagements to their own cause.)Iansenius in conc. E∣vang. c. 49 Iansenius and
Estius, who,Estius in. sentent l 2. distinct, 43. §. 3. as in many other things, here jumpe together in this interpretation, The ground they build on, they thus levell: In that sense (say they) that our Saviour sayes that all other sins, except this, shall be forgiven, in the same sense he sayes that this shall not be forgiven; but hee meanes not that all those sinnes are forgiven to every one, there∣fore he meanes not that this sin is not forgiven to every one. Consequently (say they) hee must needes speake of facility of pardon in the former, and of dif∣ficulty in the latter. But (un∣der correction) I thinke any in∣different man may see our Savi∣our speakes of possibility and im∣possibility. For, sayes Christ, all manner or kinde of sinne and blasphemy, else, shall be forgiven to men: not every particular sinne to every particular man;
for then who shall be damned? But all sinnes in some men or other, and by consequence, this kinde of sinne in no man. As if I should say all diseases in men shall be cured, but the Pestilence taking the vitals shall not be cu∣red, it is manifest I speake of possi∣bilities and impossibilities; for else it were as much as to meane that some diseases are easie to be healed, which are not easie, as desperate Feavers, desperate con∣sumptions and many others, which were a flat contradiction to the truth. Therefore I take the third interpretation to be most sound, that there is no possibility of for∣givenesse: and that not in re∣gard of Gods power absolute who can doe wha soever he will, but in regard of his absolute will, who will not have it done, and there∣fore it cannot be done. The im∣possibility
whereof seems groun∣ded on 1 Iohn 5. Hebr. 6.4. Hebr. 10.26. and so I proceed to the third Difficulty. The third Difficulty. WHether this Sin,1 Sam. 2.25. Matt. 12. Mark. 3. Luke 12 be the same with 1 Iohn 5. Hebr. 6. Hebr. 10. That it coincides with 1 Iohn 5.16. the current of Interpreters will tell you.Aug. lib. 1. de Ser. Do∣min. in monte. Pec∣catum fra∣tris ad mor∣tem puto, cum post agnitionem Dei per gra∣tiam Domi∣ni nostri Je∣su Christi, quisquam oppugnat fratrnita∣tem & ad∣versus ip∣sam grati∣am qua re∣conciliatus est Deo, in∣videntiae facibus agi∣tatu. So Beda. Austin: I thinke a brother then sinnes to death, when after acknowledgement of God by the grace of Christ, hee sets himselfe against the brethren, and burnes in envie against that very grace by which he was reconciled to God. See Gualter. Also Perkins his Di∣alogue on 1 Iohn. But to come to Argument▪ In that Saint Iohn sayes it shall
not be prayed for, it shewes it must needes be some extraordi∣nary haynous crime. The Sinne of Simon Magus was very great,Act. 8.23. which made Peter say, he was in the gall of bitternesse, &c. Yet the Apostle there wishes him to pray for forgivenesse: pray God, if perhaps the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven. The Sinne of them that stoned Stephen was great and feare∣full, it was peccatum aggrega∣tum, there was Envie, Pride, Murder, and persecution, all conjoyned, yet Stephen prayes for them. Therefore this sinne to death must exceed Pride, Ma∣lice, Envie, Persecution, and then what can it be lesse then the sinne against the Holy Ghost. Concerning Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6. who doubts but this sinne is also there understood. Yet with these two differen∣ces.
First, our Saviour, in the Evangelists, speakes most especi∣ally of sinne in speech that is blas∣phemie against the Holy Ghost, not excluding other kindes of Sinne; for, as he sayes all sinne and blasphemy shall be forgiven, that is, blasphemy, or any other sinne in thought or deed; so here againe, this blasphemy shall not be forgiven, nor any other sinne against the Holy Ghost, in thought or deed. It is sottish to thinke that this great sinne is onely confined to speeches, sith a man may be as bad or worse in deedes, as he can be in words. But here in the Hebrewes, the Apo∣stle speakes more generally, as well of other sinnes against the Holy Ghost, as of blasphemy. Secondly,Musc. com∣ment, in Mat. 12. Istisunt duplicis ge∣neru, &c. Musculus shewes a second difference: Those (sayes he) that sinne against the Holy Ghost, are of two sorts. First,
such as doe oppose and blaspeme that truth which they cannot but inwardly acknowledge, but have not at all given up their names to the profession of that Trueth, so these Pharisees, here in the Evangelists. Secondly, such as doe the like, but have also given up their names to it, and made profession of it, and of these this Epistle to the Hebrews chiefly makes men∣tion. But notwithstanding this dif∣ference, yet it is still the sinne against the Holy Ghost that is here spoken of: which thus I prove. The Sinne against the Holy Ghost, is a malicious deniall of, & rage against a fundamentall, Evangelicall truth inwardly ac∣knowledged, therefore it is con∣tained, in Hebr. 6.Heb, 6, 4, 5, 6. For the fourth verse containes in it an
inward acknowledgement of such a truth aforesaid, to which adde the fift verse: and for the mali∣cious denyall of it, and rage and envy against it, it is clearely contained in vers 6 they fall a way and crucifie &c. that is they so fall away as to crucifie Christ, and doe what they can to cast all the disgrace and scorne they can upon Iesus Christ and the Christian Religion: Not that every falling away is a crucify∣ing, for then had Peter been thus farre guilty; but sensu diviso, they so farre fall, as to commit this horrible indignity. There∣fore I conclude, it is clearely spo∣ken of in this sixt Chapter. And as clearely is it ex∣prest in the tenth Chapter. The 26 verse containes in it this in∣ward acknowledgement of such a truth above mentioned: after yee have received (saith he) the
knowledge of the Truth: The 29 verse. containing a malici∣ous rage against it. Who hath (sayes the Apostle) troden un∣der foot the Sonne of God, — and done despight to the Spirit of Grace, not onely spoken; but done, not onely to Iesus Christ, but to the Spirit of Grace, that is, the Holy Ghost, which leades us forward to the fourth and last Difficulty; Why, seeing it is against the whole Trinity (as all sinnes are) and especially against Iesus Christ the maine of the Gospel, it's called a Sin against the Holy Ghost? 4. Difficul∣ty.Why it is called the Sin against the Holy Ghost? which admits of two senses. For first, either Holy Ghost stands in opposition to man and uncleane spirits, to man, as it is a Spirit, to uncleane spirits; as it is the Spirit of holi¦nesse, the Holy Ghost; and so it
must signifie the Holy God. Or secondly, it is taken for the third Person in Trinity, in relative opposition to the first and second Persons, the Father and Son. The ground of the first sense and interpretation lies thus: Our Saviour sayes that all blasphemy against the Sonne of man shall be forgiven, but not against the Holy Ghost; as if he had said, so farre forth as you sin against me, appearing but as a man, I will forgive you; but so farre forth as you sinne against me, appearing to be God as well as man, I will not forgive you. And whereas the word Holy is added to the word Ghost, or Spi∣rit, that (say they) is in direct opposition to that unholy and uncleane spirit of Beelzebub, to whose power these blasphe∣mers did impute Christs great and gracious worke of casting
out devils.Hierony¦mus ep. 149. ut cum vi∣deas in vir¦tutib, Be¦elzebub calumnie∣ra infactis — & post ea— aliud est se Christa∣num negae allud Chri∣stum diabo¦lum dicere. Isidor. Pe∣lus. epist 39. Grgono circ. fiem. . And certainely what greater blasphemy can be framed by the wit and inventi∣on of the most maligne wretch in the world, then to say that that is done by Beelzebub, which a mans conscience tels him is done by God? If nothing be so hateful to God, and distant from God as sinne, and if nothing be so pollu∣ted with sinne as the Devill, an if amongst all the Devils, non so much as Beelzebub, th prince of Devils, what a mon∣strous, prodigious, transcenden blasphemy was this, to impute, and that wilfully, the worke of the most Holy pure God, to so fo and impure a spirit! a greater then which a mans thoughts cannot project. This sense can∣not well stand, at least alone. For if God in opposition to man b
here understood by Holy Ghost, then all sinnes against the first Table are committed against the Holy Ghost. The second Interpretation is, that it stands in opposition to the Father and the Sonne; and is taken properly for the third Person in Trinity. Of which the Schooles give this as the rea∣son: because this foule sinne is properly against the goodnesse of God. For (say they) power is properly attributed to God the Father, wisedome to God the Sonne, goodnesse to God the Holy Ghost. Consequently, sinnes of infirmity are against God the Father, sinnes of Ignorance against God the Sonne, sinnes of malice and wickednesse, against God the Holy Ghost. pon which notion of theirs, they inferre a reason why the sinne against the Ghost is onely
unpardonable, because sinnes  Infirmity and ignorance hav some pretext, but the last ha none. In which positions  theirs, there is more subtilt then sound verity. It's grant that Christ is called the Wis¦dome of God, but he is also call the power of God in the sa place, 1 Corinth. 1.24. Y the Holy Ghost is called the po¦er of God, Luke 1.35. the po¦er of the Almighty shall ov shadow thee. Neither is it clea how the Holy Ghost is prope the goodnesse of the Godhe sith the goodnesse of God is m¦nifest to the world-ward, also Christ the Sonne of God, tak our Nature, and laying down life for us, out of whose fuln we all receive, and grace  grace. Secondly, were it so, that th attributes were proper to
three Persons, as is mentioned; and that in matter of expression towards the world, for so they understand it, acknowledging all the persons to bee in them∣selves qually powerfull wise and good, I say, admit this to be true, yet how are sinnes of Infirmity against the power of God, or sins of Ignorance against the wisedome of God? What can we make of this? If sins of In∣firmity be sins against the power of God, then it must either re∣spect the Infirmity as Infirmity, or the sin as sin if the Infirmi∣ty, as infirmity or weakenesse, it is no more against the power of God, then all naturall infirmities and weaknesses are in any crea∣ture whatsoever; but if sin as sin, then it is more properly against the Holinesse of God then his power. Besides, when we say such a
sin is against such an attribute we meane it doth especially di¦honour that attribute, and ta it in vaine; as desperation is sin against the mercy of God, b¦cause it dishonours his mercy  limiting it; presumption is a s against the justice of God, b¦cause it is abused by it. But si of Infirmity doe not abuse or l¦sen the power of God, but rathe illustrate it. But if they say th they meane a bare passive de contrariety, such as is betwe blacke and white, light and dar¦nesse, or the like, then it is gra¦ted: but in the meane time the give us a very lame and unev trichotomy of three sorts of sin For they cannot deny but the si against the Holy Ghost is mo then a bare passive contraries to the holinesse and goodness thereof, for it comprehends in  an active opposition, resistance
repugnancy, abuse, dishonour, despight against the Holy Ghost. Therefore to conclude this fourth thing: It is called the sin against the Holy Ghost, because although it be equally a trans∣gression against the whole Trini∣ty, who as they are equall, so in every sin are equally offended; yet it seemes most to reflect upon the Holy Ghost, by which Christ, as man, did all his great workes, Matth. 12.28. If I by the Spirit of God cast out Devils, &c. by which to this day things are wrought that tend to the re∣paration and sanctification of man fallen, by which Christ is made ours, and we Christs, there∣fore it is called the Spirit of Grace, and despight is said to be done to the Spirit of Grace. Neither doth this thwart what is specified in the ensuing
Discourse, where it is said t have this name, because it i committed against the grace and gifts of the Holy Ghost, fo I grant that too; but as it is a offence, it is properly against  person. They sin indeed agains those gifts and graces by repe¦ling them, and making them¦selves for ever uncapable of thē but yet herein they offend proper¦ly the Spirit of God,Chrysos. in Mat. Spiri∣tus antem sancti gratia mul∣tis, & mag∣nis & par∣vulis signis se ipsam manifesta∣verat: am prophetae per spiri∣tum omnia locuti sunt & omnes illi vatere multa de ipso accepe∣rant docu¦menta. by wh properly and immed ately tho graces are to be wrought in them And though the Pharise knew not distinctly whethe there was an Holy Ghost or  as a third person in Trinity pro¦ceeding from the Father and th Sonne, yet notwithstanding th could not but acknowledge a di¦vine holy spirituall power proce¦ding from God, and closing wit men, by which the Prophets for¦merly, and Christ now among
them, did and spake so many ho∣ly and great things. See 1 Kin. 22.24. Thus have I (good Reader) as briefly as well I could, laid open those foure things, which seeme hard in this matter, and that I hope without any intren¦ching upon the ensuing Treatise. My aime herein is, thy satisfa∣ction; if I misse of it, it may be, it is either thy prejudicate thoughts, or slight perusall of what is written. But if thou hast duely weighed all things in the ballance of the Sanctuary, & found any thing too light, tell me of it, and I will either satisfie thee, if I can, or crave pardon of God and thee, if I cannot. How∣ever cover the failings of me thy brother from others, so long as they doe not endammage others, and Iesus Christ for ever cover thine. For my part I could doe
no lesse then I have done in pub∣lishing this small Worke follow∣ing. I was told by a late friend, a little before his decease, that some Divines of his acquain∣tance, in the West of this King∣dome, had Copies of the same, a intending, if I had none, to pub∣lish theirs. I thought it there∣fore very convenient to precede them in that Worke. First, that none might be more forward to continue the memory of my de¦ceased Father in any thing that might be usefull to the Church then I my selfe; and next to pre¦vent other Copies, that happily written at the second and third hand or more might be much different from the originall. In inditing wherof I know the, Au∣thors ayme was at these things mainely. First, to comfort such afflicted mindes as thinke they have committed this sinne, but
have not. Secondly,Quod non proba∣tur ab ali∣quo esse commissum; nisi cum de corpore exlerit. Au¦ust. Epist. 50. To pre∣vent all rash judgement of the persons of others, whom we are apt to judge guilty of this sin, but are not. Thirdly, to admonish men of it, and to teach them to a∣voyd the way that leades to it. Fourthly, to instruct all concer∣ning the true guise and nature of it. What acceptance other Treatises of his, those especially of Iustification and preparation, have found in the world, is knowne to the world; this also may finde some, offence I know it can give none. The Author de∣sires not thy prayers, who hath been dissolved, and beene with Christ now full twenty two yeares: those that he cannot en¦joy, for his sake bestow on me, how short soever I fall of him, how unworthy soever I be of them. I have beene somewhat too large, and perhaps the Reader
seeing the Treatise little, and the Preface long, will be ready to say as he, that seeing a little City and a great paire of Gates, said, the City perhaps will run out of the Gates. The Apophthegme is common. But to prevent such a thing, I will shut up the Gates, closing up all with my prayers that this fearefull sinne may a seldome be committed (if it b Gods will) as it is pardoned To which end, the Lord of hi mercy give us all right under¦standings, humble hearts, te¦der consciences, the feare of h Name, the love of his truth sincerity of faith, and truth obedience; that our faylings m neither become fallings, nor o fallings irrecoverable; that  we sinne, we may repent; if  repent, wee may be forgiven; we be forgiven, wee may be a¦cepted; and if accepted, we m
for ever be glorified, through IESVS CHRIST our LORD. Thine, an unworthy Minister of Iesus Christ, IOHN BRADSHAW. April 1. 1640.
Martii. 30 1640. Imprimatur, THO: WYKES.
MATH. CHAP. 12. VERSE 22. THen was brought to him one posses∣ed with a Devill, blind and dumb; nd he healed him, so that hee that as blind and dumb, both spake and aw. 3. And all the people were amased and said, Is not this the Sonne of David. 4 But when the Pharisees heard it, they said; This fellow doth not east out the Devils, but through Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. 5. And Iesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them: Every King∣dome divided against it selfe, is brought to desolation; and every City or House divided against it selfe, shall not stand. 6. But if Satan cast out Satan, hee is divided against himselfe: how shall then his kngdome stnd?
27. And if I by Beelzebub cast o Devils, by whom do your childr cast them out? they therfore sh be your Iudges. 28. But if I cast out Devils by  Spirit of God, then is the Ki¦dome of God come unto you. 29. Or else how can one enter in strong mans house, and spoile goods, except hee first binde strong man, and then spoile may his house. 30. He that is not with me, is aga me: and hee that gathereth  with me, scattereth. 31. Wherefore I say unto you,Or, All manner of Sinne.  Sinne or Blasphemy shall bee  given unto men: but the Bla¦my against the Holy Ghost  not be forgiven unto men. 32. And whosoever shall spe word against the Sonne of  it shall be forgiven him: but  soever shall speake against  Holy Ghost, it shall not be f¦ven him, neither in this W nor in the World to come.
OF THE SIN AGAINST THE Holy-Ghost. MATH. CAP. 12. VER. 22, 23. THough there be no one thing wherein God hath decreed to glorifie him∣selfe more than in his rcy, in forgiving mans sinnes; d though the greater the sinnes  the more his mercy shall shine he pardoning and remitting of m; yet is there one kinde of sinne ainous and horrible, so vile and minable, that being once com∣ted, it shall never be pardoned,
it being of that nature that it wo staine the mercy of God in  pardoning and remitting of it:  this is the sinne that is called  Blasphemy against the H Ghost. The nature and quality of  Sinne is set forth in this part of  word; as also Marke 3.28. 1. Io 16. Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6. & 10.26, 27 Of the Doctrine whereof a  may say, as the Philosopher  sometime of the Edition of  Physicks: The Nature of this S is set downe in the word of  and it is not set downe in the  of God. For it is so darkl downe, that those that are not ¦cised in the word, cannot at  to the understanding of it; an it is so set downe and laid fo the same word, that those that  the Scripture worthy their st may (if they will bestow  paines) come to the understan of it. In this History, the Evange enjoyned and directed by the
host (whose publique Notary and cribe he was) to register unto the hurch one Example of the same;  which one may receive much ght concerning the Qualiry and ature of that Sinne. In handling whereof, I will mit all other points, but those that ay tend to the illustration of this nne; which I trust will not bee  profitable unto any in this place: ough I must confesse, in setting on the same, I more respected my e than any of you, in that the nt of the distinct knowledge reof hath driven mee to bestow ne meditations upon it. So much t therefore of it, as this portion Scripture hath given unto mee, n content to impart unto you: ugh, if you will have an exact full knowledge of it, you must row further light from those er places of Scripture, that pur∣ly also intreat of the same. The Drift and Scope then of everses is to shew us in a parti∣r Example, what is the Nature
and Quality of that unpardon Sinne. The parts whereof wee will ¦sider, not as they are in themsel but as they have reference to  Sinne, that so by that means may the better cut off all ma that shall not tend to the illustra of it, though in themselves ne good and profitable. There are therefore six thing pressed in this History, conce that particular Sinne that is specified, which may give  light to all other of the same k 1. The Conception of this S 2. The Birth of it. 3. The Name of it. 4. The Nature of it. 5. The Conviction of it. 6. The Condition of it. The first part. Of the Co¦tion of this Sinne. The Conception of it  means of a wonderfull miracle our Saviour Christ wrought  one that was possessed bodily an uncleane spirit. That d
beame of light that streamed from this miracle, shining upon their Consciences, did animate and quic∣ken this hellish Monster in the Scribes and Pharisees, as it appeares afterward. For it is with the light of Gods Spirit, as it is with the rayes of the Sunne, shining upon divers Objects, it produceth di∣vers Effects; it bringeth forth through the variety of the soile; not the Rose onely, but the Nettle; not the Fig-tree onely, but the Thi∣stle; not the Vine onely, but the Brier: it animateth and quickneth not cleane alone; but uncleane Crea∣tures also, as Toads, Adders, Hor∣nets, and such like. So the divine Truth of Iesus shining upon divers persons, it brings forth divers ef∣fects, and those cleane contrary; in some by the blessing of God it pro∣duceth many excellent Graces; in other some, many foul and hideous Sinnes through the Corruption of the soile. Hence may we draw these Con∣clusions concerning this Sinne.
The first Conclusion. The Sin against the Holy Ghost is quickned as it were by the light and heate of some speciall divine Truth: for so is this particular Sin in this place. That light of the divine Truth shining about them, was i that first stirred and tempered their Corruption, and wrought and fra∣med that monstrous Sinne, that had never been begotten, if it had neve shined on them. So that the very cause why thi Sinne is committed, is by reaso that such or such a divine Truth doth present it selfe to the Eye o their Conscience, which if it di not, they would not commit such a Sinne. For Example: These wic∣ked Scribes and Pharisees, if nei¦ther this nor any such like mean had been used, whereby they migh have perceived this Truth, they had never committed this Sinne; but as it is apparent, they committed it be∣cause of that Truth. The Vse whereof may be, 1 For information of ou
Iudgment concerning this Sin. We see many commit many strange and desperate Sinnes against the light of Gods Word, of Consci∣ence, yea of Nature it selfe; and that also most wilfully, and stubbornly, & obstinately; yea, with this height of desperate resolution, that though they were sure they should goe to hell for it, yet they would doe it. Though such Sinnes be a fighting against the Truth, yet are they not this unpardonable Sinne, except the first and principall motion of it doe arise from that divine Truth, in such a manner, that he would not commit that Sinne, but for that di∣vine Truths sake. For this is a Sin, the very first motions whereof, are conceived by the sight of a di∣vine Truth; so that it is a Sinne not only committed in the light, and against the light; but by means of it, and even for the Truths sake. 2 Sith by reason of the Cor∣ruption of Mans minde, the divine Truth of God, the principall Or∣gan or Instrument of all grace and
goodnesse in the Soul of Man, espe∣cially the Doctrine of the Gospell, may work and breed such monsters in the Soule; it behooves us to doe our uttermost endeavour to purge and sweep our Soule, as much as we can, especially when we are in such places, where these divine Truths shine and appeare most. For else, a thousand to one, but some Monster will arise in the Soule. Neither is there any divine Truth that present it selfe to the eye of the Conscience, but doth breed some Monster or other in a corrupt Soule; though not so huge a one as this, yet that which may be a spawne, a fry, and seed to this. As therefore in the mud of Aegypt cast up by the overflowing of Nilus, are ingendred many vile and filthy creatures by the beames of the Sunne: so by the overflowing of Sinne, there being as strange mud cast over the Soule, strange Monsters will arise out of the same, by occasion of the divine light of Truth shining thereupon. 3 Hence observe the persons
that are most capable of this Sinne; they are such as are most capable of divine Illumination, and most ap∣prehensive of all Truth. A dullard, a blinde person that hath no eyes to looke above that which is humane, cannot commit this Sinne, but those that are able to see and behold the divine Truth. So that in this respect, Ignorance is an advantage to a man: For a narrow braine will not suffice to conceive this Sinne. The Scribes and Pharisees, Iulian the Apostata, and those that come nee∣rest to this Sinne, the grand & Arch∣persecutors of any divine Truth, they are men admirable for gifts. There are indeed many insolent Dunses and Sots that are malirious; but they receive this malice from the spirits of great wits; themselves are but axes and beetles in their hands. So that it is not a Mouse that can bring forth this Elephant; nor a Wren that can lay and hatch this Eagle. 4 Learn hence how to prevent this Sinne. Many there bee indeed
that take a most vile course to pre∣vent it; they will not know the di∣vine Truth, because they will not wilfully resist it, and so desperately perish through their wilfull want of it. But let our course be for the pre∣venting of it, to adore every divine Truth that we receive, and not to admit of the least thought against the same. Of all Sinnes this should be killed in the wombe. For other Sinnes may be cast out of possession and Kingdome; this never. The second Conclusion. The Sinne against the Holy Ghost is not conceived by means o every divine Truth, but of a super∣naturall divine Truth; that is to say, an Evangelicall Truth. So that a every light is not a means to pro∣duce and quickn things, but the light of the Sunne onely: so every Truth is not a means to breed and animate this Sinne, but some Evan∣gelicall Truth onely. The Truth hereof appeareth in this Example That divine Truth that here stirred up this Sinne was this, that Christ
Iesus the Sonne of Mary was the true Messias. This it was that stirred up their minds to this Sinne. So that a naturall Truth cannot stirre up such a Sinne as this unpardonable one; but as it is plaine, Hebr. 6.5. it must be a Truth concerning the Life to come. 1 Hence wee may observe the Climate of this Sinne, in what Re∣gion it is begotten and hatched for the most part, if not altogether; even in the Church of God: it is a Church-Sinne. As therefore the greatest Sinner that ordinarily is in the World, even that man of Sinne sitteth in the Temple of God: so the the greatest Sinne that can bee com∣mitted by man, is committed in the Church, where onely or specially those beames doe shine, that stirre up this Sinne in the Soule of Man. For as the deadliest Serpents abound in the hottest countries: so the dead∣liest and desperatest Sinnes in those places, where the Gospell of God shineth forth in its greatest strength. 2 In Temptation the Childe
of God may make use of this Con∣clusion. For let the Sinne, that he is troubled in Conscience for, be never so hainous and desperate against Conscience; yet, if by the light of the Gospell they have not been stir∣red up unto it, it is not this unpar∣donable Sinne. The third Conclusion. This Sinne is not engendred and stirred up by every Evangelicall Doctrine and Truth, but by the maine and fundamentall Doctrines of the Gospell. For this was it that begat this Sinne in them, that this Christ whom they so horribly re∣vile, is that Messias and Saviour of the World. This was it that made them spit out this blasphemy; be∣cause they saw he was so. Though therefore there is no Legall, nor Evangelicall Truth, but it hath this property through the Corrup∣tion of mans nature, to stirre up the minde to Sinne; yet no Truth, but a maine and Fundamentall Truth, the excellentest Truth, and that which being presented to the Soule of an
elect Childe of God, doth stirre up in him the most principall Graces of God, and beget in him an un∣speakable Love of God: the same Truth it is that begets in the repro∣bate (if God leave them so far unto themselves) the highest and most horrible Sinne. For that which is an Instrument of holinesse to the good, is an Instrument of impiety to the wicked: and so by degrees, that Illumination which is the means of the greatest Grace in Gods Children, is the means of the grea∣test Sinnes in the Reprobrate. The Doctrine of the Law begetteth ma∣ny Graces in the heart of Gods Childe; the Doctrine of the Gospell more. Every Evangelicall Truth is a means of much Grace; the Funda∣mentall and high points thereof much more: So on the contrary. It is therefore an high Evangelicall Truth, that is, the stirrer up of this high Diabolicall Sinne. 1 This should admonish us, if wee desire to keep our selves out of his bottomlesse gulph, to take heed
how we abuse the Gospell of Iesus Christ unto sinne against God, especially the highest Mysteries of it. Its a Corruption that we are too much subject unto. It is a fearefull thing, that our nature should be stir∣red up to sinne the more by the Law, as it is; that Sinne should take occasion by the Commandement,Rom. 7.8, 11. vers. 9. to work all kind of Concupiscence in us, that it should revive Sinne it us. But much more fearefull is it when by the Gospell we shall there unto be stirred up, yea by the princi∣pall parts of it. 2 This may be a reliefe to a di∣stressed Conscience that shall be tempted and persuaded by Sata that he hath committed this Sinne Satan setteth before thine eyes, t the end that thou mightst despai of mercy, and so grow profane, an an enemy to God, some feareful Sinne that thou hast committed, ar he telleth thee its the Sinne again the Holy Ghost. This should mak thee to try and examine what mov and stirred thee principally to tha
Sinne. And if it shall appeare to the Eye of thy Conscience, that the light of the Gospell, and the chiefe Ordinances thereof, did not irritate or provoke thee thereunto; that Sin of thine cannot be this Sin against the Holy Ghost. For he that com∣mits this, must be an enemy to the Gospell of Iesus Christ. And as the presence of those whom a man doth hate, useth to stir up in a man blasphemous and outragious spee∣ches of him, by making his stomack and choler to rise against him: so the like effects doth the presence of Christ in the ordinances of the Gospell, produce in those that be enemies and haters of him. 3 Hence wee may have some sight, why this Sinne is unpardona∣ble, because it is a Sinne stirred up, and provoked directly by the par∣don. For what is the maine matter and principall Doctrine of the Gos∣pell, but an offer of pardon of Sinne o all those that will receive Iesus Christ. And why should they bee vouchsafed pardon, that doe not
onely contemne the same, but so hate it, that they are by the offer thereof worse than before. The Kingdome of God was come to these hellish Imps. God brought Ie∣sus the Messias unto them. Their owne Consciences acknowledge it: the light of Gods Spirit seale and confirmed it. What was all thi but an offer of pardon? which the despise so farre forth, that they as for the very offer of it the worse. The fourth Conclusion. It is not the light of the Gospe in generall, and in a confused man¦ner shining, or set forth in types, an shadowes, and figures that did beg this blasphemy; but some specia and particular beam of Light bei palpably and evidently presented  the Eye of their Conscience: Its a experimentall knowledge that b¦gat in them this Sinne. The D¦ctrine of the Messias they knew w enough, and approved it: as a they affected with great devoti those Mysticall Rites and Cerem∣nies of the Iewish Gospell, that s¦dowed
out the same: this only was it which they could not endurre, the direct light and truth of it in parti∣cular, presenting it selfe to the Eye of their Conscience. For example: In Tapestry and Imagery wee can with delight behold the portrai∣cture of Serpents, Toads, Foxes, Wolves, and other filthy Beasts, that we cannnot, when themselves in themselves shall be presented unto us, but fly from them, or pursue them to death. Even so is it with many professors of Christ; that though they seeme much affected to Christ in generall, and much devo∣ted to every shadow and semblance of him; yet doe they notwithstan∣ding indeed hate and malice him, and would, were he present in per∣son with them, pursue him even un∣to death. 1 Not to measure Religion by a generall profession, and an out∣ward conformity unto the Rites and Ceremonies thereof. For even the most malitious and spightfull ene∣mies that Christ hath, are such as
professe Christ, yea, and persecute Christ in the name of Christ. 2 If in the houre of Tempta∣tion thou canst in thy Conscience assure thy selfe that thou wast never thus affected, when the Gospell and Christ Iesus was presented unto thee, that thy minde did never rise nor lift up it selfe against it, but ever liked and loved it; yea if thy Con∣science tell thee that thou art so farre from this affection, that the more knowledge thou hast had of Christ, the more thou lovest him; thou mayst assure thy selfe that this Sinne is not so much as breeding in thee.
The second part. The Birth of this Sinne. YOu have heard before how this Blasphemy was conceived by the beames of a Divine Truth that shined to the Eye of their Conscience, where∣by these Scribes and Pharisees dis∣cerned indeed that Christ was the Sonne of God. This first quickned this Monster, and made it to swell and grow in the wombe of their hearts. Now wee are to consider the Birth of this Sinne, by what means it was brought forth of them. This is set downe verse 23. For when the Scribes and Pharisees did not only see the wonderfull works that our Saviour Christ wrought, but did also perceive that the people
came thereby to the light of that Truth, which they laboured to the uttermost to smother and extin∣guish: as soone as ever they began to descry, that that the people were astonished at the wonderfull workes of Christ; and that in this their astonishment they began to con∣clude, that he was surely the Christ: they could not then containe any longer, but presently breathe out this fearfull Blasphemy. So that the sight of the peoples astonishment, and the hearing of their words, wherby they began to give glory to Christ, as the Messias and Saviour of the World, was the Mid-Wife that brough forth this Sinne. Whence observe we these Con∣clusions concerning this Sinne. The first Conclusion. The cause that irritateth and pro∣voketh men unto this Blasphemy, is not within themselves, but out of themselves. The matter of this Sinne was within themselves; but the irri∣tating cause was out of themselves For if this divine Light had shined
never so brightly upon their owne Soules, howsoever they might have maliced the same, yet they would never in that manner have spit out Blasphemies into the cares of men against it. For they knew well enough that it was not so as they said; and therefore had it not been more in regard of others than them∣selves, they would never have said so. And thus it is in the extreme ma∣litious speeches of many concer∣ning man: men are wont by seeing other mens respect unto him, to be provoked and stirred up thereto. This may serve to informe men truly in another point concerning this Sin; to wit, that those thoughts and words that are suddenly begot∣ten and hatched in man, himselfe knoweth not how nor which way, cannot be properly said to bee his Sinne. For that which stirreth up a man to commit this Sinne, is an Ex∣ternall cause out of himselfe. Many have many times strange blasphe∣mous thoughts and fantasies; yea, they many times breake forth into
words concerning God, concerning Christ, concerning the Scripture, &c. But for their heart-bloud, they cannot tell either how they come, or how they were moved unto them. Now, howsoever we have just cause to humble our selves for such Sinnes as rise out of our minds thus we know not how; yet have wee n just cause therfore in regard of them to condemne our selves as guilty o this horrible Sinne. The second Conclusion. Those that commit this Sinne, it the committing of it have a respec to others. For others sakes doing that they doe, and are in that regar stirred up unto it. As in this Exam¦ple, the Scribes and Pharisees i blaspheming Christ, had a respec to the people, and in this regar were they stirred up indeed, so t blaspheme. For their intent was to make Christ odious and vile in th eyes of them that began to admin & adore him. And this among me is the height of malice and despite to revile men, and odiously to abu
them, not to themselves onely, but to others. This Sinne therefore is such a malice and despight, as is in a man stirred up by others. The dearest Saints and Servants of God having in them many re∣mainders of corruption, the Lord many times leaving them to them∣selves, suffereth Satan to buffet them, as hee did Paul, to the end they might bee humbled, and not puffed up with the graces of God n them. For we carry about with us  strange nature, that will make us proud that wee are not proud, and that is the most dangerous pride of ll. And therefore when God hath given a Christian grace to go before thers in many holy exercises, to ake more conscience of the Word, abbath, Sacraments, and Prayer, han others ordinarily doe, and ouchsafed in more than ordinary manner to reveale himselfe unto im; hee leaveth commonly a sting  the flesh to humble them,2. Cor. 12.7. he suf∣eth such sometime to fall into any strange Sinnes; yea, such as
may have some resemblance un the highest and extreamest Sin against the Holy Ghost. But t Children of God, in such spirit desertions, are to take heed h they boult out of their hearts  hope of mercy. For although  Sinne they have committed  have a shew of malice and ha to God and his Truth, which i every man in some degree so f forth as he is flesh; yet so long is not a malice and despight  regarding others, but certaine ¦shings onely, it cannot bee  Sinne. The third Conclusion. This Sinne is no Closet. Si nor Chamber-Sinne, or House. S but a publique Sinne, a prof malice and hatred against C and his Truth; a Sinne procla with the sound of Trumpet, c¦mitted in the market place. That Blasphemy therefore  is ashamed to shew the head,
blusheth to looke a Christian in the oe, is not this Sinne. This is an im∣dent and a shamelesse Sinne. The fourth Conclusion. The very end of this Sinne is a litious purpose and resolution to tinguish the divine truth and love  Christ in others; and therefore it sireth to imprint that malice upon hers, as these here doe; yea this is  very reason why it is commit∣. The fifth Conclusion. This Sinne is a Sinne of Oppo∣on and Contradiction, when n malitiously and spightfully op∣e themselves unto, and contra∣ the Truth of God professed by ers, and that to the face of the fessors of it; yea, and therfore, be∣e it is professed by others. The sixth Conclusion. They that commit this Sinne, of
all other things can least endure  contrary practise and professio others; but according to the deg thereof are the degrees of this  and by that very practise and p¦fession of others are men thrust were into it. A man through the mali Satan may have many strange blasphemous thoughts runni his mind; yea, sometime brea forth even in tongue against  against Christ, against the Wo God, against this or that Arti Religion; yet so long as ma with any patience endure to  the contrary professed, and  the contrary practised, and i thereby provoked and stirred  more to that Sin, and to the  of those persons that profe practise the contrary, so long i farre from this Sinne. For th a Sinne that breaketh forth by contrary profession and pra They therefore that are so far  being stirred up by the co practise and profession of o
at they love the contrary practise nd profession in others, are very far om this Sinne. The seventh Conclusion. This Sinne is a Sinne that will dure no reasoning, no disputing, o conference, no contradiction, no erswasion, no authority, and by onsequent, no remedy. They therefore that hold and aintaine, though affectedly, any asphemous Errours, and yet can tiently endure contradiction and position, or disputation and con∣ence; yea, that delight therein, nd affect it, and take it in good rt, especially if thereby they bee itigated and allaied, are farre also om this Sinne. The eighth Conclusion. This Sinne is a Sinne committed  knowledge, in advisement, in de∣eration, in judgement; and not ly in violence of rage & passion.
Men commit it not in their b bloud, incensed by some person disgrace, nor in any distracted f or temporary madnesse; but they  it advisedly, deliberately, witting freely. Thus was it here with the There was nothing at all in  voice of the multitude that mi provoke them to wrath. If the p¦ple had taken occasion hereby cry out upon the Scribes and Ph¦sees, that gave Christ no better e¦tertainment: if they had deno¦ced curses and woes against the Christ himselfe sometime did,  by this means had first inra them, and they then in their  and fury against them had bro out into these blasphemies aga Christ, it had changed the nature their Sinne. For a man in his f and rage, provoked by another,  sometime speake very spight words against them whom he be¦reth no malice unto in his he especially in his cold bloud. So th this was no sudden, rash, hea unadvised, distempered Sinne
ut a deliberate, staied, setled, firme inne. The ninth Conclusion. This Sinne against the Holy Ghost is not a secondary malice, sing orginally from the hatred of some other; but it is a direct and im∣mediate malice against Christ and the Gospell. They did not thus spightfully speake against Christ, ecause they maliced these people hat began to love Christ; but be∣cause they maliced Christ, therefore they spake thus malitiously of him  the people, whom they had no ause to malice but for Christs sake. This is not therefore a refracted, or a reflected malice. For what was there in these Iewes, or in their speech, that should make them in this manner to breake forth into blasphemy? The tenth Conclusion. Every Blasphemy is said in the
word to be a kinde of piercing o God: Lev. 24.11, 26. See Iun. notes. For that is one Hebrew nam that is given unto it. So that thi Blasphemy is as it were a kinde o discharge of a great Cannon-sh against the Lord. Now what is th March that giveth fire to this Can∣non? you may see it here; the zea¦lous profession of others. So that as the Light of the Gospell turne their thoughts as it were into a po¦der; so the same light affecting o∣thers, is as it were a match to set these their thoughts all on fire. And hence it may appeare, that even the Children of God, albe they be so upheld, that they comm not this Sinne; yet may feele i themselves a great inclination un it, insomuch as nought but the hand of God keepeth them from it. For how doe our mindes naturally rise and swell at those that wee see more forward in Religion than our selves? but in other matters if we see men go further than our selves, we cannot endure it.
The third part. Of the Name of this Sinne. HItherto of the Conception and Birth of this Sin. We are now to intreat of the kinde and quality of it, which wee are to gather partly out of the an∣swer that the Scribes and Pharisees make to this people, and partly out of the Titles that Christ himselfe gives unto it. Where first of the Name, and then of the Nature. You have here then this Monster brought forth; you have it na  it is said to be a Sinne of Blas  against the Holy Ghost. Where, by Sinne against  ¦ly Ghost, you must not  a Sinne directly and pecu  ¦mitted against the p
Holy Ghost, being the third in Tri∣nity: For, 1 In that sense every Sinne, whatsoever is committed, is com∣mitted against the Holy Ghost; it being impossible for a man to sinne against any one person, but he must sinne against all; or to sinne against God, but hee must sinne against the Trinity, and by consequent against the Holy Ghost. 2 This were to lift up the Holy Ghost above the two other persons, that a Sinne committed against him only were unpardonable. 3 The Example that wee have here maketh it plaine: For the Sinne was directly committed against the person of Christ. So was Iulian the Apostates. 4 It's a question whether these persons did so much as know that there is an Holy Ghost; and this (as shall appeare afterward) is not a Sin of Ignorance: as if a man should be so mad as to smite at the King, ima∣gining him to be some begger. By the Holy Ghost then, when
we call this Sinne the Sinne against the Holy Ghost, by a Rhetoricall grace and ornament of speech you are to understand the Gifts and Graces of the Holy Ghost: as wee say, a man sits or walks in the Sunne, when he sits or walks onely in the light of the Sunne.Luke 2.25. In this sense is the Holy Ghost said to be upon Si∣meon, though essentially and really he were no more upon him, than upon any other ordinary man in Ierusalem, but in respect of his gifts and graces only: And thus the Apo∣stles are said by imposition of hands to give the Holy Ghost. What?Acts 8.17, 18. the person himselfe? no; but his gifts. So that by Sinne against the Holy Ghost we are to understand a Sinne against the Gifts of the Holy Ghost; as a man may be said to sin against the King, not only when he smites or reviles his person; but when he offereth despite and dis¦grace unto any of his royall gifts and so in like manner against  other. Hence arise these Concl¦ons
concerning this Sinne. The first Conclusion. This Sinne is not ones rising against God or Christ, in regard of some judgement or punishment pre∣sent upon him. For judgements and punishments are not called the Ho∣ly Ghost in the word; though they come from God, and by consequent from the Holy Ghost. Besides, this Sinne is a sinne against the Grace of God; which punishments cannot bee but by accident. And therefore all such Sinnes as arise from a deep sence and apprehension of them, howsoever they may be great and grievous Sinnes, fearefull and hor∣rible; yet this Sinne may bee of an higher nature than so, as shall ap∣peare afterward, and of another kind. This should teach us to use a temperate moderation in judging of those that we see in any judgement of God upon their bodies or goods to breake forth into any extremities
of passion in word or deed against God, or against any part of Gods Truth: as we see it usuall with ma∣ny so to do in extreame losses, hurts, agonies, pangs of sicknesse, and such like. Then belike Iulian the Apostata committed not this Sinne, when be∣ing deadly wounded, hee tooke of his bloud, and flung it up into the aire, crying withall, vicisti Galilaec, Thou hast overcome yet, O Galile∣an, at last. If Iulian had not committed this Sinne before in many vile and spightfull speeches against Christ & Christians, it could not so cleerly be argued from that. And yet was that speech so horribly spightfull, that the smiting of him may seem rather a bare occasion than a cause of it; and he rather sheweth in it an obsti∣venesse in the Sin, as if he should aid, Now thou hast done thy worst, et are thou still but a Galilean. But herein especially warinesse f Censure is to be used concerning uch as blaspheme in time of affli∣ction,
wound and torment of Con∣science, when God, by reason of some sinne, pincheth, and racketh, and tortureth the Conscience in that manner, that the party breaketh forth into strange, and direfull, and outragious blasphemies: that which God suffereth many to fall into, partly by hiding the merit and de∣sert of Sinne, and partly by denying strength to beare the punishment inflicted.Iob 9.17. & 10.16, 18. & 16, 14, 17 & 24.12. & 30.20, 26. Iob himselfe was oft brea∣king forth into such passions against God. And yet this, though it bee not that unpardonable Sinne, it is not∣withstanding a most fearefull Sinne, and a kinde of renouncing of God, and an holding of him to bee un¦just, which hee cannot be, but hee must be no God. It were an horrible Sinne in a Childe to revile and re∣proach his naturall Father for some over-extreme correction, though naturall parents may therein over∣reach themselves. But for a Child of God to revile and blaspheme, when God shall lay any Iudgemen
upon him, and thereby to professe him an unjust God, who can no more be unjust than not be, when one should the rather study to please God the more, and argue the horri∣blenesse of Sinne by the horriblenes of punishment, is much more feare∣full. The second Conclusion. This Sinne is committed against the love and favour of God, yea against the reall Love of God in the collation of a benefit and favour. And who cannot see that this is a Sinne of a farre higher nature, than to sinne against the wrath and justice of God? When a Childe shall re∣bell against his Father, or a Subject against his Prince for extremity and rigour, it is a Sinne; much more for justice and equity: but for love and favour and grace to revile them, is most odious and vile. So to revile and blaspheme God for his judge∣ments & punishments, which are al∣waies just and righteous, is horrible;
but to revile him for his grace and favors is hideous and ghastly. 1 To shew us what damnable wretches we are by nature, that turn all into poison and Sinne, making all things matter to feed sinne and rebellion against God. So that as a Woolfe, though he feed upon no∣thing but Lambe, yet still remaines in the nature of the Woolfe, and is the more woolvish rather than otherwise, and even turneth the flesh of a Lambe into his owne nature; even so naturally would wee doe with Gods favours and benefits, were we followed even with them alone. 2 To admonish us to take heed how we abuse any gift or grace of God to the dishonour of God. For whensoever wee so doe, wee are in the highway to this Sinne, and wee have our footsteps printed in the path that leadeth thereunto. The third Conclusion. The Sinne against the Holy
Ghost is not onely a Sinne against the Love and favour of God, or against God for his gifts and graces; but even a Sinne against the very gifts and graces themselves: and not a Sinne whereby we abuse those gra∣ces and gifts to other ends and pur∣poses; but a Sinne whereby we op∣pugne, and resist, and disgrace, and wilfully deface the said graces di∣rectly and immediately. For Exam∣ple; the Father gives his eldest Son money, the Prince his Subject a Iew∣l this Sonne or this Subject spends this money or Iewell in gaming, glttony, venery and ryot: this is an buse both of Father and King; and of the gifts themselves also, to im∣ploy them to such base uses. But this is a disgrace in a farre higher degree, that toucheth both more directly and immediately, when they shall offer disgrace to the gift it selfe, fling it away, deface it, trample it under their feet, or the like. All of us, when wee turne the graces of God into wantonnesse and va∣ity, into pride and vain-glory, doe
sinne both against God and his gra∣ces: But when we offer despight and indignity unto them of purpose and directly, this is a fearfull and horri∣ble Sinne. 1 Note hence the vilenesse of our natures, and the rebelliousness of them, that doe not onely h God, but hate the very gifts and gr¦ces also that come from God. M many times may give a gift that i not worthy of any account, ye that deserveth disgrace: as if a Kin should give one of his Nobles i way of reward for some piece o service, a piece of bread, or some suc trifle. But there is not the base gift that God bestoweth, but it  worthy honour and esteeme, and i such as should make us love God the more. 2 When we feele our mindes rise and lift up themselves against any ordinance of God, which hee hath appointed for our good, it should humble us, and wee should feare the falling into this Sin. And how apt our natures are hereunto,
may appeare by our often moiling and repining at the sacred ordinan∣ces of God, as the preaching of the Word, &c. Which are grudgings and spices of this disease. Secondly, out of this Name is to be enquired, whether the Sin against the Holy Ghost, be a Sinne against those gifts that are in the person himselfe that commits the Sinne, or in the person of some other. The answer is, that it is a Sinne partly against the gifts in them∣selves, and partly against the same in others: it's committed against both. A man would never in such a man∣ner despight the Holy Ghost in himselfe, if he perceived it not in another; neither would he ever have despighted it in another, except it had been in himself. For there being in such wicked persons as these are, an inbred hatred unto all things that doe but savour of the Spirit of God; when being after some sort possessed with it themselves, they see others also to bee made partakers of it, this is it that makes their hearts to boile
and broile within, and causeth them to breake forth into this blasphemy. And this is confirmed by our Ex∣ample in this place. These Scribes and Pharisees had received the Ho∣ly Ghost, that is, the divine Illumi∣nation of the Holy Ghost: they saw with the very Eye of their Consci∣ence, that Iesus the Sonne of the Virgin Mary was that Messias, that Christ, that sonne of David; they saw it by that divine beame of light that streamed from his divine works: this light was odious and loathsome unto them; they hated and detested it above all things: But when they perceived it to spread it selfe unto others, and to be entertained and embraced of others, that made them in this manner to blaspheme the same. Hence arise these Conclusions concerning this Sinne. The first Conclusion. That man committeth not the Sinne against the Holy Ghost, that
hateth, revileth, and persecuteth, though with the highest malice, any gift or grace of God in another, if that gift or grace be not in some measure in himselfe. For the Sinne against the Holy Ghost, is a Sinne against a gift received by the person that commits the Sinne, and not on∣ly against one received by another; but both doe necessarily concurre, the one is not without the other. 1 In this respect Paul himselfe before his conversion, though hee was a might persecuter of all Chri∣stians, and went from place to place, panting and breathing after Chri∣stian bloud, and blaspheming Christ; yet forasmuch as hee was not illuminated by the Holy Ghost, but did it in meere and grosse igno∣rance, he committed not this Sinne. Hencee also it followeth, that all the blasphemies and revilings of those that are not contrarily persua∣ded in their Consciences, are not this Sinne. Neither had this Blas∣phemy of the Scribes and Pharisees, how vile and odious soever, been
that unpardonable Sinne, if they had not been illuminated, and had spoken as they thought. Neither is it any question, but that Paul, that had so deep an hand in persecuting Christians, had as deep a tongue in blaspheming Christ,1. Tim. 1. 1 , 16. for they eve use to goe together: and yet obtai∣ning pardon, it is thereby apparen that he sinned not this unpardona∣ble Sinne. 2 Further this sheweth the dif∣ficulty of judging this Sinne. Those that do commit it, of all other least judge themselves for it. And it is a wonderfull hard thing to judge of it in another. There must be a concur∣rence of many circumstances to it, as shall after appeare. I may easily judge when a man is a blasphemer and a persecutor; but to judge whe∣ther he blasphemeth and persecuteth as Saul did, or as these Pharisees, is hard. And wee must take heed, not onely how wee doe headily sht Heaven-gates against our selves, but against others. It is a fleshly and a carnall delight, not a spirituall, that
is taken at the consideration of persecutors their future destruction. The second conclusion. Those that love, nourish, cherish, admire, extoll, or reward any Grace in another, that in respect of them∣selves they hate, scorne and deride, doe not commit this Sinne. For this is a Sinne (as appeares, not by our former grounds onely, but by our Example) that they which commit, commit not against the Holy Ghost in themselves alone, but in others, and more against that in others than in themselves. For their gall bursteth not indeed, untill they see that in another which they have in themselves. By this wee may know what to judge of a number of vile, and pro∣phane, and blasphemous persons in the World, given to drunkennesse, ncleannesse, cursing, blaspheming in their own persons, that notwith∣standing in their children &c neigh∣ours love and like the ontrary
graces: whereas he that committe this blasphemy, would never endu his Childe to blesse that which h doth so dicully curse. Would the Scribes and Parisees have endur their Cildren to have professed  blessed Christ, whom themselv thus blasphemed? The third Conclusion. Hee that in word or deed sinne against that gift and grace of t Holy Ghost in another, which  also in himselfe, and yet hateth n the gift in himself, commits not th unpardonable Sinne. Our experience teacheth us, the many in envy and malice un others, will disgrace and revile m¦ny excellent gifts and graces  God in others, and that even there¦fore because they love them, an adore them too much in themselves and would have the onely honou of them. Now he that beares suc an affection, as to envy a grace th in another, and therefore to blas∣pheme,
because he would have the lory of such a grace in himselfe one, doth not commit this Sinne; cause in this Sinne, a man hates  Grace, as in others, so in him∣fe. The fourth Conclusion. If a man doe therefore spite and aspheme a gift and grace of the pirit in another, because it is not in mselfe (as many doe) it is not this inne. For this is a Signe that hee oth not malice the gift, but the erson. A third point to be enquired into oncerning this Name, is against hat kinde of gifts the Sin against e Holy Ghost is committed. For ery good thing may bee called a ift of the Holy Ghost, because very good thing is a gift of God, ho is Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost; our health, our strength, our ctivity, beauty, &c. But yet these e not those gifts that are called the Holy Ghost in Gods Word. But the
Word of God endited by the Ho Ghost, hath appropriated this na unto certaine speciall gifts, not  the Body, but of the Minde. A m that having bin sick, hath recove his health, is not said to have recei the Holy Ghost; though the he hee hath received be a gift of  Holy Ghost. A man that hath  an hand or an eare, cannot in Di¦nity bee said to have lost the H Ghost, though both of them bee  gifts. So of Beauty; and of  Actions proceeding from these ¦dily gifts. Hee that hath the gift running, of wrestling, of any ot like exercise, should abuse the H Ghost: if hee should say that  overranne such a man by the gift the Holy Ghost, where the Scri¦ture hath curiously affected, appr¦priated and enclosed a Name,  must not make it common.  Name Church is generall,. Act. 19.32, 39, 40. sign¦ing any company gathered to ¦ther. But the Word of God havi appropriated it to a company such persons, as are assembled for
erformance of holy duties, it were rosse prophanensse to call a com∣ny of Artificers or Tradesmen eting to consult of common bu∣nesses, or to make merry together, Church. The gifts of the Holy ost therefore are to be understood f the minde of man. And surely  the good gifts of mans minde, as , reason, justice, mercy, know∣dge, &c. are the gifts of the Ho∣ Ghost; but yet all of them are t these gifts that are called the oly Ghost. For Example; He that ch learned Arithmeticke, Astro∣my, the Tongues; hee that is a eat Statesman, and knowes all the olicies of all Common-wealths nnot in these be said to have the oly Ghost. But to come to the point, the gift t is here meant, is that supernatu∣ Illumination of the Holy ost, wherewith hee illightneth  minde with the knowledge of e Gospell, or any point or parcell ereof: And the Sinne against it, hen men are so mad and furious
against the light that shineth  bring Salvation, that they doe w¦lies in them to darken and ext¦guish it, and to put out both th owne eyes, and the eyes of oth that they might not see it. The ¦cellency of the Gift argues the ¦nesse of the Sinne. The bo light, and bodily eye-sight is ¦cellent gift, to travellours espec that goe dangerous wayes for  and pits, &c. How much more ¦cellent is that spirituall Light,  directeth men here travelling  infinite dangers without it una¦dable, to the place of their ere abode? It were an horrible vill for a man to put out both his o and other mens bodily eyes; b put out their spirituall eyes, where of necessity they must needs ¦nally miscarry, is even a villany villanies, of all villanies the  villanous. The Conclusion then hence ¦sing is this, That they that sco¦deride, contemne, blaspheme  bodily or naturall gift and grace
God in man, though never so spight∣lly and malitiously, commit not herein this Sinne. This Sinne is a ntempt of higher graces and fts. Lastly, our Saviour calleth it a asphemy: Which appellation will o give some further light and in∣ght into this Sinne. To blaspheme, nerally, signifies to hurt one in ord or Speech. But specially it is en for a spightfull and malitious ling upon, reviling and disgra∣g one. To blaspheme the Holy ost, then, is openly to raile upon, d revile and give foule words of  Holy Ghost; that is, of the Truth  God reviled by the Holy Ghost. Hence gather we these Conclusi∣s concerning this Sinne. The first Conclusion. This Sinne is not committed in ought alone, but in word also, or that which is proportionable un∣it; to wit, writing, or other such gnes as may testifie and bring ones
mind to another. For words are no¦thing but notes and signes of tho things that are in our minds, wherb we make known our notions, desir & affections to others; writing, n other kinde of Signes, are the signe of words. Now there are two so of Signes, one ambiguous and co¦jecturall, another certaine and evi¦dent. And there is some differen betweene ambiguous or uncerta signes, and words; for some will n speake in words that which they  shew by some signes and tokens no¦withstanding. Many will sh many signes and tokens, and du shewes of discontent and of pro¦phanenesse, which they will not ye shew in words. But there are som and certaine signes and tokens, and of such it is here meant. Hence it appeares that this is n smothered and dissembled Sinne that lies lurking in the secrets of th heart or soule, or that dares not  shew his head. There are many grosse and wicked imaginations i mans minde, as also affections and
desires, which himselfe also nouri∣heth and feedeth within himselfe, but he will not suffer to goe abroad; yea for the further hiding of them, many will in words deny, renounce, sweare, forsweare and abjure them. But this is none of those modest and shame faced Sins, that blush to looke a man in the face; but an impudent, hamelesse, brazen faced Sinne, who then in her pride, when most gaze pon her. This Sinne makes no dumbe shewes, clips not the Kings language, but speaks plainely and eadly. The second Conclusion. To call in question the blessed Truth (though against Consci∣ence) to wrangle and dispute against it with some kinde of heate, is not to commit this Sinne, though it be a Sinne. For this is not properly to blaspheme; which is more than simply to reason against, dispute and oppose. Yet such as pride themselves, and
whose wits glory to maintaine e¦rour, and to sophisticate the holy and divine Truth of God, had nee to beware lest they passe from th one to the other. The third Conclusion. A simple deniall of any divi Truth, even of the highest, ev of the Trinity, of Christ, of God of the Gospell, of Salvation by Christ, of the Resurrection, of H¦ven, of Hell, is not this Sinne. Fo though these in a generall sense be Blasphemies and horrible Sinnes; yet take Blasphemy in the proper sense, which is here meant, for a rai∣ling and reviling speech, and it will not hold in a simple deniall; it being one thing to deny and reject, and another to revile and raile. This is cleerely set before our eyes in this Example. They doe not barely and simply deny Christ to bee the Messias; but adjoyne unto the same odious, vile and con∣tumelious Speeches. So that the
Sinne against the Holy Ghost is a greater Sinne than the bare deniall f God. If this had been the que∣tion betweene the Iewes and the Pharisees, whether Iesus were the Messias, and the Pharisees had either denied their Conclusion or Argu∣ment, and gone no further, they d not had this Sinne. For thus e in some cases of tryall, and fur∣her than this may even the children  God goe. Peter denied Christ, d against his Conscience he deni∣d him; yet sinned he not this Sin, out received mercy. Much lesse do Pagans and Infidels, Turks and Barbarians, that ignorantly doe the ame. The fourth Conclusion. A deniall of any, even the grea∣st divine Truth, that is, though ith protestation, swearing, for∣earing, cursing and abjuration, is ot this Sinne. For though every aine Oath, even for the Truth, bee ome kinde of Blasphemy; yet to
ratifie and confirme errour, yea th grossest errours, with oaths and a¦jurations, are not Blasphemies  strict and proper sense. Mat. 26.74.Hence Peter, who did not onel deny, but forsweare Christ, yea ana∣thematised himselfe if hee knew Christ, was notwithstanding free from this Sinne, though hee sinne against both knowledge and Co¦sience. So that hee that commi blasphemy against the Holy Gho commits a greater Sinne than  doth, that denies and renounce and forsweares Christ. By this also it appeares, that the simple Sinne of Apostasie is not th Sinne against the Holy Ghost. Fo he is an Apostata, that having pro∣fessed Christ and the Gospell, doth after deny and renounce the same; but that a man may do, and yet not commit this Sinne.
The third part. Of the Nature of this Sinne. HItherto of the Name of this Sinne. Now followeth the Sinne it selfe, which, duely weighed and scanned, will direct us ndeed to the true knowledge of the Sinne against the Holy Ghost. For the Sinne here committed being hat Sinne; the true description of the Sinne here committed, will de∣scribe the Sinne against the Holy Ghost. The Sinne then here committed (as appeares by all the Circumstan∣es of this History) is an open, con∣dent, and desperate opposition un∣o the publique profession of the ospell; wherein contrary to know∣dge and conscience, they freely, wilfully, spightfully, and maliti∣ously
raile against and revile th same. 1 That this their Sin was a sin of Opposition, appeares plainely. For in the committing of it, they directly opposed themselves to these Iewes that professed Christ, being touched with his miracles. 2 That it was an opposition to the Gospell, it is apparent. For they opposed to this Article of the Gos∣pell, that Iesus was the Messias. 3 That it was an opposition to the profession of the Gospell, ap∣peares; in that it did arise upon the peoples profession. 4 That it was an open opposi∣tion, appeares. For it was in the face, presence, and hearing of the mul∣titude. 5 That it was confident and desperate, appeares by the tenor of all the words. 6 That it was contrary to con∣science & knowledge, appears both by our Saviour Christs conviction, and the monstrous absurdities that they were driven unto therein.
7 That they did it freely and wilfully, appeares by the tenor of the Text. 8 That spightfully and maliti∣ously, is apparent: For they spit out their gall against Christ in the most odious manner that may bee. And this may serve to shew the detestablenesse of this Sin, and the orrible impiety of them that com∣mit the same. Now it remaines that from hence we gather the description in general of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, which must needs be the same with his. The Sinne against the Holy Ghost then is an open and malitious opposition made unto the professors of the Gospell for the Gospels sake, wherein, contrary to knowledge and conscience, a man doth freely, wil∣ly, desperately, spightfully re∣le the Author and Professors hereof. This according to the judgement f most Divines, is the nature and
quality of this Sinne: For the better understanding whereof; we will, 1 Explaine the words; 2 Prove the Truth; and 3 Shew the horriblenesse of the Sinne. 1 It is an Opposition: which is not a bare conceit, imagination, af∣firmation or assertion. For though these be where there is an opposi∣tion; yet these may be without op∣position. But opposition is when a man of purpose setteth himselfe against another. For Example; a man in armes on horsebacke with speare in hand, though hee ride and runne, and shake his speare never so much, yet except there bee a person, to whom he opposeth himselfe, he cannot in so doing be said to make opposition; and yet he that maketh opposition, useth no other kindes of motion. So that admit a man were so wicked as to revile and blas∣pheme alone by himselfe; yet such a reviling and blaspheming is no opposition. Againe, Opposition is a mutuall confronting of two Op∣posites,
when the one setteth it selfe gainst the other. For hee cannot be said to make opposition, that go∣th or holdeth with another, or that pursueth one that flieth away. This Sinne therefore, being a sinne of Opposition, is not committed with those that are of the same wicked mind, or that do not hold any con∣trary part. 2 An open or publique Oppo∣sition, is that which is not only pro∣claimed, but acted before the faces of men. It is a solemne opposition in the presence of others. So that it is as a solemne combate. 3 It is also confident, not a fearefull and timorous opposition, but with all resolution and boldnes. Not such an Opposition; as when a an is afraid of himselfe, or runnes way from his owne shadow. So that the Foole that saith in his heart, here is no God,Psal. 14.1. but dares not say it  words, and that boldly too, even o the faces of them that hold the contrary, is not guilty of this inne.
4 It's against the professors of the Gospell, the holy and religi∣ous men of God, who in a spe∣ciall manner represent God: these are the persons that in this Sin they oppose themselves against. 5 For the Gospels sake: this is the very cause of their Oppo∣sition, not for any other by re∣spect. 6 Wherein they revile, not the persons so much as the Gospel, espe∣cially professed and embraced. 7 Freely; without force or constraint. 8 Against knowledge and con¦science; not in simplicity and Igno∣rance. 9 Wilfully; against all good means to the contrary. 10 Desperately; contemning all the mischiefes that may fol∣low. 11 Malitiously; from an heart in a speciall manner set on fire by Satan against God and all goodnes Now that this Sinne is such as i here described.
1 This description is agreeable to our precedent, and to other precedents; to wit, that of Iulian the Apostata, &c. 2 This is such a Sinne, as is no possible for any that hath the least degree of grace and sanctifica∣tion in him to commit. 3 They that commit the Sinne here described, are as farre from all grace and goodnesse, as a man can imagine; neither can the wit of man imagine an higher wicked∣nesse. The greatnesse of it may thus appeare. 1 Not to love or respect the professors of the Gospell is a great Sinne, and an injury unto Christ, yea, a kind of enmity unto him. For. 1 They that so doe breake the speciall commandement of the Gospell,Iohn 13.34, 35. a new Commandement that Christ gave unto his Disciples, and in them to all that looke to bee saved by him, that they love one another, as Christ hath loved them.
2 There are no persons more lovely than they if men had eyes to see the same. For they are not onely sacramentally, but really washed from the guilt of all their Snes; they are new Creatures, born agne of the Spirit of God; they are the living members of Iesus Christ; they are quickned by the Spirit of God; they are heires of the King∣dome of Heaven, Temples of the Holy Ghost; the Sonnes and Chil∣dren of God. What greater or more admirable matters can there be deserving love and admiration than these? So that not to love the true professors of the Gospell, is to professe a contempt, and a light re∣gard of Regeneration, of the Spirit of God, of the bloud of Christ, of Christ, of Heaven. 3 No persons deserve more love than they, if men were not wonderfully besotted. The Hus∣band of the Wife,Semen san∣ctum sta∣tumen ter∣rae. Isa. 6.13. the Father of the Childe cannot deserve so much. For 1 Vnder God they are the
very pillars and foundations of the Earth. It's for their sake that the Earth endureth; when their num∣ber is fulfilled, the World shall have an end. 2 They are the causes of all the blessings that are in the places where they live: They are men that love all, hurt none, are ready to do good unto all. Their prayers pul downe from God many speciall blessings upon the very wicked. They desire earnestly, and seeke after the conver∣sion and salvation of all men. They rejoyce in the good of all, they sor∣row for the hurt of any; wherein can there be greater desert? But they that commit this Sinne, doe not onely not affect them, but set themselves against them; are op∣posites and adversaries unto them. And this is a greater degree, to bee professed enemies unto professors of the Gospell, than to be bare con∣temners of them; yea, this must needs argue much wickednesse in the heart. For 1 All true professors of the
Gospell are honest men, and good men. And for men to bee professed enemies and opposites to honest and good men must needs argue a wic∣ked heart. 2 A man cannot oppose him∣selfe, and be an enemy unto a true proessor of the Gospell, but hee must needs be an enemy, and oppose himselfe some way or other to the Gospell it selfe, and to Christ. For these are so neere united the one to the other, that one cannot touch the one, but hee must withall touch the other. 3 He that stands in opposition to the professors of the Gospell, can∣not but be in league and amity with the enemies thereof. 2 For a man to hate the Chil∣dren of God in regard of their per∣sonall infirmities, or in regard of some injuries received at their hands were a sinne grievous and inexcusa∣ble. For besides that it is evill and unwarrantable upon such grounds, to hate any whomsoever; there are those lovely parts and graces in all
good Christians that may wel more than countervaile and weigh down any such wants and imperfections, as may be in any of them, and such wrongs and injuries as by occasion thereof they may offer unto any. But to hate them (as in this case) not in regard of any such speciall quarrell against them, or in respect of any private injury and wrong received from them, but to dislike (yea to spite and maligne) them for their very profession; it is not so much to hate Christ for them, as to hate Christ himselfe, and Christi∣anity in them, and to hate them for Christ. 3 For a Turke or a Pagan that never knew better (out of a love unto, and zeale of that way and worship that he hath ever been trai∣ned up in) to oppose himself in such sort to the professors of true piety, were a fearefull course, and likely to bring upon the head of such a one, a farre greater than ordinary easure of Gods wrath; the certainty wher∣of, by many dreadfull judgements
inflicted upon heathen persecutors of his people, God hath sealed up in sundry ages at severall times. But for one that himselfe hath acknowledged Christ, been enligh∣tened by the Spirit of Christ, con∣vinced in Conscience of the truth of the Gospell, yea, and outwardly made profssion of obedience there∣unto; for such a one, I say, spightful∣ly to oppose himselfe against the professors of that which hee hath formerly been instructed in, posses∣sed with, convinced of, and profes∣sed to imbrace; what is it but wittingly, and wilfully contrary to knowledge and conscience to goe out of Christs camp, to turne head against him, and to wage warre against those that adhere still unto him? which is yet far more fearefull than the former. 4 For a traiterous wretch, ha∣ving so gon out from his Sovereign, to goe on obstinately in his rebelli∣ous courses, without any thought of repenting or returning againe to him, neglecting all such courses
whereby pardon might be procured and favour regained; and that when opportunity of atchieving it, were oft offered unto him, were a very damnable and desperate course. But in this kinde the case is yet farre worse than so: For those that commit this Sinne, not onely refuse to use any means of recovery, but even contumeliously reject Gods mercy tendred unto them in the Gospell; tread the pardon it selfe as it were under their sect; trample upon Christ the person that pur∣chased it for them; despight the Spi∣rit of God, that reveaed, and that should seale it up to them, and mali∣tiously impugne and oppose those that either have accepted, or make shew to accept of it. And what can there be imagined more hideous, or more hellish than this is?
The fifth part. Of the Conviction of this Sin. HItherto of the Conception and the Birth, of the Name and the Nature of this Sin. Now the fifth point followeth, which is the Conviction of it; wherein our Saviour laboureth to hew, that the Blasphemy they utte∣ed in this open and shameful man∣ner was against Conscience, and of malice and despight; and that there∣in they did openly rebell against God, and set themselves against the ingdome of God. They laid to our Saviour Christs charge, that (as if he were an Arch-Magitian, or Conjurer, or a Practi∣ioner of the black Art) he wrought ose great and marvellous works, which hee did, by the power and
help of Beelzebub the prince of de∣vils. Our Saviour on the other side: 1 By reasons disproves their blasphemous assertion. 2 By other reasons proves the contrary truth; to wit, that what he did, he did not by the power of Sa∣tan, but by the power of Gods Spirit. Where before wee descend to particulars, let us make some gene∣rall use of this practise of our Savi∣our. Hee pronounceth not the sen∣tence of condemnation for this Sin, before hee have by evident reason convinced them to be guilty of it. It is against the Law of Love and Charity to judge and condemne person of any crime, without j reason and good cause. And th greater the crime is, the greater mo our presumptions be, before we must condemne. Before therefo wee lay to the charge of any th high and horrible Sinne, it behov us to be able by sound and sufficie reason to convince them first of i
Accusers have ever been esteemed odious, except there have bin some just cause; much more false Accu∣sers: and the greater the crimes are, the more odious they are, that accuse any falsly of them. It must therefore needs be most odious, to accuse one falsly of such a crime without evi∣dent Conviction, as is of so high and hainous quality as this is. And as this is a great Sin against others, so is it no lesse Sinne against our selves; especially in laying to our owne charge this Sinne above all other. For howsoever in other sinnes, I may doe another more hurt than my selfe; yet if I could lay this Sinne to the charge, though of the greatest innocent in the World, I should not doe him so much hurt, as in laying it upon false surmises and grounds upon my selfe. For ano∣thers Soule is never the worse for my false judgement. But in this case especially, if wee feed and nou∣rish such conceits, many direfull and dreadfull Effects will follow in our owne Soules. For,
1 Hee that accuseth and con∣demneth himselfe of this Sinne, he thrusts God out of his roome, and sits himselfe therein, when without warrant from the Word, and dire∣ction from those that have better insight in the same, hee takes au∣thority to arraigne, judge, and con∣demne himselfe, when hee is not his owne, but Gods, to iudge and condemne. Men must assent to Gods judgement and sentence re∣vealed in his Word, and measure their judgements and condemna∣tions by it; not judge or condemne of themselves. As a man, except hee have commission from God, may not judge or condemne ano∣ther to a bodily death; so much lesse may hee judge or condemne himsele to eternall death. We have power to deserve Hell; but we have no power to condemne our selves to Hell. 2 Hee that yeeldeth to this Temptation, what doth hee in ef∣fect but give himselfe to the Devill, acknowledging himselfe of right
to belong to him, and not to God, and to bee actually a subject of his Kingdome. For hee that shall passe such a condemnation as this against himselfe, knoweth that there are but two spirituall Kingdomes, hee knoweth that the Kingdome of God doth not belong to such a Sinner; and that therefore he must needs belong to the other. Now were it not a great presumption to give away a Soule, which Christ hath reckoned at so high a price, that he hath purchased it with his own pretious bloud, without a com∣mission from God. 3 He doth what he can imme¦diately to plunge his Soule into Hell-fire. For how can he chuse ut bee possessed with hellish ago∣ies and torments, when hee shall dge himselfe past all hope of mer∣? And if it bee a sinne for a an, be he never so vile a wretch,  cast his body into the fire or ter, or to set but his Neigh∣ours or his owne house on fire; w much more then to fling
his Soule into such spirituall tor∣ments? 4 Hee striketh dead, or casts into a swound all the graces of God in him; takes away their spi∣rit, their life, their motion. For this course it quencheth the light of Faith, cooleth the heate of Love, killeth the heart of Hope, and ma∣keth a man wholly unapt to doe God any good service. For how can hee that despaires of mercy, pray unto God? What good will it doe a man with teares to confesse his sinnes to God, when he knows and assures himselfe hee shall be damned for them? What heart can hee have to thinke on God, when he shall judge that all those blessings, that God hath bestowed upon him, shall but work to his fur∣ther condemnation? 5 Though it be most certaine that they that are afraid that they have committed this Sinne, neither ever have, nor ever shall commit this Sinne, so long as they continue so affected; yet to admit of such
conceits, is the next way in the world to bring a man to the next doore in committing it. For as no∣thing is more powerfull to beget love and obedience, than a per∣swasion of our Salvation: so on the contrary, nothing is more ef∣fectuall to beget in us a spite and alice to Christ and the Gos∣pell, than a perswasion of our dam∣ation. Now before that the Evangelist teth downe the Arguments of Christs Conviction, he premiseth is, that Christ knowing their Thoughts, said unto them. And by saith he so, when in all like∣hood hee heard their words, and his answer confuted them? By is it should seeme that the Sinne ainst the Holy Ghost, is commit∣ in Thought rather than in ord. Nay: by this it appeares that it not committed in word onely, in thought also. But that they  thoughts breaking forth in rds also, appeares, not only by
the Name Blasphemy; but by the words of our Saviour, Whosoever shall speake against, &c. verse 32. Neither (reserving due reverence unto them that may have better reason to judge otherwise) doe I take this to bee meant of those thoughts by which together with their words they committed this Sinne, which were rather of affe∣ction; but of some other thoughts of judgement. They made no doubt of this in their minds, that the Devils that were cast out by Christ, suffered manifest violence; and that they were not cast out by any vo∣luntary compact or colourable force, but by a violent power and strength: upon which our Saviour worketh. For else his discourse and reasoning that hee here useth wit them, had been vain. For he take it as granted, that Satan had vio∣lence offered; that his expulsion was by force, &c. This then is th meaning, that Christ not onely hearing their blasphemous word but knowing also the very secre
Imaginations of their hearts, goeth about to confound them, and by evidence of Reason grounded upon their owne Thoughts and Imagi∣ations to convince them of a spite∣full and malitious blasphemy. The Vse hereof. 1 This Sinne shews how hard  is to convince a man of this Sin. ee their words and deeds never so pightfull and malitious, yet you all never make them acknowledge , except you deale with their houghts, and wrestle and strive ith them. Else what need Christ ave medled here with their houghts? If hee had gone no rther than their words, one would ink he should have matter enough gainst them; but he is faine to go ther. And therefore though a an could dive into the deepest crets of ones Soule that hath com∣itted this Sinne, though he could ll as it were his heart out of his dy; though hee could shew him  the secrets of it as it were in a asse, how his words and affecti∣ons
are set against his knowledge and conscience; yet it will not serve the turne. Christ had more advantage of these wretches than wee have, and could have gathered more out of their wicked words than wee can; and yet notwith∣standing hee deales not with words onely, but with thoughts, and yet cannot bring them to acknowledge this Sinne; though 'tis likely hee pricked their Conscience with it, and in it convinced them of it. 2 In that our Saviour deales thus with their Thoughts and the secrets of their Soule, and withall is faine to beat upon them with so many reasons to prove them guilty of such a Sinne: this shewes the property of those that have com∣mitted this Sinne, not to acknow∣ledge it when it is committed, much lesse to be grieved and trou∣bled that they have committed it, So that so farre are they from ac∣knowledging it themselves, th though Christ Iesus himself should
lay it to their charge, yet they would not yeeld to it. And therefore this is an undoubted signe of one that hath not committed this Sinne, to feare, and accuse himselfe of the committing of it. For, 1 This is the property of Sin∣ners to hide and conceale, and not to acknowledge a Sinne. And the greater mens Sinnes are, the loa∣ther are they to acknowledge them. But this is the greatest, Sinne that is. 2 The greater Sinner, the har∣der Heart, and the more senselesse of Sinne: the harder heart, the fur∣ther from remorse. 3 This is a Sinne of malice and spite; and we know a man will rather break his heart than acknow∣ledge such a Sinne. 4 They that commit this Sinne re most gracelesse: But there is uch grace in this, to feare and sus∣ect our selves in this Sinne. Now I come to the particulars herein Christ opposeth unto their lasphemy; not so much labouring
therein their conversion as their con∣viction, that from it he might passe to their sentence of condemnation. The question that Christ disputes, is, whether hee did cast out Devils through Beelzebub. The first Argument whereby he confutes it, and by consequent con∣vinces them of furious spite and malice, is this: If I through the power of Beel∣zebub have cast out these Devils, then is the kingdome of Satan di∣vided, and at war in it selfe. But the kingdome of Satan is not divided, and at war in it selfe. Therefore I cast them not our through the power of Beelzebub. The first part is true, except they should imagine that herein the Devils plaid one with another, and in mockery or some policie made opposition one unto another. Which howsoever in words they had been likely to have done, if they had had so much cunning then, as some in our times now have; yet in their Conscience, which our Savi∣our
smites at, they coul t, because it could not possibly suggest unto them the least colour of a reason, why the Devils should, as it were upon a Stage play their parts in that manner: but they discerned a mani∣fest enmity between that Spirit by which Christ did this worke, and those that were cast out; and therfore Christ proves it not, but lets it passe. Whence learne we this practicall method of Christ, in dealing with desperate Sinners, not so much to strive to stop their mouths, as to touch their conscience, and therfore not to weary our selves with endlesse wranglings & brawles, as if it were possible to stay their thoughts: It's e∣nough if we can convince their con∣science; which when we have done, let us leave them and their Consci∣ence together to decide the contro∣versie. If men could observe but in some measure this Rule, the World had not bin so full of endles contro∣versies as it is. Christ in this contro∣versies go's no further then so: as if he had said; you see & hear, you Scribes
and Phari, and your consciences tell you; and though you bee im∣pudent enough to deny a manifest truth, yet you cannot gainsay this; that there is betweene that Spirit which I use, and those that are cast out, a perfect hatred and jarre, and a most fiery dissention. And there∣fore if my Spirit (as you spightfully and blasphemously affirme against knowledge and Conscience) bee Beelzebub; then is there hatred, di∣vision, warre, tumult, and civill dissention amongst the Devils, one seeking the ruine and overthrow of another, and labouring to cut the throat of another. This proposition Christ leaves, though it might bee cavilled at; and a man may dwell all the dayes of his life in cleering of such a proposition as this, if hee would go about to cleer all opposi∣tions and cavils. Hee passeth to the second part, which is this; But the Kingdome of Hell is not divided against it selfe: as if hee should say; But it is too grosse and absurd for any, that
are masters of common wit and rea∣son, to imagine, that Hell is up in armes against it selfe, and that there is deadly feud amongst the Devils of Hell, that they warre and fight in this maner, as you are eye-witnes∣ses of, one against another among themselves. This our Saviour Christ proves by a short reason. For then Satans Kingdome could not stand and re∣maine, but should be neere unto an end. For that is the state of all Kingdomes rent with civill dissen∣sions. So that by this reason, either they must herein speake malitiously and against Conscience, or else they must of necessity maintaine the for∣mer absurdities. And they were no doubt speciall positions of the Pha∣risees, which Christ here frames his Argument of. The second Argument is thus conceived. By that Spirit, which your Chil∣dren cast out Devils by, doe I cast out Devils. But your Children cast not out
Devils through Beelzebub. Therefore neither do I cast them out by him. In this Argument there is some doubt what is meant by their Chil∣dren. The best of our Interpreters hold it to be meant flatly of our Sa∣viour Christs Disciples. But I must crave leave to dissent with reve∣rence from them: For, 1 there is no more reason to call his Dis∣ciples their Children, than him∣selfe. 2 In holding that Christ cast out Devils through Beelzebub, they must needs hold that his Disciples must doe it by the same Spirit. For it were senselesse to imagine, that the Disciple should doe it by the Spirit of God, and the Master by the Devill. 3 By Children are not unusu∣ally meant Scholers and Disci∣ples. Hence by the Children or Sonnes of the Prophets, are meant those that sate at their feet to learn: as Paul might be called one of Gamaliels Children or Sonnes.
And therefore I take it, that Christ means it of some of the Pharisees owne disciples and scholers, that were no professed Disciples of Chris: which, as it seemes, in those times had speciall Gifts to cast out Devils, for the grace and countenance and confirmation of the true Religion, which the Pha∣risees sitting in Moses chaire, pro∣fessed and taught: And of these, I'am perswaded, Christ speaketh in this place. 4 Hee speaketh of some neere unto them, when hee saith, They shall bee your Iudges: meaning such as they could not with any honesty appeale from; whereas they might from Christs Disci∣ples. 5 Some such are mentioned,Mar. 9.38. Luke 9.49. whom the Disciples found casting out Devils. 6 Except this be the meaning, I am not able to discern what force in the world there should be in this argument. For any man may see that our Savior taketh it as granted, that
the Pharisees did hold and main∣taine, that the dispossession that their Children used was the act of God, and done by the finger of God. And if it bee so understood, there is great force in the Reason, and it's a stronger than the former. And this is the sense of it. If I cast out Devils to no other end and purpose in substance, than many of your honored and renow∣ned Schollers doe, then I doe it not by Beelzebub. But I doe it to no other end than they, but to confirme the same do∣ctrine and faith. Therefore I doe it not by Beel∣zebub. The proposition is evident: for els their ends would have been as con∣trary as their Spirits. The assumption no doubt was as evident. For Christ wrought these Miracles, to confirme no other Re∣ligion or Doctrine, than what in substance the Exorcists did, set downe in Moses and the Prophets, howsoever there were some diffe∣rence
in the manner. So that if the Miracles of Christ were as effectuall against the kingdome of Satan, as their Exorcists were, and as power∣ull to confirme the Kingdome of God, and had no other apparent se; this Argument must needs be very good: (howsoever in their ormes there were some diffeces:) or is it not absurd to imagine that Christ should use the very same¦hing against Satan that the Iewes id; and to the very same end, to onfirme the Kingdome of God, nd yet doe it by a contrary Spirit, hough it were done after a diverse anner?) Suppose two persons set pon some notorious Thiefe, the ne smites him with a Sword, the ther with a Pistoll, and both have o other end but to save men from bbing: now were it not absurd, hat for the very act doing, the one f them should bee justified, and the her condemned as a friend and elwiller to Thieves and Rob∣rs?
The third Argument is this: If I in your Conscience cast out Devils by the power only of Gods Spirit; then have you spightfully blasphemed the Holy Ghost in a∣vowing this publiquely, that I did it by Beelzebub. But I, in your owne Conscience, have st out Devils onely by the power of Gods Spirit. You have therefore in so say∣ing spightfully blasphemed the Holy Ghost. The proposition is cleere, and can∣not be denied. The Assumption hee thus pro∣veth. That Spirit that offereth vio∣lence unto the Devill, and by strong hand casteth him against his will out of his strong holds and possessi∣ons, is only the Spirit of God. But you in your Conscience know that that Spirit whereby I cast out Devils, is no other than the Spirit of God. And by consequent you herein wilfully fight against God and his
Kingdome, which in my workes have shined before you, and have of∣fered themselves unto you. The Assumption he setteth forth by a plain and familiar comparison; sembling that Spirit to a strong and mighty man, that goeth into another mans house, and by force in espight of him binds him and robs im. The fourth Argument is contai∣ed in this Sentence, Hee that is not ith me, is against mee, &c. and is us framed: If the Spirit of God were not ith mee, and did not build with e in the work that I labour in, then ould the Holy Ghost set himselfe gainst me, and destroy whatsoever doe: But the Holy Ghost is not a∣inst mee, nor destroyeth what build. The Spirit of God therefore is th me, and buildeth with mee in y worke. And this Argument must needs unanswerable, if it be considered,
that if Christ had been an Imposto indeed, and a deceiver, hee had bee the most abominable Blaspheme upon Earth: and exercising these tricks only in the Church, to pu men from Religion; the Spirit o God would never endure it. All these Considerations the laid together, it is too too apparen that these Scribes and Pharisees di most spightfully, and malitiousl revile and blaspheme the Hol Ghost. And thus you see how pal∣pably our Saviour Christ, by stron and evident Arguments, convince them thereof. Now this is the generall an main use of this point; To imita our Saviour Christ. 1 In judging of the true na∣ture of this Sin in generall. 2 In being able to detect it i speciall, in those persons that sha commit it. Without the former man cannot doe the latter: and wit¦out the latter a man hath no use  the former.
Now the knowledge of the Na∣ture of this Sin hath these uses. 1 It serves to shew us the hor∣rible corruption of our Nature, what a monstrous Rebellion lies and lurks in us; if wee should bee left to our selves, like enough to breake forth from us. Who would hinke it possible, that there should be so much corruption in man, as to all into such a Sin against the Savi∣our of the World? 2 It serves to teach us, that Gods mercy is mingled with wisedome; hat it is not a mad or a foolish ercy; that he is not one that will st his mercy away hand over ad; that he cannot endure to have is grace and mercy wilfully and alitiously abused. 3 It serves especially to comfort hose who are afflicted in Consci∣nce for their Sinne, and are by Sa∣n perswaded that they have com∣tted this Sinne; who in this case n have no comfort but by the nowledge of the Nature of it. 4 It serves to stir us up to thank∣fulnesse,
that God hath so stinted us, and kept in the Corruption of our Nature so farre forth, that wee have not fallen into it. The knowledge how to detect it, serves for these uses: 1 That we may not labour in vaine, in endeavouring to cure that which is remedilesse, by casting of holy things to Dogs,Mat. 7.6. 1 Iohn 5.16. and praying for such. 2 That both we may our selves, and bee a means that others also may fly from them, and avoid them. 3 That the certaine considera∣tion of their end and confusion may lift up our heads above those evils that they are wont to inflict upon the Church and Children o God, and the professors of the Truth and Gospell of Christ. Now for the detection of th Sinne in those that have committe it, it is thought to be hard, yea im¦possible. But indeed the hardnes groweth more from our Ignoran of the Sinne, than from the diff¦culty
of it otherwise. For it should eeme that God writes no Sinne so vidently upon the foreheads of hose that commit it as this. For, 1. It's committed in word as ell as in thought. 2. It's committed publiquely, ot privately. 3. It's desperately and directly mmitted, not by sleight onely, or der-hand. 4. It's an act of open spite and alice. Thus farre it cannot but be evi∣nt. The greatest difficulty lies in , to judge of these three things. 1. Whether it be done freely,  in speciall Temptation. 2. Whether it be done delibe∣tly. 3. Whether against Knowledge  Conscience. These Considerations must bee ghed. For the first, whether freely and upon some speciall Temptation; Consideration is very needfull. w I doe not meane by Tempta∣tion,
a moving or stirring up to doe the Sinne, but a speciall co-working in the Sinne. For Satans worke in a Sinner commonly called Temp∣tation, is double Motion by Perswasion, Terrifying. Commotion. Motion is then when by secret ¦stinct, by reason, perswasion, al ring, inticing, terrifying, &c,  moveth one to the Sinne; and th he doth in any Sinne. Commotion is when over a besides his Motion hee helps to a the very Sinne. And this is doubl either with, or besides will. This may better be understood  similitude: as when a man shall  perswasion onely stirre up one  doe a mischiefe, as to kill a man, l¦ving him alone to doe the act; shall assist him also in the doing it. So that what a man doth in  kinde, either of Feare, or by Co¦motion besides will, cannot be t
Sinne, which is the greatest of Sins, d therefore must needs have full onsent of will. So that, 1. Manifest Feare, either of Life,  of that which is as deare as Life,  publique shame, and extreme mi∣y, or bondage. 2. Some great hope of receiving me speciall good, that a man a∣we all earthly things desireth; or of oving some grievous evill pre∣t upon him. 3. Speciall Temptation, as Fren∣, or Satanicall Illusion by dreame sleep, discharge of this guilt. For the second Consideration; tes of Deliberation are, 1. Constancy in the continu∣e of it. 2. Confidence in the mainte∣ce and defence of it. 3. No appearance of any distur∣ce or passion, but a freedome of d in the committing of it. 4. A shamelesse and bold beha∣ur after the committing of it. 5. A seeking and taking hold of opportunities of committing it.
For the third against knowledge and Conscience, this is knowne; 1 When men goe against the owne grounds and principles (i their blasphemy) which they ho and maintaine with zeale and affe∣ction. 2. When they are faine to fly i the defence of their blasphemy to shamefull lies and slanders. 3. When being evidently so f convinced of the Sinne in generall to wit, that it is a blasphemy and slander of the Spirit, yet they cease not still to maintaine it. 4. When the more they see it detected, the more still they com∣mit it. By this that hath been spoke may appeare, that very many, if no the most of the Iesuites and learne Papists in these dayes have and do commit this Sinne; sithence al these points may be determined i them.
The sixth part. Of the Condition of this Sin. FRom the Conviction of this Sinne passe wee to the Condition of it. And here riefly to recapitulate the summe of ll that is past. The more that our aviour Christ by the workes of the pirit did manifest himselfe to bee e Messias & Saviour of the world, e more did the Iewish Rulers and overnours malice and despight im, and that Holy Spirit of God y which he wrought them. And here, whereas our Saviour nd miraculously healed a man pos∣ssed with a Devill that was both ind and dumbe, which so deepely ffected the people, that they be∣n thereupon to bee perswaded at hee was indeed that Messias hich was to come: This effect
of Christs Miracles so inraged th Scribes and Pharisees, and mad their malice and spite so to boil an seeth over, that, though in their con∣sciences they were convicted eve by the same works that hee was th Messias; yet the more they were con∣victed the more they were inraged breathing out of their hellish throa direfull and damned blasphemi against Christ, and against that Spi∣rit by which he wrought; affirmin in the extreamest bitternesse, tha Christ in casting out of Devil wrought by the Devill; and that th devill wherby he wrought, was Bee¦zebub himselfe the prince of Devils Our Saviour thereupon having first evidently proved that they wer in their owne Consciences convi∣cted, that that which they said was most false slander, proceedeth afte to shew further the fearfulnesse o this Sinne above all other kindes o Sinne whatsoever: that, whereas a other Sinnes may bee forgiven an pardoned, and are all forgiven an pardoned to some person or other;
this kinde of Sinne alone shall never be forgiven to any, either in this life, or in the life to come, but that those who shall bee so gracelesse to breake out into the same, shall as certainly goe to Hell as there is an Hell. So that our Saviour here makes a distinction of Sinnes, that some Sinnes are pardonable; that other some are unpardonable. For the first he saith, that all Sins, one onely excepted, may be pardo∣ned, yea though a man should revile and blaspheme even the Son of God himselfe. For the second, hee affirmes that one Sinne onely is utterly impardo∣nable, and that Sinne is the blasphe∣my against the Holy Ghost. In the former part, when our Sa∣viour saith, that every Sin and Blas∣phemy shall be forgiven unto men; His meaning is not that they shall certainly and absolutely be forgiven to all men, so that no man for any Sin whatsoever shall goe to Hell, if he can keep himself from that one sin
that commeth after. For then there should goe but a few, to speake of, to Hell: whereas it is cleere by Gods Word, that the number of those that shall be saved is but a small number in comparison of those that shall be damned. Furthermore, the Scripture is as cleere that men are and shall be dam∣ned for other Sinnes besides this. The rich glutton in the Gospell was not damned for this Sinne,Luke 16. but for his unmercifulnesse to Lazarus, that miserable spectacle at his dore. And our Saviours Sentence of con∣demnation that hee shall pronounce at the latter day against those on his left hand,Mt. 25.41, 42, 43. shewes the con∣trary. Yea this Doctrine so taken, should be a Doctrine of the greatest liberty that ever was taught, and a very dis∣solving of the Law. For then might men murther, and whore, and steale, and lye, and sweare, and forsweare, and doe any thing without danger of Hell, so that they kept themselves from this Sinne.
But his meaning is, that this one Sinne excepted, there is no other particular Sinne, how high or hai∣nous soever, but it is pardoned in some or other, may be pardoned in any, and shall bee pardonable in all, if the fault bee not in them∣selves. 1 That they have been pardo∣ned in some, the Scripture doth am∣ply testifie. That Mother Sinne of all in eating the forbidden Fruit was forgiven in Adam and Eve, and in all the Elect, though eternally pu∣nished in the Reprobate. So the Sin of Drunkennesse in Noah: the Sinne of lying and consening in Rebeckah and Iacb; the Sinne of Incest in Lot; the Sinne of Murder and Adul∣tery in David; the Sinne of Apo∣stasie and Idolatry in Solomon; the Sinne of Oppression in Zachee; the Sinne of robbing and stealing in the Thiefe on the Crosse; the Sin of bloudy and spightfull persecu¦ting of the Saints of God (which commeth neerest the Sin impardo∣nable) in the Apostle Paul.
2 That they may be forgiven, and are pardonable in any, appeares by this, that they have been pardo∣ned in some. For if a Sinner can say that such or such a Sinne, which hee is guilty of, hath been pardoned in such or such a person; why should he despaire, as if God would not or could not pardon it in him? That which God hath done in any, hee can doe in thee. 3 That all other Sinnes are par∣doned in all, except the fault bee in themselves, is evident also. For as God forceth none to sinne; so hee forceth none to continue in Sinne: And it is not for Sinne so much that he damneth any, as for the continu∣ance therein without Repentance. And there are none that live in the Church, and have the use of their understanding, but hee vouchsafeth them sufficient means to bring them to Repentance, if they would use them, and seeke after them. Hee vouchsafeth indeed to some greater and more effectuall means than to other some, and doth worke more
powerfully in the means. But there can none complaine and say, that they wanted means, and that the fault was not in themselves that they repented not. 1 This point serves to comfort those that are afflicted, and mourne, and groane under the burthen of their Sinnes, and through the sight of their Sinnes are brought as it were to the Gates of Hell, and to the pits brinke of despaire. How should the consideration of this sup∣port them against all such Tempta∣tions, that our Saviour himselfe should with his owne mouth pro∣fesse that all Sinnes but one are for∣given to men? So that be their Sins never so many, never so great, yet if it be not that Sinne, there is hope of mercy, if due means be used, and they doe not desperately exclude themselves there-from. 2 This serves not to encourage and hearten any to goe on in their wonted course of sinning; but ra∣ther the contrary. It is the unspea∣kable goodnesse of God to be ready
to pardon all manner of Sins. But it's grosse folly and impiety in Sin∣ners to thinke and conceit that hee will pardon any but such as use means for the getting of a pardon. The Prince is a gratious Prince in pardoning Traitors or Murtherers. But this consideration, that the King may doe it, or hath done it, is no motive to make those that are Traitors or Murtherers secure, much lesse to goe in their Treasons and Murthers: But they must be content to sue out, yea to pay deare oft for their pardons, or else their hope will lye in the dust. So is it with God. It's true, he is mercifull, and ready to pardon any Sinne; yet he hath and will condemne the greatest part of the World: and he will pardon none but such as use the means to sue out and purchase their pardon, by for∣saking their Sinnes by true Repen∣tance, and humbling themselves b¦fore the Throne of Gods mercy for them, with a full resolution ne∣ver to returne againe to them. 3 The consideration of this
may serve for a speciall stay to them, who by the subtill Temptations of Satan are made to beleeve that they have committed the impardonable Sinne here spoken of. And com∣monly Satan, abusing their Igno∣rance, puts these conceits into the minds of those which are the far∣thest from that Sinne, to wit, hum∣bled and afflicted Sinners. Whereas those are least troubled with the feare thereof, that either have com∣mitted it, or are neerest to the com∣mitting of it. This therefore may help them somewhat, who know not so well what the Nature of that Sinne is, to consider what particu∣lar Sinnes God is reported in the Word to have forgiven to his Ser∣vants, and to consider whether their owne Sinne bee not one of the same kinde; which if it be, they may thence then infallibly conclude that it is not that impardonable Sinne. All other Sinnes then are at the least pardonable; yea they have been pardoned in some or other, and may be pardoned in any: But in whom∣soever
this Sinne is found, which we principally intreat of, to wit, of Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost; he is certainly without all redemp¦tion a fire-brand of Hell. We can∣not of any other Sinner pronounce an absolute and definitive Sen∣tence of damnation; no, though he should breathe out his last gaspe in filthinesse and blasphemies: of this wee may. Hee that hath com∣mitted this Sin, is branded for Hell, and is more than bored or burnt in the Eare for Satan. But why will not God pardon this Sinne? We can give no reason why, but his Will. It shall not be pardoned, because he will not pardon it. Hee hath from Eternity decreed the con∣trary; and the maine ground of his Decree is his Free-will. So that a man can answer no otherwise to this question, than this, why the Lord should punish Iudas his be∣traying, and not Peters forswea∣ring. But doth not this lessen the Lords
Mercy? For what? may some say: Can man then in sinning goe be∣yond the Lord in mercy? Can a man by any Sin drowne the merci∣fulnesse of God towards him? Though the greatnesse of Sinnes forgiven argue the greatnesse of Gods mercy; and though it argue greater mercy to forgive all Sinnes than some onely, and all men than some; yet you see this, that God hath decreed not to shew mercy up∣on all men. And as wee must not tye his Love and Mercy, which is most free, to the persons of all men; so wee must not tye it to all Sinnes any further than himselfe hath tied it. It should suffice us, that God is so infinite in mercy as to forgive some men; and to forgive in some men all Sinnes saving one. If he had saved but one Man, and pardoned but one Sinne in that one Man (if it were possible for any one Man to commit but one Sinne) his Mercy had been infinite. Hee might as freely have excepted any, yea many other Sinnes, as whoredome, pride,
perjury, Apostasie, &c. But this we must know, that God, as he is infi∣nite in mercy, so he is infinite in his justice: And in his holy wisedome and providence he so mingleth and conjoyneth these twain, that the one limiteth the other. So that God is so farre forth mercifull as will stand with his infinite justice; and so farre forth just, as will stand with his infinite Mercy. His Mercy doth not drowne his Iustice, nor his Iu∣stice his Mercy. 2 Goh sheweth Mercy to Sin∣ners, that hee might glorifie him∣selfe in his mercy. But in shewing mercy to such a Sinne, hee might rather seeme both to staine his Mercy, and to disgrace his Iu∣stice. 3 There is no Sinne whatso∣ever that makes God mercilesse, but in respect onely of the person. In this regard therefore is this Sin un∣pardonable, because the Lord hath decreed that none shall commit it but Reprobrates, in whom every Sin is unpardonable.
4 This very Sinne potentially is forgiven in all the Elect. For it is not of themselves that they doe not commit it, but of God, who bridles their wils. For even they also have the seeds of all Sinnes in themselves; as the Cubs of Woolves and Foxes, of all mischiefe and ravening, though they either cannot yet do, or dye ere they do hurt ought. 1 In comparing the Condition of this Sinne with the persons that here commit it; We may note that no outward state and condition of men whatsoever are freed by their places and callings from being Re∣probrates and Castawaies. Who are n this World neerer in place to God then the Ministers and Tea∣hers of the people, who are as it were Saviours unto others? yet hese, and onely these in all the Word of God are mentioned to ommit that unpardonable Sinne. Which should make us to take heed, ow wee condemne the true Religi∣on for the wickednesse of their per∣sons that teach it. And againe not to
content our selves with this, that we have a place in Gods Church. For we may have the highest rooms, and yet stand guilty of grievous Sinnes▪ yea, the higher roomes wee are in many times, the higher Sinnes are committed of us. Who in higher place then Iudas? and who commit∣ted a greater Sinne? 2 Here is matter of Consola¦tion for the Godly, who desir above all things to bee freed fro Sinne, and to whom nothing i more combersome then the burthe of Sinne; that though they canno be wholly rid of it while they liv here; yet the Lord hath prescribe bounds unto their Sinnes; so tha they cannot go so far in Sin again God as a Reprobate may. Fo no godly man can commit thi Sinne. 3 For as much as it is bootles for them that have committed th Sinne to crave mercy of God, ort hope for grace with God; and tha Satan therefore hath no more forc¦ble Engine to worke despaire, tha
by perswading humbled Souls, that they have fallen into it. It behoo∣veth all such, before they open the Gates of their Soule to despaire, to try whether they have committed it or no. 1 If thou dost or hast felt any marke of the Childe of God in thee, yea or no. For hee that hath any inward marke of Gods Childe, is still Gods Childe, and cannot commit it. 2 Feare of committing it, is a signe of not committing it. For it's a desperate Sinne. And such per∣sons as commit it, use not to be so much troubled that they have com∣mitted it, as that they have not op∣portunity to commit it againe and againe. Experience it selfe teacheth this in your grand malitious perse∣cutors of Religion: they use not so much to be troubled for that evill and mischiefe that they have done, as that they cannot doe more. And thus it was with these Scribes and Pharisees. 3 An unfained dislike and ha∣tred
of all the malitious enemies of Religion, and a speciall affection (caeteris paribus) to all the lovers of the Gospell. 4 An abhorring and loathing of our selves for it, and an acknowledg∣ment of it, with a desire of pardon, when we suspect our selves to have committed it, are undoubted argu∣ments of a soul that never commit∣ted this sin. 4 The more fearefull and despe∣rate the state and condition is, of those that commit this sin, the more it stands all men in hand to take heed of it, to keepe as far as may be from it, and to use all preservatives that may be against it. And to this end, 1 To know it, and conceive a∣right of it, that they may the more detest and abhorre it. 2 To take notice of those means by which men have fallen into it, that they may more carefully shun and avoid all such courses. 3 To take especiall heed of those sinnes that border neerest upon it,
and have most affinity with it. 4 To be throughly perswaded of the curse of God due to sin; and of the blessings of God promised to all obedience. 5 To be fully assured, that even the least sin that is deserveth everla∣sting damnation. 6 To beware of all presumptu∣ous sins, lest else by little and little they come to make the greatest sin no sin. 7 To set the mercy of God in the pardon of sin, at a high price. 8 To bee oft meditating of the joyes of heaven, and the torments of hell; the former whereof, this sinne once committed, doth irrecovera∣bly deprive men of, and in bonds in∣dissoluble oblige the committer of it to the later. FINIS.
