669.f.19[4] 50811846 163342
A MEMENTO For the PEOPLE, about their Elections of MEMBERS for the approaching PARLIAMENT. I. REmember that the choice of your Law-makers is your first common right, by which you distinguish your selves from slaves; for in the use thereof, you shew the original of your own Authority and Government, and how that every one of you hath such an inherent and natural Right in his own person, as not to be disposed of, ordered, bounded or limited, but by his own Consent in Parliament; the Members thereof being the peoples Representatives. And therefore if you be tender of any thing, that you call or think your Right, Priviledge or Liberty, be tender of this, as the foundation and root of all your Liberties. II. Remember that the choice of your Law-makers, is the greatest trust in civil matters, and of the neerest concern∣ment to you all, that you ever did, or can, or shall repose in any body: you may trust some with your estates, and it may be with your persons too; but you trust your chosen deputies in Parliament with your persons, your lives, your posterities, and your whole Country; and they may under God involve you in blood and confusion, or settle you in peace. O then be cautious and circumspect in your choyce now to be made, and consider whom you may safely trust. And first, consider whether it be consonant to your safety, and the end for which you elect, to trust any that have ever broken their faith, or falsified their trust formerly put in them. Remember the Declarations, Vows and Promises of the Army, how and by whom violated and broke. The Ialian saies, If a man deceives me once, it is his fault; but if he deceive me twice, it is my own fault. Secondly, Consider, whether it be fit to confer your own Legislative Authority upon any persons, who have another Legislative Authority stampt upon them already. For how can it be look'd upon but as prodigious, for two Suns to be seen in one firmament? Thirdly, Consider, whether you may trust those that shall not be equally concerned with you in all the Laws to be made, or are not equally subject to them with your selves? Those that live, and intend to live upon the publick purse, are not equally concerned in levying of monyes upon you, with those that live onely upon their own estates and trades. Publick Officers, that have great Places and Salaries from the common purse, put in a peny, and take out a pound. Those that have been made fat by the blood and ruines of the people, you can have little hopes of: for, can a Blackmoore change his skin, or a Leopard his spots? And those that are to execute the Laws, may avoid the stroak which others must abide: for how is it consonant to freedom and safety, for the Legislative power, and the Executive power, to be in the same hands? Therefore you may safely trust those to make your Laws, that must do the same good or harm to themselves, which they do to you. And such as have not been stained with the corruptions of the times, as have been ever constant to the interest of the people, and as have not been inriched by the oppressions and ruines of the Land, you may safeliest trust; of such there being most hope. Fourthly, Excise men, Corrupt Lawyers, Impropriators, Farmors of Tythes, Sword,—&c. Consider, whether you may trust any that are ingaged either by their profit or honour, or any kinde of interest, to continue any of the burthens or grievances that are upon you: as the Silver-Smiths were engaged to maintain the Image of Diana and her Temple. Fifthly, Consider, whether you may trust any man, that wants either depth of judgement, or courage: he that wants the first, may suffer you to be cozened of your Liberties; and he that wants the other, will certainly betray your liberties unto any body that boldly attempts to take them from you. And further consider, That those whom you chuse for your Members in Parliament, you chuse to sit in your own stead, to represent the whole Nation; their vote to be the voice of the people, and you to be bound thereby, onely saving to your selves your fundamental Laws and Liberties, as unalterable, and not within their trust to violate or destroy. All that are worth 200 l in Counties, are to be really in Parliament, voting there, and consenting to what is done by their Knights or Trustees, whom they have chosen for their Counties; and all the Burgesses and Inhabitants of Cities and Burroughs, are also there in Parliament, by chusing them that shall speak for them and vote for them. And that this Liberty, this Principle of common Right, might not be infringed or restrained, care was taken in The Instrument of Go∣vernment set forth by the Lord Protector, That Tradesment that live in Cities and Burroughs, should be all free to chuse, although not worth 200 l for that restriction of 200 l limited in the said Instrument of Government, is for such as are thereby enabled to chuse Members for Coun∣ties: which are the Knights girt with Swords, mentioned in the Indentures; but as for Burgesses, there is no distinction betwixt rich and poor; as all must be subject to the Law, so all must be free to chuse: which is very much to his Highness honour. And indeed, Tradesmen that live in Cities, are as useful to the Nation, and bear as much share in the burthens thereof, when they are not worth 200 l as those that live in Counties, and are worth 200 l And the encouragement and respect to Traders, being of great con∣sequence to the Commonwealth, It was not thought fit to restrain the the choice in Cities and Burroughs to those onely who were worth 200 l. Neither is that restriction of the Electors for Counties, any straitning of the election, but an inlargement thereof, full of reason; for the restraint formerly was strictly to Freeholders, having—xl.s. by the year; and now by the Lord Protector, every man, though a Copy∣holder, or a man of a personal estate, if he be worth 200 l is made a chuser, as well as Freeholders. So that all that are worth 200 l may chuse for Counties, as well as Freeholders; and for Cities and Burroughs, all universally are to chuse, who have not disabled themselves by something done in the late wars. Now Sirs, be advised to set aside all faction, self-interest, favour and fear, that may byass your judgements in your choyce; and agree to∣gether, to have regard to the worth and merit of those you chuse; let their wisdom, faithfulness and courage, their publike zeal and affecti∣on to the cause of the people, their moderation, charity and compassion, their freedom from the cruelty and oppression of the times, per∣swade you to chuse them. And in so doing, you will honour your Country, and settle it in righteousness, peace and plenty. And the ge∣nerations that are yet unborn, will have cause to bless you. London, Printed for Rich. Moone, at the seven Stars in Paul's Church-yard, neer the great North-door. 1654.
