a3648 669.f.10[61] 99864861 162599
ARGVMENTS, Proving that we ought not to part with the MILITIA, TO THE KING, Nor indeed to any other, but the Honourable House of COMMONS. 1. WEE conceive it is Treason to our selves and ours, to put the lives of Millions, so their estates and liberties, into the power of one man, their servant, so that the murthers, rapes, rapines or abuses, he shall commit, by himselfe, or his, are unavoidable, wee are also guilty of them, for it is to sell our Birth-rights, (that is the power of our lives, estates and liberties, which is ours by nature) for a messe of Pottage, or rather for nothing. Esau was well paid for his, in comparison of our selves, for necessitated to a famishing, he had suste∣nance for support. Yet what is his Birth-right of Elder-ship, to what wee part with, it was but a point of Opinion, not of Power, as ours is? But to part with the Militia, is to inslave our selves, and ours, to the Will of the Wilfull, so it is the height of pro∣phanesse. 2. It is against the law of Nature, reason, and humane justice, for that he hauing such power in his hand, may overthrow us all, ad placîtum. 3. It is against the law and will of God, so divine Ordination, that millions should be at the mercy of one man, their servant, in their lives estates and liberties; and therefore God excepts against it, and warnes the People against it, telling them how their king might abuse them, by reason of his too large betrusted power. vide, 1. Sam. 8. Repented for as a great six, 1. Sam. 12. 4. All our lawes then are of no use, and all the bloud shed, is as water spilt upon the ground, lost to no purpose. 5. Quere, If it ought not to be made treason, to bring it in question? For it is conceived, if delive∣red in right words, it is an absolute betraying of us, quite contrary to betrust, & the end of government. 6. Should we connive or consent at the disposure of it to him it were a treacherous, unnaturall, unjust and prophane act in us, and we conceive it the same in them that shall conferre it on him, so in him to desire it. 7. Now because we must bestow it somewhere, we cannot conceive where it can be better or safer be∣stowed, then where it is, many in likelyhood not so soon agreeing to abuse us, as one, we further conceiving, the carefull choyce, and large betrust of the People, will be a strong tye on them &c. Therefore we intreat the honourable House of Commons, to confine it within the Confines of their own jurisdiction; and to bestow it in faithfull hands, not factious, such as will not subdue all but themselves, nor indeed any at all, but be in a ready∣nesse to support all such, (though of different judgments and opinions in Religion) in their rights and priviledges. 8. Had we bestowed it on him by Law, that Law were lawlesse, because destructive, and quite contrary to the end of government, that law then were justly breakable, he resistable, and our safety revocable. It is a breach of the 6th. Commandement, and selfe-murther, to give power to any to murther us. 9. Yea more, had he bought the power with millions to each individuall, it was an unlawfull con∣tract, for defence of life is inst, and iustly irrecoverable, we conclude then as at 7th. 10. That to give [or debate upon giving] the Militia to the King at the end of twenty yeares, is very dangerous, and apt to beget an opinion in the people, that he hath some right to it, and that at present it is onely kept from him, for his abusing it, when as in deed and in truth he hath no right at all in the least unto it; neither is it just, or reasonable to betrust him, or any one single man in the Kingdome with it, Salus populi having already run such hazards of an utter ruining, by the Militia's being in his single hand, for which he ought, according to Protestations, Oaths, and Covenants, to be brought to exemplary, & condigne punishment, he being the greatest & most notorious Delinquent in the whole Kingdom, yea, the originall fountain and Wel-Spring of all the Delinquents in the Kingdome, giving Commissi∣ons to all the rest, to kill, murther and stay the innocent People, whom by oath, duty and office, he ought to have protected; and therefore his sin and offence more hainous and capitall then any others, yea indeed, then all others that have joyned with him. 11. Quere, Whether or no, if the King should have the Militia again, then whether indeed, have not the Scots the power of it under his name, which onely is used to colour the design, that so they may not be seen in it, to desire and endeavour to be Kings and Lords over England? But the project por∣tends nolesse. London, Iune 1646. FINIS
