A861 E1013_20 99867104 119394
A LETTER Of General GEORGE MONCK'S, Dated at Leicester 23 Ian. and di∣rected unto Mr. Rolle to be communicated unto the rest of the Gentry of Devon: oc∣casioned by a late Letter from the Gentry of Devon dated at Exceter 14 Ian. and sent by Mr. Bampfield to the Speaker to be communicated unto the Parliament. Read in Parliament Ian. 26. London, Printed by Iohn Redmayn in Levels Court in Pater noster row. 1660.
Most honoured and dear Friends, MEeting with a Paper dated at Exon the 13 instant, directed to W. Lenthal Esq Speaker of the Parliament, and subscribed by divers of my friends and relations, purporting the recalling the Members secluded 1648, as the best expedient for establi∣shing these Nations upon a foundation of lasting peace. I have taken the bold∣nesse from my relation to some of you as allyed, and my affectionate respects to all of you as dear friends and Coun∣treymen, to represent to your conside∣ration my present apprehensions of the State of Affairs here, in order to all our
better satisfactions; wherein I humbly crave your leave of freedome without prejudice. Before these unhappy Wars the Government of these Nations was Monarchical in Church and State: these Wars have given birth and growth to several Interests both in Church and State heretofore not known, though now upon many accounts very conside∣rable, as the Presbyterian, Independant, A∣nabaptist and Sectaries of all sorts as to Ec∣clesiasticks, and the purchasers of the Kings, Queens, Princes, Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and all other forfeited E∣states, and all those engaged in these Wars against the King as to civils. These Interests again are so interwoven by purchases and inter-marriages, & there∣by forfeited; as I think upon rational grounds it may be taken for granted, That no Goverment can be either good, peacefull or lasting to these Nations, that doth not rationally include and com∣prehend
the security and preservation of all the foresaid Interests both Civil and Spiritual, I mean so far as by the word of God they are warranted to be prote∣cted & preserved. If this be so, Then that Government under which we formerly were both in State and Church, viz. Monarchy, cannot possibly be admitted for the future in these Nations, because it's support is taken away, and because it's exclusive of all the former Interests both Civil and Spiritual, all of them being incompatible with Monarchical Vniformity in Church and State thus ex∣pired. That Government then that is most able to comprehend and protect all Interests as aforesaid must needs be Republique. Wherefore to me it's no small doubt, if upon the Premises to ad∣mit of the Members secluded 1648, were not to obstruct our peace and con∣tinue our War, rather than establish the one, and end the other; in that very ma∣ny
of those Members assert the Monar∣chical Interest, together with the aboli∣tion of all Lawes made since their seclu∣sion, Which I fear upon accompt of self-preservation both of Life and Estate as well as Spiritual liberty, will immedi∣ately involve all these Nations in most horrid and bloudy War afresh; the very apprehensions whereof, I confess, I do infinitely dread, and submit the dange∣rous consequence thereof to your pru∣dent considerations, and the rather, see∣ing the Army also will never endure it. Having thus briefly laid before you the present condition of affairs, let me now intreat you to consider whither it were not better to desist from that Paper, and submit to the Proceedings of this Parlia∣ment, who have resolved to fill up their House, determin their sitting, & prepare a way for future successions of Parlia∣ment; by which means being full, & there∣by comprehending the whole Interest of
these Nations, they may through Gods Mercy & all our patiences establish such a Government in the way of a Common∣wealth as may be comprehensive of all Interests both Spiritual and Civil, to the glory of God and the weale and Peace of the whole. But if by your impatiencies they be obstructed, our Peace will be so much the longer a stranger to us, and we thereby a Prey to ourselves and all for∣reign Enemies. Wherefore humbly pres∣sing these upon your serious considera∣tions with all the friendly and affectio∣nate respects and service to you all, I re∣main Dearest Friends Your very humble and affe∣ctionate Servant, GEORGE MONCK. Leicester, 21. Ian. 1659. For the honoured Robert Rolles Esq to be communica-to the Gentlemen of Devonshire, who signed the late Letter to the Speaker of the Part of the Commonwealth of England.
