B5144 E24_20 R5043 99872779 125225
A LETTER Sent from Major-generall Brown, TO HIS EXCELLENCY The Earle of ESSEX. CONTAINING, A true Relation of a great Victory obtained against the Kings forces neere Abingdon, upon Saturday last, Janu. 11. 1644. Where Sir Henry Gage Governour of Oxford, and divers others, of note and quality were slaine. Januar. 14. 1644. IT is his Excellencies pleasure that this Letter be forthwith printed and published. Jo. Baldwin Secretary to his Excellency. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Thomas. 1644.
May it please your Excellency, I Hold my selfe bound to give your Excellency an account of the ene∣mies late attempt upon this garrison. A great party of horse and foot from all their garrisons (with the assistance of VVallingford forces) under the com∣mand of Pr. Rupert fell upon us this morning early on Culham side, with intent to storme us. They gained a bridge (where I kept a Centry) about halfe a mile from us, and pre∣sently set the Countrey to cut it
down, to prevent our pursuit of them in case they should be forced backe, making use of plankes for their own retreat upon the alarm; and to pre∣vent the cutting down of the bridge, (which I had notice of) I drew forth to fight with them, first sending out Scouts on the other side of the Town, and securing our workes,) and be∣cause the caseway was long and nar∣row, I was forced to send some of my men into the meades, who chearful∣ly marched through the water, and so flanked the enemy on both sides. The enemy fought it stoutly, and plied us with their Ordnance, which they brought along with them, and found (I blesse God) no lesse cou∣rage in ours, as the issue proved. The dispute lasted almost foure houres; at
length we gained the bridge ere they had quite broke it down, and forced them to the hedges and bankes adja∣cent, which proved of singular ad∣vantage to them; but those places proved too hot for them, and they allowed us to beate them out of the field, notwithstanding the disadvan∣tages we fought upon. Had it been propper or secure, in respect of the garrison, we had followed them; but they hasted away with three Carts laden with dead men, besides many thrown into the River, and others carried on their horse backes. Their designe (I now understand) was, if they could not storme us, then (by pulling up the bridge) to prevent our hindring them to fortifie the Lady Careys house and the Church in
Culham, which would have proved of evill consequence to us; but they were prevented. VVe lost of note, onely Major Bradbury, a very gallant man, who was slaine upon the bridge, and seven or eight common Souldiers, at most; and had some wounded: Captaine Melvin and Captaine Butterfield are wounded, but without danger, of whom I must say, and of your Excel∣lencies Foot (whom I kept for our reserve) they behaved themselves with singular courage. Prince Maurice was also in person here, with Sir Henry Gage Governor, and most of the Gentry of Oxford, to see the event. Sir Henry Gage was here slaine, and many others of note whom I know not yet.
At the same precise time in the morning the enemies Horse from Farringdon fell on our Horse quar∣ters; they found our men in more ready posture then they expected: the alarm was presently taken at all the quarters, being very neere toge∣ther; and they came together, beate the enemy out of the Towne, chased them within a mile of Farringdon, and in pursuit slew, wounded, and tooke prisoners almost all, without any losse at all. Major Farmor, Major to Prince Charles regiment was slain, and his Lieutenant, with many o∣thers. Five of this regiment we took were Irish by their owne confession, whom I presently caused to be han∣ged in the Market-place, according to an Ordinance of Parliament. Cap∣taine
Blunden in Colonel Martins re∣giment deserves much for his cou∣rage in that service. Your Excellencies humble servant, RICHARD BROWNE. Abingdon, Ian. 11. 1644. For his Excellency the Lord Generall, Earle of Essex, these, London.
