B5208 R229484 99899222 152582
REPENTANCE AND PRAYER: OR, The two Fundamental Pillars of the NATION. BEING The substance of Four Sermons preached at St. Peters Poor, London. By that Famous and Reverend Divine RALPH BROWNRIGGE, Formerly Vice-Chancelour of Cambridge, and lately Lord Bishop of Exeter. Rev. 14.13.—Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea saith the spirit, that they may rest from their labours, and their works do follow them. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Riland, and are to be sold at the Hand and Bible in Ducklane. 1660.
To the READER: Christian READER, BEing unwilling the Nation should be deprived of so great a benefit as the works of so eminently learned and pious a Divine, as this our reverend Author: I could not but (in charity to thee, and in duty to our Authors sacred memory)
offer to publick view these Four ensuing Sermons: being prea∣ched at St. Peters Poore Lon∣don, when that famous Pillar of the Church, Dr. Holsworth was Preacher there. As for the Subject matter of them, it's principally concerning the Duties of Repentance and Prayer, the two Fundamental Doctrines, which every indi∣vidual Christian, and the whole Nation in general ought to put in practice; which duties as they were then Seasonably preached, so I hope they will be now as opportunely published;
this being an Age, wherein there is so much want of both. I shall not need to expatiate my self, in giving thee a character of our worthy Author, be be∣ing so generally known: I question not but the benefit which thou shalt reap by reading them, will answer the fervent desires of him who is Thine in the Lord J. K.
The Texts of the four Sermons. JOEL 2.14. WHo knoweth if he will return and repent and leave a blessing behind him, even a meat-offering and a drink-offering unto the Lord our God. PSALM, 78. vers. 34, 35, 36, 37. When he slew them, then they sought him and turned them early, and enquired aster God, and they remembred that God was their strength, and that the high God was their Redeemer; nevertheless they did but flatter him with their mouth, and dissembled with him in their tongue, for their heart was not whole with him, neither conti∣nued they stedfast in his covenant. LUKE 22. verse 31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat: But I have pay∣ed for thee, that thy faith fail not; and when thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren. LUKE 11.13. If ye then, being evil; know how to give good gifts unto your Children; how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him?
Joel. 2.14. In Jejunio Publico. Who knoweth if he will return and re∣pent and leave a blessing behind him, even a meat-offering and a drink-offering unto the Lord our God. THis prophesy of Joel. 14. It was directed to the Kingdome of Ju∣dah in the reigne of Hezekiah and Manas∣ses, after the great o∣ver-throw which God brought upon the other ten Tribes, by the King of Asyria, and in it the Pro∣phet
foretells the Captivity of Babylon, threatens a great Judgement and distru∣ction upon the whole Land. And this Judgement it is described un∣der the representation of an army, and that army of Locusts, either thereby in∣timating a succession of two sorts of judgements; First of Famine, by a dreadfull swarm of noisome Locusts, that should consume the fruit of the earth. the Second is of war, by the power of the Chaldaeans that should wast and de∣stroy Judah and Jerusalem, and carry them away Captive to Babylon. These two, the breakings of the staffe of bread, or sending amongst them the Sword of the enemy which are Gods two puissant armies against a sinfull Nation: or otherwise, the Army of Locusts, betoken but one Judgement, either that of Locusts, noysome vermine shall come upon their Land like a mighty Army, he destroyed Egypt with such an Army, and verse. 25. God himselfe calls them his great Army or else it signifies the Army of the Chaldeans, and they shall come upon the Land like a swarme of Locusts to wast and destroy.
Thus the Egyptians and Assyrians, are compared to Bees and Flies, Isa. 7.18. God shall hisse for them, and they shall come flying, and light upon the Land of Judah, take them either way, the one is a fit resemblance and tipe of the other, the Locust they are Gods Ar∣my, they shall come in battle aray and make spoile of the Land; or otherwise, the Chaldeans they are as a swarme of Locusts, their enemies shall breake in upon them like Caterpillers and Lo∣custs, and shall waste and consume, as those creatures do without any resistance. This judgement being denounced against them, the Prophet calls the Jews to re∣entance, that being the onely possible means to divert this judgement. Flesh and blood indeed, when we heat of Armies of enemies, cast about for o∣her waies to defend them; this seeking o God by repentance, and casting our elves upon his help, they have no list to ; when the Assirians assaulted Judah, God offered King Ahaz, this help, no, he ould not trouble God, he would not empt the Lord forsooth, he was so mo∣dest
as not to be beholden to God for a deliverance; any other way would please him better, as Dominicus Soto tells us, of a ridiculous and superstitious practice i Spain, to drive away Locusts, when those swarms, anoyed the Country, the country people would enter an action against the in their Courts; and Proctors and Ad∣vocates, were assigned to plead for them and then the Judge, he sentenced them and did excommunicate and accurs them. Sure all others meanes without this  repentance are of no use, meere charm and mock-helps; neither Caterpille nor Chaldeans, Armies of Locusts,  swarmes of enemies, can be driven bac but by repentance; so then the pu∣pose of the Prophet in this Chapter to call them to repentance, and he pr∣scribes repentance suitable to their co∣dition; First to the condition of their si their sins were generall and nationa they had all corrupted their wayes. Secondly the judgement threate that was generall, an over-flowing sw
as Isaiah calls it. Isa. 28.15. Sword goe through the Land: Ezek. 14.17. An end is comming upon the four corners of the Land. Ezek. 7.2. Now sure the Plaister must be as broad as the sore. First. So accordingly he invites to a generall and nationall humiliation, it was to be proclaimed by the sound of the Trumpet, vers. 15. not by a knock at a private mans doore, the trumpet was to call together the whole congregation, Num. 10.2. And if ye look to the first erse of this 2 Chap. of Joel, then the judgement comes with a trumpet, it sounds an allarme, it threatens all the in∣habitans of the Land; if God threatens with a trumpet, we must call to repen∣tance with a trumpet; with as lowd and shrill a sound, that the whole nation may be warned; it must be Zephanies humi∣iation, Zeph. 2.1, 2. Gather your selves together, O Nation not to be desired, it must be like the fast of expiation, which was the yearely fast in Israel, all must numble themselves, it is a day of atone∣ment, Levit. 23.28, 29. For to make an atonement for you before the Lord your God
whatsoever soule it shall be that shall not be afflicted, in the same day he shall be cut off from among his people; per∣sonall, and private humiliation, is not of that prevailing efficacy in generall dan∣ger; God tells the Jewes that the prayers of two or three, though never so righte∣ous men, Ezek. 14.14. As Noah, Dani∣el, and Job, should not divert a judgement from a whole Nation, they might escape themselves; but if the Nation repented not, the whole Land should perish; there is more must go to the removing of a ge∣nerall judgement; we may spit out a spark, or one mans diligence may quench a small fire, but when a whole Town is on fire, every man must bring his Bucket. One mans prayer to remove a National Judgement, is as if we go about to quench a raging fire by sprikling a little water out of a casting bottle; see this practi∣sed by the Jews, 1 Sam. 7.2. all the house of Israel lamented before the Lord, and see how they expressed and testified it, verse the 6. they gathered together to Mispah, and draw water, and poured it out before the Lord, and fasted on that
day, and said there, we have sinned against the Lord, their eies were as buckets, their heads fountains of tears. And is not a fire kindled amongst us, how many smoaking fire-brands are scat∣tered through the Land, we may say of our present sad condition as our Prophet Joel speaks, Joel. 1.2. Hear this you old men and give ear all the Inhabitants of the Land, hath this been in your days, or in the days of your fathers, who can remember such di∣stractions in our kingdome, when did this kingdom shake and totter as now it doth; first troubles in the North, when thats quenched, the flame breaks out in Ireland, sparkes scattered amongst our selves, as Ezekiel prophesies, mischiefe shall come upon mischiefe, and rumour shall come upon rumour, Ezek. 7.26. Thus out hu∣miliation should be generall, and as it must be generall humiliation, so secondly it must be solemne by the help of a fast not to eat the bread of men. First to testifie our inward sorrow, the body must be afflicted. Secondly, by this solemne fast to pro∣test our unworthinesse of the least sup∣port
of life or refreshing, not worthy of the portion (of Whelps) of the crumbs that fall from the table. Thirdly, to expresse our earnestnesse and importunity of prayer, and calling upon God, that we will lye prostrate be∣fore God, take no deniall, not eat bread till he granted our petitions, as Saul vowed, not once to eat till he had obteined his victory; as David vowed, not to sleep or slumber till he had effected his desire, now this duty of repentance and humili∣ation, it is pressed upon them by a double motive; the first is the denouncing of judgement, and that not barely foretold, but exactly described in a dreadfull man∣ner the more to affect them; God musters up his force and sets them in battle aray, from the 2. verse to the 12. the Chariots of God are 20. thousand, even thousand of judgements, and the Lord is among them to turn the battle to the gate, ah, this will work feare, and fear is a good ingredient to repentance; thus he urges his people to repentance by the present∣ing of terrours; Amos 4.12. Therefore thus will I doe unto thee O Israel, and because
I will doe this unto thee prepare to meete thy God O Israel; thus Habbakuk was afflicted with the threatnings of judge∣ment ch. 3.16. when I heard my belly trem∣bled, my lips quivered at the voice, rot∣tennesse entered into my bones, and I trembled in my selfe; God lookes for this submission, that we should be start∣led at his judgements, the Lion hath roar∣ed who will not feare, Amos the 3.8. moved with feare, thats one motive, and that drives us to repentance. But then he adds a second, and thats hope that draws us to repentance; re∣pentance it is a compounded thing of feare and hope, it takes motives, both from Law and Gospell, and yet it workes most kindly by Evangelicall means, thats hope of mercy, and that is the motive in my text, quis novit, who knows, so that the former was an affrightment to repen∣tance, this in my text is an incouragement to repentance upon hope of mercy, and in it observe two things. First the matter of their hope. Secondly the measure of their hope. First see the matter of their hope and
in it, there are 4 particulars. First, the matter of their hope is, their regaining of Gods favour, he will re∣turn. Secondly the recalling of his judge∣ments, he will repent. Thirdly, the renewing of his mercies, he will leave a blessing behinde him. Fourthly, the reestablishment of his worship amongst them, a meat offering and a drink-offering to the Lord our God, thats the first thing, the matter of their hope. The second thing is the mea∣sure of their hope, and thats somewhat strange, it is very considerable, it is quis novit who knows. Come we to the mat∣ter of their hope. The first is regaining of Gods favour, that he will return, his turning away sig∣nifies his displeasure, that he hath no de∣light in us, but is provoked and offend∣ed; his returning to us, it is the renewing of his favour, and of his good will to∣wards us when he vouchsafes us his pre∣sence, and rests amongst us, so then for the understanding the nature of this mer∣cy, this return of God will afford us these Considerations.
First, it is the main happinesse of a nation to enjoy Gods presence, to have him dwell amongst us. Secondly, it is the bitter fruit of sin that causes God to withdraw his presence and to turn away from us. Thirdly, it is the blessed fruit of repen∣tance that recovers Gods presence, causes God to return gratiously to us. First I say it is the main happinesse of a Nation to enjoy Gods presence, to have him dwell amongst us, this happinesse by Gods presence will appear by three great advantages which his presence, and abode, brings a people. The first advantage is, Gods presence and abode with a people it is the holiness of a Nation, where he dwells and vouch∣safes his presence, that people by vertue of that presence becomes an holy Na∣tion, all Holinesse comes by participation it is not inbred in us, but derived from him who is holynesse it selfe, and partici∣pation comes by union with him, a peo∣ple neare to him are an holy people, he is the Holy one of Israel, and by that neare relation, they are made an holy people to
the Lord their God, Deut. 7.6. We see that this presence of God makes a peo∣ple holy, even by that legal and cerimoni∣all holynesse amongst the Jewes. First the Land of Israel it was called an holy Land, because God dwelt in it, and vouchsafed his presence in it; he would not have it polluted or defiled; de∣file not the Land which ye shall inhabit, wherein I dwell, for I the Lord dwell a∣mongst the Children of Israel, Num. 35.34. 2 Jerusalem it is called an holy City because it was the city of the great King, God dwelt in her palaces, therefore it was accounted a sacred, and a holy City, the Temple, because his name dwelt there, 2 Chron. 7.16. I have sanctified this house that my name may be there for e∣ver. All other Nations because God was estranged from them, were an un∣cleane people, every other Land a pollu∣ted Land; here is one great excellency a Nation gaines by retaining of God a∣mongst them, they were more to God then all other Nations in the world, a kingdome of Preists and an holy Nati∣on;
thus we see God promises to dwell in the midst of Sion, Zech. 2.10. And then he tells them (in the 12th verse) that he will inherit Judah his portion in in the holy Land; for this cause the un∣cleane were to be put out of the Campe of Israel, Num. 5.3. That they defile not their Campe in the midst whereof God did dwell; while we retain his presence a∣mongst us, we are unholy people; but if we cause him to depart, we are as the un∣circumcised and a prophane people. 2. A second advantage of Gods pre∣sence is, that it is the glory of a Nati∣on, it is the high dignity and renown, and honour of a people that God abides with them, as St Paul speaks, Rom. 3.1. What advantage then hath the Jew, what is this dignity in having God so near them? much every way, thus Moses sets out the dignity of the Jews from the near refe∣rence 'twixt God and them, Deut. 26.18. God hath avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, & to make thee high above all Nations which he hath made, in praise, and in name, and in honour, this nearness of his presence he compares (in the 13.
of Jeremy, the 11. verse) to a girdle, cleaving to his loins; as a girdle cleaves to the loins of a man, so have I caused thee to cleave unto me, that they might be unto me for a people, & for a name, and for a praise & for a glory: So likewise, Isa. 43.4. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable, and I have loved thee; when God reckons up the dignities of his peo∣ple, this is the main, of Sion, it shall be said that he was born in her; thus Mo∣ses reminds the Israelites, wherein their dignity consisted, Deut. 10.21. He is thy praise, and he is thy God; many titles of honour amongst men, but this is the tru∣ly honourable title that we have a God near to us, Deut. 4.7. What Nation is there so great who hath God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is to us; while he vouchsafed his presence to them, how renowned were they, when he withdrew himself and cast them off, then were they a vile people? the hatred and scorn and hissing of all Nations. A third advantage, that Gods presence brings, it is the strength and safety of a Nation, Psalm 46.5. God is in the midst
of her, therefore shall she not be moved; Balaam could not fasten a curse upon Is∣rael while God was amongst them, and this incouraged the people of Israel a∣gainst the Canaanites, Numb. 14.9. Their defence is departed from them, and the Lord is with us, fear them not, though Gi∣ants and Cities walled up to heaven, yet fear them not. So Moses incourages them, Deut. 4.21. Thou shalt not be affrighted at them, for the Lord thy God is among you, a mighty God and terrible. And so on the contrary, when the people would needs go up to fight against the Canaanites, Numb. 14.42. Moses disswaded them, God had then withdrawn himself, Go not up, for the Lord is not among you, Sampson wist not that God was departed from him, Moses laments when God said he would not go with them; so the Psal∣mist, Thou goest not forth with our Armies, his presence is our Palladium, our shield and rock, the shields of the earth belong unto God; well then if such good comes from Gods presence amongst us, it is worth the iniquity, wherein doth this presence of God consist, how is he said
and known to dwell in a Nation? Go hath a manifold presence. First his substantial presence, so he  present in all places, he fills heaven an earth, Jer. 23.24. The heaven of he¦vens cannot contain him saith Solomon Stand in aw of him, he is in all places. Secondly, he hath a glorious presenc there where his glory and Majesty mos appears, that's in the heavens, I wil dwell in the high and holy place, Heaven i his Throne. Thirdly, he hath a powerfull pre∣sence, when he manifest himself by any remarkable work, thus the Israelites que∣stioned his presence when they were in want, is the Lord among us yea or no? Jacobs vision made him say, God was in this place. Fourthly, he hath a gratiou, presence by which he dwells amongst us, I that gratious, and mercifull, and beneficiall presence is that we speake of, there where he dwells. First, God dwells in a Nation which he chuses to be his peculiar people, th people of his Covenant and Worship, a
David said, the Lord hath chosen Jacob to be his inheritance, thus Hosea calls the Nation and Countrey of the Jews, Hosea 9.3. the Lords Land, and the world is his by dominion; but by special pur∣chase and possession; so the Church is his, that's like the Lords Demeans. Secondly the place of Gods delight, that's the residence of his presence, de∣light fixes a man to his abode, when we are such a people that God takes plea∣sure in us, Here will I dwell for I have a delight in it, Psalm 132.23, 14. The Lord hath chosen Sion, he hath desired it for his habitation, here will I dwell. Thirdly there we are to reckon of Gods presence, where he settles his fami∣ly; that's the usual place of presence and abode, where we see God gathers to himself a Church, is dayly collecting to himself a people to know him and wor∣ship him; there we may conclude that God vouchsafes his presence, Christ is thus described to walk amongst the se∣ven golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.13. where it may be said of a people or place as God said of Corinth, Acts 18.10. I
have much people in this City, many names amongst you, there resolve that God is pre∣sent; when they grow thinner and thin∣ner, God is removing. Fourthly, There we conclude is a place of presence and abode, where a man be∣stows most cost, a Lord will keep up all his possessions, so doth God the world, but his choicest care is for his Mansion-house; do we see a people inriched with his choicest blessings, his eyes are over them continually, no favour too dear for them, sure God dwells amongst such a people. Fifthly, a man is said to dwell where his abode is most constantly; Sometimes God makes in his progress, some excursi∣ons into other places, as he did to Nini∣ve by Jonah, he may be sometimes as a wayfaring man that lodges for a night, Jer. 14.18. Some rare tokens of pre∣sence; but where his Ordinances are con∣stantly, and he fixes them, that's the place of his presence, we have done with the first, his presence it is the happiness of a Nation. Secondly, consider, it is the bitter
fruit of sin, that causes God to with∣draw his presence, and to turn away from us; this is the malignanant effect of sin in general, that is parts God and us, cau∣ses him to withdraw and turn away from us, his delight is to be in the habitable world, to be amongst the sons of men, but sin and wickedness causes him to withdraw and estrange himself from us, thus Cain complained, Gen. 4.14. I am cast away from thy face, So Saul upon his disobedience cried out, 1 Sam. 28.15. God is departed from me; it was the wo∣full condition of all mankind, that by nature we are strangers from God, nay without God in the world, so Paul tells them at Lystra, that God suffered all Nations to walk in their own wayes, ne∣ver owned or regarded them, our sins se∣parate twixt God and us. Secondly, not only the world of wick∣ed men reap this fruit by their sin, but Gods own people find this uncomforta∣ble desertion, when they grievonsly of∣fended, he turns away from them, this Moses shewed them a visible resem∣blance of, Exod. 33.7. the people there
had sinned against God, then it is said, Moses took the Tabernacle and pitcht it without the Camp, afar off from the Camp; thereby signifying Gods displeasure a∣gainst them, and his departure from them, as appears, the Tabernacle was to be in the midst of the Host; but he was offended and withdrew himself. Thirdly, may not onely his visible Church, but even his darling Saints find this wofull effect, that their sins brings upon them, that God stands aloof off, and withdraws from them; how often doth David mourn for this, and pray a∣gainst it, Psalm 10.1. Why standest thou afar off O Lord, Why hidest thou thy self in time of trouble, Psalm 38.21. Forsake me not O Lord, O be not far from me, upon his sin of adultery, O cast me not away from thy presence, this the Saints find often & feel if they turn unto folly, God stands afar off, not to hear them, nor to help them, not to own them; Tertullian gives a reason, the holy spirit is a deli∣cate thing, it will not rest in a defiled soul. Fourthly, especially some sins of his
people are of higher provocation, set him off from us. First, as blood, and oppression and violence, that cast off Cain; so God sayes he would remove Judah out of his sight for the bloodshed of Manasses, When you make long prayers I will not hear you, your hands are full of blood, Isa. 1.15. verse. Secondly, a secure neglect of Gods offers of grace, that turns him from us, when he stretches out his hands to us, and we will not come into him, then said God I will get me to my own place. This cost the Spouse sorrow, when Christ knockt, and she refused to open, Cant. 5.6. At last I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone. 3 Thirdly, falseness in his covenant, orupting of his Religion, that turns him rom us: So what that works, Zach. 11.. My soul loathed them and their soul also bhorred me, it was the casting off of the sraelites, Psal 106.39.40. They were de∣led with their own works, and went a who∣ing with their own inventions, then he
abhorred his own inhetitance; it made him forsake the tabernacle in Shilo, the tent which he had pitched amongst them, 78.60. Fourthly, incorrigiblness in the use of the means of reformation, when God strives with them and they resist him, it was the case of the old world; his spirit should strive no more with them, but he cast them off. They rebelled against him and vexed his holy spirit. Isa. 63.10. Therefore he was turned to be their enemy and he fought against them, thus God is giving over Judah as desperate, Isa. 1.5. Why should ye be smitten any more. Thirdly, consider it is the blessed fruit of repentance, that it can recover God presence, causeth him to return gracious∣ly to us; when I name repentance, I un∣derstand, a reall, cordiall, spirituall re∣pentance, that, and that onely can regai Gods favour, and return him to us; tha you may the better acquaint your selve with this necessary and soveraign duty not to enter into any large discourse o the nature of it, this solemn repentance will require of you these three actions.
First, humiliation; Secondly, lamenta∣tion and deprecation; Thirdly, reforma∣tion. I will exemple to you out of the repen∣tance of the Ninivites. First, they put themselves to great hu∣miliation, the King himself rose from his throne, laid his robes from him, and co∣vered him with sackcloth, and sate in a∣shes, nay, man and beast were covered with sackcloth, prostrating, & debasing them∣selves before an angry God; we must put our mouthes in the dust, to be ashamed, and abasht, and abhorr our selves in dust and ashes; thats their humiliation. Secondly, their lamentation or depre∣cation, they cried mightily unto God; Jonah 3. vers 8. The spirit of lamentation and supplication must abound in us; not ordinary perfunctory prayers, but we must strive and wrestle in prayer, as it is said of Jacob how he prevailed with God, he had power over the Angell and pre∣vailed, he wept and made supplication unto him, Hosea. 12.4.17. This God pre∣scribes to the Priests, let the Priests the Ministers of the Lord weep between the
Porch and the Altar, and say spare thy people O Lord. Thirdly, their reformation, thats a main point in the Ninivits repentance, let them every one turn from his evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands, violence that was the sin of Nineveh, it was an oppressing people, it was that which mainly prevailed with God, see verse the 10. God saw their works that they turned from their evill way, and God repented, he saw their humiliation, he heard their lamentation, but yet that which pleased him best was their refor∣mation; thats the fat of the sacrifice; is this the fast that I have required or cho∣sen, a day for a man to afflict his soul, to bow down his head like a bull rush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him; is not this the fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to let the oppressed go free, Isa. 58.5.6. Such re∣pentance is like to prevaile with him, let him be turned away he will draw near to us and vouchsafe us his presence, see two places, Psal. 38.18. The Lord is nigh un∣to them that are of a broken heart, & saves
all such as be of a contrite spirit, Isa. 57.15. I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite spirit, revive the spirit of the humble. First, repentance so pleases him that the very thoughts and intendments of repen∣tance prevaile with him, thus David found it: Psalm 32.5. I said I will confess my sins unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin, so God promised before you speak, I will hear and an∣swer you. Secondly, the imperfect acts of repen∣tance prevaile with him, if true and sin∣cere though not according to the purifi∣cation of the sanctuary, David cries out I have sinned, presently God absolves him. Thirdly, nay God is so propitious to repentance, that even outward repentance (if it be serious) hath some good success with him for the escaping of temporal judgements; Ahab was a wicked man, his sorrow was not for sin, but for fear of pu∣nishment, yet God passed by him for that time upon his humiliation; so the Isra∣elites repentance, Psalm 78. Was an un∣sound
repentance, yet upon that he was so mercifull that he would not destroy them. First reason, it is the property of a gracious nature to relent upon submissi∣on and deprecation, not to be implacable and revengefull, it is so with men, how much more is God graciously inclined, he is slow to anger, ready to forgive; two rare properties amongst men, those that are soon angry, if they be soon pleased, we count them good natures, on the con∣trary they go too often together, hardly angered and hardly pleased; but God is hardly angered, soon pleased; if thy bro∣ther comes and say it repents me, forgive him. A second reason, especially when the breach is amongst friends, then love will be soon revived, thus it is twixt God and his people, though he be angry, yet he remembers his old loving kindnesses, as Isay. 16.6. I will remember the daies of thy youth, twixt God and his people, there is a league of love, and love it is soon intrea∣table, repentance removes the matter of Gods anger and displeasure, fire burns no
longer then the fuell feeds it, our sins are the fuell of his wrath, repentance removes them, and his wrath ceaseth, namely it is his own gracious covenant, the sweet con∣descension of the Gospel, he hath condi∣tioned with us, if ye repent, he will be mercifull we owe it to Christ, and the Gospel, thus our Repentance prevailes with him. Come we to the second particular of this hope that he will repent, thats ano∣ther gracious effect of our Repentance, it will cause God to repent; a strange work to see God repent, Repentance it is for man, and for sinfull man, God is not as man that he should repent. 1. Sam. 15.29. Repentance it is but in two cases, neither incident unto God. First, when any thing happens upon our actions which we did not foresee, God is not mistaken, known to the Lord are all his works from the beginning. Secondly, when we do that which we do not approve, Gods works are all holy and unblameable, why should he repent? and yet we see the Scripture uses this language, it repented the Lord that he had
made man, and it grieved him at his heart. Gen. 6.6. So it is said in Samuel it repent∣ed the Lord that he had made Saul King. 1. Sam. 15.35. Not that God hath those motions and affections which we find and feel when we repent. For first Repentance changes us, there is no change in God. Secondly, Repentance afflicts us, God is not subject to any sorrowfull afflicti∣on. Thirdly, Repentance condemns and blames that action of which we repent, all the actions of God are just and holy, and unreproveable; it is a speech after the manner of men, not that God hath the affections of Repentance, but he exercises those actions which in man do flow from Repentance; when God changes his deeds and dealing with men, then the Scripture saith he repents; Repentance in God im∣ports a change in some affect of his, no change of his minde, Gregory saith he is said to reverse his sentence, but not to alter his Councel; or take it thus, Repen∣tance hath a double aspect, first, it looks backward to what hath been done, so it
is Nolle fecisse, I wish I had not done so, this action is not in God, he is never sorry for what he hath done. 2. Repentance looks forward and so it is Noble ultra facere I wil do so no more, this God assumes to himself. I will punish no more; I will change my dealings, bless where I cursed, promise where I threat∣ned, yet we must not part with this sweet expression of Gods repenting toward us, we see God clothes himself with this repent∣ing and melting affection, it repented the Lord because of their groanings, Judges. 2.18. He repented according to the multi∣tude of his mercies, Psalm 106.45. So God threatens many Judgements, then adds, the Lord repented of this, it should not be, Amos 5.7. See how Gods relenting and reversing his threatnings, agrees with his repenting. First, in all their afflictions, he was af∣flicted, Esay. 63.9. How doth he seem to condole their punishments, She hath re∣ceived of the Lords hand double for all her sins, Isa. 40.2. How shall I give thee up Ephraim, my heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. Secondly, that is another expression of
Repentance to break off the curse that was intended, thus God assumes Repen∣tance, if he hath punished, he will cease from punishing, if he hath threatned he will cancel his threatnings, if he hath pas∣sed Sentence he will reverse it, he desires to repent of the evil he hath purposed a∣gainst them. Thirdly, he that repents is angry with all that provoked him to do what he re∣pents of, or were helpers, or instruments in the doing of it, thus doth God all those that had any hand in afflicting o his people, he is highly displeased with them, as a Parent casts the rod into th fire; he will afflict, those that afflicted his people: thus God threatens Edom Thou shouldest not have looked upon th day of thy brother, in the day that he became to be a stranger, Obad. 12. verse: thus Go tells Abraham, The Nation that shall op∣press them I will judge. Fourthly, he that repents of what  hath done, will do the quite contrary so God repents over his people, hath  affrighted them with threatnings,  will refresh them with promises? Ha
he afflicted them with punishments, he will comfort them with blessings, He hath wounded us, and he will heal us. Fifthly, a true penitent will vow the contrary, so doth God swear to them to spare them; for this is as the waters of Noah unto me; For as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee nor rebuke thee, Isaiah 54.9. Sixthly, a true Penitent will not one∣ly do the contrary, but do a great deal more, redeem his former action by a double amendment, so God repents of afflicting his people, for a little anger a great deal of love and mercy, For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee, in a lit∣tle wrath I hid my face from thee, but with everlasting kindnesses will I have mercy upon thee, Isa. 54.7, 8. 3. The third matter of their hope, is he renewing of his mercies, he will eave a blessing behind him, here is a hird benefit, by repenting, it gives us ope to recover his former mercies, it
prevails with God, not onely to free  from judgments, but to store us with bles∣sings, this good we get by turning an repenting, we shall not be losers b Gods Judgements and afflictions, it i here graciously promised, verse 25.  will restore to you the years that the Locust have eaten, the Canker-worm and the C∣terpiller and the Palmer-worm, my grea Army which I sent amongst you, not onely no more annoyance by them, but yo shall regain your losses, not feel th smart of former Judgements, these a the welcomes that Repentance finds a Gods hand, it doth not barely set us i the state we were before, but betters o condition: thus the loving father recei∣ved his Prodigal, Luk 15. and not onely pardons him, but embraces him, not on∣ly cloaths him, but adorns him: this is th Superperdium of mercy, this is the dow∣ry of Repentance; where he pa∣dons, he doth not onely take off hi Judgements, but brings mercy upo them; is this the manner of me O Lord, we count it fair favour to e∣cape deserved punishment, but over a
above to be laden with mercies; and the manner of expression is to be ob∣served. First, It is called a blessing. Secondly, a leaving a blessing behind him. First to leave a blessing, no doubt they meant plenty and abundance, that which the Locusts had not already devoured; First this speech acknowledges our being undone, and desert to lose all; that's one fruit of Repenrance; If we enjoy any comfort it is his goodness, a true penitent confesseth he hath forfeited all, it is his goodnesse that he takes it not. Secondly, see how Repentance hath purified and refined their Language; Prosperity, Plenty, the fruits of the earth were our own before, all in Esau's stile, I have enough, or in Nabal's, My bread and my flesh, it is either Natures bounty, or the fruits of our labour, all of our own acquiring, thus we over possesse the things of this life, but when we repent the Prophet will teach us to call them as they are, blessings from his holy hand, our peace, before it was the wisdome of
the State, or the dread of our enemies, or our riches and strength; but after a judg∣ment, Repentance will teach us to call them as they are, blessings from God, and to whom to ascribe it. Thirdly, see how Repentance will cause us to set a right estimate upon them, not so much to own them, as com∣forts, as love them as blessings, that is to take comfort in them as fruits of his hand, pledges of his favour, seals of our Reconciliation. Fourthly, it will point us to the true Author, they are not fortune, but his hand leaves them to us, not our enemies, not the Surplussage of a judgement, but he hath commanded a blessing for us. 2. It is said, leaving a belssing beind him, What means that? It hath three powers in it, in it are three intimations. It sets out the just order of blessing, First, favour, then fruit of favour, Re∣pentance. First aims at recovering of favour, Pardon my sin, O Lord, cast me not away from thy presence, most anxious for that after, that it hopes and expects other mercies, Oh a true Penitent prises
Gods favour better then life it self, or the means of life, other means are ad∣ditions, it is an unworthy love to love God for his blessings, and for himself. Secondly, it sets out the measure of blessing; Repentance counts it an high favour, though God afflicts us, yet that he doth not consume us; though the Lo∣custs come, or any other judgment, and God means to chasten us, yet it shall be in measure; it is our comfort, that when he punishes, that he remembers mercy not to suffer his whole displeasure to rise, that he punished us in judgment, not in fury, this Isaiah acknowledges, Isa. 1.7. Except the Lord had left us a small Remnant, we had been as Sodome; so Jeremy acknowledges this mercy in the captivity, That we are not utterly consu∣med: So God promises Ezech. 14.22. Yet behold, there shall be left a remnant, both sons and daughters. Thirdly, it shews the continuance; though he chastise us, yet he leaves a bles∣sing, it is a comfort to a Penitent, that God reserves mercy till afterward, that his anger it is like a Land flood, non du∣rabit
aetatem, that he will do us good at the latter end, after our chastisements, as it was a great incouragement, that Je∣remy was commanded to purchase at A∣nathoth, fields shall be bought, here is the contrary vicissitude of Gods dealing with the wicked, he may begin in mer∣cies, but he will end in judgements; contrary with his Church, he may begin with chastisements, but it shall close up well; he will leave a blessing behind him, Job's portion, his captivity was re∣turned to do them good. Fourthly, come we to the fourth mat∣ter of their hope, a meat offering and a drink-offring to the Lord our God, that's a main blessing, they hope to recover by their repentance, it is a pregnant prayer, and many particulars in it. First, the end they aim at in seeking deliverance from their enemies; that they might appear in his Temple, and worship him; if then we ask peace and safety to the purpose, that we might enjoy opportunities of serving of God, let him have the glory, so Zachary teaches u this Lesson in the 1. of Luke, 74, 75.
That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him without fear, in holinesse and righteousnesse before him all the dayes of our life, it troubled David that he was excluded the house of God, Paul teaches us to pray for our Governours, 1 Tim. 2.2. That we may live in peace and quietnesse in all godli∣nesse and honesty, peace without piety it is a carnal peace; this made David pray for the peace of Jerusalem, Our feet shall stand in thy gates. Peace is Gods hedge, about his Church, if his service prosper not break down the hedge. Secondly, it is the fruit of our Repen∣tance to offer meat-offerings, what were the Sacrifices of thanksgiving, Psalm 51. I, when we have appealed by Repentance, then our Services and Sacrifices shall be accepted, till we be reconciled, all our oblations are abominations, he will not smell in our solemn Assemblies; incense is an abomination, but repent, and then God accepts thy offerings, an impeni∣tent sinner is as if he blessed an idol when he prayes, but the penitent shall speed. Thirdly, it is the Dedication of a bles∣sing,
they hope for a blessing behind him; of plenty if they may see, they will devote it to his worship and service, plenty every man wishes for, but wilt thou serve God, honour him with thy riches, the failing of this foretells all, because thou servest not the Lord thy God with gladnesse of heart for the a∣bundance of all things, therefore thou shalt serve thine enemies in hunger, Deut. 28.47, 48. First, it is an holy care for Gods pub∣lick worship that it be maintained; God challenged the Jews for it after captivity, the times was not to build the Temple, but to stay till they had store, build pri∣vate houses, let Gods house lie wast, see they aim at that, if we may have Gods worship, it is all they aim at; brown bread and the Gospel is good fare. First, God shall have the glory: Secondly not verbal, but with cost too. Thirdly, and not a present but pro∣vide for a lasting worship, so much of the matter. Secondly, the measure of hope, who knows; a strange kind of incouragement,
yet sometimes in Scripture this form is used. I find four places, the first is Jonah 3.8. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, it was the speech of a heathen King to a heathen People, not acquaint∣ed so well with Gods dealings, the second is Daniel 4.27. Break of thy sins it may be a lengthning of thy tranquility; the third is this of Joel, the voice of the Pro∣phet to the people of God. The fourth is Zeph. 2.3. Seek the Lord ye meek of the earth, it may be ye shall be hidden in the day of the Lords wrath, it is but a may be, though the voice of the Prophet to the heathen people, it is a strange speech seeming contrary & inconsistent. First, with Gods goodnesse, it is an ex∣cellency in every good nature to be easie to pardon, which of you that are evill know how to forgive; yet the King of Israel, much more the God of Israel is mercifull. Secondly, inconsistent with his present invitation to Repentance, he prescribes Repentance, peradventure who prescribes Physick, so Jonas thought him ready to pardon.
Thirdly, inconsistent with the incou∣ragement in Isa. 33.13. The Prophet reckons up all Gods sweet Attributes, now seems to crosse all and dishearten their Repentance, by quis novit he will aboundantly padon, Isaiah. 54. Fourthly, it seems contrary to his ab∣solute covenant and promise to pardon penitents, Ezek. 18.21. If the wicked do that which is right he shall live, it is the Tenor of the Gospel, what shall we think of it, even this promise, and even this half promise and intimation may be usefull. First, it shews the grievousness of sins, great sins are hardly pardoned, Simon Magus. Secondly, it shews the hope that is left, after sin our hopes are much weakned. Thirdly, it shews the difficulty of the benefit, we may be in such danger. Fourthly, it shews the uncertainty of temporall freedom. Fifthly, it shews mercy, and to be un∣done if we cannot challenge it. Here are two things the lowest step of hope, if we have no more, yet hold this, I will wait and pray, if I cannot get assurance.
Secondly, we when we have sinned a∣gainst Gods covenant, then we have no∣thing to pleade, but quis novit, who knows; not according to thy covenant.
Psalm, 78. vers. 34.35.36.37 When he slew them, then they sought him an turned them early, and inquired after God, and they remembred that God wa their strength, and that the high God wa their Redeemer; nevertherless they di but flatter him with their mouth and dissembled with him in their tongue for their heart was not whole with him neither continued they stedfast in his co∣venant. THis Psalm; Ingratiarum actione pub∣lica. w may term it  Psalm of record or a Psalm t bring to remembrance, 'tis an holy Panegyrick or a song for the whole Nation o people of the Jews; a solemn recitall o the many memorable passages in tha Common-Wealth from their first se∣tlement,
and it hath been the wisdom of Kingdoms & Common-Wealths to have their Chrongraphos, those that should record and register the severall passages and affairs of their State, to keep upon record their beginnings and foundation, their Acts and Monuments, the good and ll events that have beided them, and ac∣cordingly the wisdom of God authorized and imployed his sacred Penmen and Se∣cretaries to inroll and register up the se∣erall passages of the Church, and to ansmit them to posterity, in particular, esides those sacred Annals of his Church ontained in the Historicall books of Scripture, the holy Ghost hath purpose∣y framed, some more summary and com∣endious, but yer full and perfect relati∣ns of the affairs of his Church, and this kewise composed and framed into songs nd psalms, to make them more fit carri∣ge for memory, and that by the pleasant∣esse of them they might sink more eeply into their hearts, & more strongly ffect them. Thus Moses after all his Ser∣ons, and commemorations made to the eople, 32. Deut. Of Gods dealings with
them & their carriage towards him, at l he composed a song, and it to the peopl and commends it to posterity as a lasti Monument for all generations, thus  poets among the heathen (whom Tit Paul, calls their Prophets) had carmi seculario, their state songs comprisi the affairs of their Common-Wealt answerable was that sweet singer of ∣rael, the Prophet David is studious  frame such sacred songs; as first this pr¦sent Psalm, so again the 89. Then th 105.106.107. All publick Psalms a songs of commemoration; David do that which the Prophet Isay speaks o Chap. the 5.1. I will sing to my well-b¦loved a song of my beloved touching b vineyard, I termed it a Psalm of record or of commemoration, & so it is, if we re¦spect the materialls of which it consist tis a recitall of Gods gracious dealing towards his people and of their ungrac¦ous dealings towards him again; but ye I find another name given by the Psal¦mist; 'tis called Maschil in the title  the Psalm, and that name respects th end and purpose of it. Maschill is
Psalm to give instruction; 'tis not onely istoricall but Doctrinal, even these Hi∣oricall parts of Scripture are not onely Gods day book to tell us what hath pas∣sed before, but they must be to us a Law ook to teach us what we must do, 'tis ot onely a Psalm to bring to remem∣brance which is the title of 38. and 70. Psalms, but Maschil a Psalm for instru∣ction, when he commemorates his ancient ercies to their fore-fathers, thats Mas∣hill a Psalm of instruction, we have heard with our ears O Lord, and our fathers have old us, what works thou didst in their days, n the times of old, what is the instruction of that, it should teach us confidence in God; Psalm 7.1. That they might set their hope in God. When he commemo∣rates ancient deliverances from persecu∣tions and enemies, thats Maschill a Psalm for instruction, to look for the like deli∣verances from him in our dangers and distresses, many a time did he deliver them, then deliver us amongst the hea∣hen, Psalm. 106.477. When he com∣memorates the wicked and ungracious courses of their forefathers, thats Mas∣chill
a Psalm of instruction, to avoid thei fathers sins, not to be as their forefather a stubborn and rebellious generation that set not their heart aright, and whos spirit was not stedfast with God, and thi instruction was not onely for them, tha the after times of the Jews should make a profitable use of the former times, bu it reaches to us Christians; Saint Pau tells us that the times of the Jews concer us Christians, Rom. 15.4. Whatsoever things were written before time, were writ ten for our learning, and again, 1 Cor. 10 He acquaints them what befell the Jews then adds verse the 6. These things were written for our examples, to the inten we should not lust as they also lusted, and then telling them of the Judgments tha befell the Jews, in the 11. Verse he saith, these things hapned to them for exam∣ples, and they were written for our admo∣nirion, so then this Psalm sets forth the great disobedience, and stubbornesse o the people of Israel under Gods govern∣ment. First, it upbraids them with forgetful∣nesse of his mercies.
Secondly, it objects unto them their proficiency and untractablenesse even y miracles. Thirdly, it reminds them of the pro∣bane abuse of his patience. Fourthly, it reproves them for their corrigiblenesse by his chastisements. Fifthly, it shews them withal the false∣esse and unsoundnesse of their hypocri∣icall Repentance. The Text it contains this last, and so ake the purpose of it to be Gods censure nd reproof of the Jews unworthy Repen∣ance, and in it observe these two parti∣ulars. First, the severall Acts of their Repen∣ance. Secondly, the many defects and faults f their Repentance. The first, will shew us, how farr they ent in the practise of Repentance. The second, will discover their fal∣ings, how much they came short of a ue spiritual saving Repentance. First, the Acts of Repentance, which ere they performed, they are four. First seeking they sought him.
Secondly, returning, they returned. Thirdly, inquiring they inquired ea after God. Fourthly, Remembring, they remem∣bred that God was their strong rock, a the high God their Redeemer; these as the four Acts and exercises of their Re∣pentance such as they were. Secondly, the Text sets out the defect of their Repentance, how much they fai∣ed in it, they likewise are four. The first defect and fault of their Re∣pentance twas untimely, delayed Repen∣ance, thats implied in this word when no till such a time, then, not till then. Secondly, twas an inforced Repen∣ance, not ingenuous and voluntarily un∣dertaken; twas extorted by plagues, the repented when they were under the ro∣nay under the sword, twas when he sle them. Thirdly, twas an unsound Repentanc not true and sincere, but fained and act onely, 'twas a flattering and lying Repen∣tance, they flattered him with their mou and they lyed unto him with the tongues.
Fourthly, 'twas a momentany, transi∣tory, unsettled, unconstant Repentance not firm and lasting, their heart was not right with him, neither were they sted∣fast in his Covenant, these foure faults. First, untimely and backward. Secondly, inforc't and extorted. Thirdly, unsound and dislembling. Fourthly, vanishing and unconstant. These are usually linked together, one draws on the other, these four twists makes up Esays Cart rope of sin. First he that puts off & procrastinates, and delayes his repentance, he will never bethink himself of it, or set himself to it, till some judgement awakens him and constrains him to it. Secondly, he that repents not but by constraint, and when he is under the lash, usually, if he look not well to it, it will be but a shew of Repentance and outward humiliation, and no better. And then lastly, unsound Repentance will never prove lasting Repentance, he will soon be weary of it, and return to his former wont again,
Come we to the first, briefly take  view of the Acts and exercises of their Repentance; seeking, returning, inqui∣ring after god, and remembring of him. Actions all of them in their own nature good, all of them if rightly performed penitential Acts, good ingredients into Repentance. First put them together, they are such acts as accompany Repentance, and will afford us a double meditation. The first meditation arises by way of supposition. The second by a direct position. First, by way of supposition; these actions of seeking, returning, enqui∣ring, remembring, being acts, and du∣ties, and exercises of Repentance, they all suppose the quite contrary actions that accompany our sinning, as thus. First, when we repent we set our selve to seek God, therefore when we com∣mit sin we part with God, repentance that's a seeking, therefore sin and wicked∣nesse, that's a losing of God. Secondly, in Repentance there is a re∣turning to God, 'tis a work of conver∣sion,
therefore in our sinning there is a departing from God, and a forsaking of God, that's more, forsaking is more then a losing. Thirdly in Repentance there is an in∣quiring after God; therefore in a course of sinne and before we repent we never think of him, but sleight and neglect him. Fourthly, in repentance there is a remembring, there is a remembring of God and of his mercies, therefore by sin we do not onely not actually think of him, but we grow into forgetfulnesse of God, we have no remembrance of him, these four evil effects of sin, take notice of them by sinning against God. First we lose him, nay we forsake him, nay we never so much as think of him, nay we remove him out of our memo∣ries we utterly forget him, here's the condition of a stubborn and a wilfull sinner, a man that lives and lies in sin, he doth wretchedly cast off all com∣munion with God, rejects and abandons him; though he may have some vanish∣ing notions of God, yet to all good pur∣poses he is an arrant Atheist, without
God in the world, no interest in him, no effectual cogitation of him, this esti∣mate the Scripture puts upon a wicked people. First it calls them forsaken of God, a sinfull Nation, they have forsaken the Lord, Isa. 1-4. So your fathers have for∣saken me, Jer. 16.11. as Saints are a ge∣neration of Seekers, so these are a gene∣ration of forsakers. Secondly the Scripture calls them de∣parted from God, Ezek. 6.4. They have departed from me with a whorish heart: David describes a wicked man, Psalm 18.21. I have not wickedly departed from my God, there is a wicked departure, the A∣postle forewarns them of it, Heb. 3.12. Take heed of an evil heart, to depart from the living God. Thirdly, the Scripture calls them re∣volters, Isa. 31.6. The children of Israel have deeply revolted, they are grievous re∣volters, Ier. 6.28. The Scripture repre∣sents them, as thrusting God from them. Cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us, Isa. 30.11. and for the matter of inquiry or thought,
or remembrance of God, the Scripture makes this the mark, and guise and Cha∣racter of a wicked man, to lay aside all thoughts of God, the wicked through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God: God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm 10.4.5. God is far above out of his thoughts, he tushes at the name of him; Pharaoh said that which every wicked man thinks, who is the Lord, I know not the Lord, Exod. 5.2. Ye that forget God; 'tis a wicked mans description, all the nati∣ons that forget God; it should beget some sad thoughts in us were there nothing else in sin, no other mischievous consequences following it, it should strike upon the heart of obstinate sinners; what while I live in sin am I no better then an Atheist? Is this the fruit of all my courses, do they utterly estrainge me from God? I lose him and the thoughts of him, and the re∣membrance of him; yes that thou dost; thou mayest go for a Christian, and be reckoned amongst the people of God, and seem to a vow him and to be acquainted with him, but while thou livest in thine impenitency, thou art wholy estranged
from him even the children of God, in their failings and infitmities they finde these sad effects partially, and in some de∣grees; not a fault that they commit, but it sets them off some degrees from God; it weakens their hold of him, they lose him in part; it dumbs their thoughts of him, it dulls their remembrance of him; but a wicked man in an impenitent course, hath all these mischiefs in extre∣mity; thats the first meditation, their supposition. A second meditation is by direct inference and position, that true Repen∣tance will inforce upon us a seeking of God whom by sin we have lost, a return∣ing to God whom we have forsaken, an inquiring after God whom we have neg∣lected, a remembring of God whom we have forgotten. First, it will put us to a seeking & thats the first act of estimation, it values that it seeks; if we count it as good lost as found, no great matter whether we hit or misse there will be no seeking; if we meet with it by chance; well & good, but lightly va∣lued, is but lightly sought for; it must be
precious pearl that the Merchant seeks for, Math. 13.45. When we come to this resolution, if we misse of Gods favour we are undone, if I find it again, I am made for ever, then we seek as we should, because we value it as we should, thy favour is bet∣ter then life it self, Psalm 63.3. See how David valued it, be not silent to me, least if thou be silent to me, I become like them that go down into the pit, Psalm 28.1. It is death to misse him; better then life to find him. Secondly, it will put us to a seeking, thats an act of diligence, search implies labour, and anxiety, and all possible indea∣vour, such are the seekings of Repen∣tance; not a few flugish wishes, but it will be active and industrious, it lights up the candle and sweeps the house, Luke 15.8. A penitent soul will give no rest to it self, till it have recovered God and his favour thats the seeking God will accept, ye shall seek and find me, when ye shall search with all your hearts, Jer. 29.13. Not the lasie seeking of the spouse, In my bed by night I sought him, but I did not find him but when she gets up into the streets amongst
the watch men, then at last she finds him, thats the first. Secondly, it will put us to a returning, it will make us tread over all our steps, and strainings and wanderings from God with sorrow, and undo what we have done be∣fore; do the quite contrary, it will make us resolve with the Church in Hosea 2.7. I will go and return to my first husband, for then it was better for me then now, so again Hosea 6.1. Come let us return unto the Lord, it is called a conversion, a full and pregnant word, not a meer aversion from sin, Repentance it is not a meer cessation and giving over what we did before, and then rest, a man thats out of his way re∣covers not himself by a meer stop and stay, no, he must go back again. Secondly, 'tis not a meer diversion, give over this sinfull course and turn into ano∣ther, I will be no more prodigal, but I will fall into some other carnall or sen∣suall practise. But 'tis Thirdly, a full conversion, that brings him to the first point from which he strayed; thus Ieremiah, 4.1. Directs, If thou wilt return, O Israel, saith the
Lord, return unto me: it brings a man round about, makes him a quite other man, Re∣pentance it will put us to inquiring, thats a busie work, inquiring and searching di∣ligently, Saint Peter in 1. Peter 1.10. Puts them together, our Saviour calls it; seeking, and asking, and knocking, con∣sulting with others that can direct us, thus the penitents in the Acts of the A∣postles. Acts. 2.7. enquired of Peter and John, Men and brethren what shall we do? help and direct us, so the penitent Jayler, Acts 16.30. Sirs what must I do to be sa∣ved? the Prophet Jeremiah shews them this duty, stand in the paths, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way; and Isaiah quickens them to this inquiry, Isaiah 21.11.12. Bids them enquire of the watchman, and what saith he, if ye will inquire, inquire, that is do it, and do it a∣gain, do it to some purpose; enquire of the guides that God hath set up. Enquire of those that have strayed and wandered, and lost him & now have found him; what course took they, and it must be early, take the wings of the morning; early beginings may do much. Isaiah gives us this Item, the
watchman saith the morning comes, and al∣so the night, if yee will enquire, enquire, returne and come, the dayes are short, the morning spends, the night hastens, early seekers seldome misse, but late begianings most commonly fall short. Fourthly. Repentance it will quicken our memories, they remembred that God was their rock, and the high God their Redeemer, it will make us recall to mind all the goodnesse of God towards us, thus the revolting Church of Israel, when she bethinks her selfe of returning to God. She recounts how well 'twas with her when she kept her selfe to him. So the returning prodigall, Luke 15. He remembered the plenty of his fathers house, this remembering of Gods grati∣ous dealings with us hath great force in the work of repentance. First. It will upbraide us for our base unthankfulnesse, Doe yee thus reward the Lord yee foolish Nation, is not he thy Fa∣ther that hath bought thee, hath not he made thee and established thee, Deut. 32.6. Secondly. It melts our hearts into re∣morse and sorrow, oh, the love of Christ constraines us.
Thirdly. It incourages and puts heart into our repentance, I will remmber the years of the right hand, we have seen the 4 acts in which their repentance consisted, now follows the second thing observable, thats the failings and defects of their re∣pentance that made it unacceptable and they were 4. First. It was untimely. Secondly. It was extorted and inforced. Thirdly. It was false and hipocriticall. Fourthly. Twas momentary and un∣constant and fickle First. Twas untimely, a delaid repen∣tance, they sinned, kept not his covenant Psalm. 78.10. Again, they sinned yet more, verse 17. still they went on again, for all this they sinned still, verse. 22. wheeled off and delaied, and set back their repentance. Even this is a malignant cir∣cumstance, breeds a great flaw and ble∣mish in our repentance, the late date it beares, oh repentance would be a timely a speedy, and an early work. Tis presently done, as soon as we have sinned, so, ratione officij, by the law of right and reason, a man is bound to be
sorry as soone as we have done evill, tis Gods Dove and he demands it presently; even in lending, Solomon bids us not put off till to morrow, much more in pay∣ing thy debts. Secondly. Tis good repenting betimes ratione incerti, doe it while thou maist doe it, while we have time, in the morn∣ing sow thy seed, thou knowest not what a day will bring forth, Eccles. 11.6. here∣after repentance may be hid from thine eyes; we all pretend our resolutions are to repent, we grant we must repent, and resolve to repent before we dy, be it so, be sure thou repent before thou dy, and then thou must retent speedily, for time to come is most hazardous; uncertainty, the Jews have a rule, he that vows to doe any thing before he dye, he must doe i speedily, because he is not certain whether he shall live till to morrow, and then his vow tis broken, and he must answer for it. Thirdly. Tis good repenting betimes, ratione facilitatis, timely repentance is the most kindly, and gentle, and easie re∣pentance, a wound is best taken when it is green, defer to dresse it, and it will ranc∣kle
and fester, a bone is best put into joynt as soon as it is out, neglect it any time it will hardly keep in; repentance is the physick of the soule, and physick ye know is best taken in the morning, thus Peter went out presently. When I was in∣structed I smote upon my thigh, Jer. 31.19. First. This is the failing of these men repentance, tis all dilatories, put it off as long as may be, it shews they took little pleasure in it. Secondly. They came unwillingly to it, as a Beare to the stake, you must fetch him about with a ring in his nose, not set to it by any inward principle of grace, but upon other inducements, or inforce∣ments rather; but yet there is one word in the text, which seemes to set a timely date upon their repentance, 'tis said they enquired early after God, how can this stand with this procrastinating, when mane properabunt, saith Calvin, in the morn∣ing they hastened, diluculo veniebant, so others by day break, true, true, all this takes not off the charge and imputation of late repentance.
First. It is an holy scorn and derision of their slow and sluggish returning un∣to God. Yes, yes, after so much time wasted and mercies abused, and provoca∣tions multiplyed, now you bestir your selves, is this your early return to God, so shaming their backwardness in this need∣full duty. Secondly. The Scripture even in the same place it upbraids sinners with de∣laies, yet then uses this term of early seeking, Prov. 1.24. Because when I have called yee refused, I have stretched out my hand and no man regarded, verse 28. Therefore then they shall call upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me, here are two extre∣mities, very late, nay too late, and yet ear∣ly, such conversations, they have an early and a late, or rather, and an early, an e∣vening and morning. First. They have vesper tinum culpae, look at the time of their sinning, oh 'tis very lare ere they repented, all the day long and they never thought of it. Secondly. There is matutinum penae, the morning of their punishment, when
Gods Judgements break in upon them then they bestir themselves; take their day of sinning, so 'tis vesper, take their day of suffering so tis, mane, sero quoad culpam, cito quoad penam. Or thirdly. They seek and inquire, ear∣ly, and yet very late, thats early, or mane, when one awakens, the sluggards morn∣ing, when he breakes off sleepe, that may be at noon or night in true computation, secutity layes a sinner in a deep sleep, when Gods hands awakens him, thats morning, till then they are asleep, thats the first fault, untimely. A second defect of their repentance is that 'twas inforct, cum occideret, when he slew them and his judgements fell upon them, then they bethought themselves and turned unto him, thats a second ma∣lignant circumstance, that marres much of their repentance, till then they never thought of him, many other times there were that would have become their re∣pentance, much better then this, when he slew them and fell upon them with a de∣stroying judgement. First. Quando pecarunt, as soon as they
had sinned, had they any grace they should have repented, I told you before repen∣tance is presently done as soon as we have sinned, God calls all that delays it, fools, Prov. 1.22. Yee fooles how long will ye love foolishnesse, as Tertullian, Deus dedicavit penitentiam in paradiso, so, the time as soon as ever Adam had sinned, God sum∣mond him to repent; wisedome and grace would have us doe so, thus tis with David when he numbred the people, presently his heart smore him, he saw his fault and sorrowed for it. Secondly, well, suppose they took not the first time, there were more interme∣diate times before he came to slay them, quando, benefacit iis, when he did good to them, that should reclaim them, they sin∣ned and yet he ceased not from blessing them, they murmured and yet he blessed them, they tempted him and yet he fed them, they would pose his power whe∣ther he could fetch water out of the rock, and he did it for them. O thats high time for Repentance, when Gods goodnesse wrestles and strives with our wickednesse, and would over come us, Saint Paul char∣ges
it deeply upon impenitent sinners, tells them it makes them inexcusable, Rm. 2.4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodnesse and forbearance, and long∣suffering, not knowing that the goodnesse of God leadeth thee to Repentance. Thirdly, there is another time when they should have repented, quando invitavit, when by the Ministery of Moses and Aa∣ron he found fault with their sins and cal∣led them to repent, that sure is a just time for us to repent, when Gods word calls us to Repentance; 'tis that which Christ commends in the Ninevites, Mat. 12.41. The men of Nineveh shall rise up in judge∣ment with this generation, they repented at the preaching of Jonah; no sooner did God dispatch a Prophet to them to call them to repentance, but they yielded presently; 'tis that which Saint Paul takes comfort, in the matter of his conversion, Act. 26.19. I was not disobedient to the heaven∣ly vision, 'twas that also that commanded the conversion of those penitents, Acts 2.37. When they heard this they were pricked to the heart, one Sermon of Saint Peters reclaimed them presently in the audience
One look of Christ took Peter; the Mi∣nistery of the word is the great sanctified instrument to work us to Repentance, 'tis a great aggravation to our impeniten∣cy to live unconverted under that Ordi∣nance. Fourthly, yet there were other impor∣tunities that in all reason they should have to repent, though they slighted the former, thats quando castigavit, when he did visite their sins with more moderate and fatherly chastisements, we know God had his ferulaes, and rods, and fatherly cor∣rections with which he did visite them. Deut. 8.2.3. He humbled thee with hunger and drought, want of bread and water, the wildernesse in which he led them, was a School of afflictions, and therefore in al∣lusion to that, afflictions ate called a car∣rying into the wildernesse, I will bring her into the wildernesse and speak comfor∣tably into her, Hosea 2.14. 'Tis the usu∣all way that God takes with us, when his word alone will do us no good, to write our lessons on our back with his rod, pro∣sperity makes us wanton, afflictions ma∣ny times hunt us in and bring us before
him; sicknesse and poverty, and losses and other uncomfortable events, they are usuall means to reclaim 'us. Hosea com∣pares afflictions to an hedge of thorns, Behold I will hedge up thy way with thorns, Hosea 2.6. So that we shall have little list to break out, thus was Manasses con∣verted, captivity and imprisonment wrought him to Repentance. 2. Chron. 33.12. VVhen he was in affliction he sought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers, 'twas Luthers speech. Schola Crucis, 'tis Schola Lucis, and it is the great aggravation of wick∣ed King Ahaz in the time of his distresse that he did trespasse yet more against the Lord, this is that King Ahaz, thats his brand, as if should say here is a sinner that afflictions will not tame; 'tis to great purpose that Solomon advises us, Prov. .11. my Son despise not the chastise∣ing of the Lord, gentle corrections must not be despised nor slighted; and David his Father counted it an happy thing to get good by such chastisiings, Psalm. 94.12. Blessed is the Man whom thou chastenest O Lord, and teachest him out of thy Law:
He shewes it will prevent this same acci∣dent, vers. 13. That thou mayest give him rest from the dayes of adversity, untill th Pit be digged for the wicked. Happy cha∣stisement that prevents slaying, to doe a Isay speakes, Isay 26.16. Lord, in trouble have they visited thee; they poured out  prayer when thy chastening was upon them. No, this wrought not with them, quan castigauit. So then here is the unworthy servile basenesse of their repentance, no time would serve but quando occidet, when he slew them, never till their heads were o the block; yea this is Pharaoh's repen∣tance, he stood out many a stroak, bu when it came to a destruction, then  seekes to Moses, Oh I have sinned, sa me from this death only. We condem it in Pharaoh, and wonder at it here, in th Israelites, and yet upon due examination we shall find it the case of many of us take it first either more collectively, an largely, for our nationall repentance. Or Secondly, more privatly and pe¦sonally for each Man's particular. First, Let us look abroad not to censu
and descant upon other Mens estates, but yet we may soberly consider the sins of the times, and lay them to heart; have we not passed all the former quandos, the seasons of repentance with small a∣mendment. First, Not when we sinned, God knows many sins stand upon the score uncanceld. Secondly, Not when he blessed us with deliverances, with peace, plenty, and freedome from annoyances, yet small fruits upon it Edentibus beneficiis ingrate. Thirdly, Not when he hath by his word invited to repentance, nay, that Manna comes out at our nostrills, we be∣gin to loath it, yee begin to question whe∣ther God speakes by us. Fourthly, Not when he hath chast'ned us in measure, shot off warning peeces, ra∣ther then murthering Cannons, commo∣tions, and plagues, and unnaturall discon∣tents, we despise those chastisements. Fifthly, When he comes to slay us, then we will bethink our selves, when the king∣dome is in a light fire, and invasions of e∣nemies, or intestine rebellions begin to
destroy us, then tis to be hoped we will repent. Secondly. Let us take it more private∣ly and personally, and then asks your hearts what time you set for your repen∣tance; tis cum occidet; when we are on our death beds, and no hope of life; when God sends his last executioner to cut us off from the Land of the living, then we resolve to repent, well, tis possible you may do so, depoenitentia non desperandum quem patientia Dei sinit vivere. Yet consider first. Tis infamia peni∣tentiae, here is a brand set upon it by the holy Ghost. Secondly, Tis incerta, dubia, there is small incouragment the scripture gives to it, rather rejects it, see what enter∣tainment such seekers are promised to find at Gods hand Prov. .24. Because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand and no man regarded it, verse 26. I will also laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your feare comes, when distresse and anguish comes upon you. verse 28. Then they shall call upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall
not find me, see what incouragement such seekers have. Thirdly, 'tis suspiciosa penitentia, there is great cause to suspect the good of such repentance, which is forc'd from us, cum occideret when the feare of death sur∣prises us. First, Because that lust that reigned in him is imp't and forc'd back by his affli∣ctions, 'tis like the sap of a Tree in winter weather, all shrunk to the root, sorrow, and sicknesse, and any great affliction, 'tis like Winter weather, it imps the branch∣es, hinders our corruption from sprouting and so we think 'tis dead, but the root holds life and sap, warm weather, pros∣perity will make it spring again like Jobs trees, chap. 14.8, 9. through the heate of the weather they will bud. Secondly, in the feare of death, or any sore affliction, we may take our selves to be mortified, because afflictions will justle out temptations, a Man laid on his sick Bed will have little list then to entertain the temptations of sinfull pleasure, he hath lost his rellish of them for a time, as sick men can finde no sweetnesse in meats
(which otherwise they delight in) because their tast is for a time imbittered, let them recover health, and they will fall to againe. Thirdly, in sicknesse many take them∣selves mortified, not because sin is weak∣ned in them, but nature is infeebled, that withdraws her strength, by which sin was active; recover nature, and sin will reco∣ver, as a graft in a Tree, let the Tree spring, and that will spring too; 'tis not the body of sin thats mortified, but the body of nature, that is infeebled, put not thy conversion then upon hazardous adventures, stay not till he come to slay thee by death, 'tis an infamous, 'tis an un∣certain, 'tis a suspitious repentance, thou maist be mistaken in it. Come we to a third defect of their re∣pentance thats falsenesse and dissembling, it was a flattering, unsound, hypocriticall repentance. Neverthelesse they did flat∣ter him with their mouths, and they lyed unto him with their tongues, all their conversion and turning unto God, 'twas but flattery and falsehood, and this flatte∣ry and falshood will appeare.
First in their professions. Secondly in their promises, flattering professions, and false promises. First. Flattery is seen in profession, first a flatterer will professe a great esteem of goodnesse and worth in the person whom he applyes himselfe to; ready to ascribe much unto him, so did these hol∣low converts in their affliction, they ac∣knowledged God was their rock and strength, and the high God their redeem∣er, thus the Herodians flattered Christ, Mat. 12.16. Master we know that thou art true, and teachest the way of God in truth, and regards no mans person, Christ disco∣vers them, why tempt ye me ye Hypo∣crites, such are the soothings of unsound repentance when afflictions presses us, O then we will acknowledge God and his goodness, as Benadad did with the King of Israel, oh the Kings of Israel are mercifull Kings, but yet false and trecherous for all their profession. Secondly. Flattery is seen in profession of great love and affections, Judah's his kisse, a profession of great love, as if Christ were dear to him, such professions
Hypocriticall repentance will make un∣der affliction; such love Ziba shewes to David, professed great love and loyalty to him, the Jewes had such blandishments to Gods word, Esa. 29.13. That they drew nere him with their mouth, and with their lips did honour him, in our extremi∣ties, who but God and Christ are in our mouthes, then we seeme much to affect them. Thirdly. Flattery is seen in profession of sorrow for any offence, a dissembler to escape his due deserts will confesse all, and professe great sorrow for former of∣fences, thus did railing Shimei to David 2 Sam. 19.18. Oh who so sorry for his offences, who so submisse in confessing it, and such professions an Hypocrite under the lash will make to God, the Israelites when thunder and lightning were about their ears, 1 Sam. 12.19. Oh we have sin∣ed in asking a King, besides all our other sins, these are there flattering professions. Secondly, as they flattered in their pro∣fessions, so they were false in their promi∣ses, repentance will make vowes and pro∣mises and so will this false and counter∣feit
repentance abound in promises, aske Pharaoh, if God spare thee this time, wilt thou let Israel goe? O yes, no longer stay, an Hypocrite will bribe God with pro∣mises, spare me this one time, yet all false, here observe a double falsenesse, false in intention, say what he never meanes, his tongue contradicts his head. Secondly, false in performances, he never makes good what he says, David calls it lying fained obedience, Psalm. 63.3. Through the greatnesse of thy power shall thine enemies yeild fained obedience to these false and counterfeit: So then in that these Jews were thus false and fraudulent in their repentance, it will discover to us the dangerous condition of this sin of hypocrisie. First, see the guilt of Hypocrisie, ra∣ther then faile it will counterfeite and act any duty, though never so unacceptable, as repentance is, no duty in religion goes downe so hard with hypocrisy as repen∣tance, repentance is a shameing duty, a Penitent must confesse and acknowledge he hath sinned, take shame and confession to himselfe, cry out with the Leper I am
uncleane, now Hypocrites are animalia gloriae, all for their credit and reputation, in matter of opinion they are in no error, quod volumus sanctum est. Joh. 9.40. what are we ignorant and blind also, in matter of conversation they are without spot or wrinckle, you are they which justifie your selves before men, Luke 16.14. 'Tis hard to bring them to acknowledge either errour or fault, but yet if it stand for their turn they will even act a penitents part, and confesse and recant and seem to be sorry for sin, so did Simon Magus, and King Saul. Secondly, See the pertinacy and obstina∣cy of hypocrisie, 'twill act and counter∣feit, and never give over, no not in the greatest affliction, cum occideret, when Gods hand is in slaying them, yet then they will counterfeit, neither mercies, not miracles, nor chastisements, nor plagues will alter or change them, Isaiah 26.10. Let favour be shewed to him, yet he will not learn righteousnesse, nay let Gods hand be lifted up, yet they will not see it; of all other sins the hypocrite is the most hope∣lesse and incorrigible, afflictions have
brought home prophane sinners, but an Hypocrite will stand to that too, either accuse God for afflicting him, or dissem∣blingly accuse himself, like some despe∣rate cutpurse, that will steal and pilfer in the Sessions house or at the Gallows. Thirdly, See the bruitish and stupid sottishnesse of hypocrisie, 'twill not one∣ly undertake to deceive men, but God also, think to mock him with flatteries and lies, as Ahaz, how did he cover his infidelity, Oh he would not tempt God, what saith Isaiah, Chap. 7.13. Is it a small thing to weary men, but will you weary my God also, an Hypocrite will not onely faulter with men, seek to delude the world, but they are lying children to God, Isaiah 30.9. Thus Peter chargeth Ana∣nias and Saphira, that they lyed not to men, but to the Holy Ghost, Acts 5.4. Thus Isaiah brings in the Hypocrites of his time, boasting even to God of their hypocriticall service and devotion, Where∣fore have we fasted and thou seest it not, wherefore have we afflicted our souls and thou takest no knowledge? Isaiah 58.3. Indeed y∣pocrites are in truth secret Atheists, they
turn the glory of God into an Idoll, so hoping to put him off with vizards and counterfeits, worse then Jacob towards I∣saac, God can neither see, nor feele, nor find out their mockeries, thats the third, the falsenesse of their repentance. Come we to the fourth defect of their repentance and conversion; it was mo∣mentary and unconstant, their hearts were not right with him, verse 37. Nei∣ther were they stedfast in his covenant. and this clause comes in as proofe of the for∣mer, tis a conviction of their unsound and Hypocriticall repentance, and here is a double conviction by which an Hypo∣crite may judge of himselfe, their repen∣tance was false and fained. First because twas not hearty, true re∣pentance is hearty repentance if the heart be wanting tis counterfeit and hy∣pocriticall, their heart was not right with him. Secondly, Because 'twas not lasting and durable, they were not stedfast in his covenant. First, Twas hypocriticall because twas not cordiall, and hearty, how was it not
hearty, were they not in earnest, was it meer outside, acted, pretended repentance tis likely not, theirs a double hypocrisy. First, Formall and expresse, when he that acts it, intends onely to counterfeit, means nothing else, thats grosse hypocri∣sy: such were the Pharisees in Christs time, and the world is full of them; hard∣ly can we think a man in such a case, as these Israelites were now in, at the point of death, would be so grosse, to mock God expressely. Secondly, There is an Hypocrisy of a finer thread, thats interpretive hypocrisy wherein we deale falsely with God and our selves too; such as God will Judge, hypocrisy how is that, when a man rests in some acts of repentance, but it failes and falls short in the main, and is careless of that. As first, There are some actions of re∣pentance, as confession of sin, calling of mercy, promising amendment, these are good, but yet more is required. Secondly, There are some affections and passions of repentance, as sadnesse, and sorrow, and feare, and anxiety of
mind, and other passionate motions, these all are good, but yet fall short. Thirdly, What then is wanting, the main of all is that the heart must be changed, I say changed, it may be affect∣ed, dejected and troubled, and yet remain as bad as ever, so it is with Pharaoh, the terrours of God deeply affected him, so was Ahab strangely cast down at Elias threatnings, he was sad in good earnest; and what think you of Judas, was not he much affected, but no new change was wrought in their hearts, they were the same men still, Pharaoh an oppresser in his heart, Ahab a persecuter. Here then is that which makes up re∣pentance to be true and spirituall, and such as God will accept, when it puts a new heart into us, changes our natures from what we were before, begets in us new resolutions, that we chuse what we refused, love what we hated, frames the very heart anew, in this case, hypocrisy works like art, sincerity like nature, how is that; why natures works begins within, frames the inwards of a man, first the heart, then shapes the outward members,
so doth sincerity, but art that works upon the outside, alters the figure, and outward lineaments goes no further, so doth hy∣pocrisy. Judge thy conversation by this tryall, art thou another man, a new frame put in∣to thee, hath God taken away thy stony heart and given thee a heart of flesh; A second conviction of the unsound∣nesse of their repentance is, that it was a fleeting momentary unconstant repen∣tance, they were not stedfast in his cove∣nant, true repentance will prove lasting repentance, hypocriticall repentance is slippery and unconstant. First, A true convert hath an inward principle of repentance planted into him, grace is a second nature, and workes constantly as nature doth, but an hypo∣crite in his actions of reformation and repentance is moved, not by an invvard principle of God, but by some outward motion, when that crosses, his conversion sailes; the motion of piety in a good Christian are like naturall motions, the motions of an hypocrite, are as artificiall motions, the motions of the Sun and of
the clock keep time alike, and for a while we will say a clock goes as the Sun, I but here is a difference, the one moves out of an inward principle, naturally the other, the clock is moved by an outward prin∣ciple, the weight and plummet makes it goe, and when that is down the Clock stands still, or as in waters, the naturall streame flowes alwayes, 'tis fed with a streame; but a sudden Landflood though it runs strongly for a while, yet it will drye up, it hath no Spring or Fountaine to feede it. A great difference 'twixt affection that will tire, and affection that will hold out, a great difference 'twixt passion that is suddaine, comes and goes, and 'twixt re∣solution that is constant, suddain flashing of heare are one thing, and the kindly warmth at the heart is another, a good Christian is the same out of affliction that he is in affliction, an hypocrite oh he is a new Man on his sick bed, recover him and ye discover him, as covetous & prophane, in affliction he vowes, in prosperity he forgets his vow, what saith David, Psal. 57.8. My heart is fixed, O God, my heart
is fixed: I will sing and give praise. Psal. 66.13, 14. I will pay thee my vowes, which my lips have uttered, and my mouth have spoken when I was in trouble. In repentance he hath renued his Co∣venants with God, and he will not breake with him, failings he may have, but yet he revolts not, Davids resolution is this, Psal. 119.93. I will never forget thy Command∣ments, for by them thou hast quickened me.
Luke 22. verse 31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath desired to have you, that b may sift you as wheat: But I have pray∣ed for thee, that thy faith faile not; and when thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren. IN this Chapter the E∣vangelist relates to u our Saviours approach and preparation to hi death. Now this So of righteousness being to leave the Horizo of this World, and to descend under the Earth, and sit in a Cloud, he was dismay∣ed and affrighted, and perplexed with the expectation and feare of death; but as the Sun in a cleare evening, when it is nee setting, casts forth most beautifull and glorious beames of light; So our Savi∣our
now approaching towards death, shines forth in most heavenly meditati∣ons and exhortations to his Apostles. He doth that which the Prophet Isaiah per∣swaded Ezechiah to do when death ap∣proached, he set his house and family in order, Like holy Jacob when he drew to∣wards his end, he called his twelve sons, and forewarned them of what should befall them, and instructed them, and blessed them, so here our Saviour calls his Twelve Apostles, and forewarns them likewise of what should betide them, and seals up his love and blessing to them. First, He makes here his last will and Testament; and publisheth and seals it up to them by the institution of the Sacra∣ment, verse 19. This is the new Testament in my bloud. Secondly, He makes here a bountifull and blessed bequeathment to his Disci∣ples; as Jacob to his Son Joseph, he be∣queathes him the portion that he had won to himself by his bowe and by his sword, so here our Saviour bequeathes to his Disciples, to the Church of God the great conquest of his own bloud, the pur∣chase
of his death and passion; I bequeath o you a Kingdom saith he, verse 10. Thrdly, He foretells them of troubles and afflictions, he forewanes them of temptations that should befall them; he gives them notice of their grand Adver∣sary that would labour to disapoint them of their inheritance, and defeate them of the Kingdom. Simon Simon Sathan hath desired to winnow you as wheat, &c. SO then the Text you see is a seasonable gracious prediction of a great tem∣ptation. The hour of temptation was now falling upon the Apostles, and Satan was now dragging his nets and framing his pits, and setting his snares to take them. And our blessed Saviour not only by the Spirit of prophesie but by his alseeing eye of divinity discovers all the intend∣ments of Satan; and gives them notice he carries an eye on all Satans plots least Satan should have advantage against us for he is ignorant nor of his devises as the Apostle speaks, he has his constant eye
upon his Saints and upon their enemies, his eye is upon Leviathan the old Ser∣pent least he should annoy the Church of God. I the Lord will watch over it day and night, Hence Bernard taking into his meditation the constant practice of Christ in forewarning his Church of temptations; he terms Christ the creature that hath simpathy with man, That crea∣ture when it sees a man asleep, and a Serpent or Snake making towards him to hurt him; runs to him, and strikes him and awakes him that he may escape  mischief, So here Christ sees his Apos slumber in security, and the old Serpent making towards them to annoy them; he rouzeth them out of their security by this watch word, and tells them Simon Simon, Satan is on you and desires to winnow you, &c. In the words them∣selves observe these three particulars. First, A danger foretold Simon, Simon, Satan bath desired to winnow you as wheat, &c. Secondly, Here is a deliverance assured them, but I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not.
Thirdly, The duty of thankfulnesse required of them, and then when thou art converted strengthen thy brethren. For the first, the danger foretold them there are three things observable in it. First, The person forewarned that is in this word, Simon, Simon. Secondly, The enemy foretold, Satan hath desired. Thirdly, The mischiefe intended by him to winnow you as Wheat. First, The Apostle here warned, it is said here to be Peter, Christ directs his caveat to him, and awakens Peter especi∣ally by this quick compellation, and it carries briefly with it a threefold consi∣deration. First, This compellation that our Sa∣viour useth is no men personate, he directs it here in a particular speciall terme to him, he names him here Simon. He doth not direct his warning and caveat in gene∣rall termes, he saith not the Church of God is in danger, and Satan labours to bring in mischiefe on Christianity, but he brings it home to Peter in particulars, and gives the caveat to him in particu∣lar,
and it carryes a threefold intimation. First, On Christs part, and so it is an intimation of speciall care, he carryes a particular eye upon Peter, and upon eve∣ry one that belongs to his care and provi∣dence, he speakes to him in individuall punctuall termes, he is tender of his pro∣tection, it argues the large and unlimited compasse of his knowledge, he takes no∣tice of every man, he sees our condition, he observes our actions, he beholds our carriage in all the turnings of our lives, his eye is on whatsoever can befall us. As it was rare and excellent in that great Commander that knew every Soldier in his Army, and could call every one by his name. I say it argues not onely his knowledge and inspection, but his especi∣all regard and affection, he fixeth the eye of his providence upon every poor Chri∣stian that belongs to him, as Austin sweet∣ly meditates, O tu omnipotente, &c. O Lord God, (saith he) thy care reacheth to every particular man as much, as to the whole Church, and thou as much tendrest and art provident over every particular man, as of the whole frame of Christi∣anity.
We are told indeed by some that he absolutely intends the salvation of the Church in generall, he will provide that the Church of God shall not be ruined▪ he hath built it on an impregnable Rock but notwithstanding they say that this o that particular may, any one Christian may fall away and perish. No verily, the providence of Christ is as carefull for Peter and Paul and every one whose names are given up to him. He beares every one on his brest and on his shoul∣der, as well as he supports the whole Church. This was foretold by David Psalm, 72. he saith not onely that he will have a care that the Church shall flourish in his time, and that there shall be abundance of peace, but he will have a care of the poorest sort, he will deliver the poor soule from violence, and preci∣ous is every poor soule in his sight: It was typified in that charge that was given up to Moses when he tooke the charge of the Government of the people, all the people were delivered him by Pole and by tale; a muster was made at his first entrance into his Government, and God
surveyed all the Army, a particular of them was given to Moses, and when he re∣signed them to God again he gives them by tale. It was typified on Aaron, he bore the names of all the Children of Israel in his bosome, not onely our persons, but our hairs, are hairs of the heads of his children, their persons then are under his eye and observance, under his regard and particular inspection. That is the first thing it is an intimation of particular inspection. Secondly, This personall name car∣ries an intimation on Satans part of ma∣lice, he desires that no flesh should be saved, he thirsts after an universall destru∣ction, but notwithstanding his more spe∣cial spight is against the Church of God, he takes more felicity in the ruine and overthrow of one Christian then in the damnation of a 1000 others, to recover one that is gotten out of his snare to bring Israel back, after they are gotten out of Egypt it is a great joy and com∣fort to Satan; but above all he rejoiceth that the most eminent Saints, Peter and such as are Pillars of the Church, the o∣verthrow
of them is a great Conquest to him. One David is more then 10000. of Israel, and to bring him to sin is his cheife ayme, hee hates those above all. The choicest Saints are the marke of his greatest malice: the image of God where it is clearest, enrageth Satans ma∣lice most. He hates us all, but those that excell in vertue, and beare the live∣lyest Characters of God are his cheife ayme. Secondly, Above all, he feares Saint Peter and such as he, if they stand they work great ruine to the power of Satan. Peter killed his thousands, and Paul his 10000. If these stand they make havock of the power of Satan, and trample on principallityes and powers. Therefore as Pharaoh made it his plot to destroy the male Children,, so doth he to destroy the most masculine Christians of the highest improvement of grace. As it was the plot of Sampson when he would destroy all the Philistines, he goes to the Pillars and pulls them downe, so it is his policy above all others, he goes to Peter, and the Apostles, and the cheifest Saints, that is
the second intimation of Satans malice. Thirdly, This compellation, Simon, Simon, it carryes an intimation on Peters part, that is of speciall care and circum∣spection in case of temptation, it is not e∣nough to rest in generall promises, the Church of God is sure, it is built on a Rock, and there we rest our selves, but we must make provision for our own safety. As in the case of War and invasion, men are not content that the Coasts be guard∣ed, & the Castle fortified, & that there be publick care to watch over the kingdom, but every man provides for himselfe, and hath Armour for his owne use. So in the case of temptation, we are not to en∣trench our selves with generall promises of the Church that is built on a Rock, and it shall stand, and the power of Hell shall not prevaile against it. It is true Satan in his War against the Church will loose the maine battell, and he and his instruments that fight in a damned quarrell, they shall be overthrown. O but if thou look not to thy selfe, thou mayest have a wound and be taken in the battell.
See this care of personall provision how Paul urgeth it, Gal. 6.1. Brethre if any be overtaken by infirmities, you that are spirituall restore such an one with the spirit of meeknesse, considering thy self least thou be tempted. In the exhortation, first he begins in the Plurall, Brethren, you that are spirituall recover you such a one; but when he comes to caution consider thy self. A man would think it were sollecisme, and indeed it seems to be a slip in Grammer; Brethren, look to thy self, and you that are spirituall see that thou be not tempted. No, it is an elegan∣cy, for in compassion all must come in, but in cantion every man must look to himself; Brethren help one another, but let every one look to himself in case of temptation: consider thy self least thou be tempted. Thus we see the first consi∣deration, it is a name of personall com∣pellation, Simon Simon. Secondly, This compellation it is a name more naturall to him then his other name; he calls him not Cephas and Peter, and by these names after he useth to call him, but Christ passeth by these, and calls
him by the name he brought with him before he was a Disciple; Simon especial∣ly now in the case of temptation he doth not mind him of his priviledge; thou art  Rock, thou art a stone, and these shall secure thee and the divine promises; but confider what thou art in thy self a weak man divested of all priviledge & security by thy own naturall condition, and com∣passed about with many infirmities. In case of temptation the safest way is not to consider our strength but our weaknesse. NOt what we are by priviledges that comes from without us; but what we are in our own weaknesse, if we be left to our selves. As the Lord speaks in Isaiah to the people of Israel, when he tells them of their danger, he calls them, thou Worm Ja∣cob; he puts them not in mind of their excellencies and prerogatives, but what they were in themselves, poor Worms, unable to rescue themselves or to resist any force. The best way is to consider what we are in our weaknesse, and not in our strength; Thoughts of strength breed security, and are forerunners of ruine;
but thoughts of weakness & insufficiency awaken diligence to prevent our danger; still we see in all the supplies and im∣ployments that the Saints had, they spe best that were conscientious of their weaknesse: What furnished Moses and made him so compleate a man for his ser∣vice, but the urging of his own weaknesse. First he pleades his own weaknesse, Lord I cannot speak, God supplies that; And then another, I am fearfull, and he argues many insufficiencies of himself, and the pleading of his insufficiencies gained him abundance of strength from God: in tem∣ptation remember the best of us, as the spirit is willing, so the flesh is weak: And consider not onely that we are built on a Rock, but our old foundation in the dust; not to remember that we are Peters and Ceph's, and are strengthned by privi∣ledges, but Simon, Simon compassed with infirmities. That is the second, it is a na∣turall name. Thirdly, This compellation it is a name ingeminated, our Saviour is not content once to jogg and awaken him out of his drowziness, & infirmities, but he doubles it
and quickens him up with a vehement compellation, and that for these reasons. First, There is some quickning sharp∣nesse in this ingemination, Simon Simon, a little before the Apostles were fallen into a strange dispute; and debate among themselves who should be the greatest, they were at a great dispute, they would needs know who should be the supreme, they imagined a kind of Popery, who should be the leader of all the rest; our Saviour sees it and pitches it, and calls them off with sharpnes and acrimony: are you thus disputing for Mastership and spremacy; the common enemy is upon you, Satan is at hand ready to swallow you up, and you are together by the ears. It is the usual condition of the Church of God, when they are in the greatest dis∣pute and objecting one against another for supremacy, and Mastership they are in the greatest danger, the greater severity is on them. Thus Jeremiah takes of the ambiti∣on of poor Baruch, The Lord will
bring a captivity upon the land, and seek∣est thou great things for thy self; The common enemy is upon us, and hath cast in his fire balls of contention, and shall we contend who shall be Mistris, it is a secret check, he shews, that while they were disputing about supremacy they were in danger, while they think they stand in the height, they fall down as Ber∣nard saith. Secondly, This ingemination that our Saviour useth; it carries with it a great strength of warmth and heat of affection, he looks on their danger, he pitties their security and tenders their welfare, there∣fore he is stirred in all tendernesse of affe∣ction; to bring them out of the snare? O Simon Simon; It is the gracious love of our Saviour, he hath not onely an eye of inspection on our danger, but his bow∣els are stirred with compassion; they are rolled together, his heart melts in our afflictions and temptation. This form of speaking is used in any extremity of the Church: In their sorrow in captivity, Exod. 3. See how God speaks, I have seen, I have seen; In the
danger of Isaac to be slain by Abraham, God posts an Angell out of heaven, and the messenger comes upon the wings of the wind; and saith Abraham Abraham, &c. So in the case of desolation and sor∣row that the Church was in, how com∣fortably God speaks to his people; com∣fort ye, comfort ye my people, &c. There is no tender hearted Mother, that springs forth into passion and tendernesse of affection, upon sight of the danger of her child, as God is stirred to compassion, and his bowels yearn to catch us as fire∣brand out of the fire, to deliver us out of the snare of Satan. Thirdly, It is a quick speech Simon Simon, to awaken and stirr them out of their greatest security. The Apostles were at leisure to fall into many disputes, and never considered the danger of them; Christ is fain to double his voice, and to lift it up as a Trumpet to awaken them, As a man that sees fire break out of his neighbours house; and knows that they are all asleep, he bounceth and knocks at the door, and calls to awaken them out of danger: so Christ is vehement and impotu∣nate.
There is a kind of Lethargy that falls on Christians sometimes that they must be affrighted out off by fearfull com∣pellations: The best of Gods Saints have need of these warning pieces to be shot off at their ears, not only the wicked that lye benumed in security, and are taken by Satan at his pleasure in every tempta∣tion; but the best of Gods children. And our spirituall dangers do no more affect us, then the bodily danger of Lot when he was loath to escape, and it seemed a fable to his sons when they were told of it, therefore Christ is earnest and impor∣tunate with them; so you see the first thing the person warned Simon. The second is the enemy foretold, Sa∣tan desires to winnow you; And here are these two particulars. First, The enemy himself that is Satan. Then secondly, the provision and pre∣paration he was to do this mischief, he did earnestly desire. First, Here is our enemie Satan, it is one of the names, that the Scripture deci∣phers the enemy of our salvation by, some times he is called Diabolus the Accuser
somtimes  the Tempter, some∣times Apollyon a destroyer, here Satan an enemy, and it is a great aggravation of the danger to know the greatnesse of the enemy that besets us, he is Satan. First, A malitious deadly enemy, he hunts for the precious soules of men. Secondly, He is a subtle crafty enemy he knows, as John speakes, he hath the mistery and depth of temptation. Thirdly, He is an old inveterate ex∣perienced enemy, he is beaten to this trade, he is excetcised and versed in the art of temptation. See the danger of this ene∣my by three reaches and depths of mis∣cheife that he conveyes in his temptation. First, This temptation that he sets on Peter by, it was an importunate tempta∣tion, there was great importunity in this temptation to set on Peter and the Apo∣stles. There were many discouragements that might have deter'd him from setting on the Apostles, the Apostles were not un∣armed, they lay not naked, they were not as a Citty whose wals were broken down, open to invasion, but there were many things considerable in the Apostles that
might have driven him off from his temp∣tation, and yet he would assault them. First, They were in Christs society, a great priviledge, and it was a great discou∣ragement to Satan to set on Christs se∣vants, those that lived and were in the sanctuary of his society. If Satan had set upon strangers, those that were out of Christs love, as a bird from the nest. So is a man that strayes from his places saith Solomon, a man that is out of the so∣ciety of Christ and of good men, he lies open to every free booter, Satan may take him at his pleasure, if Satan take  man at a Stage-Play, he seizeth upon him on his own ground, but the Apostles were in the Sanctuary of Christs society; ye Satan dares break into Christs family, and offer temptations and assaults upon his own servants about his body; no so∣ciety, not the whole Church of God,  the society and presence of Christ ca∣deter Satan from assaulting by tempta∣ons, so it was in Judas, he wonne hi from his Masters company, he rook hi from his heeles, and carryed him away b temptation, as it were in spight of Christ
that was the first determent they were in, Christs company and family, yet Satan sets on them. A second, discouragement that might have kept him from tempting the Apo∣stles, they were in the state of grace in a blessed condition, they were regenerate. Having sanctifying grace, it strengthens us against temptations. Grace in the heart of men is as a Garrison that God hath set to keep us from Satan, as the A∣postle speakes, ye are kept by faith to sal∣vation. The word signifies so to keep, as a Castle is kept by a Garrison. God sets a strong Garrison in the heart of a Christian, faith and grace beates off Sa∣tans assaults, notwithstanding the evi∣dence of grace in the hearts and minds of these Apostles, it discourageth not Satan, but he sets on them. The holiest man, the greatest Saint, nay Christ himselfe, Satan dares assault by temptation, as Gregory on that place of Job speakes of Leviathan, he drinkes p whole Rivers, the wicked of the world, ay he thinks to drink up Jordan, the Church of God, he will try if he can
swallow the Saints, nothing can discou∣rage him, no, not grace in the regenerate. A third determent that might have kept him, and yet he is importunate, they were supported with the but resse and strength of promises, they had speciall assurance that they should not fall; None that are committed to him, Father I have kept them all saith Christ, and they shall not perish, yet Satan in despight of all Gods promises wrastles with his Children, and will see if he can beguile them, as it was with him, he disputed Gods truth, hath God said ye shall dye. No, so he disputes, with a faith of a Christian, hath God promised that you shall not faile, hath he assured you of your perseverance, no such matter, it is false doctrine, he will assure us, there is no such ground and priviledge, the pro∣mises of the Gospell, are no discourage∣ment to him. Fourthly, Here was a new supply of grace that might have discouraged him, they had been even now at the Sacrament, first the Sacrament of the Passeover, there was the blood of the Lamb sprinkled o
them to keep them from the destroying Angell, yet he durst set on them, and then the Sacrament of the Lords supper, that great conduit pipe of grace, they had receiv∣ed new strength from Christ, notwithstand∣ing all these advantages that the Apostles had, the malice of Satan is thus great, and his opportunity, that he sets on them. In what case are they that neither live in the society of Christ, but in the walk and range of Satan, that have not the least part of grace, that have no hold upon the promises, that have not any strength from the word and Sacraments. If he doth thus upon the green Trees, Peter and the rest, what will become of the dry ones, those tht are destitute of all these privi∣ledges. That is the first consideration, the danger of this enemy of his importunities. The second, Is the consideration of this temptation and the danger of it, that Satan sets upon them, we find it was a humane temptation, the temptation that Peter and the rest of the Apostles were assaulted? with what was it no diabolicall suggestion but save thy selfe, preserve thy selfe from danger, provide for thine own
run not into needlesse trouble, thou canst doe no good, as Jeremy saith, it was a meere naturall incentive, it was not dia∣bollicall. Our own course dictates this, escape danger, goe not into needlesse trouble, he bids him not curse Christ and Blaspheme, and speake horribly of him; but he comes with a temptation of na∣turall affection. Here is a second cun∣ing reach of Satan. We are not trou∣bled at him; but when he appeares in his own shape, as Bernard speakes, when he comes with horrible Blasphemies. O but he folds up himselfe in our bowels, and hedges his temptations in our own naturall affections, he bids the Apostle, thou shalt provide against danger, be se∣cure against trouble, and this is the most dangerous temptation when he works with our selves, and shoots our owne ar∣rowes in our own faces; as the Axe bor∣rowes the helve of the wood by which it is cut downe after, so, Satan borrowes temptations from our affections, he goes on in our owne temper of nature and disposition, he bids us love our lives and provide for our selves, but they are hiss∣ing
Serpents, those temptations are most dangerous and deadly that come under a humane notion. This is the second. Thirdly, Yet it was a temptation of an Adversary, a man would think it were a very freindly temptation, provide for thy selfe, escape danger. If Satan should come with a horrid temptation, destroy thy selfe, make thy selfe away, rush on danger, these are horrible; but he comes in the hearts of a freind, and tells him he may doe a great deale of mischeife to himselfe, and incurre the displeasure of the high Preist, and loose his friends, and hazard his estate, and run into danger without advantange. This is the voyce certainly of a friend, but this was the voyce of an Adversary. The most dan∣gerous temptations are those that come under the semblance and appearance of good will and councell. We can start back when one bids us rush into mis∣cheife, and cast our selves downe, but to save our lives and provide for our profit, to take care of our familyes, to inrich our selves for hereafter, to provide a∣gainst hard times. O we thank every
man for these councells, he is a good freind, yet notwithstanding Satan maskes himselfe in this habit above all other. A false freind is the worst foe; as those Pyrats are most dangerous that hangs out false colours, that pretend league and yet set on us, we are afraid of Satan when he comes in his own appearance, but when he comes like Samuel in the Prophets mantle, when he comes to Christ in the shape of Peter, when he comes in the perswasion of a wife in the necessityes of Children, in the councell of freinds; yet we should discerne these to be the temptations of the De∣vill, thus you see the first thing the ene∣my that tempts, it is Satan. The second is the nature of the temp∣tation, he hath desired, that hath two things. First, Here is the great bent of his will, and then the restraint of his power. The bent of his will, he earnestly de∣sires to bring temptation, but he must desire it. But if you would know the suspension of his power, he is not able to doe that which he most desires, he is
bounded and limitted; he longs for it, and he must desire it. First, Here is the great earnest desire of Satan to assault by temptation, and to bring us to sin, Take his desire in these three things. First, See, it is the very bent and incli∣nation of his nature to do mischief, his desire is not for desire to do good for him∣self, but onely for ill to us, he longs not for his own salvation, but for our perdi∣tion; As it is naturall for Lyons to be cruell, and for Serpents to be venemous; so it is the nature of Satan to do mis∣chief, malice seeks not its own good; but to do others hurt; you may know Satan by his ymps, & the old one by his whelps, saith Solomon, a wicked man desires to o mischief, it is death to Satan not to do urt. Secondly, See his desire further, in that o do mischief in his dayly malicious ac∣usations, it is that term of infamy that e Scripture puts on him; he is the Ac∣user of the brethren, that accuseth before God day night, the great Informer against e Church. There is no sin passeth by
us, but he scores it up; did not I see this, and this hath not such a Saint committed such a sin? He is the great Doeg of the Church, as David curseth Doeg for his in∣formation, and it is Austins observation and direction for us on those Psalms, when we sing those Psalms where David curseth Doeg & those that accused him to Saul; we should turn from the little Do∣egs of the world, to the great Doeg of the Church, Satan that accuseth them day and night, and thirsts after their destruction, and weaves cunning accusations against the Church of God. Thirdly, This great desire of our ill ap∣pears by the earnest importunity, he useth to God himself that we may be given over to him. He prayes not for his own pardon but for damnation, he prayes not tha himself, may go to Heaven, but that we may go to Hell; he makes no prayer to God, but against the Church no petition but to ill. See how ready he was to seduce Ahab, here am I, he proffers his service he desires imployment to work mischief how submissively he desires that he ma winnow Peter, how he sollicites Chri
that he would not cast him out, but that he would suffer him still to torment the bodies of Gods people. It is strange, he is a proud spirit, and pride disdains to stoup, but his malice over-rules his pride, and he falls on his knees, and soli∣cites, and begs, and importunes God that he may have so much leave as to do mis∣chief. Then as you see the bent of his will, so in the second place, if he desires it, here is a second thing observable, the suspen∣sion of his power, he is restrained and chained up, he hath a clog upon him, a limitation, to fall a begging, he is fain to desire it, without leave he can do no∣thing. First, He hath an Originall prohibiti∣on, he is cast out of all power and autho∣rity, he is the basest of all Gods creatures, he hath no power over the meanest, he can do nothing to Job but by permission. But you will say Job was an holy man; He could do nothing to Ahab but by Gods allowance, nay he had not power over the Swine without he begg Christs leave. Its Tertullians Meditation, he can∣not
not hurt a hair of our heads (saith he) nay even the very hairs and bristles of the Swine, he hath not power over them, he must beg leave of God to enter into the heard of Swine, his restraint is such. Secondly, If ever God allow him, in all his permissions God manageth them with his wise dispensation, he cannot do what he would, but what God gives him leave, God alwayes carries a power over him, he holds the end of the chaine in his hand. In the tryall of Job he could do nothing while he had leave given him, God slips one linke of the chaine, he lets him trye what he would do, he doth that to the utmost & then he stops; God gives him a∣nother linke of the chaine, but there he stops. It is that, that gives us great secu∣rity, he carries him in such a sort as that he can take him off, he limits him, and sets him bounds of moderation, he hath great strength of malice, great desire, great cunning but his power is limitted, he walks as a Thief with his keeper, he is a dangerous Thief, but the keeper walks with him, and he hath shackells on his heels. This is the second thing.
I come to the last, the mischief intend∣ed to Winnow you as wheat, Now this acti∣on of Winnowing it is an ordinary fami∣liar action conceivable by any, and this represents unto us the nature of Satans temptation, and that in these three re∣spects. First, Winnowing or fifting it is no acti∣on of strength, of force and violence, but of skill and cunning and dexterity. He that comes to purge corn by Winnowing, he pours not all out, he useth no violent action on it, but by slight of hand as it were a cunning dexterity and art that he hath, he useth this action that we call Winnowing so all the temptations of Sa∣tan they are actions of cunning not of power, he may perswade and seduce us by the dexterity of his skill by inveigling us by temptations, but he cannot force and compell us saith Austin he hath a great deal of power, and strength and cunning, he may circumvent us but he cannot powerfully overthrow us. It is not in the power of Satan to force the will of any to yield to his temptations. It is repre∣sented in the first temptation, he assumed
the body of the Serpent a subtile crea∣ture, not of a Lyon; a creature of force he cannot break in upon us by force, he cannot open the door and come in upon thee, if thou open not thy own heart. It is onely God that hath power immedi∣ately, to enter into the soul, he onely that hath omnipotency, can frame and work and bend the will according to his plea∣sure; Satan can follicite and tempt us, and perswade us, he cannot overpower us, he can onely over-reach us, he cannot ra∣vish thy soul, he may inveigle it. If thou resist and beat him back; The will of any man is impregnable to Satan, it is onely in the power of God to work on the soul; it is onely an art or slight that Satan hath, he is an intreater, and seducer, not an over∣thrower, That is the first, it is a meer trick of exterity and skill. Secondly, Winnowing it is not one mo∣tion or action and there is an end, it is not presently done, but oft and oft, it is a frequent action an agitation rather, He that comes to Winnow corn he useth not one motion and then ceaseth, but he re∣peates and renews it, he exerciseth the
same action again and again; So it is with Satans temptations, it is not one sugge∣stion, that he is content with, and if you deny that he is gone, yet he knocks at the door again, he is importunate, he will take no denyal, but sollicites and renews his onsets and compasseth us about afresh: it is his continuall course as Paul saith, it is the buffeting of Satan, Satans buffets are blows and blows; a second and a third blow over and over. This is the course of Satan, he will not be beaten once and then leave, but he will come the second and the third time, and he then leaves but for a season, & after renews all his forces. First, We know his malice is infinite and restles, he can never give over doing hurt. Secondly, Satan knows not what tem∣ptation will prosper and succeed; he knows not truely and infallibly the ground of our hearts, when one tempta∣tion therefore failes, he will trye another, and another. He goes to Job and tryes him in his goods, it may be those will vex him, and then in his children, it may be a tender father may be overcome, but
Job overcame him, then he tryes him with a shrewd wife, and then with un∣faithfull friends, he knows not the dispo∣sition of the heart. And then he knows that we are not al∣way in a temper, sometime we are more watchfull, sometime more drowsie, there∣fore he sets upon us at all seasons. Lastly he knows that importunity will weary and tyre a man; that those that will not yeild out of love, will out of vexation give an answer to be quit, Thus Satan he makes his Winnowing a frequent act. Thirdly, Winnowing is an action of great stirring & motion, a combustion and beating together, there is a great stirring and beating together in temptation: Satan brings no temptation that falls upon the soul of a Christian like this, to be under the buffetings and winnowings and assaults of Satan. It puts the whole of a Christi∣an mans heart to it, it makes him weary, I go mourning all the day long saith David; It makes the Saints of God dejected in spirit, weary in soul, that Satan will never let them rest, but sets on them with con∣tinuall
buffetings, fightings without, and fears within; temptations on all sides, It makes them loath themselves that Satan should see so much evill in them, as to think to draw them to such sins by such tempations. As Gregory mourned when he was advanced to the Papacy saith he, Lord I see that the world sees some ill in mee, I am not Crucified to the world as I should. As a chast spirit is grieved that the Devill should think him such a one as would yield to the temptation of uncleannes, It makes them mourn, there is no bitternesse to this, to be under the tem∣ptation of Satan, to be alway in the sive and in the fanne, alway to have the flayle, and to be buffeted with tempta∣tions. Fourthly, Winnowing it is an action, that discernes and tryes, a man sees a heape of Corn lye on the floore, but he knows not which is good, and which is light Corne; so promiscuously when we live all at ease and peace, and settle on our dreggs, we know not who are sound Christians, but come to the winde and to the fanne, come to the tryall and
see what temptations will do, you shall see which is weighty and full corn then; and which is chaff and dust and light corn, so temptations shews a man to himself, it makes known who are probata, and who are not, who are reprobate corn and dust & chaff in the Church, & who are good grain and weighty Corn; saith Jerom a man is to be thought to be such a one as he approves himself to be in the Whirlwind of temp∣tation. Canst thou indure afflictions and not murmure? canst thou grapple with Satan, and his temptations, and not yeild? O saith James, we account them blessed that undergoe temptations. It will shew thee to thy selfe, it will make thee know whether thou be an empty husky Christi∣an, or whether there be good corn in thee; It is a matter of tryall. Last of all this winnowing is a purging action, it is vexatious, but it is alwayes profitable, it purgeth out some corrupti∣on, wheresoever there is winnowing. In∣deed Satan intends all for destruction but the live is Gods, though Satan use it, and the Church of God is alway the bet∣ter and the purer the more it is purged
from all drosse, by these temptations. What doth Satan get by all the tempta∣tions and afflictions? by all the stirs that he raiseth in the Church of God? He purg∣eth the Church, he cleanseth it, he makes it pure, he purgeth the dross from it. The Corn before it is winnowed it is bigger, it is more in bulke, but after it is winnowed it is purer in substance. The Oare before it is cast into the fyning Pot it is a bigger masse, but after it is purer in mettall, so the Church of God in all these tryalls of false doctrines and inno∣vations what ever comes to try the Church, there is falling away, and men are gone, to faction and carryed away to sedition and fractions; but all our com∣fort is, it is but the light dust and chaffe that is blowne away with the wind, the good Corn remaines. In all Satans get∣ing, all his gain is nothing but a heape of chaffe, not one true Christian at the heart is drawn away, as it is Amos, 9. Not one graine of corne shall fall to the earth, all that Satan gains by all the troubles in the Christian world, by all his false doctrines who are they? They are set down in the
Revelations, they are such as there names are not written in the book of life. As it was in the war between the Israelites & the Midianites, all the Midianites were slain, and not one of the Israelites perish∣ed, so in all the temptations and assaults that the Church suffers, not one Saint pe∣risheth, not one graine of Corne mis∣carryes, the gaine that Satan hath, is the light Chaffe, all that fall away by these seductions are but the loose haires that fall off from the head of the Church in that sicknesse. Thus you see the third thing; the mischeife intended, it is the winnowing. So much for this time. FINIS.
LUKE 11.13. If ye then, being evil; know how to give good gifts unto your Children; how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? IF we cast back our eyes to to the former Verses, we shall find in the Context a Gracious Encouragement of Christ to his Disciples, and in them to the whole Church, to quicken them to the exercise of Prayer, for the unfolding their wants to the throne of Grace. Were we well acquainted with the nature of this duty of Invocation; or, did we consider the ne∣cessity of this duty; it's the Lock and Key of Heaven, it opens the Store-house of the Mercies of God; it's the Bucket that draws up the Water of Salvation. Or,
Secondly, Did we consider the Dig∣nity it puts upon us, it sets us in a degree into the presence of God, gives access to his presence; it maintains continual inter∣course between Heaven and us. Or, Thirdly, Did we consider the Com∣forts that arise from it; it mitigates Sor∣row, composeth Distractions, it com∣forts in Distresses; and what not? Were these things well considered, a man would think we should have little reason to en∣force this Duty. On the contrary, in the Neglect of this; Did we consider the alienation of our Souls from God. Or, Secondly, our own guiltiness, that makes us shie to come into his presence; the dul∣ness of our hearts to any spiritual service, and with what weariness we serve the Lord. Or, Thirdly, that we think well of our own Infidelity, which makes us conceive there is no profit in our prayers; that makes us say in our hearts, all our prayers vanish in the air. These things well considered, Encou∣ragement is necessary.
In the second Verse he first prescribes a form of Prayer, frames our supplications for us: We know not how to pray as we ought. He himself draws our petitions. Did a King draw a Petition to be put up to himself, it would be a hopeful signe of a Grant. He teacheth not onely what to pray, but he prescribes a manner how to pray, so to offer up out Suits that they may be successful. If we fail in the manner, we may return empty, it will not be ac∣ceptable; they must be fervent, constant, and confident, and so our Saviour teach∣eth. It's a great Encouragement, that he invites, perswades, exhorts to abound in prayer. Be of good comfort; he calls us, perswades us to come. S. Austin saith, Dost thou think that he will deny thee that calls thee? Nay, he sues to thee to come: And then, the main En∣couragement of all, is the gracious assu∣rance he gives to us; Thy prayers (saith he) shall be accepted, granted and rewar∣ded. God takes it in good part, he de∣spiseth not the prayer of the poor, but gra∣ciously accepts of it: And,
Secondly, hee yeelds, grants, and subscribes to our petitions, answers all our desires; he puts us not off with a bare acceptance, but fulfils and grants. Thirdly, he not onely accepts, fulfils, and grants, but rewards and gives all that we ask; nay, he gives more than we ask, because we are subject to ask amiss; he doth not only regard us, but relieves us and rewards us. So the words, they are a gracions assu∣rance that Christ gives to the Church, that they should not only be heard, but speed in all their prayers: and not by way of hopeful insinuation: a bare insinuation, as that in Zephaniah Chap. 2. v. 3. Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the Earth, which have wrought his Judgement, &c. It may be ye shall be hid in the deep of the Lords Anger. Or like that insinuation of the Prophet Joel. Who knowes if God will be merciful unto us. — No 'tis more, 'tis not onely a bare promise that we shall be ac∣cepted, but an assurance that our pray∣ers shall be granted; and Faith, when it meets with a promise, it works wonders: Yet there is more, our Saviour assures it,
and proves it by force of Arguments and Demonstrations, he contends and dis∣putes with our infidelity. St. Austin saith, Lord, I am assured of it, because thou sayest it: But how much more when Christ proves it by argumen s; Speak but the word Lord, and Faith will rest upon it; but when arguments and reasons are ad∣ded, what Faith can denye? Christ ar∣gues, proves, and confirms it to us. Oh happy men that we are! that for the esta∣blishment and confirmation of our Faith, Christ will argue, dispute, and strive with our Infidelity; and what wretches are we if we do not yield. See how his arguments are framed, by way of a double similitude. First, from the similitude of a friend, there's hope. Which of you having a friend, &c. v. 5. Kind importunity admits no denyal. I have made you my friends, saith Christ to his Disciples. This is a strong argument, and yet a doubting Faith ob∣jects, that friendship may be broke, love may grow cold; I, but Christ argues from the similitude of a Father, friends may prove unkind, yet a Father will not grow unnatural to his Childe. God is our Fa∣ther:
O the bowells of a loving Father, that's far beyond the bosome of a friend! What can Infidelity object against this? Observe in this discourse three particulars. First, the proof of the Argument, set down in the similitude; If ye then being e∣vill, know how to give good gifts unto your Children. Secondly, the Conclusion, drawn from the Argument; Shall give the holy Spirit to them that ask him. Thirdly, the Illation or strength of the Argument, how much more shall your &c. So there are three things to be con∣sidered. First, the proposition of the Similitude. Secondly, the Conclusion. Thirdly, the proportion, how it holds, how much more. Let's come to the Similitude it self, and consider, first the matter of it, secondly the use that Christ makes of this Simili∣tude. The Similitude it self lies upon these words: Ye that are evill men know how to give good gifts unto your Children. Here are three truths supposed by our Saviour.
First, Ye, all the sort of you, this is your state and condition, Ye are evill and sinful. The second is this, Ye that are evill, have some principals of good in you, some truths remain in you; you know how to doe some things right and good. Thirdly, you that are evill and sinfull have this principle preserv'd in you, you know how to give good gifts to your Chil∣dren, how to love and seek the welfare and good of your Children. First, you that are evill and sinfull. This Tincture of evill, Christ objects against them. It points not at the most godless profanest sinners, sinners of the first mag∣nitude; as murthering Cain, traitorous Ju∣das, wicked Absolom; we yield these to be wicked men, and yet this title reacheth to them also, they are not free from this imputation. But further, the men that Christ speaks too here, they are his own Disciples, such as put themselves under his Doctrine and Discipline; nay more, they were men regenerate, such as might call God Father, as St. Austin saith, such as God accounts and ownes to be his owne Children, and they owne him their Father;
nay more, men that had made a great pro∣gress in Religion, men given to Devotion and Prayer; Lord teach us how to pray. Notwithstanding their dignity of Apostle∣ship, the priviledge of their Son-ship, their piety and devotion, Christ tells them they are evill and sinfull; this should put all, even the very best, to blush, and cry out with the Leper in the Law, I am unclean, I am unclean. We are all unclean, it should make us take up John's confession, If we say that we have no sin, there is no truth in us; this is not only a strain of humility, but a true confession of verity, we are all sinners. But, how far may these men be said to be evill men and sinners? First, it was not by their natural estate and condition, that they were evil, as the Manichees unfold this Text; for God made all good, and very good, we came unspotted out of his hands; also, Origi∣nal sin was much abated in them, and new principles of grace infused, so they could not be said to be wicked men; he accepts his for Saints, and they are washed, and cleansed in his sight; then, how far may the Saints of God be said to be evil men?
First, the best and holiest men may be said to be evil, and wicked; as in the very best of men are the reliques of much foul Corruption, which makes them evil and sinful: Original sin, though per∣fectly pardoned, yet imperfectly purged; purg'd from the death of sin, but not from the disease; the best of us all have the swadling Clouts of our first Con∣ception, in which we were wrapt; the defilements of original sin, stick close by Adam's fall: We were not cast onely into a puddle of mire, but upon a heap of stones, having so bruised us, that this is subject to the very best of us to be styl'd evil and sin∣ful. Secondly, the best of Gods Saints, are lyable to this imputation of evil, and sinfull; the good that's wrought in us, by regeneration, is so weak and feeble, by our Corruption; the Conflicts that the grace of God finds in us, makes all the graces of God imperfect, as St. Austin saith of Civil war. There are those con∣trary principles in us, that the best of us are liable to this imputation, as Daid saith, O Lord thine eyes, see thee feeble im∣perfections
of grace, thy eyes behold the weak beginnings of grace, thy eye-lids try the Children of men: not when he looks with the eye of Justice, but with the eye∣lids of his Mercy; whereby he connives and winks at us, that he may find us un∣blameable; the best of all Gods Saints have those imperfections, that makes them cry out, We are evil and sinful. Thirdly, they are evil and sinful; our Saviour puts them in Compare with God; the very best of Gods Saints are nothing but Corruption; if we have sanctification, it is by participation from him; the stars with-draw their light, when his glo∣ry appears, the view of which, made the Saints of God to tremble. Woe unto me (saith the Prophet Isaiah) I am undone. And, Job saith, I have seen the Lord. Thus you have the first truth verified. —Ye are evil and sinful. I come now to the second; though by nature ye are sin∣ful, and evil, and tainted with Corruption, yet there are some impressions of equity, some principles of common honesty still preserved; not onely those that are com∣paratively,
but those that are totally evil; those that are unsanctified, have some rules of honesty engraven upon them, some impressions of the image of God, that image not wholly defaced, concer∣ning truths and rules of morality, which nature hath still preserved. Nature it self starts back at some abominations in an un∣regenerate man, the Conscience of an unregenerate man, checks it self at some horrible impiety. In a spiritual sense, all moral vertues are but vices; as St. Jerom saith, all sacred truths are not to be known, but by revelation, natural en∣dowments are beneficial, as one benefit of the remainder of nature is, that they which cross not the rules of morality live more innocent; For, were it not that those principles bare sway in most mens lives, common honesty and justice could not be maintained. Secondly, by nature we can never at∣tain to grace, and so by those vertues we cannot prevail with God for Salvation; Yet they may for a temporal reward, as in the Romans, God rewarded moral ver∣tue with victory and prosperity.
The third benefit it gets, they that ob∣serve the rules of nature, their accompt at the last day shall be far more easie; in∣deed, the Heathen shall be all turned into Hell, but the Damnation shall be more easie; Socrates lesse punish'd than Cato. Lastly, a man that lives according to the rules of nature, keeps within the compass of these principles; though not able to reach at Salvation, yet their Con∣version is more easie; it's more possible to gain him to grace, this stock of nature is fit to graff grace and religion on more kindly; yet at the best it cannot fructifie, and bring forth fruit to eternal life, but grace being graffed, it will fructifie to Salvation. A man within the sphere of morality, that lives peaceable, sober, just, and of an humble mind; there is more hope of salvation in that man, he is not so far from the Kingdom of God, as those that sin against nature; evil and wicked men have some principles of knowledge; ye are evil, and yet ye know some good things. The third truth is, Ye that are evil, among the decayes, ruines, and rubbish
of nature, yet this truth is preserved, ye are tender affected Parents, and seek the good of your Children; God hath placed this forcible instinct, as the bowels of most unnatural men is natural love to their Children. In the first original, God did create us all one flesh, and one blood; men were not created apart, as Angels, one independant from another, but all one blood, one root, and the sap of all this is natural affection; it's this that glues and holds all the world together, it keeps the world in being, without which all would fall asunder; this tender and kindly affection of parents to Children, it's the Conveyance of all nurture: Thus Wisdom in the Proverbs, takes upon it the place of a Father, O my son keep the instructions of thy father, and what my son, &c. How forcible are these perswasions to piety and vertue! Thirdly, this is a spur to labour and industry; what's that that keeps the world in action, not all for the belly, but keep something for the Babes; it's that that quickens industry, this is the plummet that turns the great Wheel of all the
world, that makes perpetual motion of labour, to leave something behind for Children. Fourthly, the sweetness, as that it takes off the harshness of all the toyl and care incident to parents, the care in bring∣ing forth, the care in bringing up; they account it no labour, or a labour much sweetned by this tender affection. St. Austin saith, that the labour of loving and tender parents to their Children, is either no labour, or sweet labour. Lastly, this tender affection, is a pro∣vocation to piety. Salvin urgeth it, Dost thou love thy Children? be religious and pious; those that are pious claim a bles∣sing to their Children, and the want of this affection is a sign of a reprobate mind: Want of this natural affection, Rom. 1. also Tim. 2. you may see what it is, if na∣tural affection be wanting, it signifies some great mischief. And so much for the first. Now I come to the second, and that's the use and improvement that Christ makes of it, he cloaths himself with this affection, this similitude of a loving Fa∣ther
to Children; he useth this lan∣guage, of love to us, conveyes these thoughts in the sweetest expressions, that we may feel the sweetness of the love of God in the sweetest expressions. Take it in three manifestations. First, as to himself, the most careful resemblance, compares himself to a watch∣man; he that watcheth over Israel, neither sleepeth nor slumbereth: Wouldest thou con∣ceive his Care to feed and provide for thee? he compares himself to a Sheep∣herd that feeds his Sheep: Wouldest thou conceive his Tenderness? he presents himself as a Hen that gathers her chickens under her wings, Mat. 23. And as a Hen bears up her wings, &c. Deut. 32. or as the Eagle. St. Bernard saith, all of these are sweet resemblances of his tender Care. Secondly, as he takes to himself the sweetest resemblances, so the most lo∣ving relations, a friend is a sweet relation, a brother a sweet relation; Abraham be∣lieved, and he was accounted a friend of God; a father is a tender relation, I will be thy Father; a husband is a sweet relation,
I have married thee to my self: And because all these relations fall short, he joyns all together, he that doth the will of my Fa∣ther, is my Father, my Mother, my Brother, &c. and in the Canticles, Open unto me, my love, my dove, my undefiled. Thirdly, he cloaths himself with the tender affection of love, as in St. John; Pity, that is a tender and melting af∣fection, the Lord is exceeding pitiful, as in S. James; he hath a fellow-feeling of our sorrows, as in the Prophet Esay, he assumes, that he is void of passion; nay, he hath bowels of Compassion, there's the rowling and turning, and yearning of his bowels. So we have seen the first main particular of the text, Ye that are evil and sinfull. I come now to the second, the Con∣clusion drawn from this Argument; Your heavenly father knows how to give the holy spirit to them that ask him: Fathers upon earth provide gifts and portions for their Children, but here's the gift of the holy spirit. Here are three particulars Consi∣derable: First, the Donor, your heavenly Father.
Secondly, the gift, the holy Spirit. Thirdly, the qualification of those that receive it, they must ask. First, your heavenly father he is the Donor, look upon it as a hint of incou∣ragement, heavenly father; here's but three words in all. First, a father, it's a word of much kindness and affection, it argues his for∣wardness and propensity to help us. Secondly, heavenly father, it argues his allsufficiency, God father of heaven, Lord of heaven and earth, he's abun∣dantly able to supply our necessity. Thirdly, your heavenly father, its a word of ingagement; Ye may believe your father; this word gives us our right and portion, that in humble confidence, we may lay Claim to his goodness: here's alinck of love, father, heavenly father, your heavenly father; these three put to∣gether prevents three doubts that faith may object when a Christian is to pray. First, the doubt of the poor Leper, Matt. 8. Lord if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. O never question his willing∣ness, for he is a father, and what will not
a loving father do for his Child. The second doubt that faith may ob∣ject, is the doubt of the poor man for his son; Lord if thou canst, &c. He needs not question his power, he is a heavenly father, he hath al-sufficiency. The third doubt is that in Mark 4. Lord, dost thou not care if we perish? &c. never question that, for he is your hea∣venly father, this it is that makes up a full comfort; without these, infidelity would be ready to cast off all hope, and give over all prayer to God, as thinking God will neither do good nor can; or else objects there's no ingagement: Put these three together, he's a father, and is wil∣ling; a heavenly father, and is able; our heavenly father; and therefore ingaged by these three, a Child of God hath assu∣rance of hope and strong Consolation. Now the gift intended here, is the holy Spirit, Matth. 7. it's said, Your heavenly Father gives every good thing; I, but most sweetly are our prayers Confin'd here to the begging of Gods Spirit; whatso∣ever a Child of God asks, it should be things of necessity; superfluity that's not
for Children to ask, nor a wise father will give it; the Spirit of God is necessa∣ry, bread is not so necessary for life, as grace for salvation; all necessaries for life, and all superfluities are not so much, as this absolute necessity of having the Spi∣rit; it's not necessary I should live, but it's necessary I should be sanctified and saved. Secondly, a Child should ask that which is useful and profitable, and of all other gifts, the gift of the holy Ghost is most useful, it is a gift of the highest nature. First, it's the richest that God can be∣stow; one dram of grace, one blessed suggestion from the Spirit of truth, one blessed motion darted into the heart by the holy Ghost, is more worth than all the world: All things in this world may be called good, but makes them not good that have them; St. Austin saith, Riches are good, if a man have grace to use them, so he may do good with them, but grace makes good; there's no man can put vir∣tue to an evil imployment, grace is al∣wayes the ountain of good; it's the foun∣dation,
the pledge, the assurance, it gives all other blessings; Solomon when he ask'd the spirit of wisdom, God could not de∣ny him any thing, riches, honours, e∣very thing. Thirdly, if a Child should ask of a father, a sign of his love, the greatest manifestation of a fathers love; the surest sign, and richest evidence of Gods love, is the gift of the spirit, the love of God when it is shed abroad in the heart by the holy Ghost; we feel the taste of it, rejoyce in the comfort of it, it's a seal of Gods love, as St. Bernard saith, a dram of Gods grace is a certain token of a determined Election of the assurance of glorification; he that asks Gods Spirit loves God, and God love him; such prayers as these al∣wayes prevail; forgive us our sins, encrease our repentance, sanctifie our souls, purge our consciences, subdue our corruptions, over∣come our temptations: Lord, what prayers should prevail with thee, if such prayers as these prevail not; other prayers may hit or miss, but prayers for Gods Spirit never returns empty. Now for the third, the parties, those
that ask, how can we pray for the spirit, without the spirit, none can say Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost? it was the the Pelagian errour to say, that our prayers must prevent Gods grace; the Spirit of God is not the fruit of our prayers, but our prayers the fruit of Gods Spirit; our desires are wrought by Gods Spirit, an∣swers our desires; in this case, how sweet∣ly St. Austin saith, indeed his first grace, his preventing grace fore-runs all our prayers; I am found of them that sought me not: but his Concomitant grace, that may be the fruit of our prayers, yet all supplies of grace are of Gods Spirit; St. Bernard saith, it's the surest sign of grace, if we desire grace; prayer it's the breath∣ing of Gods Spirit, and there must first be a drawing in of Gods grace, before there can be ascending out: Matth. 44. there the grace of Gods Spirit; the King∣dom of heaven is compared to a treasure found in the field not look'd for, there's preventing grace, the touch of the spirit that works upon the heart in the first pre∣vention, vers. 45. The Kingdom of hea∣ven is likened unto a Merchant, that sought
pearls, and found them; here's first the grace of prevention, a treasure found in a field, not thought on, as St. Austin saith, faith is given, first, as the prime grace, then the prayer of faith, that is the breath; it's prayer that obtaines sup∣plies of grace, the matter of our prayer must be for the supplies of grace, prayer encreaseth new supplies. Secondly, prayer may obtain the sea∣ling up of our adoption, the kiss of peace and love, that seals up assurance of par∣don for sins. Thirdly, besides the first stock of grace, look for assisting grace; we can not make good use of grace, without the help of grace. Fourthly, prayer will obtain the spirit of strength and fortitude, to encounter a∣gainst temptation; ask thy father this, and he will grant it. Lastly, prayer obtains the spirit of perseverance, without the which all holy motions and inspirations are like a wind, that passeth away, and cometh not again. Now I come to the Illation drawn from the argument, how much more; 'tis a pro∣portion
with advantage; indeed it had been well, if the Argument had gon, and the Conclusion drawn with some abate∣ment, one spark of mercy to so unwor∣thy Children; the place of a servant, nay, the bread of a servant, had been too good for so unworthy Children. Secondly, if the argument had held but so much, as in Psal. 100. Like as a father pitieth his own children; or like pity, the Lord teacheth to those that fear him, David takes comfort in this, but this Scripture offers more grace, how much more? why here's full measure, shaken, pressed down, it runs over. The third expression in this proportion is; if earthly Parents have such provident Care for their Childrens welfare, how much more in God, though earthly pa∣rents be never so wise and provident for their Children, yet they may be mista∣ken, or wish things unfit, and to the hurt of their Children, as old Isaac was mista∣ken in his blessing, the mother of Zebedees Children asked she knew not what, but the all-wise God hears all our desires, and orders all things graciously for our welfare.
Secondly, Ye men that boast of your power, if ye are parents, and have any portion to bestow upon your Children, how much more God your heavenly fa∣ther; all that earthly fathers enjoy is but borrowed, the oyl in the Cruze may fail, the oyl in the barrell may be spent, all ye have is but borrowed, &c. Thirdly, if ye that are parents have tenderness of affection towards your Chil∣dren, how much more your heavenly father? God is full of bounty and mercy, ye are evil and evil natured, God gives liberally and upbraids not, to compare with him the goodness of men, is not so much as one dust of sand, to the glory of the whole earth, like a spark to the whole element of fire. Parents, what do they give to their Children, trifles; God gives the best things, his Spirit, his own flesh. God fils the world with his goodness. Fourthly, men are but Stepfathers of the flesh in respect of God, he's father both of soul and body; Ezek. 23. he chargeth, &c. wordly fathers, thou hast taken, &c. God is our being, and the
preserver of our being. Abraham knows us not, Jacob hath forgotten us: And Christ said, Call no man father upon earth, as to compare with God. Lastly, as the nearest father, so the dearest affection; the affection of the father or mother are cold and dead, in re∣gard of the ardent affection of God towards us; Parents they first beget Children, and then love them: God loves first, and then begets us to himself; a flowing of nature is parents love, but an eternal love is Gods love; we had a being in him, be∣fore we had any in our selves, he that planteth the ear, shall not be hear? and he that planteth the tenderness of Parents to Children, shall not he have Compassion? nay, how full must he needs be of Com∣passion? To shut up all the height and improve∣ment of affection in God, must require reciprocation on our parts; and it's set on a three fold proportion. First, if ye that are Children cast care upon your Parents, Be not careful what ye eat, or drink, or what ye put on, for your heavenly Father careth for you.
The proportion of obedience is the second; If reverence be due to the Pa∣rents of the flesh, how much more to the parents of the spirit? how much more re∣verence and obedience to your heavenly Father? The third is the proportion of love; If ye give love to earthly fathers, how much more to your heavenly Father? So you see the sum of the Text is; Ye that are evil, can give good gifts to your Children; how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? FINIS.
LEst Obliquie or Malice should as∣sperse the Candor and Integrity of these four Sermons, I was desired by the Seller of them, to read and censure them. Having seriously perused them, I find the true Pourtraicture of the late deceas'd (yet never to be forgotten) most reverend Bishop Brownrigge. My censure can extend no farther than the Printers Errors; The principal one whereof I find to be in the first Sermon, in the first pages being a transposition of the Title: Where∣fore, in stead of, Is the Safety of a Nation True Repentance, read True Repentance is the Safety of a Nation. In short, let me advise your charitable minds not to studie how to carp at literal faults, but study the mat∣ter, and you will soon be a sharer with me in the pleasure and profit of reading them. This I thought fit to write, as to antidote it against the tongues of malici∣ious and envious persons. R. H. M. A.
