B86 E1001_3 99860055 168724
A New MAP OF ENGLAND. OR, Forty six QUÆRIES. By I. B. Contra publicos bostes, & majestatis reos omnis homo miles est, sayes Tertullian. Jus & aequitas vincula civitatum. Cic. LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLIX.
I. WHether when any sober person prayed for the late Junto, it was not upon the same reason as the old Woman of Sracuse prayed for the long life of the Tyrant Dionysius, lest the Devil should come next. II. Whether Aristotle spake right, Arist. pol. lib. 5. cap. 10. that all Tyrants have been first Generals and Captains for the People, under pre∣tense of vindicating, or defending their Liberties. III. Whether that was not the chiefest reason that the Rump had to keep the Generalship in their own hands. IV. Whether they are not justly retaliated to be so often stript of their usurped Authority, since they as often sub∣verted the Government, under pretense of the liberty of the people, and the Chimera of the (Good old Cause) that they might invade that liberty themselves. V. Whether if the Army should purge the Rump of all the ill humours, they would not reduce it to a Nonentity, or at least to make good the words of the Prophet Elishah. VI. Whether the Junto were not mistaken in their Plot to impoverish the people by Taxes, Excise, Decimations, &c. (that they might want power if they had a will to shake off their Ægyptian Bondage) since they payed part of those Levies to the noble Army, who thereby had power as well
as honesty to discharge from the great trouble of getting Estates. VII. Whether the Army hath not dealt very hard with them to turn them to Grass in so unseasonable a time. VIII. Whether Nebuchadnezar's Judgment that hath befalne our Hogen-Mogen State were not for the same sins, if not greater. IX. Whether Dr. Holmes ought not to be punished by the Marshal-law, for wresting and torturing the Scripture to prove the Junto to be a lawful Government; And that it was their Providence, and not the Valour of the Army van∣quished those that so valiantly ran away at Chester. X. Whether Dr. Holmes married the Parliament (as he called it) and the Army by the Common-Prayer, since it is so soon become uneffectual. XI. Whether they be divorsed a mensa & thoro, or, a vin∣culo matrimonii. XII. Whether it be not most advantageous that they be di∣vorced a vinculo matrimonii causa frigiditatis (their Cha∣rity being grown so cold) least they come once more to u∣surp by the Title of Dower; since all their other Titles will not hold water. XIII. Whether the Army ought not for the good of the Pub∣lick to abate the place called the House of Commons, lest those running Foxes steal once more into their Den. XIV. Whether those Members do intend to rise at the second Resurrection, having risen twice already. XV. Whether the poor Cavaliers may not justly call that House a Den of Thieves.
XVI. Whether the Presbyterians might not to call the Speakers Chair the Stool of repentance. XVII. Whether Mr. H. M. ought not to have the preheminence to name it the Bawdy-house (being generally in fashion a∣mong the best Saints.) XVIII. Whether Sir H. V. ought to be countenanced to call it the House of prayer (but rather the Preaching house.) XIX. Whether the Army are not bound to sell the Members of the Rump at the cheaper rate then in Fifty three, lest they can find no other Customer beside the Devil. XX. Whether it will not be convenient to except M. S. from Sale, and to give him liberty to set up Shop, having no o∣ther Imployment now, to sell the rest of his fellow Mem∣bers. XXI. Whether it be not fit for his better encouragement to prohibit any other beside himself to utter any of them. XXII. Whether such a Grant be a Monopoly. XXIII. Whether it be not Darcy and Allens Case in point, the Members of the Junto being as much the bane of a Com∣mon-wealth, the Nurserie of Rogues, and the destruction of great Estates, as the making and uttering of Cards can possibly be. XXIV. Whether the Judges of the Common-law will be compe∣tent Judges of the Cause, since M. S. babled so much against the Law which he did not understand. XXV. Whether M. S. ought not to be Indicted of wilful Mur∣ther,
upon the Statute of Stabbing, being credibly repor∣ted that he killed Mr. Attorney Prideaux with his sharp words and threats of refunding. XXVI. Whether those Sycophants that fauned so much on the Infant Common-wealth (be not filii terrae) since the Army will not own them, nor give them leave once more to turn their thread-bare Coats. XXVII. Whether the Cavaliers, or M. Jo. Canne be now under the greater Curse. XXVIII. Whether the Saints in Southwark did not perform their promise in their Addresses to the Parliament, That they would live and die with them, when a thousand of them so valiantly appeared in Arms, and dispersed themselves at the sight of 20 Redcoats. XXIX. Whether when they sayd, That they would live and die with the Junto, that they did intend to live and die like them, viz. Knaves, Hypocrites and Rebels; since they con∣strue Scripture alwaies figuratively to serve their owne turns. XXX. Whether we may not justly cry out with the Roman Host when Narcissus came into the Tribunal of Plautius, Io Sa∣turnalia? since so many Servants in these daies have put on the Habits of their Masters. XXXI Whether Dr. Owen's Infant Common-wealth was not an Anabaptist, since he nor Mr. Harrington could give it a Name. XXXII. Whether Dr. Owen ought not to unswadle the Infant Common-wealth, and lick him clean, for it is feared by many wise men that it is all bes—.
XXXIII. Whether his Infant hath not crackt his crown against the Cradle, since he is become so addle headed. XXXIV. Whether it be not fit that Dr. Owen be made the Infant Common-wealths Tutor during its Minority. XXXV. Whether Mr. Harrington is studying Monarchy, or an A∣ristocracy now, since his Democratical Government took no effect. XXXVI. Whether he did not take great pains to no purpose. XXXVII. Whether the Members that so highly opposed the En∣gagement against a Monarchy, because Christ was sudden∣ly to Reign personally upon earth, did not intend one of the Members of the Army. XXXVIII. Whether Sir A. H. zeal for a Common-wealth be not quite set on fire in this great day of tryal. XXXIX. Whether he would not willingly resign his Bishoprick to be a King, notwithstanding he is a zealous Hogen Mogen man. XL. Whether Mr. Peters was not really asleep when he made his Dream, or whether it be his own or no, being it con∣tains so much truth. XLI. Whether then it ought not to be admitted for a Proverb, viz. That Knaves and mad men do speak truth as well as Children and Fools. XLII. Whether Mr. Baxter be within the equity of the second Proposal of the Army to the last Junto, for charging Sir H.V. with Jesuitism (causlesly and groundlesly) though Sir H. be no Member of the Army.
XLIII. Whether the Army would not purchase eternal honour, and the general Love of the People, If they would (now while it lies in their power) remit those Noble-men and Gentry that have offended against none besides those that were both the Armies and the Nations Scourge. XLIV. Whether those Gentlemen, and the rest of the Nation would not have omitted such a Concurrence, in defence of the Laws, Priviledges of Parliament, and liberty of the people, if the Army had kept their Authority in their own hands, and not deputed those that made a breach of all, un∣der the sacred Name of a free Parliament. XLV. Whether it be not a Duty Incumbent on each indivi∣dual Member of the Army (which they owe both to God and Man) to settle such a Government (upon the Basis of Religion and Law) that consists with the Genius of the greater and most considerable number of the people, yea, and upon such a Person in whom Right, Love of the Peo∣ple, and Law do Concenter, that we be no longer carried away like an empty Cloud, with the Whirlwind of particu∣lar mens Ambitions and Interests; more especially since a setled Religion, Law, Liberty of the People, and Priviled∣ges of Parliament wholy depended on it. XLVI. Whether if the Army seriously endeavour such a settle∣ment, they will not be more happy; more certain of their Pay, and due encouragement, and then may justly claim the Title of a GLORIOUS ARMY. FINIS.
