C1407A 45578226 172171
CATALOGUE OF THE NOBILILITY OF ENGLAND, According to their respective Precedencies, and Titles of Honour They now enjoy, the First of March, 1689. And in the First Year of Their MAJESTIES Reign. To which is added the Blazon of Their Paternal Coats of Arms respectively, and a LIST of the Present Bishops. PRince GEORGE of Denmark, Duke of Cumberland. Or,  Lions passant gardant Az. Crowned of the first, and semy of Hearts Gules. I. Great Officer, who takes Place above all Dukes not of the Royal Blood. Thomas Osburne Marquess of Carmarthen, Lord President of the Council. Dukes XIII. and Duchesses II. 1 Henry Howard Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England. Gules, a Bend between six Cross Croslets sitchy Argent, with an Augmentation on the Bend, alluding to the Arms of Scotland. 2 Charles Seymour Duke of Somerset. First an Augmentation, viz. Or, six Flowers-de-lis Azure, on a Pile Gules three Lions of England. Secondly, Gules, a pair of Wings conjoyn'd and display'd Or, (the Tips downwards.) 3 Henry Cavendish Duke of Newcastle. Sable, three Stags-heads caboshed Arg. attired Or, a Crescent for difference. 4 Barbara Villers Duchess of Cleveland. Arg. on a Cross Gules, five Escallops Or, a Crescent for difference. 5 Louisa de Querovalle Duchess of Ports∣mouth. Barry of six Argent and Azure. 6 Charles Lenos Duke of Richmond. The Royal Arms of England, Scotland and Ireland, with a Bordure componé Arg. and Gules, the Argent charged with Roses of the Second. 7 Charles Fitz-Roy Duke of Southampton. The Royal Arms of England, Scotland and Ireland, with a Baston sinister Ermin. 8 Henry Fitz-Roy Duke of Grafton. The Royal Arms of England, Scotland and Ireland, with a Baston sinister componé, Argent and Azure. 9 James Butler Duke of Ormond. Or, a Chief indented Azure. 10 Henry Somerset Duke of Beaufort. Quarterly France and England, within a Bordure com∣poné, Argent and Azure. 11 George Fitz-Roy Duke of Northumber∣land. The Royal Arms of England, Scotland and Ireland, with a Baston sinister componé Ermin and Azure. 12 Charles Beauclair Duke of S. Albans. The Royal Arms of England, Scotland and Ireland, with a Baston sinister Gules, charged with three Roses Argent. 13 James Fitz-James Duke of Berwick. The Royal Arms of England, Scotland and Ireland, with a Bordure componé Gules and Azure, the Gules charged with Lions of England, and the Azure with Flowers de-lis of france. 14 Charles Pawlet Duke of Bolton. Sable, three Swords in Pile Argent, Hilt and Pomels Or 15 Frederick Schonbergh Duke of Schonbergh. Argent, an Inescocheon Sable, over all a Carbuncle Or Marquisses III. 1 George Savile Marquiss of Hallifax. Argent, on a Bend Sable, three Owls of the First. 2 William Herbert Marquiss of Pows. Per Pale Azure and Gules, three Lions rampant Arg. 3 Thomas Osborne Marquiss of Carmarthen, Lord President of the Council. Quarterly Ermin and Azure, a Cross Or. Great Officers who take Place above all their Degree. Robert Bertie Earl of Lindsey, Lord Great Chamberlain of England. William Cavendish Earl of Devonshire, Lord Steward of the Houshold. Charles Sackvile Earl of Dorset, Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold. Earls LXX. and I. Countess. 1 Aubrey de Vere Earl of Oxford. Quarterly G. and Or, a Mullet in the first quat. Arg. 2. Charles Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury. Gules, a Lion rampant within a Bordure engrail'd Or. 3 Anthony Grey Earl of Kent. Barry of six Arg. and Az. in Chief three Torteauxes. 4 William Stanley Earl of Derby. Arg. on a Bend Az. three Bucks-heads caboshed, Or. 5 John Manners Earl of Rutland. Or two Bars Azure, on a Chief quarterly Azure and Gules; in the first two Flowers-de-lis Or, in the second a Lion passant gardant Or. 6 Theophilus Hastings Earl of Huntingdon. Argent, a Manch Sable. 7 William Russel Earl of Bedford. Argent, a Lion rampant Gules, on a Chief Sable three Escallops of the First. 8 Thomas Herbert Earl of Pembroke. Per Pale Azure and Gules three Lions rampant Argent. 9 Edward Clinton Earl of Lincoln. Argent, six Cross Croslets fitchy Sable, on a Chief Az. two Mullets Or; pierced Gules. 10 George Howard Earl of Suffolk. The same as the Duke of Norfolk with a Crescent. 11 Charles Sackvile Earl of Dorset, Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold.Quarterly Or and Gules a Bend Vaire. 12 James Cecill Earl of Salisbury. Barry of ten Argent and Azure, six Eschocheons Sable, charged with as many Lions rampant of the first, a Crescent for difference. 13 John Cecill Earl of Exeter. The same as before, omitting the difference. 14 John Egerton Earl of Bridgwater. Arg. a Lion rampant Gules between three Pheons Sable. 15 Philip Sidney Earl of Leicester. Or, a Pheon Azure. 16 George Compton Earl of Northampton. Sable a Lion passant gardant Or, between three Helmets Argent. 17 Edward Rich Earl of Warwick. Gules, a Cheveron between three Crosses botoné, Or. 18 William Cavendish Earl of Devonshire, Lord Steward of the Houshold. Sable three Stags-heads cabosh'd Argent, attir'd Or. 19 Basil Fielding Earl of Denbigh. Argent on a Fess Azure, three Lozenges Or. 20 John Digby Earl of Bristoll. Azure, a Flower-de lis Argent a Mullet for difference. 21 John Holles Earl of Clare. Ermin, two Piles in Point Sahle. 22 Pawlet St. John Earl of Bolingbroke. Argent, on a Chief Gules, two Mullets Or. 23 Charles Fane Earl of Westmerland. Azure, three Gantlets Or. 24 Charles Mountague Earl of Manchester. Argent, three Fusils in Fess Gules, with a Bordure Sable, a Crescent for difference. 25 Thomas Howard Earl of Berkshire. The same as the Earl of Suffolk. 26 John Sheffield Earl of Mulgrave. Argent, a Cheveron between three Garbs Gules. 27 Thomas Savage Earl Rivers. Argent, six Lioncels rampant Sable, three two and one. 28 Robert Bertie Earl of Lindsey, Lord Great Chamberlain of England. Arg. three Battering Rams Bar-ways Or garnish'd Az. 29 Henry Mordant Earl of Peterborough. Argent a Cheveron between three Estoils Sable. 30 Thomas Grey Earl of Stamford. Barry of six Arg. and Azure in Chief three Torteauxes, with a Label of three Points. 31 Charles Finch Earl of Winchelsea. Argent, a Cheveron between three Griphons Segreant passant Sable. 32 William Pierpont Earl of Kingston. Arg. Semie of Cinquesoils Gules, a Lion rampant Sable. 33 Charles Dormer Earl of Carnarvon. Az. ten Billets Or, on a Chief of the second a Demi-Lion issuant Sable. 34 Philip Stanhope Earl of Chesterfield. Quarterly Ermin and Gules. 35 Thomas Tufton Earl of Thanet. Sable, an Eagle display'd Ermin within a Bordure Arg. 36 William Wentworth Earl of Strafford. Sable, a Cheveron between three Leopards heads, Or. 37 Robert Spencer Earl of Sunderland. Quarterly Arg. and Gules in the second and third a Fet Or, over all a Bend Sable, charged with thee Escalops of the First. 38 Robert Leke Earl of Scarsdale. Argent, on a Saltire engrail'd Sable, 9 Annulets, Or, 39 Edward Mountague Earl of Sandwich. Arg. three Fusils in Fess Gules, within a Bordure Sable, with a Mullet for difference, 40 Henry Hyde Earl of Clarendon. Azure, a Cheveron between three Lozenges, Or. 41 Algernon Capel Earl of Essex. G.a Lion rampant between 3 Cross Croslets fitchy, Or. 42 Robert Brudenel Earl of Cardigan. Argent, a Cheveron Gules between 3 Mor ions Azure. 43 James Annesley Earl of Anglesey. Paly of six Argent and Azure, a Bend Gules. 44 John Granvile Earl of Bath. Gules, three Horsemens Rests, Or. 45 Edward Howard Earl of Carlisle. The same as the Duke of Norfolk, with a Mullet. 46 William Craven Earl of Craven. Argent, a Fess between six Cross Croslets fitchy Gules. 47 Thomas Bruce Earl of Ailesbury. Or, a Saltier and Chief Gules; on a Canton Argent a Lion rampant Azure. 48 Richard Boyle Earl of Burlington. Party per Bend Crenellé Argent and Gules. 49 Anthony Ashley Cooper Earl of Shafsbury. Argent, three Bulls passant Sable, attired Or. 50 Edward Henry Lee Earl of Lichfield. Argent, a Fess between three Crescents Sable. 51 Thomas Lennard Earl of Sussex. Or, on a Fess Gules three Flowers-de lis of the First. 52 Lewis de Duras Earl of Feversham. Gules, a Lion rampant Argent, quartering Arg. a Bend Azure, over all a Label of three Points, Or. 53 Charles Gerard Earl of Macclesfield. Argent, on a Saltier G. an Imperial Crown, Or. 54 Charles-Bodvile Roberts Earl of Radnor. Azure, three Estoils and a Chief Wavy, Or. 55 William Paston Earl of Yarmouth. Arg six Flower-de-lis Azure, and a Chief indented, Or. 56 George Berkeley Earl of Berkeley. Gules, a Cheveron between ten Crosses formé Arg. 57 Daniel Finch Earl of Nottingham. Argent, a Cheveron between three Griphons Segreant passant Sable, a Crescent for difference. 58 Laurence Hyde Earl of Rochester. Az.a Cheveron between 3 Lozenges Or, with a Crescent 59 James Bertie Earl of Abingdon. Argent, three Battering-Rams barways Or, garnished Azure with an Annulet. 60 Wriothesly Noel Earl of Gainsborough. Or, Frettie Gules, a Canton Ermin. 61 Coniers D'Arcie Earl of Holderness. Az Semie of Cross Croslets and 3 Cinquefoils Arg. 62 Other Windsor Earl Of Plimouth. Gules, a Saltier Argent, between 12 Cross Croslets Or. 63 Katherine Sidley Countess of Dorchester. Az.a Fess Wavy between three Goats heads craz'd, Arg. 64 Francis Ratcliff Earl of Derwentwater. Argent, a Bend engrailed Sable. 65 Henry Howard Earl of Stafford. The same as the Duke of Norfolk with a Crescent. 66 William Bentick Earl of Portland. Azure, a Cross Moline Argent. 67 Thomas Bellassise Earl of Falconberg. Arg.a Cheveron Gules between three Flowers-de-lis, Az. 68 Charles Mordant Earl of Monmouth. Arg.a Cheveron between 3 Estoils Sable, with a Crescent 69 Ralph Mountague Earl of Mountague. Argent, three Fusils in Fess Gules, with a Bordure Sable. 70 John Churchill Earl of Marlborow. Sable, a Lion rampant Arg. on a Canton of the last, a Cross Gules. 71 Arthur Herbert Earl of Torrington. The same as the Marquess of Powis. Viscounts IX. 1 Edward Devereux Viscount Hereford. Argent, a Fess Gules, in Chief three Torteauxes. 2 Francis Brown Viscount Mountague. Sable, three Lions passant in Bend, between two double Cotises Argent. 3 William Fiennes Viscount Say and Sele. Azure, three Lions rampant Or. 4 Francis Newport Viscount Newport. Arg.a Cheveron Gules, between 3 Leopards heads Sable. 5 Charles Towneshend Viscount Towneshend. Azure, a Cheveron Ermin, between 3 Escallops Arg. 6 Thomas Thynne Viscount Weymouth. Barry of Ten, Or and Sable. 7 Christopher Hatton Viscount Hatton. Azure, a Cheveron between three Garbs Or. 8 Henry Sidney Viscount Sidney. The same as the Earl of Leicester, with a Crescent for difference. 9 Richard Lumley Viscount Lumley. Argent, a Fess Gules between three Parrots proper, gorged with Collars of the Second. Barons LXVI. and Baronesses II. 1 George Nevill Lord Bergaveny. Gules, on a Saltire Argent, a Rose of the First. 2 James Touchet Lord Audley. Ermin, a Cheveron Gules. 3 John West Lord de la Ware. Argent, a Fess Dancetté Sable. 4 Charles Berkely Lord Berkeley of Berkeley. Gules, a Cheveron between ten Crosses formé Argent, with a Label. 5 Thomas Parker Lord Morley. Argent, a Lion passant Gules, between two Bars Sable, charged with three Besants, two and one, in Chief as many Bucks-heads caboshed of the Third. 6 Robert Shirley Lord Ferrers. Paly of six Or and Azure. a Canton Ermin. 7 Charles Mildmay Lord Fitzwalter. Argent, three Lions rampant Azure. 8 Henry Yelverton Lord Grey of Ruthin. Argent, three Lions rampant, and a Chief Gules. 9 William Stourton Lord Stourton. Sable a Bend Or, between six Fountains proper. 10 Ralph Eure Lord Eure. Quarterly Or and G. on a Bend Sable, three Escallops Argent. 11 Philip Wharton Lord Wharton. Sable, a Manch Arg. within a Bordure Or, Eight pair of Lions paws Saltier ways craz'd, Gules. 12 Tho. Willoughby L. Willoughby of Parham. Or, Frettie Azure. 13 William Paget Lord Paget. Sable, on a Cross engrailed between four Eagles dis∣play'd Argent, five Lioncels of the First. 14 Francis Howard L. Howard of Effingham. The same as the Duke of Norfolk, with a Mullet. 15 Charles North Lord North. Azure a Lion passant Or, between 3 Flowers de-lis Arg. 16 James Bruges Lord Chandos. Argent, on a Cross Sable, a Leopards head Or. 17 Robert Carey Lord Hunsden. Argent on a Bend Sable, three Roses of the First. 18 Robert Sidney Lord Sidney of Penshurst. The same as the Earl of Leicester his Father, with a Label 19 Thomas Petre Lord Petre. Gules, a Bend Or, between 2 Escallops Argent. 20 Charles Gerard Lord Gerard. Argent, a Saltier Gules, a Crescent for difference. 21 Henry Arundel Lord Arundel of Wardour. Sable. six Swallows Argent, three, two, and one. 22 Katherine Stuart Baroness Clifton of Leighton Bromswold. France, with a Bord. Gules, charged with eight Buckles Or, quartering Or, a Fess chequy Arg. and Az-within a Bord. engrailed G. over all on an Eschocheon Arg. a Saltier engrail'd between four Cinquesoils G. 23 Christopher Roper Lord Tenham. Party per Fess Az and Or, three Pales counterchanged and as many Roebucks-heads erazed of the second. 24 Foulk Grevil Lord Brook. Sable on a Cross within a Bord.engrail'd Or, 5 Ogresses. 25 Ford Gray Lord Gray. Gules, a Lion rampant within a Bordure engrail'd, Arg. 26 John Lovelace Lord Lovelace. Gules, on a Chief indented Sable, three Martlets Arg. 27 John Pawlet Lord Pawlet. Sable, three Swords in Pile, Argent. 28 William Maynard Lord Maynard. Arg. a Cheveron Az. between 3 sinister hands coupé G. 29 Thomas Coventrie Lord Coventrie. Sable, a Fess Ermin between three Crescents Or. 30 William Howard L. Howard of Escrick. The same as the E of Suffolk, with a Flower-de lis. 31 Charles Mohun Lord Mohun. Or, a Cross engrailed Sable. 32 Henry Herbert Lord Herbert of Chirbury. The same as the Earl of Pembroke with a Crescent. 33 Thomas Leigh Lord Leigh. G.a Cross engrail'd & a Lozeng in the dexter Cant. Arg. 34 Thomas Jermin Lord Jermin. Sible, a Crescent between two Mullets in Pale Arg. 35 William Byron Lord Byron. Argent, three Bendlets inhanced Gules. 36 John Vaughan Lord Vaughan. Or, a Lion rampant Gules. 37 Francis Carrington Lord Carrington. Arg. a Cross Gules between four Peacocks Azure. 38 William Widdrington Lord Widdrington. Quarterly Argent and Gules, a Bendlet Sable. 39 Edward Ward Lord Ward. Chequy Or and Azure, a Bend Ermin. 40 John Colepeper Lord Colepeper. Argent, a Bend engrailed Gules. 41 Charles Boyle L. Clifford of Lanesborough. The same as his Father the E.of Burlington, with a Label 42 Robert Lucas Lord Lucas. Arg. a Fess between six Annulets Gules. 43 Henry Bellassise Lord Bellassise. Quarterly first Argent, a Cheveron Gules between three Flowers-de lis Azure, in the second a Pale engrail'd be∣tween two Pallets Sable, the third as the first, the fourth as the second, a Crescent for difference. 44 Edward Watson Lord Rockingham. Argent, on a Cheveron engrail'd Az. between three Martlets Sable, as many Crescents Or. 45 Robert Sutton Lord Lexington. Argent, a Canton Sable. 46 Marmaduke Langdale Lord Langdale. Sable, a Cheveron between three Estoils Argent. 46 John Berkeley Lord Berkeley of Stratton. Sable, a Cheveron Ermin between ten Crosses formé Arg. 48 Charles Granvile Lord Granvile. The same as his Father the Earl of Bath, with a Label. 49 Francis Holles Lord Holles. Ermin, two Piles in point Sable, a Crescent for difference. 50 Charles Cornwallis Lord Cornwallis. Sable, Gutté de Larmes, on a Fess Arg. three Cornish Choughs proper. 51 Henry Booth Lord De la Mer. Argent, three Boars heads erazed and erected Sable. 52 Thomas Crew Lord Crew. Azure, a Lion rampant Argent, a Cresent for difference. 53 John Arundell Lord Arundell of Trerice. Sable, three Cheverons Argent. 54 Hugh Clifford Lord Clifford of Chudleigh. Chequy Or and Azure a Fess G.a Crescent for difference. 55 Susan Baroness Bellassise of Osgodby. Ermin, a Saltier engrail'd Gules, on a Chief of the same a Lion of England. 56 George Carteret Lord Carteret. Gules, four Fusils in Fess Arg.a Crescent for difference. 57 John Bennet Lord Ossulston. Gules, a Besant between 3 Demi-Lions rampant Arg. 58 George Legg Lord Dartmouth. Azure, a Stags-head caboshed Argent. 59 Giles Allington Lord Allington. Sable, a Bend engrailed betwixt six Billets Arg. 60 John Stawell Lord Stawell. Gules, a Cross Fusily Argent. 61 Francis North Lord Guildford. The same as the Lord North, with a Crescent. 62. Sidney Godolphin Lord Godolphin. Gules, an Eagle display'd between 3 Flowers-de-lis, Arg. 63 Henry Jermin Lord Dover. The same as his Brother the L. Jermin, with a Crescent. 64 John Jeffreys Lord Jeffreys. Ermin, a Lion rampant and a Canton Sable. 65 Henry Waldegrave Lord Waldegrave. Per Pale Argent and Gules. 66 Edward Griffin Lord Griffin. Sable, a Griphon rampant Argent. 67 Hugh Cholmondley Lord Cholmondley. Gules, two Helmets in Chief Argent, and a Garb in Base Or. 68 John Ashburnham Lord Ashburnham. Gules, a Fess between six Mullets Argent. Archbishops II. and Bishops XXIV. 1 Dr. William Sandcrost L. Archbishop of Canterbury. 2. Dr. Thomas Lampleugh L. Archbishop of York. 3 Dr. Henry Compton L. Bishop of London. 4 Dr. Nathaniel Crew L. Bishop of Durham. 5 Dr. Peter Mew L. Bishop of Winchester. 6 Dr. Herbert Crosts L. Bishop of Hereford. 7 Dr. Thomas Wood L. Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry. 8 Dr. William Lloyd L. Bishop of Norwich. 9 Dr. Thomas Barlow L. Bishop of Lincoln. 10 Dr. William Beau L. Bishop of Landaff. 11 Dr. William Lloyd L. Bishop of S. Asaph. 12 Dr. Robert Frampton L. Bp. of Gloucester. 13 Dr. Francis Turner L. Bishop of Ely. 14 Dr Thomas Smith L. Bishop of Carlisle. 15 Dr. Thomas Spratt L. Bishop of Rochester. 16 Dr. Thomas Ken L. Bishop of Bath and Wells. 17 Dr. Thomas White L. Bp. of Peterborough. 18 Dr. Jonathan Trelawney L. Bp. of Exeter. 19 Thomas Watson L. Bishop of S. Davids. 20 Dr. Timothy Hall L. Bishop of Oxford. 21 Dr. Gilbert Burnet L. Bishop of Salisbury. 22 Dr. Humphry Humphrys L. Bp. of Bangor. 23 Dr. Nicholas Stratford L. Bp. of Chester. 24 Dr. Edward Stillngfleet L. Bp. of Worcester. 25 Dr. Symon Patrick L. Bishop of Chichester. 26 Dr. Gilbert Ironside L. Bishop of Bristol. The Archbishop of Canterbury takes place next to the Princes of the Blood, and a∣bove all the Nobility and Great Officers. The Archbishop of York takes place a∣bove all the Nobility and Great Offi∣cers, except the Lord Keeper. The rest of the Bishops take place next after the Viscounts, and above the Temporal Barons. Whereof the Bishops of London, Durham, and Winchester do always precede the other Bishops, the rest taking place according to the Seniority of their Consecrations. IMPRIMATUR, March the First, 1689/90. Norfolk and Marshal. LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavell, at the Peacock in S. Pauls Church-yard; And Chr. Wilkinson, at the Black-Boy in Fleet-street, 1690. ☞ Newly Publish'd, 1. Roman Forgeries in the Councils during the First Four Centuries; together with an Appendix concerning the Forgeries and Errors in the Annals of Baronius. Quarto Stitch'd. 2. A Scholastical History of the Original and General Ʋse Liturgies in the Christian Church; together with an Answer to Mr. David Clarkson's late Discourse concerning Liturgies. Both Written by THO. COMBER, D. D. Precentor of YORK, and are to be Sold by Robert Clavell, at the Peacock at the West-end of S. Pauls.
