c3065a 45097624 171230
His Majesties GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, At their Prorogation, On Munday the 26th of January 1679/80. DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms DƲBLIN, Re-printed By Benjamin Took and John Crook, Printers to the King's most Excellent Majestie; and are to be sold by Mary Crook at his Majesties Printing-house in Skinner-Row. 1679/80.
His Majesties GRACIOUS SPEECH To both houses of PARLIAMENT, At their Prorogation. My Lords and Gentlemen, WHen I declared in Council My in∣tentions of putting off the Parlia∣ment to a time so remote as No∣vember, it was not without having very well weighed and considered the Grounds and Reasons that induced Me to it; Nor can I be prevailed upon by any thing that has hapned since (in refference to affairs within the Kingdom) to alter or re∣pent of that Resolution, but am rather con∣firmed and settled in it. VVhen I have said ths, I must tell you at the same time, That considering the present danger which threatens some of Our Neighbours and Allyes, in whose Interest and Safety VVe are so nearly concer∣ned, it may be of very ill consequence to make
a Prorogation for so long a time as should in the least dishearten Our Friends that relie upon Us; for this single Reason therefore, I think fit to appoint a Day for your Meeting again in April; and having thus let you see My care of you, in relation to Affairs abroad, I must observe to you, That the Distractions and Jealousies at Home are of such a nature, and so heightened and improved by the Malice and Industry of Ill men, that I am unalterably of Opinion, that a longer interval of Parlia∣ment will be absolutely necessary for composing and quieting of Mens minds; in order to which I am afraid the most proper Remedies would prove ineffectual, without the assistance of some farther time. I do therefore Resolve, That from the Day whereon you are to meet in April, there shall be a farther Prorogation, unless the Conditi∣on of Our Allyes abroad do then require Our immediate Assistance. And now, my Lord Chancellor, do as I have directed you. Where upon his Lordship said, My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, His Majesties Royal Will and Pleasure is, That this Parliament be Prorogued to Thurs∣day the 15th day of April. next ensuing, and accordingly this Parliament is Prorogued to the 15th day of Apr. next. FINIS.
