c4015C 45578240 172184
ARTICLES OF ENQUIRY Concerning certain MATTERS ECCLESIASTICAL, EXHIBITED To the Church-wardens and Side-men of every Parish within the ARCH-DEACONRY OF BEDFORD: For their better direction in their Present∣ments in the VISITATION OF THEOPHILUS DILLINGHAM D. D. Arch-Deacon of BEDFORD. CAMBRIDGE, Printed in the Year 1669.
The Tenour of the Oath of the Church-wardens and Side-men of every Parish. YOu shall well and faithfully execute the office of Church-wardens (or Side-men) in the Parish of N. and true presentment make of such de∣faults and offences, as you know to be en∣quirable by the laws Ecclesiastical of this Land. So help you God.
Articles of Enquiry within the Arch-Deaconry of BEDFORD. TIT. I. Concerning Churches and their Possessions, with the fur∣niture and ornaments, thereunto belonging. 1 IS your Church or Chappel with the Chan∣cel and Steeple thereof in good and suffici∣ent repair both within and without? 2 Are all things therein cleanly kept, free from any thing that may be noisome or unseemly? 3 Hath any part thereof been demolished or pulled down? have any of the bells, lead, timber, or utensils, heretofore belonging to the same, been imbezelled, or converted to private uses during, or since the late War? 4 Have you in your Church or Chappel, a large Bible of the last translation, the book of Common Prayer lately established, the book of Homilies allowed by authority, the table of degrees wherein Marriages are prohibited, as also a Register-book in Parchment, for Christenings, Marriages and Burials; and is the same kept in all points as is required? 5 Have you a Font of stone standing in the usual place for Pub∣lick Baptisme, and doth your Minister therein onely baptize Publickly? 6 Have you a decent Communion-table, with a carpet, and another convering of white linen to be spread thereon, at the time of the administration of the Lord's Supper? What cup, chalice, patten or flagons have you belonging to that Service? 7 Have you a convenient Seat or Pew for your Minister to read Service in, a comely Pulpit set in a convenient place to preach the
word in, with a decent cloth or cushion for the same? have you also a large Surplice for the use of your Minister in his publick ad∣ministrations? 8 Have you a book for the Church-warden's accounts, a box for the Alms for the poor, a strong chest with locks and keys wherein may be safely kept the plate, vessels, carpets, vestments and books belonging to the Church? And have you a Bier with a Herse-cloth for the decent burial of the dead? 9 Is there any strife or contention among any of your Parish about the Pews or Seats in your Church or Chappel? Have any new Pews or Monuments been erected there without licence, or any old Monuments or Ornaments of your Church or Chappel been defaced contrary to law, and by whom? 10 Is your Church-yard well and sufficiently fenced, & decently kept, without abuse or nusances? Have any encroached upon the ground thereof; or cut down any trees growing therein, unless for necessary reparation of the Church or Chancel? 11 Have you in your Parish a house for your Minister to dwell in? Is the same, with the out-houses thereunto belonging in good and sufficient repair? Have any of them been defaced or pulled down without licence? 12 Have you a true and perfect Terrar of all the Glebe-lands and tenements belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage, taken by the view of your Minister, and other honest men of your Parish? as also a note of such pensions, rate-tithes, and portions of tithes both within and without your Parish, as belong thereunto? And is a copy thereof delivered into the Bishops Registry? 13 Is there any Alms-house, Hospital, or Free-School, (being not of the Kings foundation) in your Parish, and are they and their endowments preserved and employed to their right use? 14 Have any dying in your Parish given any legacy to the Church, or Poor, which hath been misemployed and disposed of to other uses?
TIT. II. Concerning Ministers. 1 HAve you a setled Minister in your Parish? If not, how long have you been destitute? What is the living yearly worth, and who is the Patron thereof? By whom are the fruits received and how are they diposed of? 2 Is your Minister (so far as you know or believe) in holy Orders according to the laws of the Church of England? 3 Doth he diligently attend upon his Ministery, in reading the lessons and prayers, preaching the word, administring the Sacra∣ments, Catechizing the youth, visiting the sick, and in all other the offices of his Ministerial function, in such manner, form and habit, as is directed by the Book of Common Prayer lately esta∣blished, and the Act for Uniformity therewith published? 4 Doth he give notice of the Holy days, and of the Ember-weeks, that the People may be minded to pray for such as are to be solemnly called to the work of the Ministery? As also of the yearly Perambulation in Rogation week, for preserving the bounds of the Parish, and for desiring Gods blessing upon the fruits of the earth? Doth he also observe the fifth of November, the 30th of January, and the 29th of May, according to the Sta∣tutes and Orders set forth in that behalf? 5 Is his Doctrine (so far as you can judge) agreeable to the Word of God, and the 39 Articles agreed upon, and published Anno Dom. 1562? 6 Hath he at any time, that you know of, publickly or other∣wise spoken against the Order or Government of the Church of England as is now by law established? 7 Doth he administer the Sacraments in private houses other∣wise then is by law allowed? 8 Doth he every year publish in your Church or Chappel, the Statute against profane swearing, and cursing, according as it is thereby enacted? 21 Jac. cap. 20.
9 Doth he permit any strange Minister to preach in your Church or Chappel, who is not sufficiently authorized thereunto? 10 Doth he serve more then one Church or Chappel in distinct Parishes upon one day? If so, how far distant are those Churches or Chappels which he so serveth, and what wages, and salary hath he for his pains? 11 Is your Minister a man of a godly, sober and peaceable con∣versation? or on the contrary, is he a frequenter of Taverns or Alehouses, or doth he board therein? Is he a Common Game∣ster, a profane Swearer, an obscene Jester, or an intemperate Drinker? Is he vehemently suspected of incontinency? Is he a fomenter of suits and contention among neighbours? Doth he give himself to any base or servile labour, or secular trade, unbe∣fitting the duty and dignity of his office? Is his apparel grave and decent, both for fashion and colour, as the Canons of the Church require? Or is his carriage and conversation in any kinde disorderly, scandalous, or unbeseeming a Minister of Jesus Christ? TIT. III. concerning Parishioners. 1 DO any of your Parish make profession of any other Re∣ligion, than what is professed and established in the Church of England? Do any reproach the same Religion, or seduce others from it, or endeavour to alienate the hearts of the People from their Loyalty and Obedience to the King? 2 Do any absent themselves from the publick assemblies and Services of the Church? or not come in due time as well to Ser∣vice as Sermons, or not behave themselves when they are there with such reverence, order, decency and attention, as is required; or depart thence, before the Service and Sermon be ended, and the blessing pronounced? 3 Do any refuse to send their Infant-children to be baptized in your Church or Chappel, unless in case of extreme danger?
or are any children kept unbaptized longer than is allowed? or are there any more aged Persons yet unbaptized? or are any children, not Communicants admitted to be God-fathers or God-mothers in Baptisme? 4 Do the House-holders of your Parish, take care to send their children and servants to your Church or Chappel, there to be instructed in the Church Catechisme, that so they may be brought to understand, and take upon them, their Baptismal covenant, and be confirmed and admitted Communicants? 5 Do all Communicants of your Parish, upon timely notice given by the Minister, thrice at the least every year (once where∣of at Easter) in that meek and reverend manner which is re∣quired, partake of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper? and do such signifie their names, and purpose to Communicate, un∣to the Minister at least the day before the Celebration thereof? 6 Are there any living in your Parish, who have been unlaw∣fully married contrary to the laws of God? or any who being lawfully divorced have married again? or any who being law∣fully married, and not separated or divorced by due course of law, do not cohabit together? 7 Have any been clancularly married in private houses, or in the Church without licence, the Banns not being thrice pub∣lished, or by licence or without, neither of the Persons so mar∣ried dwelling at that time in your Town? 8 Do any married Women in your Parish, after their delivery from the danger of Child-birth, refuse in due time to make their publick thanksgiving in your Church for so great a mercy? or to pay their accustomed duties as is required? 9 Are such as die in the Parish, (who are not denied Chri∣stian Burial) decently buried according to the order of the Church? 10 Do any profane the Lord's day, by working in their or∣dinary callings, by tipling, gaming, or any unlawfull exercises, or pastimes? 11 Do any walk, talk, or stand idle in the Church-yard,
or Church-Porch, during the time of Divine Service or Sermon? 12 Do any quarrel, chide, brawl, smite, or lay violent hands upon any other, either in the Church or Church-yard? 5 and 6 Edw. 6. C. 4. 13 Have any irreverently used your Minister, or spoken slanderous or reproachfull words against him, to the scandal of his vocation? or interrupted him in his administrations? 14 Do any refuse to reckon with him at Easter? or to pay unto him such Ecclesiastical duties as are then accustomably due, and to be paid? 15 Do any refuse to pay the Rates assessed upon them, for the repair of the Church or Chappel, and the providing of Books, Utensils, and other necessary Ornaments for the same? 16 Are there any in your Parish Blasphemers of Gods Holy name? Any common Drunkards or Swearers? any commonly known, or suspected to be guilty of fornication, adultery, in∣cest, or any other notorious Crime of Ecclesiastical cognizance: Declare who they are that they may be punished according to their deserts. TIT. IV. Concerning Church-wardens. ARe the Church-wardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen? Have the former, and last Church-wardens given up their accounts to the Minister and Parishioners, and also de∣livered up to their Successours the moneys remaining in their hands together with all things else, belonging to your Church or Chappel?
TIT. V. Concerning Parish Clerks. HAve you a Parish Clerk, chosen by your Minister, of twenty years of age at least? Is he of ability to perform his duty, and doth he perform the same in all respects as is re∣quired of him? Are his accustomed wages duly paid unto him? or do any withhold the same from him? IF you know any other default or crime of Ecclesiastical Cognizance not exprest in these Articles, you are like∣wise to present the same, and therein to take the assistance of your Minister. The Minister of every Parish, may joyn in presentment with the Church-wardens and Side-men: and if they will not present such enormities as require reformation, the Minister himself, (being the Person that should have the chief care for the suppressing of sin and impiety in the Parish) may present the same. FINIS.
