C4330 E1087_12 99867491 169379
THE Cities Loyalty Display'd: OR THE Four Famous and Renowned FABRICKS IN THE CITY of LONDON Exactly described in their several Repre∣sentations, what they are, with their private meanings and perfect Actions at the day of publick View, which is not yet discovered. Togther With a true Relation of that high and stately Cedar erected in the Strand, bear∣ing five Crowns, a Royal Streamer, three Lanthorns, and a rich Garland. Published for both Cities and Countreys Satisfaction. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1661.
THE Cities Loyalty Display'd. Right worthy and thrice renowned Citizens, THat which is done at Noon-day, and not in a corner, is impossible to be kept private from the eyes of the world, no more can your Loyal Actions and faithfull true Al∣legiance, conceal it self under a bushel, but rather the more appear in splendid lustre and glory, like an occidental Starre, still every day more than another, which hath evidently appear'd since the blessed Restauration of his sacred Majesty. Therefore 'tis to you (most prudent Senators) the very glo∣ry of our English Nation, which have caus'd me to set pen to pa∣per, to declare these your late admired actions against the blessed Coronation of our glorious second Solomon King CHARLES the Second, which will ring like Musick in the ears of all Loyal Subjects thorowout every County of England, and other the Kings Dominions. And thus to proceed, I shall insist upon the four rich and costly Fabricks erected in Leaden-Hall-street, Cornhill, Cheapside and Fleet-street, with their representations, rarities and glories, to∣gether with that high and stately Cedar, the admired May-pole erected in the Strand, whose height exceedeth or at least equalli∣zeth with the tops of any Spiers in the City of London, or I might say as well in England, being the admiration of Standards, the glory of Summer, the wonder of other Nations, and a Mirrour of the World, especially for the Dignities, Riches and cost∣ly Ornaments bestowed upon it. I shall not conclude with few lines. But to begin with Leaden-Hall-street, that Fabrick is built near eighty Foothigh, with four stately Pillars before, two above two,
in Diameter, they are in circumference about eleven Foot, the Statue of King James on the right hand with Globe and Scepter, and on the left hand King Charles the First with the Globe and Sword, himself drawn in armour; in the middle above them two, six yards higher is placed King Charles the Second in a royal Robe, and the Crown upon his Head, a Globe in the one hand, and a Sword in the other; behind his back is artificially drawn with a pensil in rich and costly colours the Royal Oak curiously shaded, that at small distance no mortal eye but would imagine it to be a living man in the boughes of a natural Oaken Tree; above which is two Angels holding a Crown over his head, and above that the Arms, Lion and Unicorn as big as Horses, with famous Belconies at bottom to make learned Speeches to him, and this doth present the Royal Oak. In Cornhill, adjacent to the Royall Exchange, is the next built, near upon the same height, and highly archt under much like un∣to a Gate, and in the front place eight high and stately Pillars, coloured like unto Marble, and placed two above two in latitude and longitude, like unto the former. About the height of the first four Pillars, is a great and spacious roof, artificially wrought in rich and carved work; it resembles the leads of a Castle, upon which is placed four white Chairs, that is to say, two over one side of the Gate, two over the other, in which sitteth four Kings in long robes, and Crowns upon their heads, but Globes and Scep∣ters excepted; these represent the four Kingdomes, and give homage to his Majesty with low bowes and congies, when he pas∣seth by. Above this three degrees higher is erected a stately Tur∣ret, or such like, containing beautifull rooms within; it opens with twelve casements, through which appeare twelve Angels, clapping their wings, and rejoycing. Upon that is placed a great and mighty statue of a man, standing upright on the very top, holding the world upon his shoulders. Under the Gate is four Statues more, that is, Charles the first, Charles the second, Duke of Yorke, and Duke of Glocester, and over their heads are two Belconies, out of whom are made two learned speeches, and this will present the ruines of times. In Cheapside is the third, though something lower than the for∣mer, it is built four square half way to the top, and the residue as
round as an Egge, and that is laid all over with a covering, but to the eye of man it seems to be no other than Lead, the residue is beautified with rich and costly colours, supported with eight high and stately Pillars, two above two, like unto the former. There is about the middle a most famous gilded room, out of which ascend∣eth a splendid train of Goddesses, most lovely to behold, and on the top is the Oracle of Apollo, two Statues are a little lower, hold∣ing in their hands Launces, and what is on the one side the Fabrick, the same is on the other. A learned speech is made at the bot∣tom, and this doth represent the Temple of Diana. Cheapside-Conduits are all new furbished, and new Pipes pre∣pared for the running of Wine. Ludgate is richly gilded, and the Effigies of the Kings and Queen Elizabe most rarely beautified. In Fleestreet is the fourth, most high and stately, something in height exceeding the other three, it is supported in the front place with eight large Pillars, that is to say, of a marble colour, and placed like unto the former, two above two, which is four on the one side, and four on the other side of the Gate. Towards the middle of these Pillars, this costly Fabrick is built broad and spa∣cious, with rich and carved work, beautified and adorned with various sorts of colours, with the Kings Arms richly gilded upon it. Above that is built four Stories higher a renowned piece of workmanship, much like unto a Tower, or the top of a Castle, upon which standeth a very great Statue, that is to say one main top of all, it being so high for to behold it at any great distance. It seems like a blazing Comer glittering in the Air, it hath severall rooms divided in it, out of every room proceedeth a tragedy, or at least doth resemble it, great Orations is made then, and the gar∣den of plenty is represented. And as for the glories of these re∣nowned Fabricks, prepared against the blessed Coronation, the fame thereof is sounded throughout all Europe; for I myself have seen a French Limner drawing the figures of them to send to France, so that I perceive we English have not altogether patterns from France, they take some from us, and they are even such, that I believe few in this age did ever ee the like. So loyal, loving, and liberal, are our English Nation to hasten the business, for the honour of the Nation, and the triumph of our
most glorious King, that indeed all Europe do stand and even ad∣mire it. Now you have the famous Fabricks within the City described to you with the meanings thereof; let me declare to you the manner in generall of that stately Cedar erected in the Strand 14. foot high, commonly called the Maypole, upon the cost of the Parish∣ners there adjacent, and the gracious consent of his Sacred Ma∣jesty with the Illustrious Prince the Duke of York. This Tree was a most choice and remarkable Piece, 'twas made below Bridg, and brought in two parts up to Scotland-yard, near the Kings Palace, and from thence it was conveyed April the 14th to the Strand to be erected. It was brought with a Streamer flourishing before it, Drums beating all the way, and other sorts of Musick, it was supposed to be so long, that Landmen (as Carpenters) could not possibly raise it; Prince James the Duke of York, Lord high Admirall of England, commanded twelve Seamen off a Boord, to come and officiate the business, whereupon they came and brought their Ca∣bles, Pullies, and other tacklins, with six great Anchors; after this was brought three Crowns, bore by three men bare-headed, and a Streamer displaying all the way before them, Drums bea∣ing, and other Musick playing: numerous multitudes of people thronging the streets, with great shouts and acclamations all day long. The Maypole then being joynted together, and hoopt about with bands of Iron, the Crown and Vane with the Kings Armes richly gilded, was placed on the head of it, a large top like a Bel∣cony was about the middle of it. This being done, the Trumpets did found, and in four hours space it was advanced upright, after which being established fast in the ground, six Drums did beat, and the Trumpets did sound again, great shouts and acclamations the people gave, that it did ring throughout all the whole Strand; after that came a Morice Dance finely deckt, with purple Scarfs, in their half-shirts, with a Taber and Pipe the antient Musick, and Danced round about the Maypole, after that Danced the rounds of their Liberty. Upon the top of this famous Standard, is like∣wise set up a royal Purple Streamer, about the middle of it, is pla∣ced four Crowns more, with the Kings Arms likewise; there is
also a Garland set upon it of various colours, of delicate rich fa∣vours, under which is to be placed three great Lanthorns, to re∣main for three honours; that is, one for Prince James Duke of York, Lord High Admirall of England; the other for the Vice Admirall; and the third for the Rear Admirall: these are to give light in dark nights, and to continue so as long as the Pole stands, which will be a perpetual honour for Seamen; it is placed as near hand as they could guess, in the very same pit where the former stood, but far more glorious, bigger and higher, than ever any one that stood before it; and the Seamen themselves do confess, that it could not be built higher, nor there is not such a one in Europe beside, which highly doth please his Majesty, and the Illustrious Prince Duke of York; little children did much rejoyce, and anti∣ent people did clap their hands, saying, golden dayes began to appear. I question not but 'twill ring like melodious Musicke throughout every County in England, when they read this Story, being exactly pen'd; let this satisfie for the glories of London, that other Loyal Subjects may read what we here do see. So God preserve the King. FINIS.
