C4453 E861_8 R206653 99865769 118020
A DESCRIPTION OF The Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers OF CHRIST, And Also Of those called Ministers of England, by men which say they are Ministers of CHRIST, but are found to be Blasphemers and Lyars, and none of the Ministers of Christ Iesus; and wherein the difference plainly appears, and they made manifest. With an Exhortation to the People of England; to forsake them, their Blind-Guides, and to follow Christ Iesus, the Shephard of their Souls; the Way, the Truth, and Life, who saith, come learn of me, for I am meek and lowly, My Sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: And the good Shepheard goeth before his Sheep, and they follow him, for they know his voice; and a stranger they will not follow, but will flye from him, for they own not the voice of strangers: Iohn the 10. chap. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. Thus saith the Lord, what House will ye build me? and where is the place of my rest? but to this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spi∣rit, and trembleth at my word, Isa. 66.1, 2. And dwell with him that is of an humble and contrite spirit, Isa. 57.15. Fear ye not me, saith the Lord? will ye not tremble at my presence? but this people hath a revolting and a rebellious heart, they are revolted and gone; neither say they in their hearts, let us fear the Lord our God, Ier. 5.22, 23, 24. Given forth to undeceive the simple hearted; by him whose Name in the Flesh is, HENRY CLARK. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his shop, at the Black-spread-Eagle neer the West end of Pauls. 1655.
A Description of the Prophets, Apostles and Ministers of Christ, &c. THE Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers of Christ are called and chosen and approved out of God, sent out of their own countreyes, their fathers house and kindred, into all Countreys and Cities to declare the message of their Lord and Master Jesus Christ. But those called Ministers and Teachers in England, they are onely chosen and approved off by men, and not called of God; so that they are no Ministers of Christ, but are mens Ministers, sent forth by men into a particular Parish to preach; but the sheep of Christ them they follow not, nor their voice do they own, because they are strangers and aliens from the life and co∣venant of Grace. The Apostles and Ministers of Christ forsake Father and mo∣ther, Brethren and sisters, Wife and children, House and lands, Trades or occupations, honors and pleasures, and delights; deny themselves of all, and take up their cross daily, and follow Christ Jesus whethersoever he goes, and goes where he sends them, as lambs amongst wolves. Those called Ministers of England, have not forsaken nor de∣nied themselves of any thing, but injoy all things, as Father & Mother, Brethren and Sisters, Wife and children, house and land, honors, profits, pleasures and delights, tythes and money, for which they preach in the Parish where they are setled by men, and stay, being not sent thither of God; so that Christ they follow not, but are such who minde earthly things, whose God is their belly, whose glory is in their shame, and are ene∣mies
to the cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, and therefore are no Ministers of Christ. The Apostles, and Ministers of Christ, have a dispensation of the Gospel committed to them, and a command from the Lord Jesus Christ to go into all countries, or nations, to preach the Gospel in every creature, and wo unto them if they preach not that Gospel; which command they obey, and go out into all countries, and provide neither gold nor silver in their purse, nor two coats, neither shooes, nor scrip for their jour∣ney, neither staff in their hands, neither are they to stay in a pa∣rish to take tythes, gifts, nor rewards, but to go from city to city, and from one town to another, and as they have freely received, so freely give, without taking thought for the mor∣row, what they shall eat or what they shall drink, or where∣with they shall be cloathed, but cast their care upon him, who taketh care and provideth things convenient for them, without taking tythes, gifts or rewards. Those called Ministers of England have no dispensation of the Gospel committed to them by the Lord Jesus Christ, nei∣ther are they by the Lord of the Harvest, sent to labour in his Vineyard, neither in it do they labour, but are sent by men to preach in a parishes high place, where they being setled, have for their preaching, some 40, 50, 60, 80: or 100. l. a year, which they know of before they will be setled there, which is in tythes, gifts, and rewards, to cloath themselves in long Robes, and rich Black Attire, and their Wives in Silk, Gold and Silver Lace, Rings, and costly Raiment, with changeable suits of Ap∣parell; and yet with this they are not contented, but seek for gain from their Quarters, and if they can hear of a Parish, whose Minister is dead, or turned out of his place, and if there be but 10, 20, or 30. l. a year more than he had from the people of the parish where he is, if all the means and friends he can make, can and wil help him into it, that for his preaching he may get more money, which is the Root of all evill; he will leave his Flock, and like a Hireling flye away, because he is an Hireling, to the other, where none pursues him, or else will seek a Lecturers place, as they call it, in another parish, where he may have 20.
or 30. l. a year more, and no further will they go to preach, than for their own advantage, as witness their Funerall Ser∣mons, so called, that when a Rich man or woman is dead, and to be buryed, for 10. s. 13. s. 4: d. or 20. s. they will preach a Sermon; but if a poor man or woman dye, that hath not 10. s: to give them, they will not preach nor give them praise as they do the rich for their money, when they are dead; therefore it doth plainly appear they are none of the Ministers of Christ, but such as go when they are not sent, and come when they are not called of God, and cloathe themselves with the fleece, and feed themselves with the fat, and take no care for their Flock, but for their gain; and such the true Prophets and Apo∣stles of the Lord Jesus Christ were, and are, sent to cry wo against. The Ministers, Prophets, and Apostles of Christ, they wan∣dred about in sheep-skins, and Goat-skins, in Desarts, and Mountains, and lad in dens and caves of the earth, and had no certain dwelling place on the earth, being destitute, affl cted, tormented, and suffered cruell mockings, stripes, and imprison∣ments, having their Legs put in the Stocks, yet were no Vaga∣bonds, Vagrants, nor Wandring disorderly idle persons, but Fellow-labourers in the Gospel, whose habitation is with God, and for his sake, who loves them with an everlasting love, and for the peoples sakes, wom they are contented to spend and be spent; for the gaining of their souls to life, do they suffer all things. But the Ministers of England, and Preachers, so called, they set themselves down in a Parish, in one of the best livings, and fairest houses therein, or it will not serve their turn, but til they can get a better, or more money, and never go abroad into all Nations, but live at their homes at ease with their wives and children, and friends, eating and drinking of the best of the land, and of the finest of the Wheat, and are merry, taking their pleasures, receiving their profits, Gifts and Rewards, Tythes, & Eeaster Reckonings, which comes unto them by the sweate of other mens Browes, themselves fee∣ling no Sorrow, nor being in Trouble, as other men,
being invited to Feasts, set uppermost in the room, and are cal∣led of men Master, stand praying in Satans Synagogue, and for a pretence make long prayer, to be seen of men, and think to be heard for their much babbling; but the prayers of the wicked are abomination to the Lord, and he wil not hear their prayers, because their hands are ful of blood, who murder by consent, for those that put into their mouths they cry peace to, let them be what they will, but those that do not bring unto them, and put in their mouths, they prepare war against, by suing men at Law for tythes, and making distress upon their goods for tre∣ble damages, or imprisoning their bodies, to the  undoing of them, their wives and families, which the Apostles and Mi∣nisters of Christ never did, nor had any command so to do, and where the life and power of Godliness appears in any to their faces, they so hate them that live in it, that they stirre up both Magistrates and people to hail them out of their high places, where their Steeple and Bells are, to be sent to prison, stocks, and Bridewel to be whipt, and are mock't, and scofft, and bea∣ten, and stoned by those they teach so to do: Oh! what a hor∣rible thing is here committed in England? the Ministers there∣of so called by men, but not of God, preach for hire, gifts and rewards, and the Rulers and people bear rule by their meanes: Oh woe unto you! what wil your end be, now the Lord God is coming to visit you for all these things! The Gospel that the Ministers of Christ preach, came not to them by man, neither were they taught it of man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ, and by Christ alone without man are they made able Ministers, not of the Letter, but of the Spi∣rit, and have power given them from above of the Father to go labour in his vineyard, and to feed the Lambs and sheep of Christ, and to bare their testimony of Christ the everlasting Gospel, whose name is the Word of God, who is the light of the world, and is the true light that enlightens every one that co∣meth into the word, and that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all, which is their message, worke, and the gift of God to turn people from darkness to the light Christ Jesus, and from the power of Satan unto God, who is light, and in him is no darkness at all.
The Ministers and Teachers of England, so called by men, are set to School when they are children, to learn to read English, Latine, Greek and Hebrew, and to construe their Latine, Greek and Hebrew they learn into English; and when they are by their Schoolmaster thought fit, then they are sent to Oxford and Cambridge to learn of men how to preach, and not of Christ; and when they have learned of their tutors, how to com∣pact up together out of the ancient Fathers writings which was beyond Sea, and the antient Fathers writings here in England, as they call them, the Histories and Scriptures, of all together a form of words in writing which they get over and over, as a Schollar doth his lesson before he cometh to his master to hear if he can say it perfectly; so likewise do they before their tu∣tors, and others, with their notes writ and laid before them, in their Bibles, and if they can say their studied form of prayer, which they have got into their memory, and that which they have compacted together in writing, perfectly in a pulpit, an hour by a glass vvithout stuttering or stammering, and can come downe again out of their Pulpits with their brazen faces un∣daunted, then they are approved of by men to be expert young men, and good Schollars, and will make able Preachers of the Gospel, as they judge; so they receive their degrees of Arts, and are set at Liberty from Oxford and Cambridge, to go have a further approving off by men, and of men do receive their commission to Preach, and not of God; so that how to preach is taught them by man, and not of God, and what they do Preach they have it not by Revelation from Jesus Christ, but from the Letter, and by works of other mens, their own study and maginations, which comes out of the bottomless Pit, and ascends up like a smoke; take away from them the dead letter and the dead Fathers writings which they have had from be∣yond the Sea, and the dead Fathers writings, histories, and re∣cords which are in England, vvhich are the instruments and means by vvhich they preach, and not by the Spirit, as their stu∣dies full of books will witness; and then it will appear in one quarter of a year you shall scarce have a Sermon preached by any of them that have the weakest memories, and very few by
them that have the strongest memories: so that it doth plainly appear that they are but Ministers of the Letter, and not of the Spirit; therefore I deny them all to be any of the Ministers of Christ Jesus, and I deny their teachers and approvers, and com∣mission-givers, all, from the greatest to the least, to have any thing to do in this work, for it is the proper work of Jesus Christ, who is the Lord of the Harvest, and saith the Harvest is great, and the Labourers are few, pray ye therefore, saith he, that the Lord of the Harvest would send forth more Labou∣rers into his Vineyard: Therefore ye Commissions givers, and Approvers, and senders forth of Ministers, as you call them, who take this work upon your selves, cease from your actings herein, and consider with your selves what account you will give unto the Lord of the Harvest who is coming, and will say unto you, who hath required this at your hands that ye have done. The Ministers of Christ Jesus do declare by the Spirit, that which was from the beginning, which they have heard, and seen with their eyes, and looked upon; and their hands have handled of the word of life, and that life which is manifested unto them, and live in; whose fellowship is with the Father and the Son, they declare: But those in England, called Ministers and teachers, having gotten a form of some sound words from the Scriptures, and help of others, they preach by the Letter, and not from the life and power of those that gave the Scriptures forth; so that in what they preach they erre, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God, neither have they heard that which was from the beginning, nor seen nor tasted of the word of life, by the Spirit of life, which they preach of, but are as ignorant of the life and power, as they that hear them, whom their words profit not at all, because they come not from the life of them that gave the Scriptures forth, nor stand in the counsell of the Lord, therefore they are no Ministers of Christ, but are the ma∣ny deceivers that are entred into the World, which by their works deny Christ come in the flesh.
The Ministers and Apostles of Jesus Christ, they are sent to turn people from darkness to the light, Christ Jesus, the saviour of their souls, the light and life of men, the way to the Father, and the truth, and from the power of Satan unto God, who is Light, and in him is no darkness at all, and did and do turn ma∣ny to righteousness, and for so doing are counted deceivers by this Generation, as they have been by former Generations, but are true, and the truth is in them, they being of God, and the whole world lying in wickedness. Bur the Ministers, so called, in England, which preach in the high places, teach the people lyes, and so lead the people into darkness from the light; and now I appeal to that of God in all your consciences, both Ministers, so called, and people, for who hath taught the people to call the high places, with the steeples and bells in them the Church? have not you their Mi∣nisters? and is this any other than a lye, for the Church is in God, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the body of Christ is the church, which is the ground and pillar of truth, made up of li∣ving stones, Christ Jesus being the chief corner-stone, which you builders, called Ministers, refuse, and is become a stone of stum∣bling, and a Rock of offence to you, but you that stumble thereat, great shal be your fall. And who hath taught the people that God dwells in those places, called the church, in a more special manner than in any other place, but you their teachers? and is not that another lye? for God dwells not in temples made with hands: and who teaches the people to say God is worshipped in those places, but you their Ministers, so called? and is not that a lye? for God is a spirit, and is worshipped in spirit and in truth, and not in those high places. And when a company of proud high minded people, scoffers, scorners, cove∣tous, earthly minded, lovers of Money, the Root of all evill, Whores, and Whore-mongers, Adulterers, Fornicators, Thieves, Cursers, swearers, Lyars, Drunkards, Fighters Quar∣rellers Reprobates which know not that Christ is in them, are all gathered together at your call and invitation, to come custo∣marily to that which you call a SACRAMENT, and set together to eat the Bread that you break, and when you
give it to them, that they must take and eat this in remem∣brance that Christ dyed for them, and be thankfull; and when you pour out the wine, do not you tell them that the blood of Jesus Christ was shed for them, and for the Remission of their Sins? Do not you herein tell them lyes? Are not the wicked re∣served for the day of judgement? And the wicked, and all they that forget God, shall be turned into hell, their condemnation is ordained of old, being none of the seed that the promise is to, nor the Sheep that the good Shepheard laid down his life for. And who hath taught the people to call that which you call a Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, the Supper of the Lord, and the Table of the Lord? have not you their Ministers (so called) taught them, both by preaching and writing, which are lyes? for I tel both you, and all such persons afore named, that the Lord Jesus Christ neither Sups with you, nor you with him, for there is no fellowship betwixt Christ and Beliall, nor no communication betwixt Light and Darkness: and that which you call the table of the Lord, you make it a table of devills, for it is no other, for he that committeth sin is of the devill: and are not ye, and all such aforementioned, committers of sin? and so of the Devill your Father, whose works you all do, and ye cannot partake of the table of the Lord, and the table of devils. And who hath taught the people and made them believe that when their children are sprinckled with a little water on their faces, which you call baptism, that then they become mem∣bers of the church, and christians; do not you their teachers teach them so, that they become members of Harlots, and Members of the Synagogue of Satan, setting together in the Idolls-tem∣ple, being led captive by you, ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledg of the truth by your preaching, so that ye are none of the Ministers of Christ, but are the evill men and seducers, that wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived; Ah! wo unto you ye blind guides, called Ministers of England) which lead the blind out of their way, ye are all under the Curse of God, for cursed is he that leadeth the blind out of his way, and the wrath of God is to be revealed against
you all, who hold the truth in unrighteousness, tribulation and anguish be upon every soul that doth evil, ye workers of ini∣quity. And again who teacheth the people to make songs of the Saints conditions, and to turn the Scriptures, which is a Decla∣ration of the things, which are most certainly known and belie∣ved amongst us, into lyes and blasphemies? do not you the Mi∣nisters of this Nation, so called, teach them who are proud hea∣dy, high minded people, drunkards, swearers, lyars, whores, and whore-mongers, covetous, envious, malicious, scorners, scoffers, thieves and murderers, when they are met together in the high places of the Nations; Come (say they) let us sing to the Praise and Glory of God, Psal: 116.1, 2: I love the Lord, because my voice and prayer heard hath he, whenas they that walk in Darkness hate the Light, for God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all; and the wicked through the pride of his heart, wil not seek after God, for God is not in all his thoughts: The wicked say unto God, depart from us, we desire not the know∣ledg of thy wayes, and what is the Almighty that we should serve him? And what profit should we have if we pray unto him? say the wicked that are friends of the world and enemies to God; yet their teachers wil teach them to lye, and say, I love the Lord, because he hath heard my prayers, when the prayers of the wicked is abominable to the Lord. And again, Psal. 119. ver. 97: where they are taught to sing, What great desire and fervent love do I bear to thy Law? whenas the wicked turn away their ears from hearing the law of God, cast it behind their backs, and will have none of his counsel, but despise reproof, crying, it is a hard saying, who can bear it? they wil have none of his wayes, because they hate knowledg, and chose not the fear of the Lord, and yet say in their songs, they delight in his Law, of which they are not ashamed. And again, Psal. 139: ver. 21, 22. say they, let us sing to the praise and glory of God, Hate J not them that hate the Lord? I hate them with unfeigned hate: but the world love their own, and hate those that are not of the world, the wicked plotteth
against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth, and blesseth the covetous whom the Lord abhorreth, his mouth is full of cursing, deceit and fraud, under his tongue is mischief and vanity, he setteth in lurking places; in secret places doth he mu der the innocent, and in his pride doth persecute the upright in heart. And yet they will sing Psal. 16. ver. 2, 3. That they give their Goods to the Saints, the Faithfull Flock that in vertue excell: But saith Christ, when saw ye me an hungry, and gave me meat; thirsty, and gave me drink; naked, and cloathed me, or the least of these my little ones? Did not the wicked give the just and pure in heart, Gall for his meat, and in his thirst, Vinegar to drink? Do they not cause the naked to lodge without cloathing, so that they have no covering in the cold? and here the mercies of the wicked are cruelty, and yet their Mini∣sters; so called, teaches and leads the wicked to sing that they give their goods to the Saints on earth. And in the 119. Psal. 139. they sing; With zeal and wrath I am consumed, and even pined away; when at the very same time the eyes of some stick out with fatness, and in their own fat they are encloased, and have more than heart can wish, his breasts are full of Milk, and his bones are full of Marrow, and he encreases in riches, and is not in sorrow like other men: Again they say, let us sing to the praise and glory of God, Psal. 96: verse 12. If I for griefe and paine of heart, in Sackcloath use to walk; and at the very same time their filthy Flesh is adorned with Silk, and Gold and Sil∣ver Lace, Rings, and Rich Attire, costly Arraiment, and not with modest Apparell, but are haughty, and walk with stretched out Necks, with wanton Eyes, and tinckling with their Feet as they go along, spen∣ding their dayes in Pleasures and Vanity, upon the VIALL TIMBRELL and HARP, and rejoyce at the sound of the ORGAN, living in Chambring and Wan∣tonness, Rioteousness, Gluttony, and Drunkenness, and
never weare Sackcloath in all their lives, nor you their tea∣chers neither: Now all you that are called Ministers, do but see and behold what you do, do you not teach the people to Sing and say that which they do not, nor your selves neither, so that you teach the people to Lye, and Blas∣pheme, which is the work of the Devill, your Father, who was a Lyar from the beginning, whose Children ye are, and for him are compassing Sea and Land to make one profit, and when he is made, you make him two fold more the Childe of Hell then he was before, by leading them from Light into Darkness, and from the TRUTH into LYES, as is here made manifest; Depart ye Workers of Iniquity into utter Darkness, and receive your Portion among the Hypocrites, and all the Damned in Hell, for I deny you all to be any Ministers of Christ. The MINISTERS of CHRIST are all of one heart, and one minde, and agree together in the Unity of the SPIRIT and live in the Bond of Love and Peace, being guided, by the spirit of GOD, which is one, and leads up to one God and Father of our Lord Jesus Cnrist, one Faith, one Baptisme, one Truth, and Saviour of their souls, Christ Jesus the Light, one in all, the Light of the World, that enlightens every one that comes into the World, and is the Condemnation of all the World that walk in Dark∣nesse and Hate the Light, God is Light, and in him is no dark∣ness at all, and this is their message which they declare, in which they all agree:
Those in England, called Ministers, they agree not in one, for they cry, lo here saith one, lo here saith another, and saith the Episcopall Government is the true way to worship God in: Another he saith the Presbyterian Government is the true way, and in it is God worshipped in spirit and in truth: Others are for the Independant Government, and they separate them∣selves a little from the other too, and say that is the way to worship God, and this, say they, is the true way. But being all in the many forms of bodyly exercise, which profiteth little, and out of the true worshiping of God in spirit and truth, which is profitable unto all things. One saith that sprinckling of Infants, with the words spoken by him, is Baptism, and an Ordinance of God, and so he is for having all men and womens children baptized, as he calls it: A∣nother he saith that none ought to be baptized but the children of believing parents, and will baptize no other, as he calls them: Another saith that believers that can give a good account of their faith, are to be baptized by dipping, or plunging all the body in water, and no other: and so here they are all in the ma∣ny baptisms, not baptizing, nor being baptized with that one Baptism of Christ, which is by Fire and the Spirit into his death, by one Spirit, into the one Body, wherein there is Unity, which they are all out of. Neither do they agree in the one Faith, for they tell people of miraculous Faith, and of Historicall Faith, and of a dead Faith, and a justifying Faith, which they know not, nor are in, but are in the many Faiths, and out of that one Faith the just lives by, that purifies their hearts, and is their Victory by which they overcome the world: Some of them will receive all that come to their Sacrament, as they call it; others wil receive none to partake with them of their Sacrament, but those who are of their own judgment and practise in worship with them; but at their Sacrament none of them sit at the Lords Table, nor discern the Lords Body, nor eat nor drink of the bread and water of life, but feed upon that which is carnall and not spirituall. Again, one preaches one Doctrine, another he preaches con∣trary
to it, and one saith this is the meaning of this Scripture, and another saith it must be taken in another sense; another saith that the Hebrew, or the Greek Translation (which they call the Originall, but is the confounded languages) renders it thus; a∣nother he comes and saith, this is the true meaning, and he brings his Author for it, an old Fathers writing that is dead long ago; but none of them have the sense and true meaning of the Scrip∣tures from the life, which the spirit of God that gave the Scrip∣tures forth, which is the Key of David, that opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens, but the sense and meaning is by them in their many meanings given out contrary, which is from their own imaginations, the bottomless pit, and being written, or preached by them, is the smoak that ascends there∣out, and thus they twist and twine here and there, beguiling un∣stable souls, and by good words and faire speeches, deceive the simple hearted, which are ever learning of them, but never able to come to the knowledg of the truth, because they are led by those blind guides, which know not the way to the father of life, nor to Christ Jesus the saviour of their souls; so the blind leading the blind, fall both into the ditch, because they see not the way they go in, and yet these leaders are called Ministers and Pastors, but are not, but are blasphemers and lyars, turning here and turning there, saying this is the way, and that is the way; O ye serpents, ye generation of vipers! how can ye escape the damnation of hell? as were your Fathers so are ye; fill you up therefore the measure of their iniquities, that all the righte∣ous judgments of God may be poured out upon you all, who hold the truth of God in unrighteousness? for now is the Lord God gathering his army together, and coming to Battle, their weapons are not carnal but spirituall, and mighty to the throw∣ing down of strong holds, and the Beast, and the Whore, and the false Prophet which deceive them that received the mark of the Beast, and worship his Image, shall be taken, and together cast into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, your just reward, ye serpents. To the Ministers and Apostles of Christ, is given the gift of the spirit, to profit withall in the work of the Ministry, for the
perfecting of the Saints, and for the edifying of the body of Christ, till they all come into the unity of the faith and the knowledg of the son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the mea∣sure of the stature of the fulness of Christ their Master, and for their so doing their praise is not of man, but of God the father of Light, with whom their reward is, and from whence every good and perfect gift cometh that they have received, and the wisdom they have received is from above, and is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easie to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisie. But the wisdom that the Ministers (so called in England by men) have, is not from above, because it is earthly, and scorn∣full, and devillish, by which wisdom neither they, nor the rest of the world, know God, neither can they know him that hath not the son, for God hath no union with them, neither doth he make himself manifest unto them who live in strife, and bitter envying and confusion, and every evill work as they do, by stir∣ring up the Magistrates and people to take counsell together against the Lord, and against his anointed, & if the Magistrates will not do as they would have them, they will rail against them openly in their Pulpits, and wrest the Scriptures to their dis∣grace, and their own destruction; and those Magistrates that will cause the people to hale the Servants of the Lord out of their Synagogues to the Stocks, and Prisons, and Bride-wells, to be whipt and beat, and put into Dungeons (as the Rulers, Elders, Scribes, and high Priests did in the dayes of the Apostles) such Magistrates and Rulers shall have their praise; but saith Christ, what ye do to the least of these my little ones, I take as done unto my self, and it were better for you that a Milstone were hanged about your necks, and ye cast into the Sea, then that you should offend the least of these little ones, for you that touch them touch the Apple of his eye: and plainly I tel you all that are of men called Ministers, that all the stuff you labour for, and by your works have got together (it being not the gift of God) doth not perfect the Saints, nor edifie the body of Christ, for you your selves being dead in trespasses and sins, can∣not by your dead Letter, dead Works of Doctrines, Reasons,
and uses raise the dead; for it is the living that raises the dead to praise the Lord in the Land of the living, as in the Scrip∣tures you may read, that it was Christ that raised up Lazarus out of the grave, where he lay dead, which is to you a mystery: Wo unto you hypocrites, that do all to be heard and seen of men: And wo unto you that all men speak well of, whose praise is of the men of the world, and not of God, that are re∣spected of men, and do respect the mens persons of the world, and have the great mens persons of the world in admiration for advantage sake, and love salutations by the way, and gree∣ting in the Market places, and to be called of men Masters; see∣ing ye thus to be out of the Doctrine of Christ, and in the practise of the Heathen, Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites, therefore I deny you all to be any of the Ministers of Christ Jesus, and your voice I disown, it being the voice of a stranger which I am fled from. And now all you that are by men cal∣led Ministers of England, you are weighed in the ballance, and found too light; your Kingdome is divided and shall be taken from you, for it is given to another, even to him to whom all the ends of the Earth are given for his possession, who will break you with a Rod of Iron, and dash you in pieces like a Potters Vessell, for the blood-thirstie and deceitfull men shall not live out half their dayes. Weep and howle, weep and howl, all ye who are called of men Ministers of England, who have sate at ease, deckt like a Queen, and faired deliciously, and have felt no sorrow like other men, for now is your misery coming upon you like an armed man, prepare your selves, put on your strength, make ready your weopens, and come and see if you can withstand the Lord in his fury, or overcome him by all your strength. God gave the Woman Iezebell, that calls her self a Prophettess, and takes upon her to teach and seduce my ser∣vants to commit fornication with her, space to repent of her fornication, and she has not repented; therefore behold, saith the Lord, I wil cast her upon a bed of torments, and them that have committed adultery with her, and great shall be their tri∣bulation, except they repent, therefore while you have a little time prize it, and break of your sins by repentance, cease from
the evill of your doings, and learn of God to do wel, and if you will return, return to the Lord God, who is gracious and mercifull, and in patience hath born long with ye all the time that ye were learning to preach, who then saw what you were going about to do, and all your actings in that time, and all the time you have been preaching, which hath brought forth no∣thing but vanity and lyes, for all the profession of Religion that you have taught the people all this while stands in a lye, and their fear of the Lord is taught them by your precepts, who are men; for what do you, or they all possess of what you profess? nothing at all, therefore it is lightness, and vanity, and is unto the Lord as loath some, as if you cut off a Dogs head, or offered to him Swines Flesh in abominable broath; nay he will not accept of the hire of a whore that you bring before him, it all stincks in his Nostrills, and is cast out from before him, as a filthy Dung-hill. Your sacrifice is abomination, and all your works are as filthy Rags; and as the cloath of a monstrious woman, ye are defiled, and with your defilements you defile. Oh stop your mouthes and be silent, ye men who are called. Ministers of the Gospell, but are not the Ministers of Christ! and let shame cover your faces in the presence of the Lord God of life and power, who is of purer eyes than to behold ini∣quitie. Therefore all people, High and Low, Rich and Poor, Bond and Free, who have been hearing and learning for many years together of those you call Ministers, and are not the Ministers of Christ, by whose Ministry ye are not yet come to the know∣ledg of the truth by their long preaching: Cease from man, whose breath is in his Nostrills, and spend not your money for that which is not bread, nor your labour for that which satis∣fies not, but return to the Lord Jesus Christ, the Light, the Sa∣viour, and Bishop of your souls, who saith, come learn of me, hearken diligently, hear and your souls shal live, who filleth the hungry with good things, and the rich he sends empty a∣way: A Prophet hath the Lord God raised up amongst you, hear ye him, saith the Lord, in all things, who teaches the way of truth and holyness, without which no man shal see the Lord,
and this is my beloved Son, saith God, he that refuseth to hear him shal be cut off from the land of the living, for God so lo∣ved the world, that he sent his only begotten Son into the world, and this is the condemnation, the light which is into the world come, Christ Jesus the Son of God the light of the world that makes manifest in you sin and evill deeds, and shews you all things that ever you have done in your life time; and this is Christ the Prophet, that meets with you whithersoever you go, and shews you that sin which you have committed in secret, which none can reprove you for but he that seeth in secret and in the dark places; and this is Christ the light of the world, that enlightneth every one that comes into the world, and is made manifest in the conscience, and to as many as receive him, and believe on his name, he gives them power to become the Sons of God; whom he teacheth in his wayes, so that they need not another to teach them, being the children of the Lord, are taught of the Lord, and Sons of God are led by the Spirit of God into all truth, and can read the Law writ in their hearts. Now people every one of you, mind that which makes manifest your sin unto you, and checks you for the sin you commit, by bringing upon you tribulation, and anguish upon every one that doth evill. Those that walk in darkness hate Christ Iesus, the light that is come into the world, and is the condemnation of those that love darkness and not the light because their deeds be evil, and the light reproves them because their works are of the Devil; but he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be tryed whether they be of God, who is light, and in him is no darkness at all: Now people ye have a Light in your consciences, which makes manifest your sin unto you, unto which ye do wel if ye take heed, as unto a Light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the Day-star arise in your hearts, which is the sure word of prophesie; and the Son of righteousness that rises with healing in his wings, therefore come to him that ye may have life, wait upon him who is worthy of waiting on, who wil anoint you with an unc∣tion, by which you shal know al things, so that you need not to be taught of man, and gives to every one freely, without
money, and without price, bread to the hungrie, water to the thirsty soul, clothing to the naked, eye-salve to the blinde; the poor he fils with good things, and those that fear him shall not want; but the whole need no Physician, and the rich he sends empty away: Therefore while you have time, people prize it, draw nigh unto God, and he will draw nigh unto you; clense your hands you sinners, and purifie your hearts, ye double-min∣ded, cease from evil, and put not from you the evil day afarr off, but put away from you the evil of your doings, and learne the fear of the Lord, which is to depart from sinne, and the be∣ginning of pure wisdome, which teaches how to do righteouslie, justlie, and to walk humblie with the Lord, and this is the grace of God that appears to all men, that brings salvation, and tea∣ches men to denie all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberlie, righteouslie, and godlike, holie as he is holie, in this present world, in all manner of conversation; here is life and death set before you, people, choose which you will; for if you neglect so great salvation, how do you think to escape the dam∣nation of hel? Therefore people in the fear of the Lord, search and try all things, forsake the evil and hold fast that which is good of God, who is faithful and deceives none, for the King∣dome of heaven is within you, and the many deceivers are in the world, look not out at them, neither go after them, but keep your heart with all diligence, for out of them are the issues of life, for in Israel abides in his tents, and do not say but in your life-time you have been warned of the manie decei∣vers, by him who is a lover of your souls; who is knowne by the name of Henry Clark. Doth a fountain send forth at the same place sweet water and bitter? Can the Fig-tree, my brethren, bare olive-berries, either a Vine Figs? so can no Fountain both yeeld salt water and fresh, Jam. 3.12.
Here followeth a Declaration of some Lawes made by the pope, and the popish Saxon Kings, who governed England, and were the first erecters of all the Abbies, Monasteries, Fryer-houses, Chantry-houses, Cathedrals, &c. as J have them out of the first and second volums of the Books of Martyrs. BEnedict, an Abbot of the Monastery of Peter and Paul at Wirr, brought with him from Rome one John, the Arch-chantler, who first taugt in England how to sing in the Quire after the manner of Rome. In the yeer 747. at the beginning of King Edgberts reign, the Synod of Bishops disputed the profit of singing of the Psalms in the Church as they called it, and made a decree that with a modest voice they should sing in the Church, so by them called. In the Yeer 747. at the beginning of King Edgberts Reign, the Sinod of Bishops disputed the profit of singing the Psalms in the Church, as they called it, and made a decree that with a modest voice they should sing in the Church, so by them cal∣led. In the Yeer 924. King Ethelstone, alias Atelstone, made a Law that fifty Psalms should be daily sung in the Church, as he called it, for the King. In the Yeer DCCXII. King Inas alias Ina, or Iue, made a Law, that Infants should be baptized within thirtie daies: This King Ina or Iue, gave up the Government of the Kingdome of England unto Ethelardus his Nephew, and he himself took up∣on him the habit of a poor man, and with great devotion tra∣velled to Rome, and was there made a Monk, and the said King Ina made a Law, that the first fruits of all that was sowne, to be paid at the day of St Martine, as he called it, and about 720 he caused thorowout his Dominions, that everie house that had a chimney should pay a pennie to the Pope in the name of Saint Peter: this King was the first that brought up Peter-pence in England.
In the Year 933. King Atelstone made a Law, that Tythes should be paid of all the proper Goods, as well of living Cat∣tle as of Corn, and first fruits of the Ground. In the Year 940. King Edmond made a Law, that Tythes, with the first Fruits of every mans crap, should be duly paid. In the Year 959. King Edgar ordained and decreed, concer∣ning Liberties and Freedomes of the Church, as they called it, that Tythes, and first fruits of Corn, and Peter-Pence, be all paid. Pope Innocent the third (with all his Rabble of Monks and Fryers) was the first that brought in private Tythes, to be paid at Easter, about the time of King Johns raign in England. Now people here you may in part see who were the authors of Tythes to be paid out of the fruits of your labour. So here follows what the Church was the tythes were paid to, and in particular, what the tythes were that was paid and received. THeir Church was a company of strange Puissant, counter∣feit, holy, idle Vagabonds, and ravening wolves, so cal∣led (by one Simond Fish) which were Abbuts, Priors, Deacons, Arch-Deacons, Suffragans, Priests, Monks, Canons, Fryers, Par∣doners, and Sumners, these had the goodliest Lordships, Man∣nors, Lands, and Territories in the Land in their possession, and in particular, the tythes they had was the tenth part of all the Corn, Medow, Pasture, Grass, Wood, Coults, Calves, Lambs, Pigs, Geese, and Chickens, and the tenth part of every servants wages, the tenth part of Wool, Milk, Honey, Wax, Cheese and Butter; and they looked so narrowly to their profits, that if they had not every tenth Egg, the women could not have their due at Easter, but were counted Hereticks. Again they had four offe∣ring-dayes, privy-tythes, offerings to their Pilgrimages, money for Diriges to be sung at the Buriall of every man and child, or else they would accuse their friends of Heresie: And besides this they had money for probates of Testaments Mortuaries, and Confessions hallowing of Churches, Alters, super Alters, chap∣pells, and Bells, by cursing of men, and absolving them again:
Finally, the infinite number of the five Orders of Fryars, who had of every house a penny a year; the five Orders of Fryars had five pence a year of every house; and in King Henry the eights dayes, the sum being cast up to him, what came in yearly to these five Orders of Fryers, it did amount to 430333. 6. s. 8. d. a year, as is set down in the Book of Martyrs (by one Simond Fish) and not above four hundred years before that time, they had not one penny, for the ancient Britains ever stood free from such burthens, till that time that the pope and the Saxon Kings laid them on us, who now bear the same in part, as here∣after is made appear. And now you shal see if those now in England, called Ministers, do not tread in the same steps, and how far they come short of their forefathers: First, it is undenyable that they baptize Infants within thirty daies, according to the law of the Monkish King, Ina, and not according to any law of God (that they have to sprinckle little children on the face with water, & call it baptism) but by the popes, and their own imaginations, consequences, and conceivings of the Scriptures: And according to the Bishops decree, and the Kings law, they sing, and teach to be sung in the high places where the Steeples and Bels are, the Psalms and Saints conditions, that they two Poets, Sternhold and Hopkins, with others, have turned into Meeter, by their fallen wisdome, and not by the spirit of God; but they wil say they have a rule in the Scripture to sing Psalms by, Is any merry? let him sing Psalms: but what have drunkards swearers, proud and covetous persons to do to make songs of the Saints conditions, that was never none of their own? or to take the name of God in their mouthes, seeing they hate to be reformed; therefore ye singers, stop your mouthes, and be silent before the Lord God of heaven and earth, for it were better for you to be in the house of mourning, than in the high places of mirth, for the day of the Lord is coming, wherein your songs shall be turned into howling, and your joie into bitter lamenta∣tion, And as concerning Tithes, do not the Ministers of England, so called, take tithes of the people, even the tenth part of their
Corn, and Hey; Wool, Lambs, Pigs, Geese, Eggs; and have they not tithes of Coults, Calves, and dead sheep-skins, and of Bees, from whence the honey and wax comes, and tithe apples, pears, hemp and flax, and in some places of this land tithe milk, and at Easter some part of the servants wages, and Easter Recko∣nings; they have two pence of the husband, and two pence for the wife, and two pence for the chimney, and herein they out∣strip the pope, for he had but a penny a chimney, and they have got beyond the five Orders of Fryers, for they had but five pence a year of a house, and they have six pence a year, besides the two pence for a son, and two pence for a daughter, and two pence for a prentice, if a man have them, and they come to their Sa∣crament: And have they not money for buriall of the dead, and as it was the Monks office to mourn, so will they put on a black mourning suit of the parties gift that is dead, and imitate the Monk in his dissembling-mourning, heathen-like, who made cuttings in their flesh, and bauldness between their eyes for the dead, which the children of Israel were not to do, because God had chosen them to be a holy and peculiar people to himself. And again, if the people did not pay the Abbuts, Priors, Priests, &c. their tithes and money, they accused them for hereticks, and so for heresie they proceeded against them; and you may see in the Book of Martyrs what became of Here∣ticks, they were tyed to a stake, and fire and faggots put to them and burnt by that bloody generation of men. And do not these in England, called Ministers? if men who own Christ, and for conscience sake cannot pay them tithes, they will sue them at Law, and proceed to make distress upon their goods for trebble damages, or get an Order from a Court to send their bodies to prison, there to lye at great charges to the undoing of them and their families; and the same spirit that crcies them on to do this, wil carry them on to do more if they had but a Popish King, and a law, and popish Magistrates that would put it in execution, And again, have they not the best li∣vings and fairest houses, that are in most Countrey Villages in England, yea and in some Towns to: and now people you may see how far your Preachers, called Ministers, go in the steps of
their forefathers, as their forefathers were so are they; but they wil say they denie the pope, and the Bishops, and their orders: I answer, I know they do in words, but in their works they own them; so in their words they profess Christ, but in their works they denie him, for they that pay tithes, and they that receive tithes, both by their works deny Christ come in the flesh, for Christ is the end of the Law, for righteousness to every one that believeth; the priesthood, and the Levites tithes, and first fruit-offerings and sacrifices, ordained by the Law of Moses, the Alter and Tabernacle, and the Temple, were all but figures and sha∣dows of good things to come; now Christ Jesus, the sum and substance of all these, being come, the priesthood is changed in∣to one, who is made after the power of an endless life; there is of necessitie made a change of the law also, by which law they had a command to take tithes of the people; but Christ being come, put down the priests and the Levites, that were maintai∣ned by the first fruits and tithes, and he himself being in their place, he did not take tithes, for he had no store-house to put them in; for saith he, the Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the aire have nests, but the Son of Man hath no where to lay his head, ye may read in the Scriptures; and so he had no certain dwelling place on the earth; for he was sometimes on the sea-side, sometimes upon the sea, and in the WILDERNESSE and in desert places, sometimes at Jerusalem, and went round about the villages teaching, and upon the mountains, and went into the land of Genazereth, into the villages, cities, and countries to Tyre and Sidon, and from thence to the sea of Gallilee, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis, he being come to do the will of his father; he had no long time to stay in a place to take tithes, neither did he give any command to his Apostles and Disciples to receive any tithes, for he commanded them to go into all Nations, Mat. 28. and he sent them by two and two, Mark 6. ver. 7: and he sent them to preach the King∣dome of heaven, and to heal the sick, and they departed and went through the towns, preaching the Gospel, and healing e∣very where, Luke. 9. ver. 2.6. and saith Christ to them, freely have ye received, freely give, Mat. 10. ver: 8. and into whatsoever ci∣ty ye enter into, and they receive you, eat such things as are set
before you: and into whatsoever House ye enter, first say, peace be to this house, and if the Son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it, and in the same House abide til ye depart, ea∣ting and drinking such things as they give, for the labourer is worthy of his Hire, Luke 10: ver. 7, 8. Mark. 6. ver. 10, so that their meat and their drink that was set before them by these that received them, was their wages, and not tithes. Here it plainly appears that those that owned Christ and received his Apostles, they paid no tithes, neither did the Apostles receive any tithes, nor Christ neither, To whom were tithes paid? and who were they that paid tithes? those that did not own Christ Jesus, but denyed him to be the Son of God, saying, is not this the carpenter, the Son of Mary, the brothers of Iames and Ioseph, &c. but the chiefe priests, scribes, and pharisees, rulers and elders, these received not Christ, not owned him to be the Son of God, these paid tithes of mint and comin, annis, rue, and all manner of herbs, and crucified the Lord of glory; so that it is plainly seen, that those that pleaded for tithes, and paid and received tithes after Christ came, were those that denied Christ come in the flesh, both by their words and works; and as it was then, so it is now, for those now in these dayes, that profess Christ in word to be the Son of God, and pay tithes, and receive tithes, as the peo∣ple and Ministers of England, so called, do by their works de∣ny him: and those that deny him to be Priest and Prophet, deny him to be King and Law-giver; as the Pope, and popish Kings and Priests, who (contrary to his Law, Swear not at all) in their own wills made severall forms of oathes and laws to compell people to swear by, one form of an Oath to swear by to the Pope, another form of Oath, called the Oath of Supremisie; a∣nother form of an Oath, called the Oath of Allegience; another form of Oath, called the Oath of Abjuration, one form of an Oath for Judges and other Magistrates and Officers to swear by, and so likewise for witnesses, and all were to swear upon the four Evangelists, or their hand upon the Bible, or else they must hold their hands up and swear, all which way of swearing is contrary to the Law which is holy, just, and good, which is
given out by the pure Law-giver, Christ Jesus, Emanuel, God with us, who saith swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is Gods throne, nor by the earth, for it is his foot-stool, nor by Ierusalem, for it is the City of the living God; nor by thy head, for thou canst not make one haire white nor black; he that sweareth by the Altar, sweareth by all things thereon, and he that sweareth by the Temple, sweareth hy him that dwelleth therein; and he that sweareth by Heaven, sweareth by the throne of God, and by him that sitteth thereon: and he that sweareth by the Bible, sweareth not only by it, but sweareth at once by all things therein declared of; and he that holdeth up his hand, and sweareth by it, sweareth by him that made it; and he that sweareth committeth sin, and is a Transgressor of the righ∣teous Law of God, and he that committeth sin is of the Devill. And now thou Pope that was the inventer of the forms of Oathes, and ye Popish Kings and Rulers, which make Laws to compell men to swear, and you who are called Ministers, who teach people, and say that they might swear when they are cal∣led before Magistrates: Oh ye enemies of God! by whom do your children cast out devills? Doth not he that committeth sin by swearing, punish, or cause to be punished, him that trans∣gresseth your Law, or else without an oath, he that is a transgres∣sor is not punished? Do not you herein go about to cast out de∣vills by the power of Belzebub? Or do you think ever to clense the Land of evil doers by swearing? I tel you nay, the Land is not clensed of evill doers, because justice is not speedily execu∣ted, therefore the hearts of the sons of men are set on to do e∣vill; and where are the hands of wicked men more strengthned, and evill doers more encouraged to do evil, than by lying so long together in Goals? Let the transgressors be speedily brought to justice, & the innocent quit, least he be defiled by him that is guilty: So long as the murderer lives after the murder is commit∣ted, the land lies polluted in blood. Let the thiefe that is taken stealing restore fourfold, & if he have not wherewith to restore, let him be sold for his theft, that he steal no more, but labour with his hands the thing that is good, & in the sweat of his brows to eat his own bread. A word is enough to the wise, but a fool wil not hear, nor learn wisdom.
The Ministers of Christ Iesus taught the people, saying, above all things, my brethren, swear not at all, neither by heaven, nei∣ther by earth, neither by any other oath, least ye fal into condem∣nation, but let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, for saith Christ, whatsoever is more than these cometh of evill, Iam. 5.12. Mat. 5. Swear not at all: But you will say, this of Christ is meant by or∣dinary swearing, but whoever thou art, by thy earthly carnal wis∣dom knowest not what Christ means, it being hid from thy eyes. And the natural man perceives not the things of God, neither can he do, because they are spiritually discerned: And againe, Is there not in this Land swearing before Magistrates every day in one place or other, City or Town, before one Magistrate or other, or else the Goals would not be fill'd so full as they bee, and so manie bound over to appear at Assizes and Sessions, be∣sides other convictions for swearing, and drunkenness, and yet there is never the less; and I am sure it is common enough, swearing at Terms, Sizes, Quarter-Sessions, Court-Leets, and other Courts; and would you have it commonner then every day? Oh pitiful! the Land mourns, because of Oaths, and you who are called Ministers, stop your mouths for shame, and preach no more contrary to Christs command, whose Law which is pure, ye make of none effect, by upholding mens tra∣ditions: And now all ye who are swearing by any oath what∣soever, be ye warned, for the day of the Lord God is coming, wherein ye shal give an account for every idle word, and for e∣very oath you swear, and for all things done in the body what∣soever, the flying Role is gone forth, and the curse is entring into the house of the thief, and into the house of the swearer, and the Lord God wil be a swift witness against him that swea∣reth and against him that sweareth falsly. But some will say an Oath bindes men to speake the truth; therefore it is necessary that witnesses should swear, that they may speak truth. Answer, It is in a mans minde before he come to a court or ma∣gistrate, what he knows of the thing he is to speak of, and so likewise there is a resolution in the party what hee will speak, whether it be truth or a lye, although he swear or not swear,
but Christ saith, Swear not at all, men must not do evill, that good may come of it, nor sin that grace may abound. And a∣gain, If the witness be resolved to speak falsly, and the Magi∣strate or Iudge put upon him an Oath, hee is the meanes to cause him to add sin unto sin: Now to prevent both swearing and lying by Witnesses, observe what here follows, one wit∣ness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for any sinne in any sinne that he sinneth, at the mouth of two Witnesses, or at the mouth of three Witnesses shall the matter be established; if a false Witness rise up against any man, to testifie against him that which is wrong, then both the men between whom the controversie is, shall stand before the Lord, before the Priest and the Iudges, which shall bee in those dayes, and the Judges shall make diligent inquisition; and behold, if the Witness be a false Witness, and hath testified fals∣ly against his brother, then shall he do unto him as he had thought to have done unto his brother; so shalt thou put away evill from among you, and those which remain shall hear and fear, and shall from henceforth commit no more such evill a∣mong you, and thine eye shall not pitty, but life shall go for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, Deut. 19.15, 16. You may see here was no command for witnesses to swear, therefore the Rulers, Iudges, and Iustices, here is righteousness and equity for you ro act by, according to that of God in your consciences, and so shal you bring the lyar and the false Witness to justice, and prevent men for transgressing the Law of God, which is pure and good, by swearing, and so put away swearing out of the land, and do not compel men to swear, nor fine them that obey the commandment of the Lord Iesus Christ, by refusing to sweare, but lay your Sword of Iustice upon the evill doers, for whom it is appointed, and follow no longer the tradition of the Heathen, and do there∣by, making the commandments of GOD of none effect; it is not good to respect mens persons in judgement:
And he set Judges in all the Land, throughout all the fenced cities of Judah, city by citie, and he said to the Judges, Take heed what you do; for you judg not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in judgment; wherefore now let the feare of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it, for there is no ini∣quity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor ta∣king of gifts, 2 Chron. 19; 5, 6, 7. Babels Prophets are four hundred and fifty men, and the Pro∣phets of the Groves that fed at Jesabels table four hundred, and but one, even one Prophet of Elijah that had bread and flesh brought to him by Ravens, and he drank water of the brook, and cherisht and walked in the strength of the meat and cruse of water 40 days, and 40 nights, which was brought him in the wilderness as he lay a sleep under the juniper tree, and 400. of the Lords Prophets hid by fifty in a cave, and fed with bread and water, 1 Kings 18.19. If the Lord be God, follow him, if Baal be God, follow him still. PAge 1. line 2 read out on. p. 3. l. 17. r. lay, p. 6. l, 26. dele. of those, l. 32 dele. of them. p, 8. l: 18. r. communion, p. 11. l. 10, r. profit proselyte, p: 14. l. 12 r. scornful sensual. Page l. 18. 5 li. dee in, p: 19. l. 7 r. Wirr Wire, p. 28. l. 8, r. Babels Pauls l. 20. r. one Prophet of the Lord Elijah, l. 12. r. brook Cherith. FJNJS.
