c6172a e373_20 99861857 114002
The Copy of a LETTER Written from NORTHAMPTON: Containing A true Relation of the SOULDIER'S Preaching, and murdering a Woman: Which are very gros misreported by the Diurnal, and Moderate Intelligencer. Together with some more New-Light from Mr. DEL, the Chaplain to the Army. As also, The Quarter the SOULDIERS give to the COUNTRY where they are Quartered. feb. 6th LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith, at the signe of the Bible in Cornhill, neer the Royal Exchange. 1646.
The Copy of a Letter, &c. THe weekly Pamphlets, intituled, A perfect Diurnal, and The Moderate Intelligencer, for two or three wees past have blared a story of a Trooper, who was lately complained of to the General, by a Minister about Northampton, for Preaching in a private house on the Fast-day, and other mis∣demeanours. Now because the Diurnal saith, this businsse made such a noise in London; and because both he, and his brother the Intelligencer, according to their wonted favour to the Sectaries, labouing to vindicate the Trooper, have related this businesse very falsly, and sought to cast an aspersion on the Minister, and his honest neighbour who made complin: I was desired by divers of the Ministers and other friends, to give you true information of those things which those Pamphlets have falsified; that if you judge it needfull, you may publish it, or com∣municate it to such as you find to be mis-informed. The Moderate Intelligencer (as he calls himself) having pro∣mised a further relation of the businesse, the Week before; relates (Num. 97.) that the great charge against the Trooper was, That he expd  as house. And the Imperfect Diurnel (Num. 181) undertakes to give a true account, which he received (as he saith) from one well knowing the whole businesse. Where it is confessed that 8 Articles were exhibited against him to the Councel of War, containing a greater Charge then the Moderate Intelligencer speaks of, as appeare by the Articles themselves, which are there recited .
That he said, 1. That the Parson was a Minister of Antichrist, and not of Christ. 2. That he thought he was bound to unsold the minde of Scrip∣ture, as it was revealed to him. 3. That he had preached, not long before, in two Tubs in Oxford-shire, meaning (as they say) the Pulpits. 4. That he would preach the next Sunday in the Steeple-house Yard. 5. That he hoped to see the Shop-windowes open on the Sabbath-day. 6. That he fought for Half-crowns; and that he would sight, for Papists, if he might have his Liberty. 7. That he said, the Psalms of David were no Scripture. 8. That he did not deny but that he was an Anabaptist. Yet he saith in the conclusion, pleading for this Sectarie,—Here was no false Doctrine taught that might give offence. Sure, the 7. Article contains false Doctrine: and the words he is accused of in the 5. Article, amount to teaching of false Doctrine, implying that he denies the Morality of the Sabbath. And the Moderate Intelligencer also saith, The great charge was, that he preached in a private house: It seems, with him to deny the Scripture, is no great charge; For as for the Morality of the Sabbath, I knew his mind before, that he counts it an Holyday appointed by the State, as (Num. 96) he speaks of it. But to let go their opinions of the Troopers Doctrine; the Diurnal makes a very false relation of matters of fact in this busi∣nesse. First, where he saith, the Councel of War resolved that none of the Articles belonged to their cognisance by the laws of war, but the first only, where the Trooper is accused of reproachful speeches; and that, for this, they ordered him to make acknow∣ledgment to the Parson. This is not denied. But secondly, where he saith, that for further satisfaction, they examined the particulars of the other Articles, of which (saith he) few could be proved: This is related both doubtflly and falsly. For, first, they did not examine the Witnesses upon all the Articles, as that relation seems to imply, but only upon two more, namely the 6, and 7. And
secondly those 3 articles were fully proved upon oath: and thirdly all the rest could have been proved, if the Witnesses which were attending for that purpose might have been examined; and may yet be proved, if any good may come of it, with divers circum∣stances not expressed in the articles, tending much to the aggra∣vation of the charge. 3. Where he saith, the Trooper made a satisfactory declaration concerning what he had published, (and what not?) It may be his Declaration might be satisfactory to some of his own way and opinions: but I am sure there were some present that were not satisfied, of which I can tell you more then at present I am willing to write. 4. Where he saith, the Councel of war committed him to prison for one night: I hear he supped at the CROWN that night with Mr. Quatermain (a man well known in the City) and so it may be he had the custody of him for a night; and I think that was all his imprisonment: And if he was committed for any thing contained in the Articles, it is more then any of his Accusers knew; and yet I am told by a Captain, who might know, That the cause of his commitment was, his mis∣demeanour towards one of his Judges in the Councel of war, who spake against him. 5. Where he saith, the Councel of War left the Parson to accuse him of the other Articles elswhere, if he thought sit: It is true. And to encourage him to complain of the misdemeanours of Souldiers, there were two souldiers soon after sent to his house to be Quartered, when the Town had their Number before, and he had his full proportion with them: And these were not sent to the Constable as the use is, but sent imme∣diately to the Parson, (he knows well by whose direction) and though he sought redresse of this inequality, it was above a Week, and much a do before he could obtain it. 6. Where he concludes triumphing in the innocencie of the man, and his party in the Army, saying, Here was no house broken open, nor any person hurt: I can tell him where persons have been hurt, and houses broken open by Souldiers in the Army, and men afraid to tarry in their houses with∣in 20 miles of the Generals quarters, though neer his head quarter they are more civil. But I will tell you a story, which was told the Councel of war, of this John Gregory, when he was tried upon those articles: How he had confessed the killing of a Gentlewoman, after this manner:
Being asked at his quarter neer Northampton how he came to wear such fine linnen, he told this story; How after Nasby fight, he overtook a Gentlewoman upon the way beyond Harborough, and searching her, found much fine linnen about her, which he took away, and 40. s. in money which she had hidden about her very privily. (as he expressed more plainly:) and as he was newly gone from her, the Gentlewoman being thus spoiled and uncivilly searched, gave him some angry language, whereupon he turned back and killed her: Now I have known the time when this had been robbery and murther; and I beleive if the Parson, or any of the witnesses who accused him had told such a story of himself, he had spoken it against his own life; and the Councel of Warre would have taken notice of it, and the Weekly Pamphleters had been sent to, to publish it all the Kingdom over. But we find by experience, that the profession of souldiers and Sectarisme are the common sanctuaries of all obnoxious men: And if a man will pro∣fesse himself a Separatist, and contrary minded to the Doctrine of the Church, and the Discipline established by Parliament; and will cry up Liberty of Conscience the great Diana of the Sectaries, he shall have liberty to do such things as no man else may do with∣out being questioned. Now is not this Gregory a sit man to preach not only in houses, but in Churches and Church-yards, and to revile the Ministry of the Kingdom, and the Discipline authorized by the Parliament? a man that boasts of hs own wickednesse? yet the Councel of War took no notice of this: but all of them (two or three excepted) approve his preaching in the house as commend∣able. The Diurnall hath filled a page and half with this story and ano∣ther of a Trooper that Preached at Buckingham. And there is some Tavern-Poet, as I judge him, hath extended them to the quantity of a sheet in wide lines, though he leave out two of the Articles a∣gainst Gregory of purpose, when he might as well have transcribed them from the Divrnall, as he did almost all the rest of the story: and he wanted not roome. It is sold by the title of A Bloody Plot against the Independents. Sure the Printer wanted work, that would print so ridiculous a piece: but I hope he did not give much for the Copy, and then his pains was not great, if he did not lose his paper.
There was another story in the Modert Itellig bout Three weeks since, how a Report was  that M Saltmrsh Preached in some Churches at Northampton without the consent of the Minister. And he saith thereupon, It is desired that it be as∣sured that he Preached not but with the consent of the Minister, or at his desire. Now who desired him to give the Kingdom this as∣surance, he doth not say▪ But I can assure you, that Master Salt∣marsh did Preach usually at Alhallowes, without the consent of Master Ball the Minister there: for when some neighbours did ex∣postulate with Master Rll both before and after this was printed why he would suffer such a man to Preach, whose Errors were s open, and came hither before him by credible intelligence: Master Ball did divers times in my hearing, and in the hearing of many more, professe that he never gave consent. There came indeed some Gentlemen from the Generall to him, to desire Master Salt∣marsh might Preach: to whom his answer was, That for just rea∣sons he could by no means consent; but if the General would com∣mand the Pulpit, he could not hinder, neither would he make any tumult to disturbe him. And no other leave had Master Dll, who preached the last Lords day in the morning January 24. in the same Church: where he magnified the Army, and in a manner deified it in his prayer, calling it, The Ark of Gods strength. And in his Sermon on Ephes. 6.10. among other things he delivered this, That the power by which Christians must do and suffer all, was the Almighty power of God, the same power that was in Christ: and that all true be∣leivers may do the same works which Christ did, (adding this) when it is the good will and pleasure of God: quoting to this purpose Mark 16.17, 18. expounding it as a promise made to all beleevers, that they shall shew these signes, namely, cast out de∣vils, speak with new tongues, take up serpents, and drink deadly things without harme, lay hands on the sick and recover them; (adding) not that they shall do those things as often as they will, but when God will: for Christ did no miracle at his own will, but at the Fathers will. He spake also many other things very doubt∣fully, which being taken favourably were the same for substance which are ordinarily preached among us; but delivered in such tearms as were very apt to receive a bad construction among men that look for new light.
By this year may see what credit is to be given to those Two Weekly Pamplets, especially where the Sectaries are concerned in the relation. It is an usuall thing with them, especially the Mo∣derate Intelligencer, to have a snip at all men that stand firm to the Covenant: The man is so pragmatical, that he thinks he can teach the Parliament how to order Snake-affairs, the Ministry how to frame their prayers and begin their Sermons. He hath many times causelesly aspsed the Scots, the City of London, the Assembly, par∣ticular Counties, as this of Northampton, Numb. 94. branding them for a sloathfull people, who if they had a Mine of gold and silver in the Country, would not bestow digging of it: because they do not make the River Navigable to Northampton. He would be thought not only a deep politician, and divine, but a mathematician too. But I would have him know, the County of Northampton need not send for him to be Surveyour of this work, if they would go about it. There are as wise men as he who have well considered of the possibility and difficulty of that work, and of the advantage and dis-advantage it would bring if  ee effected: and are able to de∣monstrate upon those grounds h understands not, how bootlesse a project it would prove, and that the Commodity would not re∣compene the Tenth part of the ge and dis-commodity which would come thereby. The truth is, the County of Northampton are too much Presbyterian to be well spoken of in his books: few of them get by these troubles, o like to be governed by an Army. Yet I have heard some men say, That if the Presbyterians had as great Revenues by the present troubles, and could wear as good clothes, they might be as gallant men with him as some are. He tels us this Week of some exeellent Orders made by a Coun∣cell of War about the Quarter of the Army: As that the Souldi∣ers should pay their quartering at the rate of 4d. a footman, and 10d a horsman by the day, &c. if they cannot provide them cheaper: and that they shall concern thmselves with such diet as they find or as may be afforded at those ates. It were well such Orders might be put in execution, for it is a rare thing here for Souldiers to pay quarters, or to be content with diet after that rate. Colo∣nel Whleyes Souldiers of horse when they quartered with us the last month told us, we could not quarter them under 2. s. a day, and would have a hand in our Assesments about it: and some Towns
were fain to assesse  a day for  If a Souldier went out of the  of his Landlord, thgh he paid nothing  quarter. Some Officers of that Regiment Taxed , and made the Constables pay it for some Souldiers which were absent from their quarters. At this time within 10. mil of Northampton part∣ly through scarcity of provision, and partly the imperiousnes  he souldiers, such as want lodging in their own houses for them, or desire to serve God, and govern their families in quietnesse, are fain to pay 7. s. a Week and more to board a footman, and can hardly get them entertained. No man knows what a bondage it is to be uder the power of an Army but they that feel it God send a speedy conclusion of Peace, that we may have no further use of an Army: And that the Moderate Intelligencer may return to his trade, which I fear he hath almost forgotten. Your &c. Northampton, January 28▪ 1646. FINIS.
