C640 E4_14 R6967 99873058 154694
A LETTER BY The Lord GENERALS direction, from Collonel CARRE Governour of Plimouth, to the Lord ADMIRALL. ALLO, Good news from Ireland, of INCHIqVINS declaring himself against the Rebels, and 14000 Scots marched towards them; and other passages from thence. AND, HASTINGS Forces routed in Derbyshire; 1. Sergeant Major, and 1. Captain slain. 30. other commanders and common men slain also. 140, taken prisoners, whereof 80. at Egington. Many wounded. And 60. Horse taken, besides Armes. Printed according to Order. August. 5. LONDON, Printed, for MATTHEVV WALBANCKE. 1644.
A Relation how Prince Maurice his Forces are Routed, and pursu∣ed by his Excellencie the Lord Generall. IT is notoriously known, how mad the Enemie is against Gods peo∣ple, yet the more they plot and Combine, and bend themselves against Christ and his Church; the more their strength decaies; and it is very observeable that when they came against any part of our Armie with their greatest power, that they usually have the great∣est losse, we heard a Malignant noise in the City, last week that my Lord Generall was hemd in, but by severall Letters it is since Certified that his Ex∣cellencie pursueth the enemie.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT Earle of Warwicke Lord High Admirall of England: these present. My very good Lord: I AM commanded by his Excellencie the Earle of Essex, to acquaint your Lordship with the sucesse, it hath pleased God to give him in Cornewell, which is this: Yesterday morning his Lordship advanced over Horsebridge into Cornewall, from whence the Enemie being strucke with a pannicke fear, confusedly ran away; and left three bar∣rells of powder, besides Armes behinde them. At Laun∣ceston also being about 2000. they ran away, leaving two brasse peeces behinde them, and 50 barrells of powder, 30 that they had prisoners, wheref 25 are Countrey Gen∣tlemen, and five of his Excellencies Armie, Sir William Belfore and the Lord Generalls own Regiment being sent thither to fetch it off, if he can get Carriages, otherwise, to spoil it. From Salt-Ash the Enemie, the same day ran also, as soon as the Forces I sent out of this town, faced the town on this side the water, and our Brigade is now in possession of Saltash. His Excellence intends to quar∣ter this night at Bodmin, and from thence to write to your
Lordship more at large. In the mean time, his execellen∣cie desires your Lordship to block up Foy by Sea. This morning your Viceadmirall riding in the sound, sent a trumpet to Causon to summon it, and they are con∣tended to yeeld it, with 5. peeces of ordinance in it. My Lord I have no more at this time but that I am, Your Lordships most humble servant IAMES CARRE. Plimoth, 28 July, 1644. BY one of Credit, who is come out of the West from my Lord Generalls quarters it is also certified, that the Lord Generall hath again fallen upon Greenvill; and Routed him, and taken Foy, and 34 peece of Ordnance, and that Greenvill himselfe if fled as is supposed, either to Pendennis Castle, or (which is indeed more probable) to the mount, that is, a Castle upon a mount called Mi∣chaels Mount standing upon a Rocke in the Sea; at the further end almost of all Cornewall.
The Relation (as it is made by the Messenger) of the Lord Generals Victory in the VVest. SInce my Lord Generall hath raised the siege at Plimouth, and taken Mount Stamford, and Plympton, His Excellencie hath also frighted 2000 of prince Maurices forces away, that were quarteted about Launson, and took there two pieces of Ord∣nance, and hath also taken Foy, and there 34. peece of Ordnance, in the Towne and and in some ships that are taken, and since his Excellency beat Greenvill and his for∣ces from Newbridge, and taken his horse, and his souldiers well flesht with the pur∣chase there which Greenvill had plundered, the Lord Generall hath againe falne upon Greenvils quarters and routed him: the Lord Generall hath taken many prisoners, and betweene two and three thousand are
come in to him out of Plimouth: besides divers others out of other parts of Cornwal, and many of Prince Mawrice his forces come in and submit to my Lord Generall, desiring to take the Covenant: there are many armes found fcattered up and down, which the Enemy throw ftom them in the flight, here a Musket, there a sword, and here a pike, and there another piece of arms, and it cannot be possible that Greenvill can ever rally his men again to any purpose, but is fled, as it is supposed; either to Penden∣nis Castle, or to the Mount: but it is thought that as Arundell did oppose the Queene, fo he will hardly admit Greenvill to shelter there: so that it is rather beileved he is gone to the Mount, whither the Lord Admirall is putting forth ships, and the Lord Roberts is in pursuit of Greenvil. The King is at Exeter as is supposed, expecting Prince Rupert to come thither, by that time my Lord General returnes out of Cornwall. On Satterday last, there were Letters read in the House of Commons, which brought good news out of Ireland, and to this effect.
That 14000. Scots are come out of the North of Ireland towards Dublin, and that the Protestants in Munster rise against the Rebels, and are nigh 1000. That Inchiquin is in Ireland, and hath laid down his Commission, and declared himselfe for the Parlia∣ment, against the Rebels in Ireland. It is also certified from thence, that the Rebels sent to the Marquis of Ormond, to desire him to ap∣point the English Commanders that are in Dublin, to leade the Catholicks against the Scots, but the Marquis of Ormond returned answer, that it was advise as he conceived did not tend to any good to them, for if the English Commanders should be put upon such a designe, it would cause them to leave all as he thought, and joyn with the Scots against them, and therefore the Marquis as it is certified from thence, would do nothing at all in it. The Scots by this time it is believed is within 12. miles of Dublin. A Relation of the routing of Hastings Forces at Egington and Burton, by Sir Iohn Gell in Derbyshire. SInce Winkfield Mannor is besieged by Sir Iohn Gels forces from Derby, Hastings with a party of horse and foot from Ashby de la Zouch, Tetbury, and Lichfield, were designed to plunder about Derby, but being discouraged, retreated and quartered about Burton, and Egington, Sir Iohn Gell having intelligence hereof, sent to Major Sanders at the siege at Wingfield Mannor, who drew out 6. troops of horse, and on Wednesday last surprised 80. of them at Eginton, about 12. at night, with their Captains and com∣manders, and from thence marched to Burton and gave them an alarme, and drove them out of the Town, where was slain Sergeant Major Peate, and one Captaine more, besides some other Officers about 30. in all, and wounded many, took 60. prisoners more, and divers Arms, and routed the rest. FINIS.
