d2672 e1746_1 99868562 170323
A Cluster of Grapes Taken out of the Basket of the Woman of Canaan. OR, COUNSEL and COMFORT FOR BELEEVING SOULES, Comming to CHRIST and meeting with Discouragements. BEING The summe of certain SERMONS Preached upon Matthew 15. from Verse 22. to Verse 29. Wherein among other things, is de∣clared more particularly, I. What seeming harsh entertainment the soul may find from Christ. II. What holy, and humble behaviour the soul ought to have under that entertainment. III. How blessed and comfortable a conclusion Christ will make with the soul at last. By JOHN DURANT Preacher of the Gospel in CANTERBURY. London, Printed for L. C. and are to bee sold by H. Mortlocke at the Phoenix in Pauls Church-yard neer the little North-door. 1660.
This shade's the Authors outside: but this booke his inside opens. prethee doe not looke Admiringly one either; Passe them o're as emptye shaddowes, for they are noe more. Both bookes, and writers (y'ea, and all things else) at best are shaddowes: but the bodye's Christ. Soul art dejected! Christ a lone can ease thee and giue both comfort, and councell to raise thee. A. P
Durants Counsel and Comfort for Beleeving Soules.
To the Right Worshipful Thomas Bonner Esq Mayor, the Recorder, Aldermen, & Sheriff, &c. With the Reverend the Ministers, and the Saints, and Faithful ones in Christ Jesus, in the Town of New-castle upon Tine: Grace and Peace bee multiplyed. THat Dedication of Books hath been wretchedly abused, is a thing past doubt. Holy and wise men, in all ages have complain'd of it, and some of late years have scrupled it. But yet that Books may bee dedicated, is to mee beyond controversie. Such Books as carry in them any thing besides what is truth, and of concernment, gain no patronage by a Dedi∣cation (no persons being great enough to patro∣nize errour or vanity) And such Dedications as are onely stuffed with applause and flat∣teries, as they have not been owned by any wise Patron, so they have been rejected by every understanding Reader. When Writings, as Vessels, are fraught with rich and necessary things (and such are all spi∣ritual Truths,) with which kind of Treasure I have indeavoured to fill this Tract; And when Dedications are designed rather for ser∣vice than for ceremony (which is my design in this) then without doubt they may pass without stop or Scruple, as Ships consigned to particular Ports and persons: Nor can such
Dedications be suspected as a precarious po∣licy to seek patronage of what is written. (Cer∣tainly Luke never intended that, when hee dedi∣cated his Gospel to Theophilus) Neither may they be accused of Patent Monopoly, (as if they onely intended, the persons to whom they are directed.) Without doubt the same E∣vangelist Luke intended the General good in his Gospel, though hee sent it first to the particular hand of his most excellent Friend, as hee did also his History of the Acts. The following Sermons are intended by mee for the general good of many. But I thought it more than meet to consign them particularly to your Port and persons, which when you have received, may pass further, as Commodities of price and profit to many souls. Now if I bee demanded a reason of this particular Assignation unto you, spare mee to say the truth, which is this, I do heartily desire, 1 to witness how much I honour you whom God hath honoured: And 2 also to acknowledge a debt, wherein (with and for my Brother joint∣ly, and my self singly) I am ingaged unto you, which albeit I cannot repay, yet I must remem∣ber. I know your Virtue and Prudence will not bear those worthy words of your own wor∣thiness, which yet may bee spoke concerning you with truth and soberness. And I can tru∣ly
say, I never loved to rub their itching ears, who count no sound sweet, but what trum∣pets their own praises: Upon this account I shall forbear to speak that of you, to your selves, which yet I think, I am bound (for the benefit of the example) to tell others. Yet this I must needs crave your License to print, that having heard of you much by the hearing of the ear, I saw more by the seeing of my eye, when I was amongst you. And though my stay was not long, yet my observation was such, as that I must say, that those good re∣ports of your Town, do not (like the bad ru∣mours of the times) exceed the truth. If fame bee found so faithful in its reports of all persons and places, as of yours, hence∣forth It will bee a Slander to call her Liar. You are indeed as you have been famed, persons fearing God, doing justice, holding forth the truth, and practising godliness. I must say of many Towns which I have seen, The fear of God is not in those places; but of New-ca∣stle, I may say in a sober sense, JEHOVAH SHAMMAH, the Lord is there. For you, Right Worshipful Magistrates, suffer mee, though not to applaud, yet to ap∣prove, (how much soever you are above my approbation) your worthy doings in the ma∣nagement of your power and places, wherein if you have any equals, I am sure you have
no Superiors. I could wish others did imi∣tate that, wherein you excell. You are found to bee Ministers of God to such as do good; for good; and those that do evill, Know you bear not the Sword in vain. Sabbath-breakers, Swearers, (but why should I in∣stance in particulars?) all sorts of vicious per∣sons feel your Sword sharp, and you a Terror to them; whereas your eies are upon those that are faithful: Ministers and people, fearing God, and doing that which is good, have of you the praise of the same. I beseech you give mee leave, (not to praise your selves, but to provoke others to a godly jealousie) to tell these South∣ern parts, that there is fair weather in the North; And if in any place in England, certainly in your Town, and under your Government men may and do lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. And this one thing I must needs say, Were all the Ministers in England so carefully and tenderly provided for, and encouraged, as they are in New-castle, there would not be that complaining in our streets, as there now are upon that account. Indeed the Ministers of your place have their double honour; Your incouragement of them, and provision for them is such, that I know not whether I should intreat other parts to imi∣tate your Bounty or Wisdome most: Certain∣ly both are laudable; You know not any
Minister among you by any Character, but of Christ. To preach and practise the power of godliness, is the work you equally coun∣tenance and encourage them in: and though there bee (as where is not?) some difference a∣mongst them, yet that makes no difference of them to you, who have the like care of all. What can I say of this? Spare mee to take up the Psalmists words, For my brethren and companions sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee, yea, the peace of God (which the Learn∣ed know to comprehend in it all blessings) be for ever upon you, and yours, for your un∣parallel'd care and kindness to Christs Mini∣sters amongst you. And for you (my Reverend Brethren) Let mee beseech you to improve so choice a mer∣cy, as you have under your Magistrates. I know you desire not (how much soever you deserve) praise: yet let mee say, you are to bee praised, for that you are of one heart, (though in all things not of one head) you minde and speak the same things of faith and life; Though yee disagree in some things of Church-rule and Order, your publick wor∣ship is in the same place, and with the same Spirit. There is not heard in your Pulpits (where you preach by turns) the noise of Axes and Hammars; Heats, Debates, Dis∣putes, are exiles at your Assemblies: you fast
and pray together, your design is the same, and your endeavours are joint, to convert sinners, and to establish Saints. Those loose and vain opinions which have pestered and plagued many places, by your zeal and uni∣ty for truth, are (through Christs blessing) marvelously prevented in your Congregati∣ons: and as for those unchristian Divisions and Animosities (which are elsewhere the sinne and shame of dissenting Professours) by the Spirit of Love and Peace, (which rules in your hearts, and appears in your la∣bours) they are either not at all, or not pre∣vailing in your place. But that I may not trouble you with more, I will onely adde this further, that I perceive yee have well stu∣died that Text, Psal. 77. which speaks of this, as Israels happiness, that God led them by the hand of Moses and Aaron. Surely the people of your Town seem to bee led but by one hand: Indeed Moses goes before, (as it is but fit) and Aaron comes after: Your Magistrates in Civils, and your selves in Spirituals, are so one in hand (and I hope in heart) that though you have offices distinct, yet your indeavours are joint, and both make up one great mercy to the people under you. As they incourage you, so yee reve∣rence them: They are not such who assume power in Spitituals, but leave your work to
your selves, and yee, (I hope none of yee) are as those who despise Dominion, nor inter∣meddle with the politick affairs. Let that heart be filled with sorrow, and that hand and head be cursed of the Lord, that indeavours (in the least) the breach of that holy and righteous har∣mony that is betwixt you: I presume, yee will say, Amen, to my prayer for you in this par∣ticular. To you then (holy and beloved Brethren) Who fear God, and have faith in Jesus, and are blessed by, and a blessing to such a Ma∣gistracy and Ministry. Let mee speak also a few words, I bear you witness to others, that there is amongst you, the Spirit and con∣versation of the good old Puritans, (whom I mention with honour) it is your credit that you are not in this day of reproach and blas∣phemy, (which is upon profession for Profes∣sors faults) a shame to that worthy name wherewith yee are called. The itch of no∣vel opinions, the botch of vain fashions, the plague of neglect of duties, and slighting Or∣dinances and Ministry, these are not seen a∣mongst you, or on you. I verily saw much of Christ in you, your carriage was seem∣ing exact, and I hope your study is to bee what you seem for. Wo be to Hypocrites and Sin∣ners (hollow-hearted Professours, or ignorant and profane persons) in New castle. They that are
bad under Magistrates and Ministers so good, will bee damned without mercy under two of the greatest witnesses that can bee against a people. But I hope better things of you, though I thus speak. I beseech you so live, that by your good examples, (concurring with the power of your Magistrates, and preaching of your Ministers) yee may help to convince and convert evill doors, at least, to put to si∣lence the ignorance of foolish men. To you all, Magistrates, and Ministers, and Saints, jointly and severally, let me return my hearty & humble thanks for that singular respect, which for many years yee have expressed to my ever dear and beloved Brother, whose lot is cast among you. It is to mee matter of joy and praise before the Lord, that since it plea∣sed God (who disposes of all our persons and places) to carry him so far from all relations, that he did vouchsafe to fix him amongst your selves, who abundantly make up all relati∣ons, in your care and kindness to and for him. Now the blessed God for ever reward your love to him and his. Let your goodness accept of mee (who am obliged in and for him) this short, but sincere acknowledgement for the same. I shall not trouble you with the re∣membrance of that kindness, which (when by the good hand of God I visited my brother, and saw yee,) you were pleased to express. It
is your goodness you had rather shew kind∣ness than hear praise. Therefore I judge it would trouble you, if I should blaze that, which yet was such and so great, as I have and must speak of to others, and before the Lord with thanksgiving: your receiving mee, and love to mee, was in the Spirit of the Gospel; yee did receive mee in the name of a Prophet, and in the name of a Disciple, (howbeit I am unworthy that honour.) Oh that hee who rewards a cup of cold water, gi∣ven upon such an account, would abundantly reward your large and loving respects to me (even poor me) in that way, and upon that score. My gratitude would overflow, did not the consideration of your Modesty (which loves not to hear its own applause) set mee bounds. I will therefore conclude thus, May your Per∣sons, your Government, your Labours, your whole Town, and your Universal All, be alwaies under the special favour of the blessed God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom I remain, Right worthy, Reverend, and Beloved Sirs, Your most obliged, and most affectionately humble servant, JOHN DURANT.
To the Reader. TO serve the counsell of God in a mans particular Generation, is a du∣ty incumbent on all that profess themselves the servants of Christ: and to bee sincere and diligent therein, is to bee in the exercise, and partake of the sure mercies of David. But to bee willing to do any thing which may bee service to Christ in a∣nother Generation, and to bee indeed successefull therein, is a blessing which few attain unto. And yet though such a blessing be obtained but by a few, I perswade my self, it may at least bee desired and pursued by all. For as wee are to covet earnestly the best gifts: so are we to aim at, and endeavour the best service; and such is that which lasts and lives, when wee are gone, and fallen asleep in our Graves. I hope I shall be freed from the crime and censure of pride, if I say, that my aim in these small pieces, which I have been pressed formerly to print, was to serve, not onely my present, but the next Generation. And I must acknowledge to the praise of the glory of Christs grace, that my experience of the good liking and acceptance of my Labours this way, gives mee grounds to hope, that my service may extend it self beyond my own age. Certainly books last longer than men; and they speak when wee are dead and gone. Hereupon I am encouraged once again to
appear in the Press for the same service, which is on∣ly to subserve the counsell of God for the good of thy soul, (Christian Reader) by the following Ser∣mons; concerning which, I will onely preface a few words, about their Occasion, Scope, and Mode. 1 For the Occasion, take that thus; there is ex∣tant among those choice labours of that Man of God, Mr. William Bridge (now of Yarmouth) one Sermon (pitty it is there, were no more) upon the story of the Woman of Canaan. This Sermon, I had a Childe (who is now with him who gave it) that was much taken with it. I perceived shee read it of∣ten with savour and delight; whereupon it was in my heart, to inlarge a little more upon that subject, which certainly is sweet to all those who have spiritual sen∣ses exercised to discern the glory and rellish of Gos∣pel discourses. This was indeed (Reader) the occa∣sion of these Sermons. 2 The Scope of them is, to do good to many, who are the sons and daughters of Mystical Canaan. In the History of the example here opened, wee may observe, what ought to bee the carriage, and what may bee the comfort of any soul, that hath or shall come to Jesus Christ. Indeed the way of coming to Christ, I have not inlarged in, (having formerly done that in my Ministerial course) the special thing at∣tended and aimed at, is, to direct and help poor souls, who know and are in the way to Christ, but lie under temptations and troubles, by reason of some seeming harsh, delatory, and denying entertainment, which they meet withall. And therein I hope this work will be unto thee (Read∣er) of advantage.
3 Concerning its Mode, or the manner of handling these Sermons; truly it is without affectation or curiosity, either as to phrases or fancies; and in the same plainness wherein they were preached (and ta∣ken) are they now without any further polish printed. And truly the bread of life is best, when it is plain. Experience hath put it beyond controversie, that the truths of God take and work most sweetly and so∣veraignly, where they are delivered most plainly and simply; Not in the wisdome of man, but in the simplicity of the Spirit, and in that ordinary lan∣guage wherein the Lord gives to each man utte∣rance. The way of such mens preaching is exceeding bad, (albeit the matter may bee truth and good) who rather tickle the ear, than touch the hearts of their hearers. This last I studied, and therefore that o∣ther I neglected. And (Reader) if thou affect words, thou maiest spare thy pains, for upon that score the ensuing Sermons will yeeld thee no pleasure. But in case thy heart bee set on things, which may concern thy soul, read humbly and seriously, and I dare (un∣der Christ) promise thee profit for thy pains. My desire was, and is, to serve poor, humble, hungry souls, that will be glad of any of the crumbs which Christ gives: and if thou bee such, fall to, and the Lord be with thee in thy perusal of these Sermons, which (with thy soul) I commend to the blessing of Christ, desiring thee (Reader) in thy prayers to re∣member him, who is Thine in soul-service for Christs sake, John Durant.
THE Woman of Canaan coming unto Christ. The First SERMON. Matthew 15. from vers. 22, to vers. 29. And behold a Woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto him, saying, Have mer∣cy on mee, O Lord, thou Son of David, my Daugh∣ter is grievously vexed with a Devil. But hee answered her not a word, and his Dis∣ciples came and besought him, saying, Send her away, for shee crieth after us. But hee answered and said, I am not sent, but un∣to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Then came shee, and worshipped him, saying, Lord help mee. But hee answered and said, It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to doggs. And shee said, Truth Lond: yet the doggs eat of the crumbs which fall from their Masters table. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O Wo∣man, great is thy Faith: bee it unto thee, even as thou wilt. And her Daughter was made whole from that very hour. IN all our addresses unto Christ (which is the great business of our Life and Happi∣ness) it concerns us, not onely to know the great Precepts that should guide us:
and the gracious Promises that may incourage us; But also to bee well acquainted with all those Pat∣terns and Examples of any that have gone to Christ before us; and likewise with those occurrences which they did (and wee are like to) meet withall in this work: Now (my Brethren) unto this purpose I know no one story in all the New Testament, which speaks of any coming to Christ, like that which I have read, to acquaint us a little by way of Pattern, what wee should expect when wee come to Christ. In the coming of this Woman to Christ, wee have something very patternable for us to minde. And in the carriage of Christ to her, wee may see what wee may expect at the hands of Christ, even then when wee come to him. There are fix heads unto which the whole story, as it is here recorded, may bee reduced. First, You have the coming of the Woman unto Christ, in vers. 22. Secondly, You have the seemingly harsh entertain∣ment that Christ gives her at first, for hee answered her not a word, and though his Disciples spake on her behalf, hee puts them off. Thirdly, You have the Womans good behaviour, notwithstanding all this, vers. 25. Shee worshipped him, saying, Lord help mee. Fourthly, You have the Repulse that Christ doth give to that, in vers. 26. But hee answered, and said, It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to doggs. Fifthly, You have her yet renewed recourse to Christ after that repulse, in vers. 27. Truth Lord: yet the doggs eat of the crumbs which fall from their Masters table. Sixthly and lastly▪ You have the blessed issue of
all, in vers. 28. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O Woman, great is thy Faith: bee it unto thee e∣ven as thou wilt, &c. My intention is not to confine my self to the Method, but to the Matter: In which you have, The Coming of the Woman. The Entertainment of Christ. The Carriage of the Woman under all. And the blessed Conclusion wherewith all is ended. At present wee shall consider the first of these, The Coming of the Woman of Canaan. And behold a Woman of Canaan came out of the same Coasts, and cried unto him, saying, Have mercy on mee, O Lord, thou Son of David, my Daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil. This Note Behold, is observed to bee a Note of Attention, and it is put in, to usher in some matter that is more than or∣dinary remarkable, and to bee minded by us. Here is a Woman, and a Woman of such a Country, and so coming, and that upon such an account, that both the one, and the other, and altogether, may very well bee brought in with a Behold. I have former∣ly spoken at large of souls coming to Christ, how God leads them, and how by Faith they are brought to him; and therefore shall not handle that now. Onely, there are here three heads of Observation, to which I shall reduce all at this time; And as sometimes I make three Sermons upon one head or point, so at this time I shall make one Sermon up∣on three heads. And the order in which I shall proceed to speak of them, shall bee this: First, Wee will a little consider the party coming. Secondly, The manner how shee comes. Thirdly, The occasion, or the account upon which shee comes at this time.
To begin with the first: Behold (saith the Ho∣ly Ghost) A Woman. You will bee ready to say to mee, What shall wee see in her? why truly in this Woman coming to Christ, you shall see this Truth. That the way to Christ is very free for poor souls of any place, in any condition. Here is a Woman (I list not to quibble upon that) but here is a Woman of Canaan. Canaan of all the places at those times had a mark upon it, to bee most opposite to goodness, and it may bee said of it, as once it was said of another place, Can any good come out of it? But of what place of the Coun∣try? shee was a borderer to Tyre and Sidon; Now Tyre and Sidon were the worst places of that Coun∣try. They were in a sense the Sodome sinks of Ca∣naan. The Salvage places (as wee say of some Sea-Towns) the most notorious Cities of all that Country; and yet now a Woman of this bad Country; the door is open, and shee comes to Je∣sus Christ. You read of some (in John 12.20, 21.) that came to Philip, and said, Sirs, wee would see the Lord, &c. Why my Brethren, It is a certain truth, whatever Country you are of, whatever place, sex or condition, the way is open, and you may freely come to Jesus Christ. This truth is so general in all the Gospel, and so frequently preached, that I shall not need to stay upon it. You read that Christ freely invited, and lovingly entertained all that came, even Publicans and Harlots, Sinners and Re∣bels, Enemies and ungodly ones; I say not, qua tales, but qui quondam tales, i. e. such as once were so vile, and therefore unworthy and unlikely to come; yet come they did, and the way was not hedged up, nor the door shut against them. There are three ends why I touch upon it, and for
which I desire you to Behold this truth in this woman. First, Behold this Woman, and truth for this end. To let you see The certainty of that great truth, That some of all sorts shall bee saved. Is the way to Christ open and free for any sex, of any condition and Country? then some of all sorts and Countries shall come in, Rev. 7.9. you read besides the sealed▪ ones (of the Jews) the Holy Ghost takes notice of an innumerable company of the Gentiles, and they are thus set out, to bee of all Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues. My Brethren, I do not intend so much as in the least to prop the opinion of general Redemption; but this I say, that sith the way to Jesus Christ is so free, and so open unto all, that therefore some of all, though not all, may come to him, and shall bee saved at last. I say not that all shall bee saved, (I could wish that errour had died with Origen) but I say, some of all, i. e. some of all conditions, Countries, Kindreds, &c. shall bee saved by Jesus Christ. And why O soul, may not wee bee of that some? But secondly, See (my Brethren) what an incou∣ragement here is unto Faith. The poor soul would come, and when hee comes hee must beleeve (your Faith are your feet by which you must come to Christ.) But now the great question is, When the soul is upon his way going to Christ, or upon his feet (It is such a sinner) that the question is, May hee come? yes, hee may, the way is open and free to any. In Luk. 7.37. You read of a Woman that came to Christ, that is called a sinner, &c. What ever Country you are of, I pray minde mee, bee it never so barbarous and base: Bee thou, O soul, a sinner of any City, suppose Sodome, there is this ground for your Faith to build upon, and if you
could (as it were) peep and look within the Veil, you should see that there are some of your Country∣men and women in Heaven. Father Abraham was in an Idolatrous Nation, yet in the 51. of Isaiah, saith the Holy Ghost, Look to Abraham; consider what hee was, &c. and Behold (saith my Text) A Woman of Canaan came to Christ; take notice of her well, for this end also, to strengthen my Faith, you may come what ere bee your Country. Thirdly, Behold withall, How inexcusable poor creatures will bee, that do not put forth indeavours to come to Christ. What will you have to say? will you say you might not? this truth will tell you there is a way open for any of you. This story, as it is in Mark 7.24. saies, Christ would have hid himself, but hee could not. Therefore, as it is an incourage∣ment to Faith, so it will leave unbeleef without ex∣cuse. This poor woman will condemn thee, poor Christless, careless Creature; Behold her coming, and tremble to think of thy tarrying away. To ter∣rifie all poor negligent souls, that minde not, seek not, come not to a Christ, is another end why I would have you all behold the Woman of Canaan coming: When shee is gone before, what will be∣come of you, if that you follow not after? certainly her coming will bee your condemnation. So much for the first head, the party coming. Secondly, How doth this Woman come? Why truly, my Brethren, you must keep Behold in your hand all along. Behold how shee comes, shee comes crying, and saying, Lord, thou Son of David, have mercy on mee. Verily (my Brethren) this manner of her coming deserves a Behold, as the very coming it self. There are three circumstan∣ces in the manner of her coming.
First, It is said, shee cried. Secondly, Shee cried, Have mercy on mee. And thirdly, O Lord, thou Son of David. First, Shee cried unto him. The word doth denote a very passionate cry; the Syriack doth use a word which doth signifie such a cry, which is as a beast that doth low after its Calf. Shee cried unto him, that is, Shee came with abun∣dance of affection and of intention of spirit. The Evan∣gelish Mark tells us, shee fell at his feet. I cannot better open this, than by turning you to that which is (as it were) a parallel, 2 King. 4.87. where you have a poor woman, whose soul was bitter, coming to the Prophet, and so soon as shee came to him, shee fell down and caught him by the feet. I pray be∣hold and learn, in all your addresses unto Jesus Christ, put forth the highest affection, put forth the most intenseness of your spirits that may bee, cry, and get hold of him, Christ will not charge thee with unmannerliness. Shee cried, it notes the Ago∣ny of her spirit that shee was in. Oh that our drou∣sie careless souls would but learn of this Woman! Many are so far from crying, that they scarce lisp. But remember it (Sirs) when you come to the Lord Jesus, stir up all your souls, let all your af∣fection then go out: Oh! when should wee ever let out all our souls to the utmost, if not then when wee come to close with Jesus Christ? There is a lawful and laudable passion to bee manifested in this matter. Christ loves and likes to hear our cries: O let not this poor womans crying, cry any of us shame, who are so far from a crying after Christ, that wee do almost cry away Christ: Well, behold her praise-worthy passion, and go thy way (soul) and imitate her therein. Never approach
Christ, but with much passion, with most earnest and ardent affection. Secondly, Shee cried, Have mercy on mee. Poor Woman, shee speaks as one poor in spirit, (that is) rich in Faith, (as Christ calls her after∣wards) shee had no Merit, but shee knew the Lord had Mercy, Behold it, and know this as a lesson to bee learnt hence, viz. That when you approach Christ, let it bee by Mercy, by meer Mercy. That same poor Publican in the Gospel of Luke cries, Lord bee merciful to mee a sinner. My Brethren, right closing with Christ, right saving justifying Faith which carries the soul to Christ, eyes nothing but Mercy. This is the main incouragement that keeps up Faith, yea, and this is the great Motive that doth still prevail with the Lord, therefore wee should take hold of it; in Ephes. 2.4. It is said, But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith hee loved us, &c. Thou hast misery that pincheth thee, but the Lord hath mercy that will pitty thee, and thou that sayest thou hast no works, know this, the Lord hath much grace. Behold the Woman of Canaan, and see how shee doth, and wee ought to eye and plead meer mercy, and that onely, and alwaies when wee come to Christ. Thirdly, Observe a little further what shee saith, Lord, thou Son of David. Shee speaks in lan∣guage beyond the learning of the Scribes and Pha∣risees; though they were great Doctors of the Law, yet they had not learned this mystery, to look up∣on Christ, as the Lord, and as the Son of David. It was indeed a miracle, that a Woman of Canaan should have this knowledge, and wee might say (as it was said in another case of Christ) whence hath
this Woman knowledge? why my Brethren, what could any of us have said more to Christ, to speak out our Faith, what is it? but that wee do beleeve in the Lord Jesus Christ: This phrase speaks Faith. Learn hence, In all your addresses to Christ, to come in the language of Faith, and speak to Christ as be∣comes Jesus Christ. Still know, hee is the Lord, Da∣vids Son, the promised one indeed. When you come to deal with Jesus Christ, bee not hasty, con∣sider who hee is (hee is the Lord) and hee is the Son of David, the true and the onely Messiah. Remember this lesson in all your addresses to Jesus Christ, re∣member this good example; it is a Saints pattern. There are two sorts of people I would desire to look upon this pattern. The first are those, who it may bee are but now be∣ginning to close with Jesus Christ. And secondly, Those who it may bee have revolt∣ed and back slidden from Christ, and are now returning again. I pray (Sirs) make as much haste as you can, but observe how you go. Go to Jesus Christ with much affection, with much humility, renounce Me∣rit, and cry Mercy, and still give the Lord his due: So you see this Woman of Canaan doth, and go thou O soul, in any case, and do likewise. That is all I will speak to the second head. To proceed to the third and last thing, Behold once again the occasion of this Womans coming, It was, That her daughter was grievously vexed with a Devil. The Evangelist Mark saies, shee was vexed with an unclean spirit. The one is a general, the other is a particular expression of it. I do not think it worth the while to dispute about this infirmity, or this pos∣session under which her Daughter lay, what it was; All that I shall note, shall bee not of a Physical,
but rather of a Spiritual and Theological Nature,— from this Mothers coming to Christ upon this oc∣casion. In the general, shee takes her childe to bee possessed with a Devil, shee goes not to a figure∣flinger, not to any cunning man (as simple ones use to say) shee goes not to the Devil in a Doctor, to cast out the Devil of her Daughter, No, but shee comes to Christ. I pray, in the general, Learn in all cases, distem∣pers, diseases, &c. to go first to Jesus Christ. You may go to men, to Physicians (though not to Wizards) but you must go to Christ, and behold the Woman of Ca∣naan to establish you in that good Christian custome, of having recourse to Christ on all occasions, in all necessities, whether for yours, and your selves. But this is general. There are two things in particular. The first particular thing I would have you learn out of this Mothers coming upon this account, Is, Parentive pitty in compassion on children. This Wo∣man of Canaan pitties her childe, and cries, as if shee her self felt her Daughters pain, and though shee was not sick simply, yet shee was Sympatheti∣cally; thou that canst let the little one cry, and it may bee perish while thou art fooling abroad, Oh remember the Woman of Canaan, have pitty on your poor children, and for their sakes go to Jesus Christ. And do I mean onely you should go to Christ for them when they are sick? no, but Oh pray for thy childes sick soul. It was a notable speech of one of the Antients, said hee, Wilt thou mourn over a body from whom the soul is gone, and not over a soul from whom God is gone? Oh shew that you have spiritual sympathy; many of you have a natural sympathy, if you see the childe burn and snake, &c. of a Feavour, thou canst pitty him;
but it may bee thou seest him shake and reel with drunkenness, and not pitty them at all. It is Mother∣ly pitty to sympathize with sick bodies, but Christian pitty to sympathize with sick souls. Friends, put on bowels (as the Elect of God) as the Woman of Ca∣naan, and have compassion on your children; In all their afflictions bee yee afflicted, with all their sorrows bee yee affected, and go to Christ, on their behalf, but not onely for bodies, but also and espe∣cially for their souls. This is the first particular. But the second is that which I would stand upon. Considering that this distemper upon the Daughter, did bring the Mother here unto Christ, I would espe∣cially speak to this, and intreat you to Behold this occasion of her coming, and it will afford us a very profitable Note. The Note is this. Behold what occasions the Lord sanctifies some∣times to bring souls to himself: What is the occa∣sion? My Daughter is sick. The particular Doctrine is this, That sometimes the Lord doth sanctifie corporal, or external occasions, and afflictions, to bring souls home to himself. The great means, the standing Ordinance by which the Lord brings souls to himself, is the Word, and the Word Preached. But yet I say besides that, the Lord is pleased sometimes to make use of other means, and among the rest, sometimes the Lord doth sanctifie external afflictions to bring home poor souls to himself. There are two things in all external afflictions that I would have all to minde. First, God sending. Secondly, God sanctifying of these afflictions. First, You should observe, That God sends them. Afflictions do not arise out of the dust; if any evil be
in the City or Family, it is the finger of the Lord, it doth not come by chance or fortune, it comes from God, and wee ought to behold him in it. But then secondly, Observe the Lord sanctifying afflictions. The Lord doth not alwaies sanctifie af∣fliction where hee sends it: But sometimes God doth sanctifie it unto many good and gracious ends and purposes; and in particular, I say, God doth some∣times to some souls sanctifie afflictions to this end, to bring home the poor soul to himself. There are three Comings unto Jesus Christ, in all which the Lord doth sometimes, to some persons, make use of corporal afflictions. First, There is that which wee call our first fun∣damental Coming to Jesus Christ; when the soul doth first come to Jesus Christ from his wandering rebellious estate and condition, when it is first brought out of the wilderness. Secondly, There is our gradual Coming to Christ; When the soul that is come to Christ in a good mea∣sure, comes a little nearer, hee comes from strength to strength, and so by degrees appears before God in Sion. Jacobs Ladder had many staves, and com∣ing to Christ hath many steps and stairs: Therefore besides our prime, or first coming unto Christ, there is a perfecting progress, or ascendent going to, or growing up in Christ higher and higher, which is, (as it were) our coming nearer and nearer. Thirdly, There is our Coming to Christ, which is our Return after some eminent Revolt, when a soul hath left its first love. Now in all these, and unto all these, the Lord doth sometimes sanctifie externall afflictions; the Lord doth sometimes sanctifie external afflicti∣ons, to bring the soul home to himself; As Poverty, The Lord makes many an one poor, that they may look
after a rich Christ. And Disgrace from creatures the Lord permits, and sanctifies that to make the soul long and labour, that they may bee precious in his sight. And Sickness upon us and ours; the Lord doth sometimes kill the childes body, to save the Mothers soul; take away the husband, the hee may bring the wife home to himself; wee might give ma∣ny notable instances. As in Matth. 8.2. There you finde a Leper came to Christ, and what occasion brought him; truly this mans Leprosie brought him to Christ, and for ought wee know, had not this man been a Leper, hee had never come to Christ. In Matth. 9.27. There wee hear blind men cal∣ling after Jesus Christ; but why? you shall see in that place, their blindness upon their eyes, make them look after Christ. And Matth. 21.14. The blind and lame came to him to the Temple to bee healed, &c. Thus it pleaseth Christ sometimes to sanctifie corporal afflictions to bring us home to himself. There are two Reasons why the Lord doth this. The first relates to us. The second, unto himself. First of all, I say, The Lord doth sometimes take this course, upon our account; considering us, the Lord works thus on us; In Jer. 9. saith the Lord there, I will melt my people, for how else shall I do for the daughter of my people? i.e. As if hee should say, I cannot tell else what to do for them. Oh my Brethren, the Lord sees sometimes nothing else will do it but affliction. Mee thinks I hear the Lord sometimes speaking of a poor creature after this manner, There is such a one, who so long as hee can bee well, and do well, as to externals, I shall not hear of him, I must therefore take some other
course with him; well, I will go and melt him, &c. Oh Sirs! this is our folly, that (whatever Armi∣nians dream) wee are so backward to come to Christ, that except hee draw, wee will not go; nay, except hee drive, wee will not stir, nor step forward; all the perswasions of the Lord, they will not work us up to free will, except hee make, hee add power to perswasion: Indeed in the day of his power, wee are (potentially, not perswasively onely) made a willing people, as Psal. 110. Upon this account it is, that Christ is, as wee say, fain to use the Rod sometimes to bring us home to himself. How oft doth Christ say, sith my Pipe will not, my Rod shall fetch such a sheep, and such a sheep? (i. e. It may bee thy soul, and thy childes soul.) I will make it a day of power, and by grace I will follow them with one means after another. You know what is said by the Lord, of a backward people, in Hosea 5. verse the last. In their affliction they will seek mee. In 2 Sam. 14.30. You read, Absolon sent for Joah to come to him, and hee would not, but Absolon sent and fired his fields, and then hee comes. My Bre∣thren, wee may very well parallel it; God saith sometimes, go Minister, preach to him judgement, and threatning, and that will not do; and go mercy, that will not do; then go sickness, & Oh! sick∣ness must preach a Sermon, before many will hear a word. Well, here is the first Reason (which as I said, relates to us) Afflictions are sent and sanctified to bring us to Christ, because often nothing else will. Truly, I say, this is our naughty Nature, that fair means will not work upon us, and this is our Fathers grace, that hee will take other means, but hee will effect his work. Secondly, The Lord doth it upon another account,
which relates to himself; To shew us, That hee is not tied to means, but can work by any providence if hee please. The Lord hath more means than one, and hee is a free Agent, hee can use which hee plea∣ses. If Onesimus, a naughty and bad servant, will not bee wrought upon at home under a good Ma∣ster, hee shall bee brought to the Gaol to hear a Sermon there; you have that intimated in the Epistle to Philemon. The account of it take in brief thus, Philemon was a godly man, and a good Master, and hee had 2 Church in his house; but Onesimus was nought for all that, his Master could not by any means work upon him, but hee breaks out and away, (it is likely) hee runs: And by the hand of Ju∣stice, (God ordering of it) is brought to a Gaol, where a Prison prepares him to hear, and a prisoner is provided to preach, and now hee is wrought upon. God hath many waies, if wee run from one, hee hath another to meet with us in. If a Pulpit do not, a Prison shall; if a soft word win not, a hard shall; hee will have us see that hee is not tied to any means, and therefore sometimes will by a sickness, a loss, &c. bring us home, as well as by other waies. There is onely one Objection that must bee an∣swered. Object. But doth not his seem to give some advan∣tage to those who cry down the preaching of the Word? It hath been a seemingly fair, but a really poor Argu∣ment of those to tell us, that God can make any thing an Ordinance, and therefore they cast off preaching, and say, what need that? cannot, and doth not God work sometimes without that? Repl. I answer generally; My Brethren, One good means may very well go hand in hand with another:
And my Brethren, none of the Lords means are Yea and Nay; destructive one of another, or incon∣sistent one with another: All may, and all shall stand; and in vain do wee think to make one an Ar∣gument against the other. It is certain God can alwaies, and hee doth often work by afflictions; But yet the Word is the chief, known, tried, and standing means: And after all that hath been said to the contrary, I still think, that though the Lord may make use of, and sanctifie afflictions (as sickness up∣on us and ours) to bring us home to himself, yet it is very rarely without the Word. There are two Considerations in particular, that I would have you minde. First, Many times Afflictions (as poverty and sickness) do make a word to work a word that wee have heard. The words of the wise (saith Solomon) they are as Nails fastened. Now it may bee the Lord fastens, or rather puts in a Nail in the Assembly by his Word, and the poor soul runs away; now the Lord sends an affliction after him, to fasten the Nail, and the man is cast upon a sick-bed, and now saies hee, I remember such an instruction. Af∣fliction brings home, and drives home a word for∣merly preached unto us, which wee heard, and did not regard or remember, but now by an Affliction are made to do both. I have thought Affliction doth that which Posset-drink doth in Physick (it is a plain similitude, yet mark it) A man takes Physick, and it works not, then give him a draught of Posset-drink, and that makes it work, that helps it on; so it is here. A Word is given out, and it works not, then the Lord sends Affliction, and that makes it work: But still it is the Word that works, the Word formerly heard, &c. You know what is said,
in Psal. 141.6. It is said there, when they are over∣thrown in stony places, they shall hear my words, for they are sweet. Why the words were sweet before, and heard before; but then they shall bee made to relish, and then they will minde them. Well, minde this, though Affliction work, it is rather as a help to the Word, than of it self without the Word. This is one Consideration. Secondly, Another Consideration is this, That mostly the Lord makes use of Afflictions (if not to) back what wee have heard, yet) to bring them to hear. Minde it; Many a time the poor Creature hath li∣ved without Sermon-hearing all his daies, and Af∣fliction comes, and that drives him to the Word: Now the soul will go to Lectures, now the soul will wait on the Ministery; so that Affliction doth rather bring him to the Word as the means, that work, and bee an effectual means without it. I pray then mark these Considerations, to keep up your highest thoughts of the Word, and that preached as the prime means; verily experience seals to these two things, that the work of Affliction, rather seconds a Word heard, or brings the soul to hear the Word, than simply works without it. Now then for the Application of this. There are five Uses that I shall lay before you. First, Doth the Lord this way use and sanctifie sick∣ness and affliction sometimes upon us or ours? Then look about you, and see whether God hath sanctified any affliction upon you. Wee live in a sickly time, it may bee sickness hath been in all your families; hath this (like the Woman of Canaan) brought you to Christ? did the sickness of thy body, advance thy foot to Christ? You will say, Wee are like the Woman of Ca∣naan,
and God forbid but wee should go to Christ when wee were sick. But did it bring you to Christ in a soul-way, in a soul saving-way? Quest. How shall I know that? Answ. Let mee propose two things to you, to let you try. First, When any affliction brings a soul to Christ (besides the material sickness or affliction that is upon the outward man) the soul is sensible of something like it, lighted upon the inward Man. There is a sense of the same spiritually, as well as corporally. As now, when sickness brings a man to Christ, hee speaks thus, I am sick, my head akes, I, and saith the man, my heart akes too. Oh wife! I am a poor sinner, I cried first out, I am sick in body, but now I am sick in soul; still the soul sees something like it in spirituals, if his sickness brings him to Christ. If thou onely art sensible of a corporal disease, and goest to Christ for that, then it is but a corporal coming, not a soul, nor a saving coming unto Christ: but when thy sick body leads thee to the sense of a sick soul; when thy Feavour, thy Ague, brought thee to feel the like distemper in thy soul, and thou there∣upon wentest unto Christ for that, then was sick∣ness indeed sanctified in a soul-saving-way. Secondly, Observe this, Hee that by any affliction or sickness is brought home to Christ, whatever the issue of the affliction may bee, his heart is for certain moving still towards Christ; even after the sickness is gone. You may have a man while the sickness is upon him, then hee may bee up in prayer with his Lord have mercy, &c. but when it is gone, his sick∣ness is gone, and devotion is gone too: But if this bring him to Christ, though the sickness bee gone,
yet the man follows after Christ still, and mindes him. The soul after sickness is as hee, Luk. 8.38. who besought the Lord that hee might bee with him. O soul! if thou camest to Christ sick, thou desirest to bee with Christ well; I pray then look to it, see if your afflictions have been sanctified, and if they have brought you unto Christ. That is our first Use. Use 2. Then secondly, Let this teach us all to prize those afflictions by which wee can say, the Lord brought us home to himself; I say, learn to prize such an affliction: Never speak ill of that sickness, by which the Lord Jesus brought thee nigh to himself. You say it hath been an hard time with you, sickness hath been sore in your families, but did Christ bring thee nigh to him? never speakevil of that affliction more. Minde Psal. 94.2. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, and teachest him out of thy Law. Hast thou been afflicted? hath that taught thee something of the bitterness of sin, of the necessity of Christ? and hath it taught thee to look after thy soul, to look after a Christ? happy man art thou. Oh my Brethren, many a man hath said to the praise of God, blessed bee God for such a sickness, &c. I have heard of some that have blessed God for plun∣dering, for poverty, for such and such a sickness on themselves and theirs, &c. And truly well they might so do, because it brought them home to Christ. Christ hath saved a parents soul by taking a∣way a childes life; Oh therefore, if God hath done so by you, you may sing, happy time, blessed afflicti∣on. I pray speak well of all things which help you home to Christ. Use 3. Thirdly, This point will give us a Lesson of Hope in the behalf of any of our Relations, whose
souls wee love, and labour with, till Christ bee form∣ed in them, but at present is not. Sickness, Loss, Affliction are a way sometimes. Now hope in the Lord; if thou that hast done thy indeavour upon thy poor Relation to bring him to Christ, and yet hee is not come, thou little knowest what affliction may do. It may be that which thou couldest not work upon thy childe with all thy instructions, that God may do with an affliction. I cannot advise you to pray; as I have heard of one (who it may bee, spake it ho∣nestly, though not handsomely, Lord break a legg or an arm, &c.) Lord send him a Feavour, an Ague, &c. I cannot advise you to that. But this I can say for your incouragement: God can send, and sancti∣fie an affliction to bring home thy childe at last. Christs Rod can do that which yours cannot; Oh therefore pray and hope, indeavour and hope, yet God can work and win upon thy yoke-fellow, thy childe, thy brother &c. For God sometimes you see sends and sanctifies afflictions, to bring in to Christ. Use 4. Fourthly, Let this teach us patiently to bear any affliction that may bee upon us for present; why so? because for ought wee know, God may sanctifie it to bring us nigh to himself; should not wee then bee patient? Possibly thou art a poor creature, that hast been but a Talker of Christ, onely a meer pretender, but yet to this day didst never re∣ally come to, nor rightly close with Christ, and now thou art sick, and weak. Free Grace may design, and intend thy real, experimental and truly saving knowledge of, and laying hold upon the Lord Jesus, and to that purpose it may bee (I say) that God brings affliction, O therefore learn patience; who can tell but the Lord will bee gracious, and by this
affliction bring thee home to himself, hee is cha∣stening thee here, that hee may not condemn thee hereafter. True it is, that no affliction (as the Apostle saies) for the present is joyous, but after∣wards it may bring forth the peaceable fruit of righ∣teousness. Oh therefore, I say, beware of repining and murmuring, for possibly the Lord afflicts thee, that hee may bring thee, as this woman, to him∣self. The last Use, Let all your hearts run out after this in all your afflictions, that (if it bee the Lords plea∣sure) it may work upon you, (as it did upon the Wo∣man of Canaan) to bring you neer to Jesus Christ: Minde and desire is then in all afflictions. This is that you should look after in your afflictions, not onely to consider that God sends it, but to observe how God sanctifies it. Say, Oh Lord, thou hast af∣flicted my body, do good to my soul; say, thou hast afflicted mee, and mine, thus or thus in body or e∣state; oh that indeed thou wouldest work upon mine heart thereby. Consider, to move you, First, It is your soul-concernments that do most of all ly upon you to consider in all your afflictions. It may bee God hath taken away all thy estate, and thou art considering how to make it up again, why know, it doth more concern thee to consider how thou mayest bee rich in Faith, and come to a good estate in Christ, rather than to vex thy self about thy estate and how to recover thy loss: Or else it may bee you are ill, and now your great care is to bee well again; Oh thou oughtest rather to consider thy soul-sickness, thy spiritual illness, and indeavour to get that cured in Christ, than thy poor carkass. I beseech you be∣loved minde, (as you use to say) the main, and know, that it is the soul that is that main, and do no
altogether minde your bodies, but sometimes minde your souls. Oh that God would make people, but to minde their souls more (I could wish) but as much as their bodies! Secondly, To move you, Consider, whatever the issue of any affliction may be, blessed are you if your souls are brought to Christ, It is well indeed if closing with Christ bee the conclusion. Let childe live or die, estate go or come, so thou and Christ meet toge∣ther, all is well. Blessed is the man that can say, I lost my estate such a day, and I found my Lord Je∣sus such a day, &c. Therefore suffer the word of Ex∣hortation; Above all things see how your souls are brought to Christ in every Affliction; and make it your grand work to observe and obtain that, by all the hand of God at any time upon you or yours. But before I conclude, I must answer this case of Conscience. Case. But will some poor souls say, Alass, If I should go to Jesus Christ upon such a carnal account, shall I bee accepted? Because my husband, wife, or childe is sick, will hee hear mee? Is this a fair foundation, or a good first Motive to bring mee to Jesus Christ? Resol. I answer, Truly my Brethren, If thou goest onely to Jesus Christ upon a carnal account, or occasi∣on, I cannot say Christ will bid thee welcome; But if thy carnal occasion bee but a Motive, to bring thee upon a higher account, thou mayest go and finde entertainment. Although a dirty shooe bring you into your Fathers house, yet your Father will make you welcome. Therefore I say in the Name of the Lord, do not stick at this case, but rather bless God that hath sent an affliction to awaken thee, to bring thee home, than question whether you shall bee
accepted upon this account. Let mee therefore end as I began. Behold the Woman of Canaan, for it may bee her condition is yours (in a sense) you have a sick childe, as shee had, &c. I pray thereupon go to Christ, as shee did; verily Christ will in no wise cast you off, in case you come. Suppose the first Motive bee low, and corporal, yet the Matter may prove high and spiritual. Who knows but the Lord hath sent divers sicknesses up and down for this end, to bring divers souls to Christ? I pray therefore minde it, and in all af∣fliction look and long that it may have the same operation on you, which it had on this Woman, who was by this means brought to Christ. And this shall suffice for this verse.
Christ may seemingly entertain (at first) very harshly. The Second SERMON. Matthew 15. from vers. 23, to vers. 29. But hee answered her not a word, and his Dis∣ciples came, and besought him, saying, Send her away, for shee crieth after us. But hee answered and said, I am not sent, but un∣to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Then came shee, and worshipped him, saying, Lord help mee. But hee answered and said, It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to doggs. And shee said, Truth Lord: yet the doggs eat of the crumbs which fall from their Masters table. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O Wo∣man, great is thy Faith: bee it unto thee, even as thou wilt. And her Daughter was made whole from that very hour. BEsides those Many Men, which upon an eminent account are recorded in the Gos∣pel; there are also sundry Women, who are in an eminent manner recorded likewise; and concerning whom the Holy Ghost hath noted something for our special observation, and imitation. Among others, there are Two Women in the Gospel, which are very remarkable: The one is the Woman
(that you read of, in Luke 8.) who is called, a sinner; And the other is the woman commonly known by the name of The Woman of Canaan; and both these women are recorded for eminent coming unto Je∣sus Christ. Wee have here in this place the story of The Woman of Canaan; and indeed it is a very holy History, and many things are in it which are to bee heeded by us. The last day I gave you an account of the Method in which the Holy Ghost doth here re∣cord it. But letting pass the Method, I told you I would stand upon the Matter of the story, wherein you have four heads. First, The coming of the Woman to Christ. Secondly, The entertainment that Christ. doth give her. Thirdly, You have her carriage under that enter∣tainment. Fourthly and lastly, The blessed issue of all. Wee began the last day with the first; The com∣ing of the woman to Christ, in vers. 22. And behold a Woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto him, saying, Have mercy on mee, O Lord, thou Son of David, my Daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil. There are three Circumstances in her coming that wee stood upon. The Party coming. The Manner of her coming. And the Occasion of her coming. The Party coming, It was a woman of Canaan, A Woman of Canaan, neer Tyre and Sidon, of a bad place in a bad Country. (But wee told you the way to Christ is open to all.) But then how did shee come? Shee came with much affection, shee cried, Lord, and shee came for meer mercy. (Justifying Faith still
goes to Free Grace, and Meer Mercy.) And shee came to him as hee was the Messiah, the Son of David; shee did, and wee must eye Christ as hee is, in all our ad∣dresses. Lastly, But what brought the good woman here? Why truly it was a sick childe at home, that was sore sick, that brought her to Christ. Whence wee observed, That sometimes the Lord doth sanctifie sicknesses, and other afflctions upon us and ours, to bring us home unto himself. I pray minde it, For, (My Brethren) wee have lived for some months under one sickness or other: But now let mee ask you the question, Have you done like the Wo∣man of Cannan? have you gone to Jesus Christ, not onely for them, but have you gone for your souls to Jesus Christ? Mother, hath thy sick childe brought thee savingly to Jesus Christ? or husband, let mee ask thee, hath the sickness of thy wife done a cure upon thy own soul? can any of you say, bles∣sed bee God, the Lord took away a childe, or hus∣band, but that was a strange cord that drew, and brought mee to himself; Oh! blessed is that sick∣ness upon you, or any of yours, which (as the Wo∣man of Canaans) brings you home to Jesus Christ; Therefore I shall press it home a little further in four things, by way of consideration, for you to take the more special heed unto the things which I then spake, and you heard, viz. The improvement of all afflictions to bring your souls to Christ. Consider first, Possibly, yea probably, the Lord did therefore send such a sickness to thy soul, that hee might bring thee home to himself; The Lord saw nothing else would do thee good, and therefore sent that: Thou wert, it may bee, a poor vain creature, that couldest scoff at a Sermon, and no preaching would
do thee good; now it may bee the Lord sends sick∣ness to bring thee in: Hee doth by sickness, as by a special servant, send for you, and it stands you upon to go to him; therefore now Brethren look about you, if ever God send a Messenger of a particular Errant, if the Messenger have not his answer, woe bee to you. It is a great evil to neglect any of the Lords Messengers. Secondly, It is certain, wee have all more reason to go to Christ for our souls, than upon the account of any sickness for our bodies. Our souls are our highest concernment; and there is more sickness, and more danger, in and upon your souls, which should carry them to Christ, than can bee upon your selves and families: There are but a few whose souls are better than their bodies. Indeed wee read of one, hee had a holy soul, but a weak body; holy Gaius, in the third Epistle of John; but generally our souls are worse than our bodies, and therefore wee have more reason to go for our souls. The Feavour it may bee is upon thy body, and is it not in thy soul? the De∣vil possesses thy childes body, doth hee not possess thy own soul? Oh therefore considering you have more reason to go for your souls, than your bodies, set every thing bee sanctified in you, and have that work upon you. Thirdly, The Lord Jesus hath more bowels, and hee is easier prevailed withall to do for the soul, than in any case for our bodies, or for the bodies of our Re∣lations. You never read of any that came to Christ for their souls, that Christ did cast them off. The Lord Christ may in wisdome and grace deny you, when you come for your body; hee may say, it is not good you should bee well, but hee will never say, It is not good your souls should bee well.
Fourthly and lastly, The person that goes to Christ in, and for his soul by any affliction, gets more by the affliction, than hee could get by all things else. Minde it, I beseech you. Oh my Brethren, what do you get when you come to Christ? why saith Christ, Hee that comes to mee shall never hunger nor thirst more; that is, in his soul; And hee that comes unto mee, I will in no wise cast out: you get soul-satis∣faction, and soul-enjoyment, and is not that above all bodily gettings? And therefore I beseech you upon these accounts, look about you, how the hand of God is sanctified to you by the afflictions which are, have been, or may bee on you. But wee shall now proceed. How doth our Lord entertain this woman? which is the second thing wee are to come to, Christs man∣ner of entertainment: Why truly my Brethren, very strangely, very harshly, wee may speak it with reve∣rence, very harshly. In vers. 23. Hee answered her not a word; and though the Disciples spake on her behalf, vers. 24. Hee saies, Hee was not sent, but to the last sheep of the house of Israel; though shee worships him, and renews the request again, hee tells her, It was not meet to take the childrens bread, and cast it to doggs, vers. 26 From the whole carriage of Christ to her, observe this, Doct. That sometimes the Lord Jesus is seemingly harsh to some poor souls when they come to him. Or if you will thus, Christ sometimes very roughly entertain poor souls. Mark the point well. Indeed it is a strange point, A point that seems to coss all the Gospel: What, that Christ, whose Name is Love, and whose Nature is Love, that Christ, who is rich in Mercy, who is full of pitty, who hath made
sweet Promises, to invite, and left great presidents to incourage us to come; that ever hee should enter∣tain us with frowns, with harshness, with severeness, this is strange: Yet sometimes this is true. Wee have a great instance of it here in this poor woman, and wee shall indeavour to open it to you; onely be∣fore I proceed to the proof, I pray consider, and remember how I express the point, to prevent mi∣stakes. It is easie to misunderstand this unto the dishonour of Christ, and our own disturbance, if wee minde it not well: Therefore consider how I word or phrase the point. Now there are three words which I put into the doctrine, which are as so ma∣ny limitations or cautions, that neither you, nor I may mistake Christ, nor the text, nor the president; when ever wee speak of it. First, I say seemingly. Secondly, Some times. Thirdly, I put in, to some souls. First of all, I say, Christ is seemingly harsh in his entertainment. My Brethren, Jesus Christ is not really so, but a man may seem to bee that hee is not. It was said of Paul (Act. 8.17, 18.) this man seems to set forth strange doctrines, which yet hee did not, hee preached true doctrine, viz. The right way of the Living God. It was a slander of him that said in the Parable, of Christ, that hee was a hard Master: But yet it is a real truth, Though Jesus Christ bee not so, yet hee may SEEM to bee so; Jesus Christ may seem to bee, and to do, that which neither hee is, nor will do. It is said in Luk. 24.38. that Christ made as though hee would have gone further. Christ really did not intend it, but made, as wee say, a shew of it; and so here; Christ doth not intend to deal harsh∣ly with any that come (no, certainly Christ intends
all Love, and all sweetness, &c.) but yet hee may seem so to do. Minde that word, it is seeming, or in shew, Christ carries it harshly. But then secondly, It is so but sometimes, it is not alwaies; The Lord will not chide for ever, as David said. And so in Isa. 57.16. hee will not contend alwaies, nor bee wroth for ever. My Brethren, Je∣sus Christ may seemingly carry it so sometimes, but not alwaies. As first meeting, in John 20.15. when Christ and Mary met in the Garden, Christ ar first carries himself strangely, but afterwards hee opened himself sweetly, and clearly to her; and so Christ may for a while carry himself seemingly, harsh, or rough, it may bee for a moment, a day, a year, a few years, but not alwaies: Christ cannot alwaies re∣strain his bowels, nor cast off for ever. Take these two truths as everlastingly and un∣doubtedly true. The first is, That Satan will not alwaies spare thee. And secondly, Christ will not alwaies chide thee. Satan for a while will give a soul good words, to tempt him to sin, and folly, and to that end may speak fair and smooth; but at last Saran will bee like himself, a Devil, a dread and terrour: And Christ may for a season carry it harshly, but hee will not, indeed cannot do so for ever. To the end hee must bee (as hee is) very kinde. And then thirdly, It is but to some persons, not to all. My Brethren, all that come to Jesus Christ are not entertained alike; the most are entertained with present love; but a few, some there are that hee doth seemingly for a while entertain with frowns. I do not read of any such story in the Gospel as this.
Wee read of many who came to Christ, and all en∣tertained by Christ sweetly, none but this poor wo∣man is left as a president of this point; but yet one clear President is enough for proof. And there are onely two things wee shall do in the amplification of the Point. First of all, Wee shall shew you, How Christ may seemingly carry it harshly, and strangely to poor souls, when they come to him. Secondly, Whence it comes to pass that Jesus Christ, thus strangely carries himself seemingly harsh? For the first, How doth Jesus Christ discover any seeming harshness in his carriage to those that come to him? I will go no further than to the instance of the Text. I will gather six things out of this story, wherein you and I may learn and see, that some∣times Christ may discover, as if hee were unkinde, harsh and severe. First, It appears upon the first view of the whole, Hee did not entertain her presently. Secondly, Possitively, Hee did not so much as give her a word. So it is, vers. 23. Thirdly, When others spake to him on her behalf, hee refuses to hear. Vers. 23, 24. Fourthly, The Lord doth reject her, though shee doth renew and reiterate her motion again to him. Vers. 25. Fifthly, Hee hints that, which might as one would think dash the poor creatures hope. Vers. 26. Sixthly and lastly, Hee may keep us long ere hee send us away, with that wee come for; As hee did her. Now soul minde it, and if Christ seem to frown, and to carry it strangely, let it not seem strange, for it is no new thing.
First, The Lord Jesus Christ doth not entertain her presently. One would think, I say, one would think, (especially considering the many former Presidents of persons coming to Christ) that this woman should have been embraced presently: How lowly doth shee come? how loudly doth shee cry? in the lan∣guage of what Eaith doth shee speak? yet Christ doth not answer her. Remember yee, the Lord Je∣sus may let a soul sometimes long lye before him, and never take him up. You indeed read of the Prodigal, who when hee fell upon his face, the Fa∣ther fell upon his neck; but beware thou promise not thy self this presently. Christ may let thee fall upon thy face, and not fall upon thy neck. In Matthew 11. verse last, You have there a sweet call, Come unto mee yee that are weary, &c. Now I pray minde it, a poor soul may go to Jesus Christ very weary, and heavy laden, and the Lord may let it lye a great while under the burthen of filth, under the burthen of guilt and of fears, and may seem, for a while, not at all to minde it. Certainly, it could not bee a little while, that David lay under the burthen of Gods absence, after hee had sinned against him: See Psal. 38. and the beginning; where hee complains, That his wounds did fester, and were corrupt. David was like a man going to a Chirurgion with many wounds, and the Chirurgion lets the wounds stink, before hee gives a plaister to him. Sinners, look a∣bout you, The Lord Christ may let you lye without a plaister many a day, without washing your wounds many a day. Paul prayed three times for one thing, and that thing denied him. If ever you come and knock, and cry, and call, and the Lord doth not pre∣sently open, do not say, never one was so dealt withall as I am; the Woman of Canaan was so
before thee, that is clear, shee was not present∣ly made welcome. Secondly, The Lord did not onely not entertain her, but did not speak a word to her. So it is expresly, vers. 23. The Lord answered her not a word. Oh my Brethren, how harsh was this? what, not a word? O! not a word? Why, if the Lord Jesus will not pre∣sently give the balm that the wounded soul doth beg, will hee not speak? No, not a word? And yet it is noted, Shee cried after him; yet not a word, not a word. It is upon record as the case of Saul, setting forth the greatness of his distress (when God did most severely deal with him) That he Lord did not answer him by dreams or visions, nor by Urim nor Thum∣mim; that is, God did not speak a word. And my Brethren, let mee tell you, It is a harsh dealing, when the Lord shall let us lye crying, and hee bee dumb, as if hee did not hear. It is harsh not to bee heard. There are two waies by which the Lord speaks, viz. 1 By his Spirit. 2 By some actual dealing with the soul. 1 Sometimes Christ saith by the Spirit, Soul, bee of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven. 2 At other times hee gives good signs, by sup∣porting and refreshing the soul; but it may so fall out, as that hee may carry it so seemingly harsh, as not to answer a word to the soul either way. And this is no new thing, wee read in Psal. 22.1, 2. Da∣vid there (who was then a type of poor souls) cries out there, Why art thou so far from helping mee, and from the words of my roaring? O God I cry, but thou hearest not. So in Job 30.20. saith Job, I cry unto thee, and thou dost not hear mee: I stand up, and
thou regardest it not. Hee saith, God did not so much as regard what hee said. If the Lord Jesus would not presently entertain us, to do as wee wish, yet certainly one would think, a word were but little; but sometimes Christ will not speak a word. Thirdly, The Lord carries it so seemingly harsh, that when others speak on her behalf, hee refuses to hear. Mark it; here were (as wee say) good spokes∣men for this woman. Vers. 23. His Disciples besought him, saying, send hr away, for shee crieth after us, i. e. As if they should say, Lord, the poor woman cries very loudly, shee cries after us, as the beast after the Foal, &c. What saith Christ? why, I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Hee puts them by, hee gives them a denial, and something more, as wee shall shew by and by. In Numb. 12. you read a sad story of Miriam, Moses his Sister, shee had provoked God, and God had smote her with a Leprosie, and Moses cried to the Lord for her, saith the Lord, If her Father had spit upon her face, should shee not bee shut out of the Camp seven daes? Oh my Brethren, sometimes the Mi∣nister may, the Father may pray, and the Mother may pray for the childe, and yet the Lord will not speak, but put them off. If Moses and Samuel should speak to mee for this people, yet my minde could not bee towards them Jer. 15.1. Oh my Brethren, It is no new thing, for the Lord to carry it so seem∣ingly harsh, as not to hear others when they speak on our behalf. Possibly the soul may say, I am un∣worthy to speak, but had I some friend to speak on my behalf, certainly then hee would hear; why, they may all speak for thee, and yet Christ may put them all by. Fourthly, The Lord doth reject her, though shee
doth renew, and reiterate her motion again to him. This is harsh; And pray minde how shee doth it, Shee came, and shee WORSHIPPED him, saying, Lord help mee. It is not said in verse 22. that shee wor∣shpped him (or that shee fell down) But here it is said, Shee worshipped him. Shee renews her request with vehemency, and with reverence; and here was her humiliation put forth. Weigh it but a while. Lord help mee, &c. My Brethren, shee speaks at this rate, as if shee should say, Lord help, if thou do not help mee, I perish; Lord help mee, if thou dost not help mee, vain is the help of Man. Shee adores him as the Lord, But doth this prevail? nothing less; though shee re∣news her cry, yet the Lord turns her off. It is harsh not to bee bid welcome, not to have a word not to have others heard when they speak for us; but when the soul shall repeat, and re-inforce, and as it were heighten her humiliation and prayer, then to bee rejected, this is an addition to all the former; yet sometimes the Lord doth thus. And wee finde a like instance to this in ohers; saith Job, in chap. 16.6, 7. Though I speak, my grief is not asswaged: and though I forbear, what am I eased? but now hee hath made mee weary: thou hast made desolate all my company. The Lord may as it were tyre out the soul, and make it weary. And so in Psal. 69. and the beginning, I sink into the deep, I am weary of cry∣ing, my throat is dried, mine eyes fail while I wait for my God. The Lord may let the soul cry again and again, till the very moisture is dried up, and yet to put it off; so that the soul may cry out with Job, Job 23.13. hee is of one minde, who can chage him, &c? Therefore the Church hath a remarkable ex∣pression (Lamentations 3.8.) Also when I cry and shout, hee shutteth out my prayer. Shouting, it is an
addition unto crying. Why here is the poor wo∣man crying, in vers. 22. I and shee cries and shouts, in vers. 25. and yet the Lord puts her off. Fifthly, The Lord Christ may carry it so seem∣ingly harsh, that hee may hint that, that may seem to dash the poor creatures hope. Oh this is sad, and sore indeed (Beloved) That the poor creature, who it may bee came with a little Faith, and a little Hope, should bee entertained so harshly, as the soul may bee ready to say, Now farewel Faith, and farewel Hope, &c. Thus the Lord hath carried it to some before; as if hee had cut off all their hope. It was a very sad expression that they used, Ezek. 37.11. Then hee said unto mee, Son of Man, these bones are the whole house of Israel: Behold they say, our bones are dried, and our hope is lost, wee are cut off for our parts. Why truly (poor soul) Jesus Christ may so speak to you, that you may say, Now our hope is gone; and wee, for our parts (whatever may bee the portion of others) for our own particulars, wee are cut off, and cast off; And Christ may carry it so, as if hee gave, (I say as if (not that hee doth really) but I say) as if hee gave us ground so to say; that hee hath cut off all our hope, and destroyed all that upon which our expectations were bottomed. You have Job complaining of this himself, Job 19.10. Mine hope hath hee removed like a Tree. But of all expressions, that is the most remarkable, which you have in Lam. 3.54. The waters flowed over mine head, then I said, I am cut off. Oh Sirs, Jesus Christ may for a while so speak, that the soul may say, now my hope is perished, and now I will sit down and despair. And mark it but a little in this great instance of this wo∣man of Canaan: For here are two words that Christ
useth to this woman, which indeed did seem (for it was no more than a seeming) to dash all her hope in peeces. First, Thē one is, I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, i. e. As if Christ should say, My good friends, my dear Disciples, you pitty the woman, so it may bee do I, but what shall I do? I cannot go beyond my commission, I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel; this woman is none, shee is a Canaanite. Now how might the poor woman complain sadly, Oh Lord, are none of the Canaanites in thy commission? am not I in thy commission? then farewel Lord; Hee speaks a word that might even dash all her hope. So say some souls, Christ is onely for the Elect, I am no e∣lect one; and thus the soul goes away hopeless. Secondly, And the other word that Christ speaks, which might dash all her hope, is in the 26. vers. It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to doggs. Oh what a killing word was that? poor heart! shee might rather have expected that the Lord would have looked upon her, as upon a silly Lamb, as upon a trembling Dove, that hee would speak softly to her; but how roughly doth hee speak? And how might this poor woman have mourningly muttered, and in secret sighs have hereupon spoke thus in her self? What, must not doggs have childrens bread? what said hee? &c. Ah my soul, didst thu mark it? Doggs, and childrens bread, and I none of them, and it is not meet, &c. Brethren, Christ may call a Lamb a Dogg; this seems to bee very harsh. It was a harsh speech that the Lord did use to his people, when hee cried, Go to your Gods that yee have served. Christ may say, you are a dogg, get you gone.
Quest. But how could Jesus Christ speak thus? wee know hee did account her Israel in the Spirit, though not in the Letter, as a Lamb, not a dogg; how did Christ then say, I am not sent, but to the lost sheep, and thou dogg must not have childrens bread? Answ. There are these kinde of Answers. First, Some there are that say thus, Christ speaks after the manner of Men, as a Minister in the way of his Ministery, guided by his Commission. So Mr. Cartwright, those that were not of the Jewish Church, either by birth, or proselitism, they were out of the commission, that seems to satisfie some. But I will tell you what satisfies mee: The Lord speaks two waies. 1 Either plainly, and positive, as hee intends, and as things are. 2 Or by way of Trial, probationally, to try us. Mark it, The Lord may speak that to try us, that hee doth not intend; neither doth hee mean as hee speaks. The Lord may bid Abraham go offer Isaac, yet hee meant no such thing. John 6.6. When Christ spake of buying bread for the multitude, it is said, this hee spake that hee might try them: Thus the Lord speaks, that hee might try us. The Lord may speak doubtingly, and hint heavy words, not that hee hath hard thoughts, but onely that hee might try us. Hee may speak doubtingly of our Election, that wee may make it sure. Sixthly and lastly, Herein Christ may shew him∣self seemingly harsh, in that hee may at last keep us long, ere hee doth send us away with that wee come for. This woman had at last her request, but it was long first (as wee say.) Christ may entertain us, and not speak any way, so as to trouble us, yet
for all that hee intends not to give us presently the thing wee come for. My Brethren, the Lord Jesus may make us wait daies, weeks, months, and years, (though hee let us within his house, and speaks to us now and then) and yet hee may not presently give us the particular thing that wee come for; this is usual for Christ, to make some tarry, which yet hee turns not away. And truly wee that are hasty, count this harsh: Christ may make us wait a great while, and that wee esteem, and it seems to be very harsh: But this is a known thing, and I shall not enlarge upon it at all; Therefore thus much of the first thing, wherein Christ may seem to carry it harshly towards those that come to him. The second thing is, Whence comes this to pass that Christ doth so carry himself? Truly my Brethren, It is strange, after so many clear Prophecies, after so many comfortable Pro∣mises, after so many experiences of Christs kinde dealing, that hee should with any soul, at any time, upon any account, carry it thus harshly to them. I shall give you an account of this in general first, and in particular afterwards. My Brethren, In the general you must know this, That Jesus Christ is not so tied by Prophecie, nor ob∣liged by Promise, but that in all his dealings hee may act as in his Prerogative. Hee is the freest Agent that is. It is prophesied of Christ, That hee will gently lead those that are with young; and promised, that those that come to him, hee will in no wise cast off. Now Christ is not so bound up by this Prophecie, or Pro∣mise, but that hee may act his own Preregative. And there is a double Prerogative Christ will maintain. First, Of his Absolute Will.
Secondly, Of his Infinite Wisdome. First, The Prerogative of his Absolute Will (I say) Absolute Will. My Brethren, Jesus Christ may give Mercy to whom hee will, and hee may give Mercy how hee will. I finde our Lord and Saviour, two times in parti∣cular standing upon the Prerogative of his Will; And let us in a word consider them. One is in Matth. 20.15. where hee speaks of himself in a Parable, May not I do with mine own what I will? The other is in the last of John 21, 22. where Pe∣ter asks Christ, Lord, what shall this man do? saith Christ, in vers. 22. If I will that hee tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Christ will have all to know his will is free; Hee wills as hee wills: What if God will shew mercy this way to one, and another way to another, hee hath his Prerogative Royal? what if hee will when Jairus comes for his Daugh∣ter, go presently? and what if hee will dispute it with the Woman of Canaan? Christ will still so act, as to maintain the Prerogative of his Will. Secondly, Hee will maintain the Prerogative of his Wisdome; Though hee come with a commis∣sion, yet hee is to act as his Wisdome is. And thus, though hee bee a servant (as hee is the Fathers ser∣vant) sent with absolute command, to receive poor souls when they come; Yet how, and when, and what way, is left to his own Wisdome. Rejoyce, and bee of good comfort; Christ is bound to receive all that come to him, I but how hee should receive them, that is left to his Wisdome; And it may bee much wisdome in the Lord Jesus Christ to receive some harshly, and some sweetly. Two boyes go to School, the one is of a rugged nature, and the o∣ther of a sofr nature; The Masters wisdome knows
how to deal with either of them: So that now, this is the general account. Jesus Christ being left to the Prerogative of his own Will and Wisdome, hee doth therefore sometimes entertain some souls harshly. There are six particular accounts of it that I can∣not now name, but must leave to bee inlarged the next time. Use, Onely for the Use of this; My Brethren, you have heard a strange, yet a certain Truth, That the Lord Jesus doth sometimes seemingly entertain some souls harshly. Now all that I would say is this. 1 Do not Mistake mee. 2 Do not Mistake your selves. 3 Do not Mistake this Truth. There are these three Mistakes that all our hearts are liable to, either the one or other of them; one while they mistake the Preacher, and say, hee spake that which never entred into his heart to speak; Another while they mistake themselves, and a third time the Truth it self. Now I pray thee take heed of all these. Therefore first, Do not Mistake mee. Though I tell you the Lord Jesus may entertain some harshly, I do not this to keep you off from Christ. Oh, the Lord knows here is my heart, and this must bee my labour while I live, to draw you to Jesus Christ. But what said Christ, in John 16.3. ha∣ving before been telling them of great persecutions they must go thorow, saith Christ? These things I tell you, that when they come, yee might not bee offended. Oh soul, that is my aim, intent, that if thou art a poor soul coming to Christ, thou mayest not bee startled; I tell you before-hand, Christ may frown, hee may turn the deaf ear, not that you should keep off,
but that when these things come to pass, that you should not stumble nor bee offended, but that you should go on. And therefore is there ever a poor soul that saith, God hath wrought upon mee lately, but I have been going to Christ, and I have knocked, and hee speaks not a word? Oh bee not discouraged, the Lord sometimes will do thus. Secondly, Do not Mistake your selves. Poor sinners are apt to mistake themselves, as now, when they hear of Christ, that Christ is ready, and willing to receive, us what use do they make of it? Why say they, then wee may go when wee will, and so live as they list, and think to go to Jesus Christ. No, mistake not, Christ may receive thee harshly; do not deceive your selves, Christ is a Lion, and hee can roar; though hee will not tear you to peeces, yet hee knows how to carry it severely sometimes. There is Hay and Stubble laid upon the foundation, and yet they are saved, but how? but as by fire. Sinners, sinners, you may bee saved coming to the Lord Je∣sus, as the Woman of Canaan, but beleeve it, you may bee saved by fire, hee may call you Dogg, be∣fore hee gives you the childrens bread, and make you wait long before hee answer. Do not mistake your selves, and provoke Christ to make you know this truth to your cost and sorrow. Thirdly, Do not Mistake the point. A mistaken truth is the ground of some great er∣rours; as well as any thing else; indeed many er∣rours are truths mistook. And there are two Errours, that people may run into, if they mistake this point. First, Doth the Lord Christ deal thus with some? Therefore (what therefore?) Why I was mistaken, the Lord never dealt so with mee; therefore I am
not right. Nay stay there, I did not say the Lord dealt so with all, nor alwaies, but with some at some∣times, there are some the Lord kisses presently. Two humours coming to the Physician, have not the same kinde of Physick: Fine or thin humours, and rough and strong humours are not alike purged; the one is, and may bee purged more gently, the other more roughly. You have an instance of two in one place, viz. Lydia and the Jaylor, Act. 16. Fine Lydia (as I may so call her) of a tender spirit, the Lord takes up the latch, and enters softly, silently, without any great noise, without any rough hand, but the rough Jaylor, hee hath an Earthquake, &c. Do not say, I am not right, because the Woman of Canaan was so dealt with, and I am not. Secondly, Do not mistake the point, and say, Well, it is true, and the Lord deals thus with mee, and I think it will never bee better. Oh say not it will never bee better; No, my Brethren, though the Lord deal harshly with thee, yet hee will use thee bet∣ter: Cry not, Oh the Lord hath entertained mee harsh, and hath been silent, and not spoke, and that which hee hath spoken hath been in wrath, hee hath called mee dogg, and therefore I can expect nothing, &c. Why know, the Lord doth do it but sometimes, and know, that that God that speaks harshly to thee now, will speak sweetly afterwards. Note that place, Judges 10. The people of Israel there cry to God, deliver us this once, what saith the Lord, in vers. 13. You have forsaken mee, go to your Gods, I will deliver you no more; get you gone, saith God, and yet mark, they follow on their cry, save us but this once, and it is said, in vers. 16. his soul was grieved for them. Oh my Brethren, though the Lord do seemingly enter∣tain you harshly at first, yet bee of good comfort, hee
may yet speak well to you, yea hee will at last. Onely let mee conclude with a little peece of the story of Joseph. It may bee there are some of the women of Canaan, that have cried long; pray remem∣ber Joseph, and Josephs Brethren came down to him, My Lord (say they) wee are the children of one Man, and wee come to buy corn, and Joseph answered them roughly, by and by hee laies one by the heels; hee lets them go, and keeps but one; Oh the poor Brethren of Joseph might think, what shall wee do? wee are come into a strange Country, and wee meet with strange language; wee came to buy bread, and wee are made prisoners; you all know the story, how Jo∣seph entertained his Brethren at last. Three things are in Josephs story, in the book of Genesis. First, Though hee speaks roughly, yet his bowels were towards his dear Brethren. Secondly, Though hee spake roughly, it was that hee might have Renjamin. And thirdly, Though hee spake roughly, yet at last hee entertained them royally. Jesus is our Joseph, and wee go to him for corn, the Lord may speak roughly to us, as Joseph did to them. But first, Hee hath bowels when hee speaks roughly. Oh Jesus his bowels did roll to this poor woman, when hee spake roughly. When I spake against him, my bowels were turned within mee, saith God of E∣phraim. Oh thou childe of Canaan, thou sayest hee hath called thee Dogg, beleeve it, hee is grieved for it at his heart. Oh the sounding of the bowels of Christ are often towards us when hee seems to carry it harsh. And then secondly, Why did hee speak so harshly
at first? it was all to get Benjamin; let us allude to it, and apply it to you: You have a Benjamin, the Lord loves, your hearts, your soul, your spirit, that is your Bejamin; the Lord speaks roughly, that hee may have Benjamin, and when once that Benjamin comes, a living heart is brought to him, hee will quickly make friends. Lastly, Joseph made a large recompence for all; and truly so will the Lord Jesus make a large amends for all. Oh children of Canaan in the Promise! and thou woman of Canaan in the letter! though the Lord seem harsh at first, yet at last hee will bee sweet; they shall have corn and mony too, they shall have enough to bring them where they shall have all the Land. Thou shalt have soul and body-mercies, mercy for the way, and mercy for the Country. The Lord Jesus will deal bountifully. The Lord may deal roughly, but hee will yet deal royally. How did hee deal with this woman? Oh Woman! bee it unto thee even as thou wilt. Jesus did never speak so to any body. Christ may say at last, Oh soul, go to the pot of Manna, and take and eat what thou wantest, what thou wishest. And, poor soul, bee it to thee even as thou wilt, for soul, body, daughter and all. Though the Lord Christ may speak roughly at first, and entertain seemingly severe, yet hee doth end really sweet. Thus much at present.
Reasons why Christ at first seems to bee harsh. The Third SERMON. Matthew 15. from vers. 23, and so on. But hee answered her not a word. And his Dis∣ciples came and besought him, saying, Send her away, for shee crieth after us. But hee answered and said, I am not sent, but un∣to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Then came shee, and worshipped him, saying, Lord help mee. But hee answered and said, It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to doggs, &c. BEsides those things which are commonly ex∣perienced, and which must bee certainly expected in the coming of every soul to Christ, besides those, there are some RARE extraordinary things, that now and then fall out upon some souls in their coming to hrist: And my Brethren, it concerns us to bee acquainted with them, that in case they should befall us (as others) wee may know what to think, and how to carry our selves. Now in this story of the Woman of Canaan, wee have some of those rare and extraordinary things, which may befall some souls when they come to Christ. Indeed wee have not the like History in all the New Testament unto this; you read of ma∣ny
that came to Christ, and you read how Christ did entertain them, but you never read that Christ did carry it so to any, as hee did to the Woman of Ca∣naan. There were four heads of matter unto which I said we might reduce this story. First, The coming of the Woman to Christ, that wee have dispatched. The Woman came upon a low account at first, shee had a childe-sick, possessed with Satan, and her sick childe did revive a dead soul, and brings her to Christ. But now the second head wee are come to, It is Christs entertainment of this Woman. How doth Christ entertain her? shee comes with much affection, shee speaks with great humility, how doth Christ welcome her? truly very strangely, hee answers her not a word; And when the Disciples spake on her behalf, hee seems to reprove them; when shee renews her request, hee puts her off with a dreadful answer; so strangely doth Christ some∣times carry it to poor souls. The Doctrine wee are upon from the carriage of Christ to the Woman, is, Doct. That Iesus Christ is seemingly harsh sometimes to some souls when they come to him. Wee expressed the Doctrine with more caution, because it is rare, and it must not bee mistaken; Therefore wee told you the lst day, those three ex∣pressions are boundaries of the point. 1 It is but seemingly; There is harshness in the carriage, when none in the heart, 2 And that sometimes. 3 And but to some persons; wee do not read of any more but this one, to whom Christ did carry it so.
There were two things I said I would open, in the doctrinal part. First, Wherein Christ might shew some kinde of harshness sometimes to poor souls. This wee opened by this instance of Christs car∣riage to this Woman. 1 Hee doth not entertain her. 2 Hee doth not speak to her. 3 Puts off them that spake for her. 4 When shee renews her request, shee is not the better. 5 Nay, hee speaks that as might dash her hope. 6 And at last hee doth for her, but upon a great dispute, and after denials and delaies. Secondly, But whence is it that the Lord should thus sometimes, unlike himself (as wee may so speak) carry himself thus to poor souls? The Prophe∣cies speak contrary, the Promises speak fairer, whence is it the Lord whose Name, and whose Na∣ture is love, should deal so harshly with any when they come to him? I answer, Though God will fulfil the Prophecies, and make good the Promises, yet hee will keep up the Prerogative both of his WILL and of his WIS∣DOME, that in the general I spake unto the last time. But there are six particular Reasons that I shall give of the point; Christ may have six ends, or six Reasons why hee will deal, it may bee with you, as with the Woman of Canaan. First, Christ hath a design to further humiliation. Secondly, Christ hath a design to make a little trial upon the poor soul. Thirdly, Christ hath a design to caution many, by dealing harshly with some.
Fourthly, Christ hath a design fully to bring the soul to Gospel self-denial. Fifthly, Christ hath a design to heighten himself in the heart. And sixthly and lastly, That the soul may catch more hastily, and keep more closely hold of Christ. Now pray minde it, possibly this afternoon I may give an account of Christs dealing with some of your souls; it may bee some of you are like the Wo∣man of Canaan that have gone to Christ, and found hard entertainment, and you are ready to say, Lord, why dost thou do so? such a one went and found thee friendly and favourably, while I come and cry, and have no kindness, Nay, seemingly, and to my sense, much harshness. Consider now what I shall say to satisfie you in the Reason of this strange carriage of Christ. And first, It may bee Christ intends to humble thee. Jesus Christ doth indeed humble all, but not all alike, nor all in the same manner, Now by thus dealing with the soul in this manner, hee doth humble the soul in the best and sweerest manner, viz. in an Evange∣lical way. Legal humiliation, it is just as a Father deals with a very untoward childe, hee will not bee ruled, and the Father sends him to the Magistrate, that hee may go to Bridewel; But Gospel-humilia∣tion is just like a Father dealing with his childe by himself. The Father looks strange, and speaks hard, and thereby humbles the childe; so, Christ will not turn us over to Satan, to buffer us, and fear us, and as it were break us; but himself by a little unusual, strange, and rough carriage will that way humble us. And truly what will humble us, if that will not? There are but three heads unto which humiliation doth relate, and you shall see, this same harsh deal∣ing
of Christ with us at first, will tend very much to the accomplishment of them all. First, Humiliation relates to sin, that sin may bee exceeding bitter. Secondly, It relates to self, that the soul may bee exceeding low. Thirdly, It relates to Christ, that a soul under the sense of the bitterness of sin, and the lowness of self-thoughts, may think of Christ very highly. Now observe, when Christ shall deal roughly with a sinner coming to him, all these three are ef∣fected. Oh now! First, Sin is made bitter by this dealing of Jesus Christ: The Law made sin bitter, but the Gospel makes it more bitter. Oh! saith the soul, mine iniquities make Christ look frowning, they separate between God and mee. A tormenting Devil with a fiery face, doth not make sin so bitter as a frowning Jesus Christ with a harsh countenance, when Christ looks angry; thus saith the soul, Oh that ever my sins should make my Father frown, that is all love. I had once thoughts that sin was that which would make the Devil roar, and speak ter∣ribly, but now I see it makes Christ himself harsh, and speak roughly. Oh vile sin! Oh great evil! now thy sin appears (Oh my soul) to bee indeed exceeding sinful, the sole and principal evil that is; for it makes my Saviour carry it sadly towards mee. Secondly, By this harsh dealing of Christ, the soul is humbled in it self: If Christ frown, self must down and kneel. It may bee the soul comes con∣ceited, hee is not so bad as the Preacher would make him; but when the soul shall come to Christ for mercy, and Christ shall frown, and call him
Dogg, Now, saith the soul, though I thought Preacher, and Father, and Mother made mee worse than I was, yet now I see I am very bad, Christ hee calls mee Dogg, and hee saith, it is not fit I should come in house with the children; and makes mee to see, that for all my daintiness, and high thoughts, I am no  than a Dogg. Oh self! how poor, and mean, and exceeding vile art thou? Thirdly, Christ is mightily exalted; this carriage makes thee more to prize Christ. Poor creatures one∣ly thought Christ a common person, one that might bee easily come and spoke unto, yea and prevailed with. But now, when Christ carries it a little high, and speaks something harsh, bidding us as it were keep off: Now hee comes to bee heightned in our heart, and by casting us down, hee doth lift up him∣self, that now wee come with more reverence and fear, with more self-abhorring, and Christ-admiring thoughts, than possibly wee did at first. So that Christ by this carriage, rendring sin more vile, and self more base, and himself more precious, doth here∣by sweetly and surely humble us; and this may bee one reason of this strange carriage to us. Secondly, The Lord intends to make a trial upon the soul by this harsh dealing. I pray minde it (Beloved) That Jesus Christ, that will never burn the soul to ashes, doth yet intend to make a trial of the soul in fire; And my Brethren, the harsh dealing of Jesus Christ it is a shrewd trial to us. Two things I shall intimate in this, the Lord by harsh dealing makes a trial of two things. First, Christ will make a trial of the reality of our humiliation, and hunger, by which wee pretend to hunger after Christ, and to pant for him, as those who do heartily prize him.
And Secondly, Of the reality of our Faith too. First, Christ by this makes a trial of the reality of our spiritual hunger, by which wee pretend to long after Christ. All is not hunger and thirst for Christ which seems so to bee. The soul comes to Christ, as a man that is a hungry, comes to bread, and Oh, saith the soul, I am hungry; and now ist will try him; Hee comes and saies hee thirsts for Righteous∣ness, and Bread of Life; now, saith Christ, I will try him a little, will hee lye by the cupboard-door? and if I say bread, will hee say a crumb? If I call him Dogg, and bid him bee gone; will hee yet lye at my feet? A hungry man indeed will do so, and I will try if this soul bee (as hee saies) really hun∣gry: So Christ hereby tries our spiritual longing. Many pretend to long, who do not so much as love, (for longing is the strength and height of love) Ma∣ny, say they hunger, who yet have not a spiritual stomach at all to Christ, the Bread of Life: They ask bread, but it is onely an asking. Now Christ will try us, and by this strange carriage hee trieth us indeed. And for us to continue begging, crying bread, after Christ hath spoke to us, as to this wo∣man; After hee hath said, I am not sent for you, it is not meet to give unto you; bee gone, what, should a Dogg have childrens bread? after this, I say, to wait, and worship, to beg, and reiterate cries for bread, this will make Christ say, this longing is sin∣cere, and strong, beleeve it, here is a hungry soul indeed. Many wish for Christ, who do not heartily hunger for him. Secondly, Christ will try Faith too, and it is good for us to bee tried in our Faith. Saith Christ, Here comes a soul to mee, hee looks as if hee would take hold of mee, I will try whether hee bee one
of Jacobs children that will wrestle a fall, and keep his hold when I seek, and seem to cast him off. I will see if I call him Dogg, Whether hee will trust and beleeve hee may bee a Childe. It was a trial and demonstration that Jobs Faith was right, when hee would trust in a killing God, and it will try our Faith indeed, to wait upon, and cling to a seeming∣ly rejecting Redeemer. And this was the great mat∣ter in the case of this poor woman; Oh Woman! great is thy Faith: Jesus Christ did all this to try the wo∣mans Faith. God will see whether the soul will take hold of an angry Christ, and run after a going-away Christ. In 1 Pet. 1.7. saith the Apostle there, That the trial of your Faith, being much more precious than of gold that perisheth, &c. It is not spoken of Faith in it self, that that is more precious than gold that perisheth, (though that is precious) but of the trial of it; The very trial of Faith is a precious thing. Now that Christ may try our Faith, as well as our Hunger, therefore hee deals a little harshly with us. Thirdly, The Lord hath this design too, By his harsh dealing with one, hee will make many wise. When two or three of the younger boles shall see the Fa∣ther deal something harsh with the eldest, it teaches them all something. The Lord help us, wee are a company of mad untoward children, wee neglect many a precious opportunity; Christ calls, and wee will not answer, &c. Now when Christ shall deal harshly with some, then wee shall bee made wise to hearken when Christ calls. How many have preach∣ed this truth from that experience? Children (have some Parents said) take a Christ while hee smiles, take a Promise when it is tendered, you do not know what it may cost you; I neglected my sea∣sons,
and I found it a hard matter for mee to close with Jesus Christ. You have a great word, in Heb. 3.7, 8. Wherefore to day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation in the wilderness, &c. What doth hee allude to? hee alludes to the story of the children of Israel in the wilderness; and of Gods harsh deal∣ing with them, and all because of their unbeleef. The Lord Jesus Christ, hee doth deal harshly with many, leads them thorow wildernesses, stings them with Scorpions, to make others wise to accept of mercy, when and while it may bee had. Ah! how many think it an easie matter to come to Christ, and have bread presently; and therefore defer and de∣lay, put by (at best) lay by many a choice tender till another time, as they think wherein they may at pleasure take it: But now, when they shall see such examples as this, that a man or woman may come, and call, and crouch, and worship, and begg, and yet bee put off, yet have no mercy, No, nor no kinde word (as was this womans case) this will make them wise to take heed how they refuse that which afterwards they may request with tears, and yet bee rejected. But besides, fourthly, The Lord Christ doth deal thus, that indeed hee may bring the soul to Gospel-self-denial. I say unto Gospel-self-denial. The Lord is resolved, that whosoever will bee his Disciple, must deny himself; Now some have observed, that nothing doth so much tame any, as hunger. The Lord Jesus Christ will take the soul upon the hip, and make the soul fully deny it self; and now, saith God, If thou wilt come to mee in my way, well, otherwise no bread: Bread, bread, saith the hungry man, if I may have it this way, or that way, any way, I will
take it; well, saith Christ, I see the soul is come pretty well too (as wee say) I will keep off a little longer, make him fast a few daies more. Deny him till hee is ready to dye for hunger, and then I shall make him deny himself in his honour, in his inheri∣tance, in his very birth-right: I shall make him say, what profit will that or any thing do mee, if I dye for hunger? and I am at the point of death. There∣fore whatever the terms are, I will deny all, part with all for this Bread of Life. So that real, univer∣sal self-denial, is by the Lords grace effected through this delaying, and seemingly-denying carriage. And to this end, or for this reason, doth Christ sometimes deal with us, as with the woman of Canaan. Hee will seemingly deny us, that wee may really deny our selves. Hee will tame us, and then put his own terms upon us, and for that end carries it so strangely to us. Fifthly, Christ doth intend to heighten himself in our hearts: Before Christ give us himself, hee will greaten himself. And my Brethren, it is our sore mi∣sery, that wee are too apt to have sleight thoughts of Jesus Christ; Now Christ will make us prize him very highly, and therefore wee shall come by him very hardly. It is a Rule, and a general Observa∣tion, That wee prize that highly, which wee come by very hardly. Oh Sirs! the Lord Christ knows how to heighten himself in your hearts, by deferring to grant your request. Possibly thou art a poor igno∣rant creature in thy first coming unto Christ; one who thinkest well, but not well enough of Christ; Thou valuest him a little, but not as the chiefest: Now Christ is resolved to heighten himself in thy heart, and will therefore keep off so long that thou shalt come thereby to prize him at a higher rate than
all the world, and shalt have cause to say, I value him much, and love him dear, for I came by him ve∣ry hardly, and was fain to wait long before I did enjoy him. Lastly, The Lord Christ may have this end, Namely, That the soul might catch at him more ha∣stily, and keep him more fastly; therefore hee doth hold off thus, and deal thus harshly; wee are not eager enough in closing with Christ. My Brethren, the soul is apt to linger in the matter of taking Christ, but when Christ shall stand off, that will make the soul come on more hastily. Jesus Christ doth catch us by craft, as the Apostle saith, 2 Cor. 12.16. Truly Christ doth catch some poor souls by craft, as the fisher-man doth the fish, you know, or may have heard how that is; The fisher-man laies the bait, and draws it as it were away, hee draw it before the fish, and when the fish is ready to take it, hee doth make as if hee snatched it away, and why so? truly that the fish may catch at it more eagerly, and bee held by it more surely. So doth Christ with us, when hee shall offer, and seem to draw back, when hee shall come neer, and suffer us as it were to touch him, and then snatch away again, this will make us come on more earnestly, and close with him more eagerly. The soulby this means takes the bait, I and the soul will hold it too when it hath it; beleeve it Sins, the Lord Jesus Christ is kinde to catch by craft. Well, this is the account of the Reason, wherefore it is that sometimes Christ is seemingly harsh to some souls. There are but three Uses I aim at in this Do∣ctrine. Use 1. The first Use is, To let us all see that Christ is not so easily come by, as the generality of people do
think: All have Christ freely, but not easily. Minde it. My Brethren, I think, and I will tell you my thoughts, because it may awaken you, and do you good. I think many will go to Hell as upon other mistakes, so upon this, that they do think it easie to go to Heaven, and easie to come by Jesus Christ. But if it bee true, that Christ stands a loof off from a poor soul, then it will appear to bee a hard work to come by him. Remember this, you will finde three things will make it hard work ere Jesus Christ and you bee brought together. 1 The backwardness of your own hearts. 2 The many hinder ances and puts in of Satan. 3 And the seeming backwardness of Jesus Christ. First, Your own hearts will bee backward. Ah soul! unless the Lord make it a day of his power, they are not a willing people, Psa. 110. hee that talks of free-will, I am afraid, was never sensible of free∣grace, nor of the backwardness of his own heart. Secondly, The Devil makes it hard work too: Verily, when the soul would go to Christ, the Devil will hinder, and set one to hinder another, to keep the soul off from going to Jesus Christ. But thirdly, and especially, The seeming harsh dealing of Jesus Christ, makes it very hard work. Oh, say some poor souls, My thinks the Lord makes mee willing, and hungring after a Christ, but when I come to Christ, Christ hangs off; My thinks God the Father is willing I should have Christ; hee hath sent him, the Spirit is willing, hee hath revealed Christ to mee, and my heart is willing; but I come to Christ, and hee doth not hear mee; verily here you will finde difficulty, and it will much pazzle and try Faith, to beleeve upon, and close with a Christ, who seems to stand at a distance: His seem∣ing
harsh dealing will make it real hard belee∣ving. Use 2. The second Use is of Caution. I pray learn by this, to take heed how you provoke the Lord Jesus Christ to deal thus harshly with any of you. My Bre∣thren, the Lord Christ can frown, and look bitter∣ly, and deal severely, &c. and beware how you pro∣voke him so to do. The truth is, there bee some souls that rationally (I mean religiously rationally) cannot expect otherwise, that if Christ do receive them, hee should receive them very harshly. Let mee in a word touch upon this, and do you remem∣ber it. Two words I would speak my minde in, that I may not bee mistaken. First this, I do not say that there are any souls that have reason to think Jesus Christ will reject them. Whatever you are, Canaanite, Perisite, or Jebusite, &c. Whoever you are before the Lord, I do not say, there is reason for you to conclude that there is no coming to the Lord. But This I say secondly, That though you have no reason to think hee will cast you off, yet you have reason to think hee will deal harshly with you; you may have reason to fear hee will not presently en∣tertain you. First, I think there bee some souls that may ve∣rily expect God may make them stand at the door, and wait till they cool their heels, and though Christ will let them in at last, yet hee may set them stand all night: Some souls Christ may let them bee hoarse with crying, and yet Jesus Christ may stand off. Secondly, There are some souls that may expect, that though hee should let them in, yet it may bee
with them, as with some childe, the childe is let in, and hee sits at the table, but the Father looks so strangely and harshly on him, that his meat doth him no good; thou mayest never rellish mercy sweetly, till thou comest to Heaven, it may bee. Thirdly, There are some souls that may expect, that though Christ will give them mercy, yet hee will dispure it out with them; that they shall wrestle a whole night, as Jacob, and go limping all their life time, and bee called Dogg many a time, and as it were threatned with a cudgel, before ever hee give them childrens bread. Therefore I beseech you for the Lords sake, souls, look about you. Now there are three sorts of people that have thus reason to think, that though Christ may receive them at last, yet it may bee very harsh at first. First, Those that have dealt very harshly with Je∣sus Christ: With the froward, I will bee froward, saith God. Grace will receive froward ones at last, yet hee will bee harsh. Why, what was the matter Joseph looks so roughly upon his Brethren? their consciences could tell them. Wee had not pitty upon our Brother, Gen. 42.21. Sirs, there are many poor souls deal harshly with Jesus Christ; I say, deal harshly with Christ; is there any deals harshly with him (you will say) how can that bee? why bee not mistaken, as you deal with Christs members, so you deal with him. You scoff at poor Saints, and Christ takes it as against himself. O minde it! you that have been, or are, the persecutors of the Lords people; you can expect no other, but that Christ should deal harshly with you, since you have done so by him; It may bee there is a poor man or wo∣man by thee that hath precious Faith, I say, that hath precious Faith, thou dealest hardly with them, and
so thou dealest hardly with Jesus Christ in them, and hee may do so with thee. Secondly, Those souls that have lived in any more notable prophaneness than others, may expect if Christ receive them, it should bee, as the woman of Canaan, harshly. Take a plain similitude; Let two men go to a Physician, the one hath a little knock on the crown, a little dressing, a little washing doth cure it; another hath a wound in the thigh, or the arm, that must have a great deal of lancing, and washing ere it bee whole. Oh! sins are wounds; the least vanities are knocks on the crowns; but there are blasphemies, and uncleannesses, and unrighteous∣nesses (with a witness) and the Lord must deal a little harshly with thee, how else should hee deal with thee? Tremble at every little sin, but tremble especially at great sins. I say not that great sins shall hinder us from Christ, but upon the account of them at our first beleeving, wee may meet with harshness in Christ; The deeper our wounds, the sharper our cure alwaies. Thirdly, There are a third sort of people that cannot but expect Christ will deal harshly with them. Those that do neglect many a sweet and gra∣cious tender of mercy, and salvation by Jesus Christ many a day. Suppose two people in the same Con∣gregation, one is crouded here, that never heard the Gospel all his daies; another is here that hath heard the Gospel many years; you that have neglected sweet calls, and precious opportunities, if Christ receive you at last, it will bee rich mercy, but it will bee harshly. I have often thought of it; young people do not know how much bitterness of spirit they avoid by closing with Christ betimes. My thinks I see some souls under such a condition, you
have stayed out all day, and come home at mid∣night, I do not say you shall not bee received when you come, but you may bee received with a whip, and go to bed without a Supper, as wee use to say to some children. Now I am afraid of one snare of the Devil. My thinks I hear the Devil whispering to some souls, well, bee it so as you say, so long as Christ will receive you at last, so long as I shall not go to Hell, so long as I shall have mercy at last, then I will go on, &c. I will speak three words to this. First of all, It is more than you know; I say, it is more than you know, that you shall bee saved at last. I say, it is possible Christ may receive the soul, but how do you know it? who did tell thee, that it thou didst sin so many years, after all thou shouldest have Christ with a whip and a knock? Secondly, It is a thousand to one that it shall bee so. The soul that puts off closing with Christ upon this presumption, that hee shall have it at last, and will presume to tarry, because hee perswades himself of a sure reception, though it may bee sore; I say, these of all persons, in my judgement, have ground to fear lest the Lord give them to a deluded heart, to damning dreams, and soul-cheating hopes. I fear if any bee thus Christ will not receive them, no not at first, nor last, neither sweetly, nor severely; therefore take heed of this delusion. But let mee add, Thirdly, I will suppose this, that thou shalt bee saved at last very harshly: Consider the terms, dost thou know how harsh they will bee? Dost thou know what terrours of the Lord may bee upon thee? what terrours of Hell may bee in thee, &c? Oh Sirs, who knows the power of Gods wrath? who knows
the terrour of a wounded conscience? can you live seven years under the apprehension of Gods wrath? fourteen years under terrour? and every day to walk up and down under everlasting burnings? Be∣ware how you go on upon those tearms, but let e∣very soul bee wise now, beware now, bee watchful now, that sith the Lord, though hee bee sweet, can bee bitter, beware how you provoke him to bee so to you. Last Use, The third and last Use, It is for Exhor∣tation, to exhort you all to receive this truth, so as not to bee offended with it. I say, so to receive this truth, &c. I remember our Lord and Saviour, in John 16. preaches the truth of persecution upon this account; These things (saith hee) I speak, that you may not bee offended &c. My Brethren, this Truth, this great Truth, this strange Truth (that Christ may deal thus hardly with some souls that come to him) I preach it, and tell you of it, that you may not bee offended; not offended when it comes to pass as to your particulars. There are two offences, one is, therefore to say I will never go to Christ; The other offence is, I finde it so, that Christ is harsh, and therefore I will go no fur∣ther. I pray bee not thus offended. First, Do not stumble upon this as a rock of of∣fence, and say, I will not go to Christ; this is but to some, I do not say the Lord will deal thus with all; say not, were I in the Woman of Canaans con∣dition, I could never hold up, and therefore I will stand off. Do not say so, who are you that walk up∣rightly, and avoid sin, and snatch at a tender of mercy, and are willing to come at a call? go to Christ, and you will finde that hee will entertain
you friendly, or suppose it bee seemingly harsh, yet remember, better bee entertained by Christ seemingly harsh, than not to go at all, and bee shut out for ever; bee not offended therefore, do not stumble at going to Christ. Secondly, Let no soul bee so offended at this dealing, as to say, I will bee gone, I will bee gone, I will wait no longer. By Brethren, it may bee there may bee some poor soul here before the Lord, that may say, I am a second Woman of Canaan, a woman of a bitter spirit, of a grieved soul, because I have gone to Christ, and am not entertained. I have got Father, Mother, Minister, childe to pray for mee, I am not yet answered. My beloved, for all this, thou art but a Woman of Canaan, and the Lord may deal with you as such; what though hee speak not at all, or but harshly, this is not new, neither do thou so wonder at it, or bee offended by it, as to think of drawing back, or going away from Jesus Christ. Therefore let mee speak two words to thee. 1 One is, Bee advised. 2 The other is, Bee encouraged. The first word is of Advice; I pray take advice O poor heart. Thou sayest thou hast gone to Christ, and hee frowns; thou sayest thou hast looked up to the brazen Serpent, and yet the sting of the fiery Serpent abides; thou sayest thou hast called for a crum of bread, and no answer comes; bee advised to look about you, to see why God deals thus with you; you may bee bold with the Lord Jesus (hee never checked the Woman with boldness) ask Christ, Lord, is thy design to humble mee? then do so; or, Lord what is thy design? is it to try mee? then do so, but support mee. Is it to heighten thy self in my
heart? Lord, what is thy design? look about you and consider for which of all the Reasons it is, that the Lord deals thus with you. Secondly, Bee encouraged to wait upon the Lord yet a little longer. Tarry thou the Lords lei∣sure yet a while. In Psal. 40. saith the Psalmist there, I waited for the Lord, and at last the Lord heard mee, hee brought mee up also out of an horrible pit, and hee hath put a new song into my mouth: Oh it is a blessed Scripture, wait thou yet for the Lord, thou art yet in a horrible pit of sin, and filth, fear, and doubt; thou cryest, yet the Lord doth not hear; I but yet hee may hear, this is no strange thing; indeed the soul is ready to say as the Church, Oh all you that pass by, is there any sorrow like to mine? Lam. 1.12. So it may bee your soul is ready to say, was there ever a∣ny sorrow like mine? my conscience disturbs mee, Sa∣tan disturbs mee, I go to Christ, and hee doth not hear mee, hee will not answer; Oh bee of good com∣fort, and wait still, hee that calls thee (as the Woman of Canaan) Dogg now, will say to thee, Go thy way, great is thy Faith, Indeed my Bre∣thren, when I was drawing up the conclusion of this, by my self, I thought I should meet with a Woman of Canaan, and I was bid to incourage her thus. First, All this harshness it is but in shew. As wee told you the last day; Joseph had bowels though for a time hee dealt roughly. Secondly, All this will not last, Joseph will speak peace, and the Lord Jesus that seems rough now, hee will speak to thee in soft language at last: Therefore you that are as the Woman of Canaan, waiting upon Christ, and yet hearing nothing from him, bee com∣forted, and counselled.
First, Bee comforted, your condition is blessed; Blessed are they that wait at the posts of Wisdomes gates, Prov. 8.34, &c. This may bee the condition of a beleever, and it is blessed. Object. I saies the soul, If I did but know that, or think that. Repl. Did Josephs Brethren know hee knew them? did they think hee wept, and his bowels yearned? It was their happiness Joseph knew them, though they knew it not: And it is comfort Christ knows us, when wee are, and may bee as igno∣rant of him, as they of Joseph. That is the foun∣dation of our life and comfort, that the Lord may, and doth know us first, before wee know him; and hee still knows us, even while wee know not him. Minde that, in the second Epistle of Timothy chap. 2. vers. 19. Nevertheless the foun∣dation of God standeth sure, having this seal, the Lord knoweth them that are his. Let that word bee for thy comfort. But then Secondly, Bee counselled to carry your selves very wisely. Carry it well, and it shall bee your wisdome. I know indeed, my Beloved, wee need much wisdome to carry it wisely when Christ doth frown. Oh! wee are apt to have impatient spirits, mur∣muring spirits, rising spirits; nothing is so pro∣voking as unkindness from Jesus Chrst. I look for no better from the Law, or from the Devil; but that Christ should speak death, or Christ call Dogg, or that hee that was sent to give the chil∣dren bread, should say hee was not sent to mee, Oh this doth wound mee, this doth kill mee, (saith the poor soul) Well yet bee counselled to wait: Do not think evil of, nor speak hardly con∣cerning
Jesus Christ. Hee knows (as wee say) what hee doth; there may bee many reasons of this carriage of his; and therefore whatever bee his carriage to thee, let thy carriage to him bee good; if Christ deal with thee as with the Wo∣man of Canaan, do thou deal with him as shee did. Now what that is, wee shall come unto next.
Souls must still carry it well to Jesus Christ. The Fourth SERMON. Matthew 15.25. and 27. verses. Then came shee, and worshipped him, saying, Lord help mee. And shee said, Truth Lord: yet the doggs eat of the crumbs which fall from their Masters table. AS a fine Copy fairly written (which doth attract the eyes of all to look upon it, and stir up the spirits of ingenious Scribes to imitate it) Such (my Beloved) is the Example of the Woman of Canaan; (the history where∣of is here recorded, and which we are now handling) It is a fine Copy, and fairly written. Here are great things, glorious Mysteries held forth, and you and I should look upon them, and indeavour to read and imitate them. There are four heads unto which wee did reduce the whole matter of this discourse. First, The Coming of the Woman to Christ. Secondly, The Carriage of Christ to the Wo∣man. Wee were ending of that the last day. The Woman shee came with much devotion, in much affection; The Lord, contrary to what hee was wont, turns away, makes as if hee did not hear, hee would not vouchsafe to speak a word, and when hee was
intreated by the Disciples, hee puts them off, and when shee renews her request again, hee speaks harshly, &c. The Lesson wee then did go upon from the whole, you know was this, That sometimes Christ is seeming∣ly harsh to some souls that come to him. Wee opened it, and gave the Reasons of it, and applied it. And that which wee did aim at, truly it was principally two words. The first was to exhort you all, that sith Christ doth sometimes seemingly entertain some souls harshly, That you would not provoke him so to do. As the Lord lives, and as your souls live, if you stand out too long, if you put off Christ too often, though at the last hee may save you, it will bee by fire: Therefore I beseech you (especially you that bee young) take a Christ while you may have a Christ; while Christ knocks softly, and speaks sweetly, and wooes lovingly, entertain him, lest hee go away, and make you come after him crying, and it may bee a great while ere hee come back a∣gain. The second word was, To you poor souls that may bee the children of this Woman of Canaan, (that have gone to Christ, and have found him stand at a di∣stance) Do not despair, no new thing is fallen upon you. The Lord Christ doth sometimes use so to deal with souls. And (my Brethren) as you shall see after∣wards (though hee stand at a distance now) hee will in time embrace you sweetly. The Woman of Canaan that was entertained harshly, went away joy∣fully. But how did shee carry it under this harsh deal∣ing? That is the third head wee are now to speak to. Here the carriage of the Woman is set out in
these two Verses, the 25. and 27. verses. And mark it, in vers. 25. It is said, Shee came and worshipped him, saying, Lord help mee. My Brethren, As the Lord said to Peter in ano∣ther case, wee must say of the Woman in this; Flesh and blood hath not revealed this to you. Flesh and blood could not teach, nor help the poor Woman to such a carriage. What, for the Lord to turn away, for the Lord to put off? and for her to re-inforce her devotion, renew her suit afresh, and to come and worship him, &c. The 27. verse, Truth Lord: yet the Doggs eat of the crumbs which fall from their Masters Table. The Lord had in a manner called her Dogg, and said, it was not for doggs to have childrens bread; shee doth not deny it, but shee grapples with grace, and saith, Truth Lord, yet doggs may have a crumb, &c. I shall put all that is spoken here of her carriage into one Lesson; but before I do that, I shall name two other observable points. The first is this, A right Faith coming, and car∣rying of the soul to Christ, is a resolute Faith. That is one point I would name, pray mark it, The Lord Jesus seems to put her off, hee gives her nothing that was a visible incouragement, yet shee will go on, and yet shee will not bee put off. When the soul comes to Christ, hee comes as one that needs a Christ, and wants a Christ, will have, and as one that must have a Christ; and what then? hee will have a Christ before hee goes away. Though hee have not evidence, hee will have adherence; though the soul can see nothing, and though no hope, yet hee will bee resolute; although Christ will not smile, though conscience is not quiet, though the
wound bee not healed, though the Lord put off angrily, yet the soul keeps resolute to him, and will not bee sent away empty; Faith, if right, is still resolute. The second Point that I shall name, is this, That a right Faith knows how to confess, and beleeve at once. A true Beleever will not conceal his sin, yet will close with Jesus Christ. A right Faith will deny nothing, and yet it will beleeve all things. My Brethren, mark it a little, there are a company of vile people that are (as they say) all for Faith, and nothing for confession, and what say they? be∣leevers, it is not for them to come and confess sin. Why, a beleever will confess sin; doth the Lord say dogg? yes, truth Lord, I am a dogg, will the soul say, as this Woman did. There are others that will confess, and not beleeve. Oh, they cry out, they must confess, and bewail, and lye low, and humble themselves, &c. but they cannot beleeve, they dare not beleeve; confession is their work, &c. Why poor hearts you may do both; you may say, Lord, I am a sinner, yet I beleeve, for mercy is for sinners; I am ungodly, yet I beleeve, for Abra∣ham beleeved in him, who justifieth the ungodly: I am a dogg (as thou sayest Lord) yet I beleeve a dogg may gather up a crumb. Well, remember it, True Faith doth not hinder confession, nor confes∣sion should not hinder Faith. But the particular Lesson of the place is this, Namely, That it is the duty, the wisdome, the glory of poor souls, to carry it holily and humbly unto Christ, when Christ seems to carry it harshly unto them. So doth this poor Woman; or if you will take it shortly thus. It becomes Christians to carry it
really well, when Christ carries it seemingly ill. I know, my Brethren, this is a hard work, but as hard as it is wee must learn it, and I will assure you, if ever God intend to do you good, though flesh and blood murmure, yet the Lord will whip you into this Lesson, but hee will make you learn it, Namely, to carry it holily to him, when hee carries it seemingly harsh to you. I remember that passage, in 1 Pet. 2.18. Servants bee obedient to your Masters; not one∣ly to the good and gentle, but also to the froward. It is the duty of a servant professing the Name of God, though hee have a froward Master, yet hee must carry it well. Now mark it, Is it the duty of a ser∣vant to carry it well to a bad Master, and is it not the duty of Saints to carry it well to Christ? wee are the servants, hee is the Master. So in Heb. 12.9. Mark the Apostles argumentation, saith hee, Wee have had Fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and wee gave them reverence; shall wee not much rather bee in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and lve? Mark, there is life in this, our life depends on our reverent carriage in this case. Alass! if Christ bee gone, our life goes with him; carry it well there∣fore, if thou love thy life; you must bee subject and submissive even when hee seems to bee sharp, other∣wise death is at the door. Minde it then, would you have a pardon? and doth Christ seem to deny you? where can you go for it but to him? and when you come, if you submit; there it is; soul, in the point is your life; Therefore mark the lesson well; It is the duty, wisdome, and glory of Saints, to carry it well to Christ, when hee carries it seemingly ill to them. There are four persons in the book of God recorded, that God did seem to deal very hardly withall; and of all of them, this Woman of Canaan was most rare. Good
old Aaron, holy Job, the Virgin Mary, (the Mo∣ther of our Lord) and this Woman in the Text. But truly, as the Apostle said, now remains Faith, Hope, and Charity, the greatest thereof is Charity; so of these that are upon record, the greatest of these is this Woman; shee seems to excel in good carriage under hard usage. For Aarons carriage you have it recorded in Lev. 10.3. The Lord had dealt very severely with him; Nadab and Abihu (his two sons) were consumed with fire from Heaven before the Lord. Ah Lord! how harsh was this to flesh and blood? what meer man, having nothing more than man, could bear it! a good Priest hath two sons taken away suddenly. But how doth Aaron carry it? The Lord spake to Moses, and Moses to Aaron, saying, This is that the Lord spake, I will bee sanctified in them that come nigh mee, and before all the people I will bee glorified; and Aaron held his peace. The Lord seemed very se∣vere against the old man, hee took away two of his children at once, when they were about his work the Lord satisfies him by Moses, and hee held his peace. A blessed behaviour it was, well-becoming him, and very patternable unto us. The second is that of Job. In the first and se∣cond chapters, you may read and see that God car∣ries it strangely to him, yet it is said, in all this Job carries it very well, so well, that the Holy Ghost bears him witness, Hee sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. And when his Wife put him on to curse God, Oh saith hee, Thou speakest like one of the foolish women; what? shall wee receive good at the hand of God, and not evil? There was a carriage in∣deed very good and right, according to our Do∣ctrine.
Thirdly, Our Lords Mother carries it well to the Lord, when hee seemed to carry it harsh to her. In John 2.3. There you have our Lord and his Mo∣ther at a Wedding, and there was wanting some Wine, and the Mother said to Jesus, they have no Wine; saith Christ, Woman, what have I do with thee? mine hour is not yet come. What dost thou call upon mee for Wine in the middle of the feast? shee was taken up, as wee say, sharply; I but how sweetly doth shee carry it? In vers. 5. saith shee to the servants, Whatsoever hee saith unto you, do it. Truly a very sacred speech it was, and argued that her soul was really good, and would appear so to Christ, even when his carriage was to appearance very cross to her. Lastly, You have this story in the Text, which in a sense (as I said) is the greatest of all four; for, beleeve it, God never dealt so with Aaron, Job, and Mary, as hee did with this Woman, nor in some respects (consideratis considerandis, as they say) did they carry it so well as shee: There was some∣thing in those children of Abraham (for so they were) which did oblige, and inable them, to carry it better than could bee expected from this stranger, this Canaanite, yet shee transcends in her holy, humble, sweet behaviour to our Lord, as I shall open by and by. Well, There are two things to bee opened for the explication of the point. The first is, How the soul should carry it well to Christ, when Christ carries it ill to him. Wherein doth this good behaviour lye? Let the Lord carry it how hee will, what is our good behaviour? I say, what is our good behaviour which wee should shew to him?
And then secondly, Why wee ought so to carry it? what are, or may bee the reasons and grounds of such a carriage? I begin with the first, And shall not instance nor inlarge in any particulars, but what wee may finde in this pattern, and pray mark it well. For my thinks in this Text there are six things (in this Wo∣mans good behaviour) shewing, and evidently teaching all of us, what should bee out carriage when wee come to Christ, &c. First of all, Though the Lord dealt roughly with her, shee kept up honourable thoughts of him. Secondly, Shee doth not suddenly, nor sullenly go away, but tarries and waits upon Christ. Thirdly, Shee speaks to Christ, as professing her onely hope in his help. Fourthly, Shee denies nothing of what the Lord seems to charge her with. Fifthly, Shee doth gather upon Jesus Christ (as it were) and catches bold of that by which Christ would cast her off. Sixthly and lastly, Shee was content to have a little in the lowest manner, when shee might not have her first and great request in the highest manner. First of all, This good carriage the Woman had, Shee thinks honourably of Jesus Christ. The Lord puts her off hardly, what doth shee do? doth shee in a carping censorious manner, revile and speak evil of Christ? Crieth shee out, oh pride, O stateliness, O sowre man! Doth shee say, yee followers of his, is this your good Lord and Master? whatever hee may say, or you think, certainly hee is an austere man, and beleeve it, hee is a surly Master, &c. not a word of this, but the Text saith, Shee came to him, and worshipped him, and said, Lord, help mee. If
Jesus Christ had dealt never so well with her, shee could not have dealt better with him. It is the Royal Carriage of the Spouse of Jesus Christ (The ueen, in Psal. 45.) when shee was brought into the Kings presence, and dealt withall best; All that is advised and required of her, is this; Hee is thy Lord, worship thou him. But this poor Woman when shee is turned off, shee comes to him, and worships him, and saies, Lord, help mee. When the Lord seems to deal harshly with a soul, the Devil is at hand to put on a poor soul to think hardly of Jesus Christ. Oh Sirs, Experimentally souls know this to bee true, that they can hardly keep down murmuring thoughts, when Christ doth not entertain them presently. I re∣member it was the speech of Mr. Calvin, intima∣ting the moderation of his spirit about Luther, saith hee, Though Luther should call mee a Devil, I would honour him as a Saint. So truly do thou, though Christ call thee a Devil, do thou honour him as the Messiah. In Psal. 22. you have a very remarkable passage, Why art thou so far (saith the Psalmist) from the words of my roaring? O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hearest not, vers. 1, 2. It was harsh dealing for God to let David cry all the day long, and not to hear him, what then? Read the 3. vers. But thou art holy, &c. Oh Sirs, Sirs, look about you, and learn your Lesson well, you must carry it well to Christ; though hee deal harshly with you, you must speak to him, and think of him ho∣nourably; you must beware of blasphemy. The Devil thought Job would curse God, if God carried it cross, but hee was deceived; and set Satan bee deceived so in you; hee will tempt and put you on to enter∣tain dishonourable thoughts of Christ; and if it may bee, hee will make you charge God foolishly, and
speak of Christ fouly; but take heed, see your pat∣tern of piety in this womans practice, and carry it as shee did. Whatever Christ do or say, though hee put thee off, and call thee dogg, yet come neer, and bow, worship him, and call him Lord, Say, hee is holy and ho∣nourable, and thou wilt still count him so; this is thy good behaviour which will bee thy wisdome and glo∣ry to strive for, and to come up unto. This is the first thing in this Womans carriage. I proceed. A second thing in her good behaviour, is this, Shee doth not suddenly, nor sullenly go away from him; Shee goes not away in a fume, or a pet, as wee use to say, No, but as the Disciples said, Master, Shee crieth after us. Poor souls may come to Christ, and cry, and hee may go away; knock, and hee not open; call, and no body answer; what shall you do? Oh, take heed of going away grumbling, and sullen. The Woman shee renews her cry, shee comes and saies, Lord, help mee. Truly, my Brethren, it was a proud speech of those, in Isa. 58.3. that said, Wherefore have wee fasted, and thou seest not? Where∣fore have wee afflicted our souls, and thou takest no knowledge, &c? And my Brethren, it is spiritual pride for us to say, Lord, why do I cry, and thou not hear? keep on crying, (Soul) that is thy duty. Wee are apt to bee very sullen, though the Lord bee very wise in not hearing what wee say. It was a strange peece of sullenness in Jonah, in Jonah 4.8. when hee wished in himself to dye, and said, It is better for mee to dye, than live. It will argue much hypocrisie in your coming to Christ, if (although Christ do deny) you do not tarry and wait upon him begging. In Job 27.10. It is said of the hypo∣crite, Will hee cry alwaies? Thou sayest thou dost hunger for Christ, thou dost thirst for Christ, thou
hast a hungring and thirsting for righteousness; well then, because you have it not, will you go away? it is but an hypocritical hunger; were it cordial, it would continue. It is an Argument of spiritual pride, for us not to wait and tarry begging, though the Lord seem to keep off, denying. It was a proud speech of the King of Assyria, in 2 King. 6.33. Be∣hold, this evil is of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer? Nay, hee should have said, it is of the Lord, and therefore it is meet, I must, I will wait; so this Woman did, and so must wee, wait, and not go away. Many a soul is apt to give all over, to cry, I will pray no more, seek no more, this is evil, and must be watched against. An humbly wise soul will wait, and wee ought so to do, for that is another peece of this example, and another part of our good behaviour. But then Thirdly, A third thing I do observe as the good carriage of this Woman (that should bee ours) to Christ, is, That shee doth really tell the Lord, that her onely hope was in his help, LORD, HELP MEE, &c. The Lord seems to put her off, shee comes and worships him, &c. and cries out, Lord, help mee; a comprehensive speech it is. My thinks there are three things in that expression, which I shall briefly open unto you. First, It is as if see should say, Lord, thou a∣lone canst help mee. Secondly, As if shee should say, If thou wilt not help mee, no body will. And Thirdly, It is as if shee should say, Lord, If thou wilt not help mee, I am resolved is go no where els and therefore O Lord help mee. Well, mark it, It is your Copy you must , if thou wilt carry it as thou oughtest, and therefore lay it up in thy heart.
First, Though the Lord reject thee, tell the Lord, yet hee is thy help; there is no other Name whereby I can bee saved, but thine, no other Physician, but thee, no other balm, but thee, no other help, but in thee; this is good carriage. Secondly, Wee must not only look to Christ as the helper, but as hee alone that will do it. Tell Christ, that if hee do not help thee, none will; therefore Lord help. That speech is spoken out, to that purpose, Psal. 69.20. Reproach hath broken my heart, and I am full of bitterness: and I looked for some to take pit∣ty, but there was none, &c. This poor woman might have said, as the Woman with the bloody Issue, I have been with all the Doctors, and none can cure, none cast the Devil out of my childe. O soul, it is a savoury speech to say, Lord, all help but thine is in vain. I have gone here and there, to this and that creature, but all are empty, all are hopeless, all are helpless. It is thee alone (O Lord) that I see can help; therefore O Lord hear, and O Lord help. And then consider it further. Thirdly, Shee holds it out as one resolved to go to no body else, Lord help, shee will not leave him. It is said, They that forsake thee, and go a whoring, they shall all perish; But it is good for mee to draw nigh to God, as hee said, Psal. 73. vers. last. I have thought this to bee a part of the intendment of that expression, in Psal. 16.1▪ 4. Preserve mee, O Lord, for in thee do I trust. Their sorrows shall bee multi∣plied, that hasten after another God: their drink-of∣ferings of blood I will not offer, nor take up their names into my lips. I have, I say, thought it to bee, as if hee should say, Lord, help mee, I will go no where else, I will not go to an Idol, thou canst do it, and thou wilt do it, and no body else can do it,
and I am resolved to go no where else; here I lye, here I will dye, if I must; none can, none shall bee to mee a helper, but thy self alone, and therefore Lord help. Well, that is the third thing in this Womans carriage, which is our Copy. But to proceed. Fourthly, Mark it a little, This good Woman carries it well to Christ, in that shee doth not dny what the Lord did hint about her unworthiness. Christ calls her dogg, and shee doth not at all deny it. Oh Sirs, a beleeving soul acts highly, but it goes humbly. Mark but a little the phrase; My thinks our Lord and Saviour doth speak two sad things to her in one word; It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to doggs. In this speech it is evident that Christ, First, Hee calls her Dogg. And Secondly, Hee tells her, It is not meet for Doggs to have childrens bread; yet how humbly doth shee carry it! Shee saith, TRUTH LORD; As if shee had said, I may bee a Dogg, and am so, and it is not meet for mee to have childrens bread, &c. Oh Sirs, if the Lord Christ in the day of your distress, (when you shall go to him under the sense of your sins) if then, I say, hee rip up, and charge upon us our sins, and shall say to thee, but thou wert a drun∣kard, but thou wert a swearer, &c. then know how to he have your selves, and say, Truth Lord, it is so, I dare not, I do not in the least deny it. It is good carriage to confess the truth of what Christ laies to our charge. I meet with two sad examples of the Lords own people, that were got upon so proud a pin, that they did deny what God charged them with. In Jeremiah 2. God charges them with fooleries, and going away from him, saith God in
vers. 23. How canst thou say I am not polluted, I have not gone after Baalim? see thy way in the valley, know what thou hast done: thou art a swift Dromedary, tra∣versing her waies. Now mark in vers. 35. Yet thou sayest, because I am innocent, &c. That God should charge them with Idols, and they say that they are innocent, it argues a very proud heart, and it was very ill carriage, a behaviour which did not become them; yet so it was. And just so bad a behaviour is theirs, in Malachy 3.13. saith God there, Your words have been stout against mee; yet yee say, What have wee spoken so much against thee? Oh Sirs! souls that are in a saving condition, do know this that I am going to say, when the conscience accuses, flesh and blood will go to put all off; what I a drun∣kard, I a swearer? &c. I, thou art, and if God charge it upon thee, it is, and must bee thy good carriage, in all humility to lye down, and say no∣thing. You have a notable word, in Lam. 3. It is good for a man that hee bear the yoak in his youth, vers. 29. Hee putteth his mouth in the dust, if so bee there may bee hope. Oh, do not deny any sin the Lord charges thee withall; if there bee any hope, it is in this, putting thy mouth in the dust. But of all ex∣amples, I will commend you to that, in Jeremiah 3. saith God, in vers. 20. Surely as a wife treacherously departeth from her husband: so have you dealt treache∣rously with mee, O house of Israel, saith the Lord. What then, do they deny it? No. A voice was heard upon the high places, weeping and supplcation of the children of Israel: for they have perverted their way, and they have forgotten the Lord their God. Oh, here is good carriage, when the Lord shall deal harshly, bring all thy sins to remembrance, rip up sin here, and fin there, Oh with a voice of weeping
say, truly it is so. Let God charge any thing; Let Christ say what hee will, hee cannot lye, whatever his language bee: If Christ say Swine, Dogg, reply nothing, onely say as this Woman did, Truth Lord. That is the fourth thing. But then again Fifthly, This Womans good carriage lies in this, Shee doth gather upon Jesus Christ (as it were) and catches hold of that, by which Christ would seem to cast her off, and doth take an argument, from his harsh speech, to plead for her self. It is not meet to give the childrens bread to Doggs. See how shee takes hold of it, Truth Lord, But the Doggs may eat of the crumbs that fall from their Masters Table. Doth Christ say, go Woman, dogg Woman, say thou, I will take hold of this word, a crumb Lord. It is good when a soul can catch hold upon a Christ▪ even by that with which hee would put it off. For instance; suppose Jesus Christ should say to thee, thou art an ungodly wretch, come not to mee, catch hold of that, and say, thou art a God that justifies the ungodly. Saith God, thou art a Rebel, get thee gone? catch at it, and say, truth Lord, it is so; but the Lord Jesus Christ ascended to give gifts to Rebels. Doth the Lord yet say, thou art an enemy? answer, true Lord, but there is reconciliation for enemies in the blood of Christ, &c. Learn to catch at that hand by which Christ seems to thrust thee away; hold that. It is indeed a Mystery, but so is all godliness, and wee must learn it; and out of this Womans example wee may bee helped therein. That is the fifth. But not to inlarge, I will come to the next. The sixth and last thing in her good carriage, is this, That shee is content with a little in the lowest manner, if shee may not have a great deal in the highest
manner. For mark her expression, A crumb Lord, there is little; and under the Table, I will bee glad to stoop so low, and lick that which lies there upon the ground. Oh that this frame of spirit were in us! surely it is a blessed thing to bee thus bowed in our hearts, to stoop thus to Christ. Wee cannot e∣nough admire, nor (I fear) imitate this Woman, pray look upon her, listen to her. Truly my thinks the poor Woman saies thus, Indeed I am a poor Canaanite, I am not one of the children of the house of Israel, I may not sit down at the childrens table, nor take of the bread so soon as cut from the Loaf, but I will bee content to take it under the table, there I will lye, &c. And truly (my Brethren) this was the good carriage of the Prodigal, mark how the Pro∣digal comes home. Father, make mee one of thy hired servants. Hee doth not say, Father, remem∣ber, I was a childe, and let mee come in for a por∣tion, &c. No, but make mee but a servant, and what servant would hee bee? a hired servant; the houshould servants had a priviledge that the hired servants had not. I shall turn you to a Scripture for it, Exod. 12.44, & 45. verses. The hired servant might not eat of the Passeover, when the houshold ser∣vant might. Hee would bee a hired servant, that if his Father would not take him into full grace, and give him a childes place and portion again, hee would bee contented with any thing. Now the Lord help you and I to think of these things; here is good carriage. Here are six things you see wherein shee carries it well. But now In the second place, I should give you the Reasons why this same good carriage should bee, notwith∣standing Christ carry it harshly.
There are three heads of Reasons. First of all, If you consider who Christ is, to whom you come Secondly, If you consider what your selves are who come to this Jesus Christ. And Thirdly, If you consider the Errant for which you come to him at any time; you will finde in all these three, Matter; and Motive enough to make you carry it thus well to Christ, though hee carries it ill to you. The Woman considered who Christ was, the Son of David, the Messias; and shee considered who shee was, a Canaanite; and shee remembers that shee had a childe under the power of the Devil; and let us touch a little upon them. First Consider who Christ is to whom you come. I shall hint out my meditations as to this in four par∣ticulars, who Christ is. First of all, Hee is the Lord; God blessed for ever∣more; Therefore worship thou him (saith the Psal∣mist) Psal. 45.11. FOR hee is thy Lord; and be∣cause hee is thy Lord, therefore worship thou him. The Lord Jesus, to whom you and I come, hee is the Lord Jehovah, God blessed for evermore, and should wee not carry it well to him? wert thou to come to a man, but a meer man, upon a weighty affair. though hee were a little cross, thou wouldest carry it well; and shouldest thou go to the Lord God, blessed for evermore, and carry it ill? Surely the consideration of a God ought to fill the soul with all reverence in every approach unto him, and with all humbleness of carriage in our dealings with him. If thou art an Arrian, doubting and denying Christs deity, there might bee the shadow of a Plea for an irreverent deportment; but being thou art one who
callest Christ Lord, and professest (at least) to ac∣knowledge him God; this very thing obligeth thee to demean thy self well, however hee deals with thee. Secondly, As hee is thy Lord, so hee is thy Life; My meaning is, thou goest to him, without whom thou canst not live; and therefore thou hadst need to carry it well. Whither should wee go? (saith Peter) thou hast the words of eternal life. Christ is your Physician, for that you must carry it well to him; you do carry it well, and wait upon a Doctor fairly, be∣cause your life lies upon it, and will you not deal so with Christ, when the life of your souls lies upon it? I knew a Physician that was of great Name and Pra∣ctice, a man of a very cynical spirit, as rugged, crab∣bed a carriaged person as any of that Profession; hee could scarce give a pleasing look, and would often give course, cross, indeed very bad language; and yet I have heard him so reverently spoke unto, and so patiently waited on, that I have admired it; but what was the reason? Oh hee was a Doctor, and they came to him knowing his skill; and therefore it made them carry themselves so respectfully to him. Oh soul! Christ is thy soveraign Physician, thy one∣ly Doctor; upon that account let him do or say what hee will, as hee will, bee it never so seemingly cross (for really ill hee cannot carry it) it becomes thee to have a good behaviour. Thirdly, Hee is Wisdome, infinite Wisdome, one that knows what hee does. Alass my Beloved! if the Lord Christ were capable of folly, wee might charge God foolishly; but Job knew Gods wisdome was infinite, and therefore hee would not charge God foolishly. When hee rips up thy sins, bee still, hee knows what hee doth. When the Lord Jesus
shall launce the wound, and cut conscience, and tell thee of sin, and rip up unworthiness, lye still, carry it well, hee is very wise. How oft doth the Chirurgion binde the Patient, and cut, and launce it? How oft doth hee search the wound, and gash the flesh, yet still is the Patient quiet, hee silently submits? why, hee knows the Chirurgion is wise, and one that understands both what, and wherefore hee doth so. Truly (Beloved) Christ is infinite in wisdome, doth nothing but what wee need, and hee can (yea and in time will) give a good reason why hee carries it thus or thus unto us (as I former∣ly told you in the second Doctrine) therefore wee ought to bee silent, and carry our selves reverently, and well unto him.
Fourthly and lastly, Consider further who the Lord is; why truly the Lord Jesus is so generous, so gracious, that hee cannot bee angry if wee stoop; Hee cannot carry it ill, if wee carry it well. The Lord Je∣sus is of so sweet a disposition, of so tender bowels, that when hee sees us weep, his bowels turn within him. Christ, though hee roar, and make thee tremble, yet if thou bow, and fall, and art si∣lent, hee will (as they say of the Lion in such a case) Lick and love thee. It was the glory of the King of Israel, that when Benhadads servants came to him with ropes about their necks, hee was overcome with it, 1 King. 20.32, 33. Oh you know I have once, yea twice told you of Joseph, I must tell you once more of him. Joseph speaks rugged, very rough∣ly, yet at last hee bowed, what was the cause of it? Look upon the story. In Gen. 45. you have that which doth usher in his speaking kindly. In the first vers. Then Joseph could not refrain himself, &c. whenwas that? Look into chap. 44. from verse 18. down∣ward. Then, when Reverend Judah, his Elder Bro∣ther, and the rest, with bended knees, and doubtless with weeping eyes, lay at his feet humbly under all, and yet earnestly supplicating, Oh how doth his bowels yearn towards them! So then, when thou shalt lye at his feet humbly supplicating, laying out thy mi∣sery, and what thou dost expect, hee cannot hold out; witness this Woman of Canaan unto whom at last Jesus Christ sweetly condescended (though at first hee carried it towards her strangely, as you have heard) Truly as shee found, wee may expect even the same condescension, if wee have the same car∣riage. Christ hath that innate sweetness, that infinite grace, those soft affections, that however hee begins roughly, hee will conclude comfortably (as I shall shew when I come to it) Remember Christs Name is Love, and Lovingness is with him. The conside∣ration of his Nature calls upon thee, O soul, for such a carriage as I have opened; therefore study it. If thou well knowest Christ, who hee is, thou canst not well forget what carriage is suitable to such a person; so that if you consider who Christ is, to whom you come, and withall if you do not forget your selves, and the Arrand you come to him about, you cannot but carry it well to him, though hee should carry it seemingly harsh to you. I should proceed to open these two other things, viz. The conside∣ration of our selves, and our business to, and with Christ, are grounds for this good behaviour, but I see at present I must end here: Therefore now I shall onely name two words of Use. First, I will ask you a Question. And secondly, I will give you a word of Advice.
First, I will ask you this one Question, If it bee our duty to deal well with Christ, when hee deals ill with us; What shall become of those that deal ill with Christ, when hee deals well with them? If when Christ frowns, wee should worship him, if when Christ puts us off, wee should then draw near to him, if when Christ calls us Dogg, wee should worship him as our Lord, What shall wee think of those, who when Christ smiles, invites, doth them good, they do ill to Jesus Christ? Oh my Brethren, Mon∣sters they are, and not Men, and yet I must tell you, wee need not go to Africa to finde these Monsters; people professing the Lord are apt to deal ill with Christ, when hee deals well with them. In Jeremiah 2. saith the Lord there, Testi∣fie against mee what iniquity have your Fathers found in mee? &c. Is there any such before the Lord? Oh let mee testifie for the Lord against you; what evil did Christ do to you? why then dost thou blas∣pheme the Name of God? thou hast often head by his servants, I lay down my life for sinners, and yet thou wilt swear by the Life of Jesus Christ. If the Lord had spoke angerly, thou sholdest have bles∣sed him, and wilt thou now curse him, when hee speaks kindly? In Malachy 3.13, 14. saith the Lord there, Your words have been stout against mee; wherein have they been stout? In that you have said, it is in vain to serve God: and what profit is it that wee have kept his Ordinances? &c. Mark it a itle, I ga∣ther out of this Scripture this truth, that whoever speaks sleightly of the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, his words are stout against Jesus Christ. Have you not spoke sleightly of prayer, praying, breaking bread, of Church-fellowship, as if these were vain? your words
are stout against Jesus Christ. Sirs, If the Lord Je∣sus should make every hearing of a Sermon twenty pound, yet you were bound to honour him by hear∣ing a Sermon: And if hee should make breaking of bread, fire and fagot, you were obliged notwith∣standing to ingage in that duty. But now you have all sweetly, why are your words stout against the Lord? you may have Ordinances free, and worship with peace, and yet your words are stout against Je∣sus Christ. Christ will say one day to such, There was a Woman of Canaan that carried it well when I dealt crosly with her, but you carried it cross to mee, even when and while I was all kindness to you. Oh Sirs, think not that Christ can take it well; nay, hee must needs take it ill. If this Question I hint fasten on thy heart (O soul!) and finde thee in this fault, O humble thy soul for this thy sin. Thy carri∣age is quite contrary to this point and example which I have opened to you. The second word I would speak, is a word of Ad∣vice; and that is but this one word. Who are you before the Lord, that are of this house, that this good Wo∣man was? That are under the frowns of Christ at pre∣sent, that have heard Jesus Christ call you Dogg, that have prayed often, and been put off alwaies? I pray take a word of Advice, carry it well even now un∣to Jesus Christ. You know what the wise man tells us, in Eccles. 7.14. In the day of prosperity bee joyful, but in the day of adversity consider. I would but a lit∣tle allude to it. It may bee there sits a soul, but it is a day of prosperity with him, hee praies, and the Lord hears, hee looks, and the Lord smiles; But there is a Man or Woman, with whom it is the day of adversity, thou callest, and Christ doth not an∣swer,
it is thy day of adversity. Now consider, con∣sider what, consider how thou carriest thy self, Look to thy lips, do not sin, do not murmure, though thy wounds stink, though thy conscience burn, though thy soul tremble, it is thy day of adversity, and therefore consider. Oh, consider how the Lord eyes thee to see how thou wilt carry it. Take heed the Lord do not see a cursed Canaanitish carriage in thee; here is a good Canaanitish carriage in the Text. I remember what a godly man said, within these se∣ven years, lying under a great pain of a great grief, of which hee died; as hee groaned exceedingly, saith one, you groan much, I, replied hee, But though I groan, I dare not grumble. Though Christ keep thee a little at staves end, and carry it harshly, yet bee of good courage, and confidence; wilt thou but wait a little? wait the Lords leisure, carry it well, hee will deal well with thee. Bee therefore advised how thou behave thy self, surely a waspish spirit, and a murmuring tongue, argue one is not well advi∣sed (as wee say) in his carriage; Therefore go home as an advised Christian, let the Lord Jesus do, or say what hee pleaseth, hold thou thy peace, sup∣press thou thy passion, and in all things shew a humble, reverend, blessed behaviour to him. But of this more in the next.
Reasons why wee ought still to carry it well to Christ. The Fifth SERMON. Matthew 15.25. and 27. verses. Then came shee, and worshipped him, saying, Lord help mee. And shee said, Truth Lord: yet the doggs eat of the crumbs which fall from their-Masters table. AS to bee entertained by Christ really and readily, is a great mercy; so to bee reject∣ed by Christ (though it bee but seemingly) must needs bee a great misery. Indeed there cannot befall a poor soul a sadder evil, than to come to Christ needing, and expecting relief, and to re∣ceive either an absolute denial, or unusual delaies at the hands of Christ. And yet my Brethren, this is a case that sometimes hath befallen many, and may befall us; Wee have a notable instance of it before us, in this story of the Woman of Canaan. There were four things I told you that wee would principally speak unto in the handling of this story. The first was the Coming of this Woman. The second, is, the Manner of the Entertainment that shee had by Christ, which was very sad, not an absolute denial, but a strange and unusual delay.
Thirdly, Now wee are considering the Carriage of this Woman under this strange and rough entertain∣ment that shee received from Christ. The point is of concernment for us to consider, that whensoever it will befall any of us, upon any account, wee may know how to carry our selves as shee hath done. In these two verses wee have her Carriage, and after wee had opened that, wee gathered up all into this one Observation, viz. Doct. That it is the duty, the wisdome, the glory of a Christian, to carry it unto Christ very holily; when hee seems to carry it to the soul very harsh∣ly. Or shortly thus, Wee must carry it really well, when Christ carries it seemingly ill. There were but two Principal things, which I said were necessary to bee handled in the explica∣tion of the Point. The First is, What this good Carriage is, where∣in this holy, and blessed behaviour to Jesus Christ doth lye. And secondly, Upon what account it is our duty, and glory, to have this Carriage. Now for the o∣pening of both of these, I did onely confine my self to the example in hand, to see how the Woman car∣ried it; and to see from her what were the Reasons that did prevail with her to carry it thus to Christ. Here are six things wherein this good thing, viz. this good Carriage of this good Woman, appears. First, Though the Lord dealt roughly with her, shee kept up honourable thoughts of him. Secondly, Wee shewed shee did not suddenly, nor sullenly go away, but still shee cries after him, And, Thirdly, Shee speaks to Christ as professing her one∣ly hope in his help.
Fourthly, Shee denied nothing that Christ speaks against her. Christ seems to say to her, First, That shee was a Dogg. And then, Secondly, That shee should have nothing. Truth Lord, saith shee. Fifthly, Shee doth gather upon Jesus Christ, and by that very hand which hee thrust her off, shee gathers hope. Lastly, Shee was content to have a little in the low∣est manner, when shee might not have her first and great request in the highest manner. Wee did the last day open these more largely. But now, whence is it that wee must have, and labour for this good Car∣riage? or what is the reason wee should carry it thus holily to Christ, though hee seem to carry it roughly to us? I referred the reason of it to three heads. I told you, if wee do consider either Jesus Christ, or our selves, or the Errand upon which wee come to him at any time, wee shall see great reason to carry it well to Christ, howsoever hee may seem to carry it ill to us. And all these three considera∣tions wee have here in the Woman. First, Consider who Jesus Christ is, when you go to him. Why truly my Brethren, hee is the Son of David, and our Lord; Because hee is our Lord, therefore wee must worship him. It is because Ma∣sters are Masters, therefore servants must carry it well; wee did open that, and therefore shall not repeat it now. But, Secondly, Consider wee our selves, who wee are that go to Jesus Christ; and (my Brethren) you will see that such as wee are, coming to Christ, should car∣ry it very well to him, though hee should seem to carry it ill to us. Alass, what was this Woman?
Certainly the Holy Ghost did help her to look within, to see her self as shee was, viz. a poor Wo∣man; A Woman of Canaan, of Tyre and Sidon, a Woman that was a Dogg by Nature; such a Wo∣man had need to carry it holily when shee comes to Christ. And my Brethren, if you look upon your hearts (as shee was, so are wee) you will see all the reason in the world, to carry it holily and humbly to Jesus Christ, though hee should carry it seem∣ingly harsh to you. First, My Brethren, wee are poor Creatures, and certainly our poverty doth speak for our humility. Indeed, wee are beggars, and you know the speech of Solomon, in Prov. 28.23. The poor useth intrea∣ties. It is but meet that those that come a begging, and are poor, that they should use intreaties. And my Brethren, let mee tell you, it is an argument that wee have not the blessing of spiritual poverty, if wee do not carry it well to Jesus Christ, however hee carries it to us. Indeed it is observed, as the very natural disposition of the Spanish Nation, that though they bee beggars, yet they bee proud. I wish in a spiritual sense, that were not true of the most of us; wee carry it too proudly, and that be∣cause wee forget what wee are. I remember Solo∣mon, when hee would strike fire out of the flint (as it were) (that is reverence, out of the hearts of ir∣reverend ones) falls upon this consideration; Hee is in Heaven, and thou art on Earth, Eccles. 5.2. Ah! it is folly (as Solomon there intimates) for us who are upon Earth (wee dust and ashes) to carry our selves hastily, irreverently before the God of Hea∣ven. Our poor condition prompts us on (were wee wise to minde it) to a good Carriage. This I finde
to bee the proper reason of that good Carriage which wee opened, from Psal. 22. You finde there the Psalmist crying out, Oh my God, why hast thou for∣saken mee, and I cry, and thou hearest not, &c? but thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Is∣rael. Here is excellent good Carriage, but what is the ground of it? See in the sixth verse, But I am a Worm, and no Man. As if hee should say, I am a worm, a poor silly creature, and therefore if I cry, and thou hear not, yet thou art a holy and honourable God. But Secondly, Wee are not onely poor, but wee are polluted creatures. And now, my Brethren, our pol∣lution (when wee come to Jesus Christ) should have a power upon us to make us carry it, so holily and humbly as wee opened. The Leper under the Law had a liberty to cry out, yet hee was to cover his face, and to cover his lips. My Brethren, you and I are but Lepers when wee come to Jesus Christ; and upon this account it is that wee should carry it holily, and humbly. This had an influence in Jobs good Carriage, in the 40. and 42. chapters, Behold (saith Job) I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I have spoken once, but I will speak no more. Surely it argues wee are not sensible of our own stench and pollution, if wee dare stand upon terms, and mis-behave our selves towards our holy Physi∣cian. If thy poverty will not binde thee to the good behaviour, let thy pollution do it. Thirdly, Yet add a third string to this cord, that it may keep thee in; Wee are not onely poor and pollu∣ted, but wee are very enemies. And (my Brethren) an enemy, especially a conquered enemy, coming to plead for his life, for mercy, had need come humbly.
When the servants of Benhadad came to the King of Israel, as enemies, and as conquered enemies, they come with ropes about their necks, and lye at his feet, and snatch at a word, 1 King. 20.33. Oh sinner! that is thy condition, thou art an enemy, thou hast been in rebellion, and thou art suing for reconciliation, and shouldest not thou carry it well? Is thy heart so unsensible of thy former Carriage, as to miscarry it self again? Surely thou hast need, and all the reason in the world, to crouch and bend, to yeeld and bow, well to carry thy self (who hast been an enemy) with all reverence to the Lord Je∣sus; otherwise you do much forget your selves. But I shall not inlarge. That is the second Reason why souls should carry it holily and humbly to Christ, Namely, if wee consider who wee are that come to Christ. But then, Thirdly and lastly, Consider you the Errand for which you come to Christ at any time, and you will see in that an Argument to make you carry it well. This Wo∣man came to Christ upon a great Errand, Ah Lord, My Daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil; And, Oh Lord, I am troubled with him too (might shee say) A great business then, shee came about, and so do wee when wee come to Christ. If wee were to speak with Christ for a trifle, then if Christ spake roughly, wee might go away, but it is about what most concerns us. For, suppose it bee thy first com∣ing to Jesus Christ, thou art a poor creature under sin, and now thou art made sensible of it, what dost thou go to Christ for? for ease of thy burden, &c. Suppose thou art coming to Christ after some back∣sliding, under the guilt of some spiritual Adultery, and now thou art coming to him that hee should re∣ceive
thee again, and is not this a serious thing? Nay, suppose thou goest to Christ but for the life of one of your children, or your own life; these are se∣rious things, and in serious things wee should carry it humbly, when wee come to such a one as Jesus Christ is, being such as wee are, upon such a weigh∣ty Errand as all our occasions are; I fear thou (that mis-behavest thy self to Christ) forgettest thy busi∣ness with him. Is the sentence past, and art thou con∣demned already? and art thou come to Christ with the chains about thy feet, and the halter about thy neck, and now carriest thou thy self ill to him? Art thou suing for thy pardon, and now proud? art thou before the Lord for bread, childrens bread at any time, and is thy case such, as death follows upon a denial of it? and now mindest thou not thy Carriage? Pray souls look about you (as my phrase is) what come you to Christ for? is it for temporals, or eternals? come you for your selves, or for yours? are you seeking for things on Earth, or in Heaven? do you desire your childrens, or your own, or both deliverance from the Devil? I pray minde your Errand, what thing it is you come to Christ for; and let it bee al∣most what it will that you are with Christ about, the consideration of the one, or other, should and may prevail with us, to carry it exceeding well, though hee seem to carry it ill. So much for the explication of the Point. Why now then for the Application; Indeed there is but one thing that I do aim at as the proper and principal intendment of this Point, which is, to di∣rect, and inable both my own heart, and yours (under God) to carry it thus well to Jesus Christ, though hee may carry it ill to us, But before I speak to that, I
beseech you, if it bee your duty to carry it well to Jesus Christ, though hee should carry it ill to us; then do you take heed (as I was concluding the last time, and would a little hint it again) that you do not car∣ry it ill to Jesus Christ, when Christ carries it well to you. Therefore all you that are before the Lord, you hear this, though Jesus Christ should spurn at you, you should worship him; though Jesus Christ should cast you off with a denial, yet you should lye at his feet, and honour him. I beseech you take heed, when Christ smiles upon you, do not spurn at him; when hee doth good to you, bee not you bad to him. This is a necessary caution, even to those that pretend to God. In Deut. 32. What a large Catalogue of good Carriage is there of God towards a people? When they were in a desert Land, hee lead them, and as an Eagle hee bare them on his wings, &c. 10, & 11. verses. Hee found him in a desert Land, and in the waste howling wilderness: hee lead him about, hee instructed him, hee kept him as the Apple of his Eye. As an Eagle stirreth up her Nest, fluttereth over her young, spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings: So the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange God with him, &c. Here was good Carriage from the Lord, but how did they carry it? See in verse 15. But Je∣surun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxed fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness: then hee forsook God, which made him, and lightly e∣steemed the Rock of his salvation, &c. Oh! as Moses said, in verse 6. Do yee thus require the Lord, O fool∣ish people and unwise? Jesurun, the Lords people, the Lords heritage, a people that profess God, are very apt to carry it ill, when the Lord carries it well.
And I wish to God this were not the Carriage of England this day, now wee have peace and advan∣tages, and opportunities. But now the Lord doth well, wee carry it ill. I beseech you, beware of it; I shall press it in a few words; Who is there of you all before the Lord, but I may say to you, as the Lord said to his people by Jeremiah; Have I been as a barren wilderness, or a dry heath? &c. There is not the most notorious Rebel that lives out of Hell, but is beholding to Christ for being preserved. Who of you all that have not had choice dealings by Jesus Christ? I beseech you do not deal ill with Christ. I know you are ready to say, what, do wee deal ill with Christ? I pray mark it, I will speak but two words. First, When thou sinnest wilfully after Christ hath called thee from sin, and tendered thee a pardon, thou dealest ill with him. Minde well that place, Heb. 10.26. If wee sin wilfully, after wee have received the knowledge of the truth (i. e. The great truth of the Gospel-grace, in, and by Christ, distinguished, vers. 28. from Moses his Law) then what follows? why vers. 29. It is accounted base, and dispiteful deal∣ing with Christ, who shed his blood for sinners. Ah thou wretch! dost thou hear, Christ pitties wretches, and is come to procure and give in pardon to sin∣ners, and calls, Come sinner, leave thy sin, take my pardon; cast off thy wickedness, accept my grace; and yet thou turnest thy deaf ear; thou now de∣clarest a hard heart, and dealest ill with Christ, who is dealing well with thee. Well then, I say, who∣ever thou art, that when thou hearest that Christ died for enemies, that hee hath gifts for Rebels, and that hee is ready to justifie the ungodly; and now wilt
bee a Rebel still, this is dealing ill with Jesus Christ. This is that which the Apostle calls trampling under foot the blood of Christ, &c. And so,
Secondly, When you deal ill with any of the emi∣nent things of Christ, you deal ill with Christ. You know what the Lord will say at the last day, Mat. 25. For as much as you have done it to any of these lit∣tle ones, you have done it unto mee. When you scoff at any member of Christ, Jesus Christ saith, There is one scoffs at mee. And when you deal unworthi∣ly with any of the things of Christ (as the Ministers of Christ) Luk. 10.16. Hee that heareth you, hear∣eth mee: and hee that despiseth you, despiseth mee: and hee that despiseth mee, despiseth him that sent mee, &c. It is not spoke of the Twelve, but of the Seven∣ty: Those that hee had sent out to preach in his Name, though they were not the Twelve extraordi∣nary ones, I say, but the ordinary Disciples. I pray minde it, ordinary Ministers are so near Christ, that hee accounts despising of them, as a despite of him∣self. And so for Christians, the meanest of them all, &c. Consider them that thou dost despise, what are they? they are the Lords Messengers for thy good, and they are the Lords Members whom hee tenders. And so I say, for any thing of Christ, they that deal ill with them, deal ill with Christ. I know what is the great Objection against this, and I remember Dr. Stoughton did well answer it. Wee do not take these to bee the servants of Christ, the Lords people; his answer is, Beware you do not smite as chismatick, a ho∣ly one, and a Saint bee found a bleeding. Well, I be∣seech you take heed of this; many that pretend to have much from Christ, they deal exceeding ill with Christ, it is a sin without excuse. Therefore theLord doth make the 2. of Jeremiah, to bee a con∣viction to leave them without excuse. Christ may say unto you all, whom in misery hee hath support∣ed, in want supplied, in all things sustained; I say, Jesus Christ may speak thus to you, If so bee in the day of your distress, I had let you lye under the bur∣then of sin; If when you came to begg mercy, I had put you off with a denial, or long delay, you ought to have carried it well: but how inexcusable will you bee, that while Christ carries it well to you, you carry it ill to him? But the most proper. Use is to speak something to direct us all to this good Carriage. You hear, howe∣ver Christ carries it to you, yet you ought to carry it holily, and humbly to Jesus Christ. And it may bee there is some poor soul or other that is now going to Christ; It may bee thou art a Months-Convert, and thou art wrestling long with Christ, and hast no an∣swer; or it may bee thou art a backslider, and art re∣turning to Christ, or hast been with Christ upon some family, corporal occasion, hear how you are to carry it. I will hold out my thoughts distinctly, that I may the better direct: And I shall press the Use under two heads. Cave, Viz. 1 Beware, beware of ill carriage Unto Christ. Cura, Viz. 2 Take care, labour for a good carriage Unto Christ. Under these two Particulars I would press this good Womans practice upon my self, and you; That however Christ seems at any time, in any thing to carry it to us, although it seem ill, yet let
not us carry our selves ill to him, but rather over∣come our evil with good, and study to behave our selves to Jesus Christ as wee ought. I beseech you attend it. First, Beware of ill Carriage. Satan is at your elbow, hee is tempting, hee is busie to make you curse God, and dye: This was Satans main work to provoke Job to ill Carriage, and that is his work up∣on thee now. Satan seeth thee groaning under a sin, that thou hast no ease, now Satan is tempting thee to carry it ill, but beware, do not carry it ill. Take heed of two things as the principal peeces of good Carriage. First, Beware of evil words, and wishes. Secondly, Of unlawful works and indeavours. First, Beware of evil words, and wishes. My Bre∣thren, wee are apt in affliction to sin with our mouths. But oh Sirs, let mee tell you, Mouth-sin is great sin; Tongue-sin on Earth, is tormenting-sin in Hell; Do not speak ill, nor wish ill. Do not speak ill. It was an ill speech, yet that good man drops it in his trouble, Psal. 73.13. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocency. And it was a very ill speech of the Church, in Lam. 3.18. I said my hope is perished from the Lord. And a bad wish of Job, Job 6.8, 9. Oh that I might have my request! and that God would grant mee the thing that I long for! even that it would please God to destroy mee, that hee would let loose his hand, and cut mee off. Beware of speaking unadvisedly with your lip. Saith the soul, I cannot stand up under the frowns of Christ, and I would to God I might dye now; God notes what you say, Jer. 45.3. Thou saidst, woe is mee now! Mark, God noted what Baruh saith. But
you will say, may not the soul speak? may not the bitter heart vent it self? may not I speak of my condition as it is? I pray mark but these two or three things. First of all, You may speak, but it is our misery wee are apt to speak more than it is; Many a time wee cry out of our misery more than it is. But, Secondly, Mark this, though wee may speak, It it best to hold our peace. Better is it for the soul to put his mouth in the dust, then there will bee hope, as wee opened, Lam. 3.29. But then, Thirdly, In all your speaking, you must distinguish between humble prayer, and hasty speaking. You may go before the Lord again, and again, and speak to him, as the Woman of Canaan; you may tell the Lord your wounds stink and fester, your bones are broken, &c. but you must not do this unadvisedly, or passionately. Quest. How shall the soul know, even in prayer, that hee doth not speak of his sad condition badly? Answ. I answer first, When in all your prayers, and expressions unto God, you leave your complaint upon your selves. This was Jobs practice, Jeb 10.1. saith Hee, My soul is weary of my life, I will leave my complaint upon my self, I will speak in the bitterness of my soul, i. e. I will say, Lord, my wound is great, but I made it, &c. you may expostulate with God, but still leave your complaint upon your selves, i. e. lay the fault of all upon your selves; do not blame Christ. Confess whatever thou feelest smart or sore, that thou must onely thank thy self for it. Lay not thy sorrow to thy Saviours charge; whatever you say, speak not as charging Christ, but condemning self. That is one thing.
And secondly, As you must leave the complaint upon your selves, so you must not absolutely, and pe∣remptorily condemn your selves. The soul is apt to cry out, my case is bad, and it will never bee better, I conclude I must perish, there is no hope, &c. Ah! these condemning, concluding, absolute concluding speeches thus against our selves, proceed from pas∣sion, and are of that kinde of words which wee must avoid. But it is not enough to watch words, take heed especially to your works. Therefore Secondly, As you must beware of sinful words and wishes, so, beware of sinful works, and indeavours. When the Rod of God is upon thy back, take heed of putting forth thy hand to evil. Sauls way, was a wicked way; Indeed the Lord dealt sadly, severely with him; neither to answer him by vision, nor dream; by Urim, nor Thummim, was very sore and grievous. And my Brethren, to bee able to forbear at such a time any thing that may seem a way to help, I con∣fess it is very hard. But although it bee difficult, yet it is duty. Wee must beware of going to Witches, and Wizards for counsel in any case. It was Sauls sin, and I wish it had died with him; but it remains too great a practice in these times, Oh take heed of it. Take heed, I say, you do not by any evil practice seek to ease your selves. Though Christ should not answer thee, no more at present, than God did Saul; though hee do neither speak to thee himself, nor suffer his servants to speak on thy behalf (as here in this Womans case) yet beware of doing any unwarrantable thing to ease thy minde. Bee not as Saul at Endor. No, neither bee as Saul in Mount Gilboa, (as the story is, 1 Sam. 30.) At Endor hee consults with a Witch; At Gilboa hee took a sword
and slew himself. O take heed of that temptation! viz. Self-Murther. I have heard it often as observed heretofore, and I know, that to this day, it is an e∣vil practiue many take, they will lay violent hands upon themselves; this is to go back to hell for a plai∣ster. And surely such a plaister hath so much ve∣nome in it, that it is madness to expect Virtue from it. I beseech you therefore beware. This is the first part of my advice. Learn your duty at least thus far, Not to carry it ill in word or work, however in any thing the Lord deal with you. But my Point saith more, therefore I must press it. Wee must carry it well to Christ, however hee may seem to car∣ry it to us. And therefore to come to that in the next place. Secondly, Recompence not evil with evil, but rather recompence evil with good. It is true (as I have often said) Christ cannot carry it really ill; but however do thou recompence evil with good. Now to that end I pray minde this Woman of Canaan, and imi∣tate her, write after her Copy, do as shee did, let your Carriage to Christ answer her Pattern in all the particulars which I opened and instanced in. And to this end give mee leave to commend to you, the ex∣ercise of three Graces, in the exercise of which shee was, and in them you should bee, (and so shall car∣ry it well to God) Namely, Humility, Prayer, Re∣solute Faith. First, Observe her Humility, and go thy way, and do likewise. However the Lord carries him∣self to thee, humble thy self under his hand. Christ could not speak a word never so bad, but shee would hee viler. If the Lord would say Dogg, shee would ay so too; Especially labour to carry it humbly in
this one thing, to accept of any measure, in any man∣ner, of comfort that Christ gives you. Thou art per∣plexed, comfort thou wouldest have; Now observe, Christ it may bee offers thee a crumb, and thy proud heart will not accept of comfort, unless thou mayest have much. This is just like a little childe, the Mo∣ther gives it a small peece of bread, and it cries, and throws it away, if hee may not have his Brothers peece of bread. Ah! Beloved, look to your hearts; Take heed of this proud peece of childishness. If your hearts were humble, you would accept of, and thank Christ for a little. As it is with the hungry soul, so it is with every humble soul; Hee admires mercy in a morsel, and is willing to stoop under the Table, to take up a crumb. Put on therefore, and bee cloathed with humility, and put it forth, shew it in your Car∣riage to Christ, as this Woman of Canaan did. It was the humility of her soul, by which shee carried it so well; and this is the first Grace in her Carriage un∣to Christ, wee should indeavour to conform our selves. I come to the next. Secondly, Observe in her the Grace of Prayer (I do not say, the Gift of Prayer) But I observe it as the Grace of Prayer (for here was no great gift) Oh Sirs! however the Lord doth keep up Prayer, your case cannot bee so bad, but pray you may, and pray you must, Do but observe an instance or two in the Book of the Psalms, of very sad cases, and yet they did not give over Prayer, Psal. 61. there you have the Psalmist crying after God, in the first verse, But when would hee cry? Why when my heart is over∣whelmed, vers. 2. Thou sayest thy heart is over∣whelmed, and thou canst not, it is in vain to pray; Mark the Psalmist prayed then. Again, Psal. 88.
observe how sad the case of Heman is set forth there; My soul is full of trouble, my life draweth nigh unto the grave, vers. 3. And so on. But what saith hee in vers. 13. But unto thee have I cried, O Lord, and in the morning shall my Prayer prevent thee. Though the case was very sad, yet it was not past praying. Here is the Devils temptation, What, wilt thou pray, it is in vain? thou hast prayed, and Christ doth not answer, Nay, hee hath returned thee a rough answer; (So in∣deed the Serpent subtilly suggests, to take us off from Prayer.) But resist the Devil in that temptation; do thou yet pray, and give not over; yet say, I will pray unto him; say with Jonah, Yet I will look again to∣wards his holy Temple, Jonah 2.4. Quest. But if the soul say, But I cannot tell how to pray; I have not a Gift of Prayer. Answ. If thou bee a Saint, Thou hast a Grace of Prayer. And observe this, thou canst pray as much as the Woman of Canaan, Lord, help mee, and, Truth Lord, &c. Here are but three words, Lord help mee. And let mee in allusion tell you but three words that you should pray to the Lord, let your case bee what it will. First, Lord, thou onely canst help mee; all the men in the world cannot help mee. Secondly, Lord, thou didst help many as bad as I. Thirdly, And Lord, If thou didst never help any as bad, then now thou wilt have the more glory by help∣ing mee. Object. Possibly the soul will be ready to say, But alass, Jesus Christ puts mee off, I would pray, but hee turns away, and will not hear; and I would catch hold of him, but hee runs away. Repl. You know what Jacob did, (Gen. 32.26,
27.) Hee would catch hold of God, though hee would bee gone; and you must wrestle with him, and cry af∣ter him, You must not let him go. You see the Dis∣ciples tell Christ, that this Woman cried after them, vers. 23. Shee was as one that ran after another, who went away. Shee crieth after us (say they) do thou so; if Christ seem to go, run after, cry after. Bee not put off, renew, and re-inforce thy Prayer again and again. Indeed, in this the Grace of Prayer differs from the Gift; the Grace lives, and lasts, the Gift dies, and goes out. Well then, stir up thy self to take hold of God; and keep thy hold, having taken it. Pray, if thou canst but a little, and go again, and pray the same words again and again; Christ himself did so; Three times hee prayed in the same words, Mat. 26.44. Bee not ashamed if thou want variety of expression. A few words prevail with God and Jesus Christ. Therefore I say, Pray alwaies; however Christ carry it, cast not away thy Prayers, but continue in it; so this Woman did, and wee must do likewise. But Thirdly, Bee resolute in your Faith. And pray let mee mark this by the way, Though shee doth not say, Lord, I beleeve, yet shee did beleeve. The Woman was acting the Grace of Faith all this while, and shee acts it very resolutely, shee speaks as one beleeving him to bee the Messiah, as one whose onely hope and help was in him, and as one that did cleave and adhere to him. Our Lord Jesus witnesseth to the Womans Faith. vers. 28. It was strong and resolute; shee did beleeve, and was acted and upheld (as I shall shew hereafter) by Faith in all this address. A Faith shee had, and a Faith shee expressed really, though it is not expres∣sed
literally, as to the terms; yet it is evident as to the Truth of it, that shee did beleeve; so do you. Beleevers are ready to think that in time of trouble, it is a time to pray, and to hear, but not to beleeve, &c. Thou thinkest thou mayest cry after Christ, and wait upon Christ, I but thou shouldest beleeve in him, Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. So Job, I wil trust in him though hee kill mee. That act of Faith I am now pressing, is Trusting; and I pray minde it what kinde of Faith I press in this par∣ticular; It is a Trusting Faith. Job did trust, and hee that feareth God, must trust in him at all times; yea in the dark. And truly this word or term Trust, doth very fitly set forth the thing I intend to press you in this particular unto. Now that you may a little understand it, consider that there are four words in the Scripture, that set forth the great My∣stery of Beleeving. There is first, The general word Faith. I beleeve, Lord, help my unbeleef. Secondly, There is the particular word of Hope. Hee hopeth. Thirdly, There is a particular word of Knowledge, which is as much as Assurance. I know whom I have beleeved. And Fourthly, There is this word Trusting. And now what is the nature of Trust. A man that beleeves, hath a pretty deal of light of God, but hee that hopes, hath a little more; hee hath more that knows; but what hath hee that trusts? I shall give it you in this similitude: One comes to another, Sir, I know you can help mee, pray help mee, pray help mee; saith hee, I cannot do it, or I will not do it. The other replies, but I beseech you Sir do it; under∣take it for mee, I pray promise mee. The other re∣turns No, I will undertake nothing, I will promise you nothing. The man returns again, but yet I will commit it to you, I pray consider it, I will leave it with your goodness, and though you will not say you will do it, yet Sir I will trust in you. So, thou goest to Christ, and hee will not hear thee, hee turns a∣way, and saith nothing; after all thy cries, hee seems silent; thou art left without assurance, and with∣out visible hope. Now say, Lord, I leave my case, my soul with thee. I will yet relye upon thy grace, and although thou wilt not give mee in a particular promise, why yet Lord I will trust in thee. Oh trust to his Omnipotent Arm, that hee can do it, and because of his Tender Compassion, and Rich Free Grace, trust in him, that hee will do it; and this is that which Christ takes very well at our hands, Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose minde is stayed on thee, be∣cause hee TRUSTETH in thee, Isa. 26.3. When all fails, Hope and Heart fails, and Christ seems to speak contrary, Cry out, Yet Lord, I will trust in thee. To draw up my self to a close of this Use. I beseech you all often remember the Woman of Ca∣naan, consider her Carriage, and this point which I have been pressing from her practice; and in your condition strive to have her Carriage, especially in the exercise of those three things, viz. Humility, Prayer, and Faith. Besides what in the former Ser∣mon I opened, which I shall not now repeat. For onely this is that I would press, viz. have such a good carriage in all things. You know what is the particular occasion wherein Christ and you trade, or
have to do upon any account. Bee thy case what it will, or Christs carriage bee as hee pleaseth (cross, or kinde, as wee speak) still know, you ought to study and strive to demean your self holily. How∣ever the Lord carries it to you, your duty and wis∣dome is to carry it well to him.
Quest. I but you will say, This is very hard, how shall I do it? Answ. I told you indeed it is a hard Copy, but wee must indeavour to write it. And blessed bee God, the Copy is written in great letters, so that wee may with the more ease see it, and imitate it. Quest. But how shall wee do it? Answ. Take but these Three things. First, If ever you would imitate this Copy, Bee sure that you take heed of those persons, that will shake your hands while you are a writing. Oh Sirs, when you are to copy out the great Copy of the Woman of Canaan, 1 Away from the Devil. 2 Away from Carnal Reason. And
3 Away from flesh and blood. These will shake your hand. The Devil will put on Job to curse God, Satan will suggest a thousand things to a soul in the Woman of Canaans condition. Mark, saith hee, hee doth not hear thee, thou dost not belong to him. Mark, hee gives thee a terrible answer, hee is rather a Judge than a Father: So, for carnal reason, and flesh and blood (I will put them both together) they will rise; what, must I bee called Dogg? must I bee put off, as I must not have a crumb? But if ever you would carry it well, take heed of those that will hinder you; if you hearken to those, they will but shake thy hand, and make thee rather blotthy Copy-book (as wee say) and onely make a few scrawls (as boies, when some jogg their hand) instead of writing by thy Copy. Bid the Devil stand further off. If you resist (James tells you) Hee will flee. Shake off carnal reason, minde not what that judgeth, or sayeth, of Christs carriage to thee. Eye thou thy lesson, and regard not a∣ny that would hinder thy learning of it; that is one thing. But then, Secondly, If ever you would write well by this Copy, I pray often look upon your Copy. Wee see that children do mistake, because they do not often look upon their Copy. It is no shame to learn of a good Woman; it may bee you begin at first to think of the Woman of Canaan, but you do not read thorow; you should again and again look over, look thorow and thorow this Example; content not thy self with once reading or hearing; repeat the story again. Remember the Doctrine a second and a third time. Hee takes a Copy best, who eyes it most; and that soul will best imitate this Woman of Canaan, who reflects upon, and considers her Example often.
Thirdly and Lastly, Strengthen your hands as much as may bee. My Beloved, a cold hand shall I say, or a cold heart, will write but very poorly: if you do not warm your hearts with some other good considerations, you will not write well. I will give you one general warming heating word to consider, that you may write after this Copy, that you may carry your selves thus well. As long as you have a heart to carry; Nay, but to indeavour to carry it well to Christ; Christ cannot carry it ill to you. In this sense I tell thee, if thy indeavours beehumbly and heartily to carry it well to Christ; Christ cannot carry it ill to you. I read once it is said of Christ, viz. John 4.4. That hee must needs do such a thing, hee must needs go thorow Samaria. There was a poor Woman of Samaria hee must bring home. And it is said, in 2 Tim. 2.13. If wee beleeve not, yet hee abideth faithful, and cannot deny him∣self. Truly, there is a must in some things upon Christ; and there is a cannot, which may safely bee spoke of the Lord Jesus. Hee must bee kinde, and hee cannot deny himself in that. After our humble holy waiting hee must speak; and hee cannot conceal his grace from those that (as this Woman) address themselves to him; And therefore it is certain (and warm thy fingers, hand and heart (that thou may∣est write the better) with this consideration) that while you carry it thus (as I opened) unto him; Hee cannot continue strange to you, but must, and will appear as you expect and desire. Remember it, and rejoyce in it; I say unto you from my Master, that albeit the Lord Christ may delay, and demur, yet at last hee will speak to us, and do for us. I need not send you to any man, but onely to wo∣men, to assure you of this, who are upon record in Scripture, as presidents for this purpose. I intreat you to remember, that there are three Women in the New Testament to whom Christ shewed much mer∣cy, though at first hee seemed not to minde them. The one is in Luk. 7.37. One that is called a sinner, shee came and sate down at his feet, and wept, but hee did not seem to minde her. The other is the Woman that had the bloody Issue, in Luk. 18. And the
Third is this Woman of Canaan. Here are three Women, whom Christ at first did not seem to minde, yet hee dealt with them very well at last; And, Bee yee comforted in this confidence, Hee will deal as well with you, as ever hee did with them. Christ is still the same in love and kindness; Oh that wee could bee the same with this Woman of Canaan in her car∣riage! And thus I have done with that particular, viz. how the Woman did behave her self; hereafter wee shall see how shee sped, and what was the hap∣py Conclusion of all.
Faith alone carries the Soul thorow all Discouragements unto Christ. The Sixth SERMON. Matthew 15. vers. 28. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O Wo∣man, great is thy Faith: bee it unto thee, even as thou wilt. And her Daughter was made whole from that very hour. AS the dawning day after some long and dark night; And as the cooling winds in the midst of some great and scorching heat; so are these words of our Lord to the Wo∣man of Canaan, very comfortable, and very refresh∣ing. The man that hath lain tossing all night, with what joy doth hee entertain the dawning of the day? and the Traveller that is spent with heat, with what eagerness doth hee suck in the cool breathings of the wind? Now, such was this speech of Christ to the Woman of Canaan in this place. They were as a day dawning, and as a cool refreshing to her soul. By this speech (my Beloved) no doubt, no doubt, but this poor Woman was now marvelously refreshed, and as much as her soul could want or wish, shee had from the Lord in these words, as wee shall see afterwards. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O Woman, great is thy Faith; bee it unto thee even as
thou wilt. These words have the last particular which I noted in this story; Namely, the Issue or the Conclusion that Christ made with this Woman. The beginning was very sad, A poor Woman, at the feet of Christ, begging much, but seeming not to bee heard; but behold the issue is very good. That Je∣sus Christ that answered her not a word, answers her now many words, and many comfortable words; Oh Woman, great is thy Faith: bee it unto thee, even as thou wilt, &c. There are two things you may observe in this Answer of Christ here. First, You have here, Christs Commendation of her Faith. And, Secondly, You have Christs Condescention to her de∣sire. First, You have Christs Commendation of her Faith. O Woman, great is thy Faith. Thou art not onely a Beleever, but a great Beleever; thou art no more a Woman of Canaan, but a Woman of Israel; no more a Dogg, but a Childe; Great is thy Faith. Secondly, You have the Condescention of Christ to her desires, Now that is held forth in two things. First, More Generally. Secondly, More Particularly. First, More Generally, Bee it unto thee even as thou wilt. Oh great word! a word exceeding the Womans wish; Our Lord (as his manner is) ex∣ceeds her request. The poor Woman would have been glad of a crumb, and by this word my-thinks Christ ids her go to the Table, and cut what shee would, take not onely crumbs, but what peeces shee pleased. Secondly. Hee doth particularly grant her parti∣cular
request about her Daughter. For her Daughter was made whole from that very hour. There were three Questions which truly my thoughts did suggest when I considered these words, and they were (if I may so say) they were in my own heart to make in the reading of these words. And I shall propose them with the Answers thereof, being they are Questions not of strife, but of much edification. The First Question is this, The Lord commends this Woman for her Faith, Wherein doth her Faith appear? Secondly, Why doth the Lord say to her, Bee it unto thee even as thou wilt? And Thirdly, Why was the request shee made first, grant∣ed last? Quest. 1. The Lord saies to her, Woman, great is thy Faith; why, wherein did the Womans Faith appear? Shee prayed (that wee read) shee cryed (that wee read) shee worshipped (that wee read) but it is not said shee beleeved. Shee doth not say as hee, I be∣leeve, Lord help my unbeleef. How then doth Christ say, Oh Woman, great is thy Faith? Two Answers I shall give. Answ. 1. The Lord Jesus Christ doth know that which wee cannot see. That may, and doth appear to Christ, which oftentimes doth not appear to us. Hee needs not that men should tell him, for hee knows all things, &c. John 16.30. The Woman needed not to tell Christ that shee did beleeve, for Christ himself saw it. The Lord Jesus Christ doth observe that in us, which wee do not many times observe in our selves. In the last day, when the Lord shall judge both the righteous and the wicked, hee will rell the righteous, they did this and that thing, which
they did not know, as that speech intimates, When saw wee thee naked, and cloathed thee? Matth. 25. The Lord can see a few Names in Sardis, and a little strength even there, where the heart can scarce finde any thing; Therefore minde it by the way, and do you (O poor of the flock!) (that fear your own Faith) I say, do you hear, and rejoyce, Jesus Christ can see Faith in us, when many times wee cannot see it in our selves; that is light to him which is in the dark to us. Answ. 2. Mark this Answer, You must distinguish between the real beeing, and the extrinsical, or expli∣cite appearance of Faith. Things may bee really and essentially, which are not visibly, and explicitely: And the Scripture takes notice of some things that are really, though not explicitely. As now in Job, Job 1.5. Peradventure my Sons have sinned, and curs∣ed God in their hearts; That is, implicitely they may do it. So the Lord takes notice of those things that are in us (i. e. real and true, though it do not appear in the formalities thereof.) That poor Wo∣man, in Luk. 7.50. had Faith, though there was no formal profession of it. Christ hath a discerning eye, hee can see what is in us, even as in the root, before the bud, or fruit appear. Hee can, and doth know what is in us radically, though wee do not so visibly, and expresly make it out. Now such was this Wo∣mans case. Though here is no explicite Confession, or Profession of Faith, yet shee did that which is Faith implicite. And in this Woman there was real Faith, which did act her in this address to Christ; as you will see if you consider it; for what is Faith? Faith is the coming of the soul to Jesus Christ: Shee comes. Faith is the casting of the soul upon Christ▪
Shee cast her self upon Christ. Faith is a resting on Christ, without a word of evidence or assurance: The Woman doth so. You may by this satisfie your selves then in the first question. This Woman did beleeve, though she did not in so many words express it; shee shewed it, though shee did not speak it. But then in the second place, Quest. 2. Why doth our Lord say unto her, Bee it unto thee even as thou wilt? Take a double Answer to this likewise. Answ. 1. The Lord Jesus saw that this Woman did want more things than one. Jesus Christ saw all her wants, and all her wishes too, though shee did not express them. That place in Romans 8. is known to all of you, but the 27. verse is not so often taken notice of. And hee that searcheth the hearts, know∣eth what is the mind of the spirit, because hee maketh intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God. The soul sighs, and groans by the Spirit, and many a time the soul doth not know his own sighing; who shall know it? why, Hee shall know it that makes in∣tercession; this is particularly spoken of Jesus Christ. The Spirit helps thee to sigh, and thou canst not tell thy own sighs; Jesus Christ can tell what it means, I say, Jesus Christ knows; for that place is to bee un∣derstood particularly of Christ, for it is hee that maketh intercession, as it is there expressed. It is a Scripture which may much stay our hearts; Christ knows what wee want, even then when wee cannot tell our selves; onely in the general, sigh. Minde it, Oh my Beloved you go to Jesus Christ with one word, and a many sighs, the Lord will answer all your sighs, and will say, Bee it to you, not onely as you speak, but as you groan, and as you sigh too.
Answ. 2. The Lord Christ loves to shew his bounty in rewarding any souls, for any delay. Isa. 61.7. for your shame you shall have double; And Zechariah 9.12. Turn yee to the strong hold, yee prisoners of hope, even to day do I declare that I will render double unto thee. Upon these accounts it was that our Lord doth not answer this Woman with a particular word, take what you come for; but in a general way, bids her take all things, any thing which shee could desire; take what thou wilt, as thou wilt. But to proceed to the last Question. The Third and last Question is, Why doth the Lord give this in the last place? Her Daughter was made whole. One would have thought this should have been the first word; Woman go thy way, thy daugh∣ter is whole; but first hee speaks of her Faith, and then to her souls desire. Why doth Christ so? that is the Question. Answ. Now the Answer hereunto is easie, and it may bee this. Our Lord Jesus is wise and gracious, and therefore (knowing what wee need most, and what is best to bestow upon us) Hee doth still give that first which is most necessary, and which is the chiefest. My Beloved, I pray remember it. The Lord loves to give the best mercies first; her Daughter was posses∣sed with a Devil, but that was but a corporal infirmi∣tie; her own soul was more under the power of the Devil, and the deliverance of that most needful; therefore hee gives the more necessary thing first. O my Beloved, you have a wise Christ, a good Christ, hee will satisfie particular desires, but hee will first do the best things. Indeed Christ reacheth us to begg the best things first. Seek yee first the King∣dome of Heaven, and therefore first pray, Thy King∣dome
come. But wee are ignorant, and apt to mistake; wee often ask the best things last. Now Christ will give the best first, Therefore hee begins to speak to the Mothers soul here, before hee mentions her Daughters distemper. But let this suffice for these Questions. To come to the words, there are many Points observable from this place; Particular Notes I shall take in by the by, and therefore shall not touch upon them. Neither shall I press the words too hard, there is no need of it. This Text, like a brave hony-comb, drops out in three things, like hony without any pressing. First, Observe here, What it was that carried the Woman on, and thorow all this while, (what bladder kept his Woman from sinking.) It was Faith. O Woman, great is thy Faith. Secondly, Observe, What rich bounty is here; here is glorious Grace, rich Grace; Have what thou wilt. And then, Thirdly, Observe, That shee hath a particular grant of her special request, her Daughter was made whole. It is the second thing I do principally aim at, but shall speak of the two other. And first, Observe from the first, That it is true Faith alone that carries the soul thorow all difficulties, and discouragements, in the way to Christ. I shall not bee large in the handling of this Point. I have often spoken of Faith, and the work of Faith, as it doth receive Christ; how that is performed, &c. therefore I shall confine my self to the Text, and the boundaries of it, to shew that in all the difficul∣ties the soul meets withall in coming to Christ, Faith bears the soul up under all. And pray mark what I say, I say, true Faith nor strong Faith, neither do I say
a degree of Faith, but a true Faith. It is true, this Wo∣man had great Faith (and shee needed it, for she had great difficulties) but the Point lies positively thus, Faith, if it bee true, it is that, and that alone, that carries up the soul above all difficulties, and dis∣couragements in its coming to Christ. I suppose I need not tell you that there are difficulties, in the way of coming to Christ. This Woman knew there were difficulties, and discouragements, but what car∣ried her thorow, did her Patience carry her thorow? (shee had that) did her reverend esteem of Christ car∣ry her thorow? (shee had that) did the pinch of her wants carry her thorow? No, Christ doth not say, Oh Woman! great is thy patience, or great is thy e∣steem of mee, or great is thy want; But, O Woman, great is thy Faith: It was the Womans Faith that carried her thorow these difficulties. I will demon∣strate this Doctrine by some instances; and therefore I shall mention some of the difficulties which are in our way to Christ, and shew how that it is Faith, and Faith alone, by which the Lord doth use to help us a∣gainst all these difficulties. Now therefore I pray minde it, and you may mostly observe in our-coming to Christ, There are four waies from whence our dif∣ficulties, and discouragements do arise; and you will see, that true Faith alone will carry the soul thorow all these. The difficulties arise thus, from 1 Self. 2 Satan. 3 The World. 4 Christ himself may do that seemingly, which may, and doth make it difficult to come unto him. But now yet see as to each, how Faith carries the soul thorow all these.
To begin with the first, which is Self, that comes in to oppose us. And pray good people look about you, your selves are the greatest hinderances to keep you from Christ; now what shall carry us up above our selves but Faith? by Faith Moses denies him∣self. And saith Christ, Whoever will come after mee, must deny himself; how shall hee do it? nothing but Faith will do it. I will give you but an instance of it; Self doth hinder coming to Christ two waies. 1 Either by too much diffidence. 2 Or too much confidence. One while it is too high, and will nor stoop to come to Christ; Another while too low, it cannot bee raised up to such a work; Sometime Self is arrogant, and proud, what, I go to Christ? not I, I can shift well enough, &c. O∣ther while it is diffident, and fearful, and crieth out that it is not fit, or able, not is it meet for his soul to go, &c. Well, yet for all this I pray mark, it is Faith makes Self go, notwithstanding all this. For, as to the Pride of self, Faith brings in so clear a light of the excellency, and necessity of Christ, that self-con∣fidence is put to silence. And the high thoughts are brought down by the obedience of Faith, and so carried to the obedience of Christ. Hee that be∣leeves the testimony which God gives of Christ in the Gospel, must stoop and bow; and Faith help∣ing the soul in that business, carries the soul out of proud Self, so as that arrogancy shall not hinder the souls coming and closing with Christ. And for diffi∣dence, and the working of Self that way, why Faith doth evidently carry the soul over that hinderance. For Faith seeth the arm of Christ stretched forth to receive the feeble soul. Faith tells the weak heart that Christ will come to it, if it cannot go to him. Faith assures
the soul that Christ will inable it to imbrace him∣self. Faith shews Christ as able and willing to create a hand and heart in us to receive, and to take hold of himself. When Self cries but childe-like. I am weak, and same, and cannot go to Christ, then (mark it) Faith saies, true, thou hast no leggs, but hee that bids the man arise, gives him feet; Faith saith, thou hast no strength, but hee that bids thee be∣leeve, will make thee beleeve. What did carry Abraham above and against himself? It is said, Rom. 4.19. Being not weak in Faith, hee considered not his own body now dead, when hee was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of Sarah's womb, &c. Faith raiseth up the soul, and carries it on to Christ, even notwithstanding the souls nothingness. Faith incourageth the soul to go, although it bee empty; Faith saith, though Christ bee a great King, yet a poor soul may come to him without a present. In a word, Faith levels the mountains, and fills the Vul∣lies; it carries the soul on its way to Christ, not∣withstanding any hinderance from Self. Self shall not keep off where Faith is, the soul denies Self, and goes to Christ. But then to proceed, Secondly, Satan hee binders. And remember it, Satan doth more oppose your going to Christ, than hee doth oppose your leaving of sin. If thou wilt leave thy fin, Satan will bee content so thou wilt but trust to Self, and not go to Christs Grace. But when once the soul opposes sin, and goes to Christ, then Satan opposes; now what shall help and carry on the soul, and strengthen the opposed soul to oppose Satan? In Ephestans 5. saith the Apostle, Above all take the shield of Faith, whereby you shall bee able to quench the fiery darts of the Devil. Let Satan do his worst,
Faith will carry on the soul, it will quench his darts, and tread upon his devices, and sweetly strengthen the heart to cloze with the Lord Jesus, in despite, and in defiance of Satan, and all his hinderances. But then, Thirdly, the world, that opposes too. The world hinders the soul, by saying, what, will you go to Christ, and leave my pleasures, and leave my riches, and my honour, &c? Now, what carries up the soul above the world? why the Apostle tells, 1 John 5.4. And this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our Faith, And then, Lastly, Christ himself seems to oppose. The Lord doth not speak, and that is sad; and sometimes hee doth speak, and that is as sad. For (as wee for∣merly noted) hee seems to speak harshly, and Christ may seem to deny, and reject the soul in its approach to him. Now what shall carry up the soul, when Christ himself seems to put back? nothing but Faith. It is observed, that it was Faith carried up Job to go to God; it is therefore very observable that Job doth oftentimes profess his Faith in God. As in Job 13.15. Though hee kill mee, yet I will trust in him; it is a known speech. But that expression in Job 19. makes it more evident what carried him up to God; you have very sad expressions in that chapter, inti∣mating how God himself seemed to oppose Job. Hee hath overthrown mee, verse 6. And hee hath stript mee of my glory, vers. 9. Yea, Hee hath destroyed mee, on every side, and hath kindled his wrath against mee, verse 10, 11. Now what shall carry Job up? See vers. 24, 25. I know my Redeemer liveth, and oh that this profession of my Faith were written on a Rock for perpetual remembrance. It is as if hee should say,
My friends, my dispuring-friends, do not break my heart with arguments, you oppose, and God op∣poses too; but this carries mee up, I have a Re∣deemer, and I know that my Redeemer lives, &c. Had Job no other grace but Faith? Yes, You have heard of the Patience of Job, but yet Jobs Patience failed. Had hee not Humility? Yes, Hee that could lay his mouth in the dust at first, and say, Naked came I into the world, and naked must I return; Certainly Job had Humility also, but it was not that which sup∣ported him. Had hee not Prayer? without doubt Job had a praying spirit, and did call on God again and again, as hee often intimates; But yet it seem∣eth ayer failed, and therefore hee is charged by Eliphaz with neglect of it, in Job 15.4. Thou re∣strainest Prayer, thou dost lessen Prayer, thou dost diminish Prayer; so the word signifieth. I but mark, though Patience failed, and Hu∣mility and Prayer failed; yet Faith carries Job thorow all; Yet I will beleeve and trust. I pray observe, what∣ever Grace, or Gift, you have nothing will carry you thorow difficulties and discouragements in your way to Christ, but onely Faith; It was the Womans Faith that kept her up all the while. And it is that, and that alone, which carries every soul thorow all hinderances (as well as those which I have hinted) unto Jesus Christ. So you see the demonstration of the Point; to come to the next thing then. You will ask mee the Reason, Whence is it that Faith should thus bee the onely Grace to carry up, and carry out the soul, in the midst of all difficulties, in go∣ing to Christ. I will name very briefly these two heads of Reasons. The first is, From the appointment of Faith by God.
Secondly, The operation of Faith in us. These are the two great pillars of this Truth. First, From the appointment of Faith by God. My Beloved, Faith doth therefore carry us out thorow all, because it is that Grace that God alone hath ap∣pointed. Read the Gospel, or the Prophets, and you will finde them speaking of these two great Truths. First, That Christ is the onely one that is appointed to bring us to salvation. (There is no name but his, Act. 4.12.) Secondly, That Faith is the onely Grace appointed to bring us to Christ. You have our Lord shortly in one place speaking of both, in John 6.40. And this is the will of him that sent mee, that every one which seeth the Son, and beleeveth on him, may have ever∣lasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day. There is a great Question among Divines, Why Faith, rather than Charity, Patience, or Gospel-Obe∣dence, should bee the great instrument of Justification? And (my Beloved) this is the absolute Answer to the Question, Because God hath onely appointed it. There may bee some conjectural Reasons, why God hath appointed Faith, but the chief Reason is, be∣cause God hath appointed it. Now Divine Institu∣tion being upon Faith, thence it is that Faith doth the work; it is not from any inherent worth in the Grace. (Alass! What is the worth of a sinners hand, to take a glorious Christ!) But it is onely from Gods pleasure, and appointment, that Faith alone shall bee the Grace to carry the soul to, and help the soul in its receiving of Christ. God hath appointed no other leggs to carry us, and because hee hath ap∣pointed these, hee will bless his own apointment to effect the work. The Lords appointment makes all things operative: Therefore
Secondly, The Reason is from the operation of Faith in us, by virtue of that appointment. My Beloved, Faith it is a working Grace, and Faith is our great strength in every working Grace; it con∣veyeth strength unto all Graces. There is a threefold Operation of Faith to carry the soul thorow all difficulties and discouragements, in its going to Christ, viz. an Inlightening, an En∣livening, and an Embracing work, in the blessed business of closing with Christ. I will a little open them all three. First, Faith hath an Inlightening work. An inlight∣ning work, is that which carries a man thorow ma∣ny difficulties and discouragements. In Psal. 34. you have a fine expression, where David is speaking of his and others seeking God, and of their incouragement in that work, saith hee, in vers. 5. They looked unto him, and were lightened; and their faces were not a∣shamed; by Faith the soul sees the necessity of Christ, the inclinableness of the heart of Christ, &c. and this carries the soul thorow all difficulties. Saith Faith, look yonder, there, and there alone, is the rock of safety; And if you bee not there, you must sink; this makes the soul swim amain. And look, saith Faith, there is a safe Landing. Christ (saith Faith) stands with out-stretched arms of power and love to imbrace thee; and Faith realizeth such a fight, e∣videnceth it to the soul, and so inabling the soul to see it, helps the soul to go to Christ. Secondly, Faith hath not onely an inlightening work, but an inlivening work. My Beloved, other graces stir us up, and put us on to go to Christ, but Faith doth onely enliven us. Love and humility doth marvelously stir up the soul to go to Jesus Christ, and
so do other Graces; I but these do not feed the soul, nor strengthen; there is a great deal of difference be∣tween the Whip and the Meat you give the horse. A whip, a blow, that stirs it, but doth not strengthen it. A conviction of need, a fear of hell stirs us to go to Christ, but it doth not inable us, or inliven us. My Beloved, Faith is the strengthening Grace. The Just shall live by Faith, Heb. 10. (there saith hee) you have need of patience, that after you have done the will of God, yee might receive the Promise, &c. Now, The Just shall live by Faith, 36, 37, & 38. verses; Do not cast away your confidence, what then? You have need of patience, &c. doth hee stay there? No, but adds, The Just shall live by Faith. True, you will need patience, if you go to Christ; but you will live alone by Faith. Wee need patience to tarry the Lords lei∣sure; to bear the Lords frowns, to tarry till hee come; but how shall wee live in the mean time? Oh, The Just shall live by Faith. Faith being an enlightening Grace, therefore it is an enlivening Grace; Faith it findes honey (as Jonathan) and Faith it findes a Promise, and dips in the finger, and takes a little, and that enlivens and strengthens the soul. Nay, Faith, though it bee full of fears, it is a soul-enliven∣ing-Grace. Take that instance of the Woman with a bloody Issue, in Luke 8.44. compared with vers. 46. It is clear, shee had a Faith, and shee had fears, and shee had virtue. For this Faith full of fears did gather virtue from Jesus Christ: So thy Faith that is full of fears may gather virtue from Jesus Christ, and therefore is it that it carries us thorow all diffi∣culties in our going to Christ. Thirdly, Faith it hath an imbracing work. These all died in Faith, not having received the Promises;
What then, how could they live? but having seen them afar off, embraced them, Heb. 11.13. My Be∣loved, Faith it hath an imbracing work of the Pro∣mise, and because Faith can imbrace the Promise, therefore can it carry the soul thorow all the diffi∣culties that it meets with in the way to Christ. What is the Anchor at the end of a Cable (one Ship will carry a thousand Anchors) but one Anchor will hold the Ship, because it hath a fastening power. Faith is but a little Anchor of it self, I but it hath a fastening power, and so Faith staies the soul. In Isa. 26.3. Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose minde is stayed on thee, because hee trusteth in thee; because you trust in God, therefore are your minds stayed. Oh Sirs, what shall I say more, Faith, it is a catching hold of that Christ that puts thee off? And because Faith imbraces, and holds him that is sure and strong, it doth therefore ipso facto (as wee say) in that very thing carry the soul to Christ thorow all dif∣ficulties. Well, I pray minde and meditate a little upon these things, for they are of the life and My∣stery of real Christianity. But I will now speak to some Uses of this Point; Therefore to make some Application, there are onely three Uses. Use I Let mee say, This Doctrine is profitable for reproof. Is Faith such a Grace? is it Faith that car∣ries the soul thorow all? Oh then, bee reproved all who profess to beleeve, and yet are ignorant of what Faith is. Why poor soul, what shall carry thee tho∣row all, but Faith? and art thou ignorant of that? Is there but one boat to carry us over the Sea? and are wee ignorant of that? Ask, what is your Faith? why, saith one, I say my I beleeve, I say my prayers, &c. Ask another what is your Faith? hee replies, I
leave my sins, saith hee, &c. this is thy Repentance, but not thy Faith. There are three great parts of peoples ignorance about Faith. First, Many are ignorant about the ground of Faith. What is the ground of Faith? why, the ground of my Faith is this (saith one) I am so and so mended of what I was formerly, and God hath a little frighten∣ed mee, and troubled mee for my sins, and there∣fore I beleeve. As if trouble for sin, and moral a∣mendment, were a ground to build Faith upon; whereas the great, and the precious Promises are the onely and alone ground of Faith. Secondly, Others are ignorant about the Object of Faith. The Object of my Faith is the Promise, saith one, &c. Now the Promise is not the object of Faith; it is true, the object of Faith is in the Promise, but the Promise it self is not the object of Faith; It is Christ in the Promise that is the object of Faith; the Promi∣ses are your spectacles thorow which you see Christ, it is hee alone that is the object of your Faith, which you are to eye, to look, and to live upon. Thirdly, Others are very ignorant about the work∣ing of Faith, &c. Many know not how Faith works, therefore minde it; The work of Faith is onely to bee our hands, and our feet, to go to Christ, and to take Christ. It is observable, in Heb. 11. That Faith was the life of those worthies there mentioned; some did this, some did that; some went this way, some went that way, but still it was all through Faith, and they obtained a good report, but all by Faith; for it was Faith that carried them thorow all. But a∣lass, how ignorant are some about the working of Faith? Ask, what do you when you beleeve, one saith, I say my prayers, another, I read the
Bible, &c. Ah souls, you are much to bee reproved, that know not yet what that is, which onely carries the soul to Christ. Let that bee for reproof. Use 2. It serves very much for Consolation to all those who have true Faith. Bear up thy heart (O Beleever!) with that which is in the heart. The soul is ready to say sometimes in the way to Christ, what have I to carry my heart up? hast thou Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ? beleevest thou the Scriptures? beleevest thou in God? upon the Son of God? &c. then bee of good comfort, thou hast that which will carry thee thorow. You know the story of Father Jacob, hee must go over Jordan, but hee hath no company nor help, nothing but his single staff in his hand, and hee walked all his pilgrimage, forward, and backward, with that staff. O! the staff of Faith, thou who hast it, thou mayest walk thorow a wilder∣ness, into the good Land with it. Faith, it is your Jacobs staff, your Moses Rod, &c. Object. But saith the soul, I fear I have but a little Faith, yea, I fear I have none at all, &c. Answ. 1. Thou sayest thou hast but a little Faith; mark, what saith our Lord? If you have Faith but as a grane of Mustard seed, you shall say unto this Moun∣tain, remove hence, &c. Matth. 17.20. Though thou hast but a little Faith, it shall not fail, it shall car∣ry you thorow. It is true Faith doth all this, not thy great Faith. Object. I but saith the soul, I do not see that I have any Faith at all. Repl. Why Jesus Christ hee can see it, when thou canst not. The Woman that had the bloody Issue had great Faith, though possible shee saw it not. Hast thou that which that Woman had? hast thou said
of all the world, they bee Physicians of no value, and dost thou, though in much fear, come, bee it but behinde Christ, perswaded as shee was that Christ can, though thou question whether hee will, heal thee? why comfort thy soul notwithstanding thy fear, Christ will observe, and own thy Faith, as hee did hers. Use 3. If it bee thus, That it is Faith alone that carries the soul thus to Christ thorow all Discou∣ragements, this will then bee profitable for Instru∣ction. My Beloved in the Lord, look within you, strengthen Faith. Oh my Beloved, as the love of ma∣ny waxes cold, so the Faith of many waxes weak; but remember, a Christ above you, and a Faith within you, is all that which you ought to minde. Christ a∣bove you will carry you thorow all things to glory; and Faith in you will carry you thorow all to Christ. But I pray look to this, look to True Faith. A poor fearful beleever that hath a trembling soul at a dy∣ing hour, what shall relieve it then but Christ? and what shall carry, and keep the soul to and with Christ, but Faith? when your souls must immediare∣ly go to God for Judgement, nothing but Faith will, or can carry you with comfort, or with confidence: against a dying hour prepare a living Christ, and in order to a clozing with Christ, strengthen, Oh strengthen your Faith. I shall give you two Directions. If you would have Faith carry you thorow all, &c. First, Leave Faith to it self, Let Faith alone. Faith alone must do it, and Faith alone can do it. I will tell you how God clears up the thing to mee. You have seen a brave work-man, that was to remove such a peece of Timber, and hee by his own skill
could remove it, but there bee some that stand by, and will bee helping; when as wee know that they do but hinder him; and saith the Artist, let mee alone, and I can do it my self; and wee use to say, let the man alone, you do but hinder him, hee will do it himself: So here, let Faith alone in its work, you think to help it, but you oft hinder it. You have seen, or heard it may bee, of a man, that being to go over a River, and having two friends with him, one saith, it is deep and dangerous, I will go and see if there bee any shallow place; The other faith, it is good to make a bridge, or boat to go over; Oh but saith the man, I can swim, and I must go, and I will venture, let mee alone, I will swim, and never look for bridge or boat. Truly so it is here, Faith would go to Jesus Christ, but Reason and Sense will not let Faith alone. Reason comes and saith, Bee wise, beware what you do; If you will needs go to Christ (saith Reason) I will go make a bridge, or invent a boat; then cometh Sense, and saith, I will go look a shallow place where you may go over, &c. where∣as Faith will swim thorow. And saith the beleeving soul, I must venture and swim, I cannot bee drown∣ed in a way of swiming. Oh Sirs, let Faith alone, and it will swim to Christ; Sense and Reason do but hinder, not help Faith; Single simple Faith doth its work alone; Therefore I say, Let Faith alone, do not trouble it with suggestions of Sense or Rea∣son. But then, A second Direction is, Let Faith have its perfect work. Therefore (as the Apostle faith about Pa∣tience, so) let Faith have its perfect work. Faith goes at first to half a Promise, but let it alone, it knows where to fetch a whole Promise. Let Faith
alone, it will go to a Promise; for what? for re∣fuge, for help, for all. Faith will go to, and look upon Abraham (as Isa. 51.2.) and finde incou∣ragement from him: Nay, it can run back to A∣dam, and help it self with the thoughts of his expe∣rience; let Faith have its course, and it will carry you to every Promise and Example to incourage you. If it have its perfect work, it will gather strength from all the Word of God, to help you in your work of closing with Christ. I beseech you in these Directions strengthen and labour to incourage Faith. O soul, minde it, storms and trials may come, and then you will need afresh to run to Christ: Look to your leggs, your Faith, it is that must carry you. If death come, death and doubting will come toge∣ther; now remember what must carry you thorow, nothing but Faith. Trust to no parts, duties, &c. one∣ly trust to the Lord in the way of Faith. I shall con∣clude with two things. First, Woe to thee poor soul (whoever thou art) that wantest Faith. I do not say, woe to thee that art a poor man, nor woe to thee if thou beest mean in the world, nor say I, thou art a sick or weak man, and therefore woe, No, No, But art thou an unbe∣leever, a soul without Faith? then woe indeed to thee. Ah, woe bee to that man that wants Faith; for without Faith it is not possible to please God, or to go to Christ; and how sad is the state of that soul that can do neither? Woe to all unbeleevers. Secondly, Blessed are you that have Faith; I say not that have so great a Faith, but Faith, true Faith. I say, Blessed are you that beleeve, you that do be∣leeve, though but a little, yet your little Faith will do this great work, it will keep you from drowning,
it will carry you to Christ. That little Faith Peter had (for all his fears) kept him up from sinking. I remember what our Lord said to Nathaniel; who be∣leeved, as I may say a little; Beleevest thou? thou shalt see greater things than these, John 1.50. Do but go on beleeving, and thou shalt see greater things than yet thou hast seen. Two things your Faith will do. First, It will bee your Leggs to carry you to Christ, and that thorow all difficulties; so you see it did this Woman. And, Secondly, It will (if I may say so) Compel (as it were) Christ to entertain you after all denials. Ah souls, what a glorious entertainment did Christ give this poor Woman at last. Well, therefore strengthen Faith, and that will help you to do as this Woman did; and then you shall in the Issue speed, even as shee did. But of that in the next.
Christ will bee certainly kinde at last. The Seventh SERMON. Matthew 15. vers. 28. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O Wo∣man, great is thy Faith: bee it unto thee, even as thou wilt, &c. YOu have sometimes seen, or at least heard, of a poor beggar, who hath long lain, and loudly cried at the gate of some great person, and yet never liftened to, never let in; but anon it may bee the Master of the house himself hath opened the door, and spake to the man kindly, and dealt with him very comfortably; how was the face of this beggar lightened, how was his heart refreshed! just so, Nay, greater than so was the heart of the Woman of Canaan cheared, when our Lord answered and spake unto her the words that I have read. Shee had as it were lain long, and cried loud, and begged hard, and no answer, but now at last the Lord answers, and the Lord answers sweetly, Oh Woman, great is thy Faith: bee it unto thee even us thou wilt. The last day wee came to this verse; in it I told you wee had the last particu∣lar of the story of the Woman of Canaan, which holds forth the blessed conclusion, which our Lord
doth make with this poor Woman. After I had hinted and resolved three questions, I told you there were three particulars, which in an eminent manner are remarkable in this place. The First, wee did dispatch then, and that was this, The Grace which did carry on, and carry out this poor Woman in all this address, it was her Faith. And thence wee noted this Doctrine. Doct. That it is onely Faith which can carry the soul thorow all difficulties and discouragements in the way to Christ. Onely Faith. Remember it Sirs, some of you have a little know∣ledge, and others of you have a great deal of Profes∣sion; some of you talk much, and the poorest thinks (it may bee) as well of himself, as hee that saith most; but remember, whatever you know, talk, or think, nothing will carry you to Jesus Christ but Faith; you may have fine words, and good wishes, but alass, wording, and wishing is not coming to Jesus Christ. Why this Woman had other gifts, and other graces; shee had much humility, and shee had much pa∣tience, and shee had a fine gift of prayer, &c. yet it is not said, Woman, much is thy patience, or great is thy love, strong are thy prayers, but oh Woman, great is thy Faith, &c. Wee did open the point at large, and pressed it upon you in the Application in divers particulars, which I shall not add unto, or repeat. Onely I beseech you, my Beloved, let this abide upon your hearts; streng then Faith. When you come to dye, you will then see a need of Christ (if you do not now) and if you have not a living Faith, you cannot have a living Christ, and then is your soul dead before death. Faith is ano∣ther kinde of thing than the world is aware of;
wee hardly know the notion now, but wee shall ne∣ver bee able to know the preciousness of it, as in∣deed it is precious, but by the experience of it: Now the greatest experience of Faith is seen in that blessed business of going to Christ. In that wee have this experience of the use, power, and price of Faith, that whatever wee have, and pretend unto, nothing but sincere, single Faith, will carry us unto Jesus Christ. But I proceed. The second thing (which indeed is the principal thing) is this. The kindness of Christ now to this Woman. You see his commendation of her Faith; well now, mark his condescension to her; how much doth Christ condescend to this poor Woman? hee condescends to talk with her; commends her Faith, and com∣plies with her wishes to heal her Daughter, &c. Oh blessed condescension! The Observation from the whole will bee this, Doct. That however the Lord Jesus may deal at first, with poor souls that come to him, in the issue hee will deal very kindly. Or if you will, wee shall express the Observation to prevent mistakes thus, That all those who truly come to Christ, shall in the issue finde his carriage to bee very kinde, howsoever at first it may seem very strange. You see the Doctrine lies full in the words; wee have opened in the story already, how strangely Christ did carry it at first to this poor Woman; but how sweetly doth hee carry it at last? Sorrow and weeping may bee for a night (saith David, Psal. 30.5.) but joy comes in the morning. Oh my Beloved,
it may thunder and lighten, and bee tempestuous in the beginning of the day, and yet it may prove a fair sun-shiny day after. First coming to Christ may have clouds, and darkness, but the latter part shall have light and life. This point is very comfortable, certain, and clear in this instance. It is comfortable in all its branches; and it is certain in its bottoming (this ex∣ample being a sure bottom to build the Doctrine up∣on.) And you will see it clear also, if you will but minde the terms in which I express it. Now there are two terms I keep in the Point, that I would de∣sire you to minde. The first relates to the persons that are considered in this Point. And the Second relates to the thing it self. The first relates to the persons that are considered in this point. And they are all those that truly come to the Lord Jesus. My Beloved, there are two sorts of persons who live under the sound of the Gospel, that I cannot think upon but with a sad heart. The one are those who never so much as pretend to go to Je∣sus Christ. Notwithstanding all Christs tenders of himself, notwithstanding all their own need of him; upon no account, one or other, do they so much as pretend to go to Jesus Christ. Some are enemies, and opposire to very professing of coming to Jesus Christ. Secondly, There is another sort that pretend to go, but go neither rightly nor truly; They do not truly come to the Lord Jesus; you have a type of both these, and their miserie, Matth. 22. in the parable of the Wedding. There were some that would not go to the Wedding-supper, and there was another hee went, but hee went without his Wedding-garment; why now, how did the Lord deal with them? for
the one it is said, in versf. 7. Hee sent, and miserably destroyed them with his armies. And for the other, It is said, hee found him out, and cast him out into utter darkness. Therefore minde it, all you that have heard of Jesus Christ, all you that talk of Jesus Christ, if you do not go at all, or if you do not go aright, this point doth not concern you: I do not say Christ will deal well with you; alass! you deal ill with him, and hee will deal sadly with you. It is onely those that truly go to Jesus Christ, that this point deals with∣all. The Woman of Canaan came to him truly, and shee came to him rightly also; shee came to him (as appears here in this story) as to the Messiah, the Son of David; and shee comes with great humility (shee worships him) with great resolution (shee would not bee put off) but above all shee came with a good Faith; and this Woman so coming, though the Lord dealt strangely with her at first, yet hee concludes kindely with her at last. The second thing I put in the point is, That in the issue, and at last, Christ will deal kindly with them that rightly come to him. I do not say, at first hee will do it; (No, at first hee may seem to bee strange) but at last, in the issue, hee will bee kinde. Christ will not presently, it may bee, grant our re∣quest, but in the issue hee will. I will open it thus. There is a Threefold Issue, or end, in which all that come to Christ shall experience his kindness. The first is, the Issue of the Act of comming it self. Secondly, The Issue of our whole life. And, The third is, The Issue and End of all things. Now in one of these three Issues, all that come to Christ shall finde him deal kindely with them.
First, In the Issue of the Act of coming it self. I pray mark this, Coming to Christ is an action made up of many steps; wee do not at once come to Jesus Christ. There is the Agress, Ingress, and Prress in every going. The Agress, or Address to it. The Ingress, The first setting upon it. And then the Progress, The going on in it. Possibly when thou dost first set up a resolu∣tion of going to Christ, hee will not come in and give thee an answer; possibly when thou hast set thy foot in the way, and gone a good way, hee will not come and speak kindly to you; but by that time you are come up to Christ fully, then you shall finde Christ will deal kindly with you. The soul doth not at first fully come up to Christ; it is a great while ere the soul doth fully come off from fin, ere the soul doth fully come out of Satans power, ere hee doth fully come up to the proposals of Jesus Christ. Now, do not wonder if Jesus Christ do not deal kindly with you, till the Issue of the whole Act; but in the Issue of the Act, when it is compleated, then you shall finde him deal kindly with you. You are now, it may bee (poor soul) treating with Jesus Christ, and as it is in a treaty of peace between differing states, there are some pre∣liminary treatments, all is not presently concluded as soon as it is presented. There are demurs, and debates, and there are seeming breakings off, and departures; no compleatings, but as it were for a while complementings: It is seldome seen, that at first all things are fully concluded upon; But when the Treaty is perfected, then you have the sound of Trumpets, and the noise of Drums, and all the ex∣pressions
pressions of joy that may bee. It hath been said of old, that comming to Christ it is a Marriage Act, and so indeed it is. Now there are not compleat Acts of kinness, till the whole Marriage bee consummate; Therefore, though Christ may carry it strangely at first, yet in the Issue, when the Marriage is consum∣mate, then you shall finde Christ complying, and shewing himself kinde. Secondly, There is (that which wee call) the Issue of our life. And my Beloved, at Death, the Lord Jesus Christ will smile upon many a soul, who have gone softly in the bitterness of their spirits all their daies. Mark the just man, and behold the perfect man; For the end of that man is peace, Psal. 37.37. Though you have clouds, and darkness upon you all your daies, and though Jesus Christ doth seem to carry it roughly to you, through the whole course of your pilgrimage; yet when you are actually going into the good Land, then you shall see Joshuah going before you. Many that have had fears and terrours all their life time, yet at the end of their life, when they have been going out of the world, they have had joy, and comfort. The story of Mris. Drake is known, shee had many terrours, much sadness, no smiles from Christ all her daies; till at last, when shee came to dye, a little before her death, Christ dealt so kindly, that shee went out of the world in an extacy, and ravishment of spirit, full of peace, and full of joy; triumphing in the Lord; so that in the Issue of our time and life, wee shall finde Christ kinde, however hee is at first to us. But then Thirdly, Or else in the Issue of all things. When all things shall bee wrapt up, by a final End and Issue put to them, then Christ will shew himself
kinde, however strange hee did seem to carry it to poor souls before. You read of a day (in Mal. 3.17.) in which the Lord will make up his Jewels, and then you shall return, and discern between the righ∣teous and the wicked, &c. And Matthew 25. there Christ speaks very sweetly, when the Lord shall say to those on his right hand, Come yee blessed of my Fa∣ther, inherit the Kingdome prepared for you, &c. Then hee shall say to this poor man, and woman, thou didst mourn after mee all thy daies, thou didst wait upon mee all thy life, and though I seemed to carry it strange, thou wert sincere; Come yee blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdome prepared for you, &c. I do observe that this carried up the heart of Job, in Job 19. I know that my Redeemer liveth, and hee shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth, and then in my flesh I shall see him, &c. This Text in Job is worth its weight in Gold upon many accounts. That, that Jesus Christ that is now at the right hand of the Father, Job many thousand years ago said, hee should know upon the Earth, and though hee set him up as a mark to shoot at then, yet hee knew at last hee would deal kindly with him. Well then, I pray put all together; Persons truly comming to Christ, in the Issue, either of the Act of coming, or of their Lives, or of all things, shall finde this to bee a certain Truth, that Christ will deal sweetly with them, how∣ever now hee may seem to carry it strangely. And (my Beloved) I shall not need to bring any other in∣stance to prove it, than this instance in the Text. Never was any so strangely dealt withall, as the Woman of Canaan, and yet what a blessed Issue doth hee make with he? Oh Woman, great is thy Faith, bee it unto thee even as thou wilt, &c.
There are onely two things that I aim at in the explication of the point. And, The first is to shew you wherein the kinde close of the Carriage of Christ in the Issue shall appear to poor souls, however at first hee may carry it strangely. And Secondly, The ground of this. Wee shall begin with the first; And I shall out of this instance of the Woman of Canaan, shew you how kindly Christ will carry it at last, in the Issue, though hee carry it roughly at first. Pray observe this speech, Jesus an∣swered and said unto her, &c. I remember in the book of Ruth, when Boaz had espied Ruth, and talk∣ed of her to his servants, hee spake to her himself, in vers. 8. and what saith shee, in verse 10. Shee fell upon her face, and bowed her self to the ground, and said unto him, Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou shouldest take knowledge of mee, seeing I am a stranger? It was a marvelous act of kindness, that Boaz should take knowledge of her to speak to her. Just so mee thinks it was here; Christ at first talks to his servants of this Woman, hee did not speak at first to her, but to the Disciples of her. But now, al∣though before the Lord did not seem to take know∣ledge of this Woman, yet I say, now the Lord is so kinde, as hee turns to her, and takes notice of her, and hee speaks exceeding kinde to her. Oh Woman, great is thy Faith, bee it unto thee even as thou wilt, &c. Let us open it a little. Here are three Parts. First, Oh Woman, great is thy Faith. Secondly, Bee it unto thee even as thou wilt. Thirdly, At the same hour her Daughter was made whole.
First, Hee answered and said unto her, O Woman, great is thy Faith. My Beloved, wee must open this by degrees; and it is very much which is here con∣tained. For, First of all, Hee answered and said unto her. O blessed kindness! that Jesus Christ that before an∣swered her not a word, hee now opens his lips, and vouchsafes to speak to her. David, who knew what an act of kindness this is, sets it forth, both in the Negative, and in the Affirmative. Negatively, speaking of his enemies, in Psal. 18.41. They cried, but there was none to save them; even unto the Lord, but hee ANSWERED THEM NOT. And Af∣firmatively, speaking of himself, in Psal. 118.5. I called upon the Lord in distress; the Lord answered mee, and set mee in a large place. Oh my Beloved, it is an act of kindness that Christ will speak. Let not my Lord bee angry, saith the soul, do but speak to mee. Oh it is mercy and kindness, when the Lord breaks his silence, and doth but speak to us. Why now Christ you see speaks to the Woman. And it is said, Jesus answered and said unto her, hee answers his Disciples before, about her, but did not speak to her; now hee speaks to her. Remember you not the expression, in Cant. 8.13? Thou that dwellest in the Gardens, the Companions hearken to thy voice: cause mee to hear it. Oh, saith the poor soul sometimes, Blessed Lord, thy Companions hear thy voice; An∣gels that wait upon thy Throne, they hear it; and the Saints in the Sanctuary, they hear it; and I am with∣out knocking, Lord let mee hear thy voice. Here is the first step, that hee vouchsafes to speak to her. Secondly, Hee saith unto her, Woman, &c. how
soft is this language? Now hee doth not speak to her in a rough manner, but Woman. My Beloved, you know what is said of Job; Then the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind, who is this that darkens words of wisdome, without knowledge? Job 38.1, 2. But behold the Lord hee answers in a still voice, hee speaks as a man to a woman. By Beloved, had the Lord spoken louder, it may bee it would have broke her; the Lord will speak to poor souls in a still voice. I re∣member a prayer of Job, Job 13. about verse 20. Onely do not two things unto mee: then will I not hide my self from thee, withdraw thine hand far from mee; and let not thy dread make mee afraid, &c. And it is worth our considering, because it will open what wee are upon; hee doth as it were capitulate with God, and hee makes but one Article, Let not thy dread make mee afraid; As if Job should say, Lord, if thou wilt but take away thy dread, if thou wilt not speak in thy Majesty, as a great God, then speak Lord. That this is the meaning, appears by Elihu his interpretation of it, in Job 33. about 6, & 7. verses. Behold, I am, according to thy wish, in Gods stead: I also am formed out of the clay. Behold, my terrour shall not make the afraid, neither shall my hand bee heavy upon thee. Job was afraid to hear God speaking (as wee say) in high language; and there∣fore desired God to forbear it. Why you see, Christ doth here forbear high words, hee now speaks to this woman in a low, and loving manner, even as a man to a man, or a woman to a woman; Hee answered and said unto her, Woman. Without doubt this fa∣miliar word, and way of speaking to this Woman, did much chear her heart; and shee might hereupon say (as Ruth did to Boaz, when hee spake familiarly
to her) saith Ruth in the story, Ruth 2.13. My Lord hath comforted mee, and hath spoke friendly un∣to mee. It is much mercy that Christ will give us an answer: But it is much more mercy, that hee will give us a soft answer. You know the story of Eliah, God saith, hee would speak to him, but hee came in a whirlwind before hee came in a soft answer; but Eliah was a strong man, and could bear what wee cannot. If Christ should not speak to a poor heart in a still voice, but in a whirlwind, alass, it would over-power the soul; Therefore it is that Christ speaks as a man to his friend, yea, as a Father to a childe; so you know hee did use to speak. Daugh∣ter, bee of good chear; Son, bee of good chear. And thus wee finde it in other places, the Lord speaks friendly, Zach. 1.13, And the Lord answered the Angel that talked with mee, with good words, and comfortable words. If Jesus Christ do not speak at all, or if hee do speak, yet if it bee not comfortable words, wee count it strange and harsh; and so it is, and may bee (as wee have shewed at first) But still know now for all this, whatever hee saith at first, yet at last hee will speak comfortable words. Thirdly, Christ condescends yet, and speaks more kindly; for, hee owns, acknowledgeth, and com∣mends this poor Womans Faith. Mark it, Oh Wo∣man great is thy Faith. Why here is our third step. The Lord Jesus eyes and owns her Faith, and that is a great act of kindness. Poor soul! Thou lyest at the feet of Christ, thou sayest, I have desire, but no hope; I have fear, but no faith (thou that art full of fears) yet the Lord will call thee (for all that) Releever, hee will spy out, and acknowledge thy Faith, and
call thee a Daughter of Abraham, as here, Woman, great is thy Faith. It is the kindness of Christ, hee will espy our gold, under much dross; our little coal of fire, under many embers; Christ will do for us, as for the Church of Philadelphia, Rev. 3.8. saith Christ, Thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my word; Or as hee said in that same chapter to Sardis, A few Names are among you. O how doth Christ speak to this Woman now at last! Mark it, and see, is not the language altered? Christ at first spake to her as a Woman of Canaan, calls her upon that ac∣count (as some call Turks and Infidels) Dogg; but now hee speaks to her as a Daughter of Abra∣ham (for so are beleevers called, in Gal. 3.7.) saith the Apostle, Know yee therefore, that they which are of Faith, the same are the children of Abraham. In this speech, Christ tells her in effect, Shee is an Is∣raelite. Once it was (poor soul) a stranger, an enemy, a Canaanite, a Hittite, such were the words in which Christ at first did as it were speak to thee. Well, but yet stay a little, and thou shalt hear Christ speaking in kinder language, hee will yet call thee Son, Daughter, Saint, Friend, in a word, no more a Canaanite, but at last Christ will speak to thee as an Israelite; and say of thee, as of Nathaniel, Behold an Israelite, in whom there is no guile. I Pray minde it, it is an admirable discovery (this) how kinde Christ will carry it at last. Whatever sin hee charges in a spirit of conviction at first, yet alwaies at last hee will acknowledge our Faith, I say, our faith, and love, and whatever is good in us. I appeal to you (O experienced souls!) are not you afraid to own your own faith? One while your unbeleeving fears, another while the humble working of your hearts, will
not let you see your own Grace; I but you have a kinde Christ that will take notice of it, and own it; though thou bee a Canaanite in thy first address, and in thine own account (and Christ may seem there∣fore to deal harshly with thee) yet still (I say) in this hee will at length bee kinde, and shew it in eye∣ing and acknowledging any good, every Grace that is in thee. But I proceed unto the next thing here in Christs speech. The fourth, which is, Great is thy Faith. Hee doth not onely own, but honour her Faith. Oh my Beloved! what an act of kindness is this commendation of Christ? Praise is a fruit of love, a sign of love; why my beloved. Jesus Christ will deal so kindly, that hee will praise you at last. Hee doth now praise this poor Woman, whom hee seemed to sleight before. And though Christ may at first seem to sleight and despise us, yet at last hee will not only own, but honour us. And this is certainly his kindness. How kindly did hee deal with the poor Woman, in Luk. 7? hee was entertained by a Pharisee, and had large entertain∣ment, yet how doth hee turn himself to the Woman, and how kindly did hee deal with her? Hee com∣mends not the Masters Feast, but the Womans Faith. Nay, hee seems to reproach the Pharisee that invited him, and to exalt, and honour the poor sinner that came unto him. Her Love and Faith are very much praised by Christ there, (vers. 46, 47, 50.) Oh Sirs, that Jesus Christ that you go unto, truly, however at first hee may seem not to own you, much less to honour you; at last hee will both own, and honour you. Look as Jesus Christ will deal severely with painted Sepulchres, Hypocrites, so hee will deal sweetly with sincere Beleevers. That is one part of
this kinde speech, wherein our Lord deals very kind∣ly, though at first hee spake to her harshly. The second part is, Bee it unto thee even as thou wilt. Wee may say of these words, as one of the Antients said of some others; They are wonders, and not words. Oh how doth the Lord condescend in kind∣ness now to this poor Woman of Canaan, when hee saith, Bee it unto thee even as thou wilt. Once hee said, I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Once hee said, It is not meet to take the chil∣drens bread, and give it to Doggs, But how well is the world mended with this poor creature? Now the Lord doth not hint, that hee was not sent to her; but hee calls her beleever. Now hee doth not tell her, shee should not have childrens bread; but now hee bids her take what shee would. Once it may bee (poor soul) Jesus Christ said this to thy conscience, Thou art a Rebel, (deserving no mercy) at another time it may bee hee said this; Thou art a filthy per∣son (and not yet prepared for mercy) I but at last Christ will no more mention guilt or filth, but hee will say to thee, Rebel, There is a pardon; And to thee, polluted sinnet, There is purging and cleansing; yea, hee will say to thee, poor soul, There is Mercy, All Mercy, Any Mercy; what thou wantest, what thou wilt, there it is, &c. As it is in this expression here to this Woman of Canaan. I will open this too, in two or three steps. Bee it unto thee even as thou wilt. First, How fully doth the Lord spenk to this Wo∣man? Psal. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. Woman, take to the full as much as thou wilt; As if our Lord Christ should say, Woman, Thou art a poor Woman of Canaan, and art in want;
and I have a rich Treasure; it is unsearchable; go to the Mine, take what thou wilt. Woman, I see thou art a poor hungry soul, and I am Manna, and bread from Heaven, come to mee, and take as much as thou wilt. Woman, thou hast made but one Peti∣tion, but I see more in thy heart, take what thou wilt. My Beloved, the Lord Jesus Christ hee gives like himself, very largely to poor creatures; Hee satis∣fies their souls even to the full. David at last could sing such a song as this is, Psal. 103.3. Bless the Lord, Oh my soul, who forgiveth all thine iniquities: who healeth all thy diseases, &c. You that lye hun∣gring at the gate of Christ, and cry, bread Lord, a Morsel Lord, yea, a Cumb Lord; Christ will say, There is a whole Loaf, bee it to thee as thou wilt. It was the speech of a dying Saint, that lived long full of sorrow; I am now as full of joy as my heart can hold. See Zach. 9.12. Turn yee to the strong hold, yee pri∣soners of hope; even to day do I declare that I will ren∣der double unto thee. Good now minde it (poor soul) it may bee Jesus Christ may shut thee up in prison, yet there thou wilt bee a prisoner of hope; I but what shall you have at last? Hee will render double unto thee. All the Lords children at last, they shall have double: So it was with Joseph, hee had hard usage at first, cast into prison, &c. but at last hee is out, and Governour of all the Land. At last Christ will deal with you all, as hee dealt with Jo∣seph. The Lord Jesus will deal with a bountiful hand, full, heaped up, running over. That is the first thing. But then, Secondly, Bee it unto thee EVEN AS thou wilt; It relates to the Manner eminently, as well as to the Matter. As thou wilt; that is, in such a man∣ner
as thou wilt. When David came up to Araunah, to have the threshing-floor, and cattel for a sacri∣fice, hee would have them so, and so; And Araunah said to him, Do what seemeth good unto thee, 2 Sam. 24.22. And there is very much in that; The Lords people have their hearts many times set upon the man∣ner of their mercy. Deal bountifully with thy ser∣vant, as thou usest to do unto those that love thy Name, (saith David) in Psal. 119.132. The poor soul that lies at the feet of Christ, would have mercy, and have such mercy as his Lambs have, that lye in his bosome. Thomas, hee would have a sign from the Lord, and hee would have such a sign, John. 20.25. and in vers. 27. Christ condescends to him; but a little to open this. One while the soul will have Love, I, and it must bee immediate Love. Let him kiss mee with the kisses of his mouth, Cant. 1.2. It was a very elegant, and holy allusion of Bernard, (and therefore I shall mention it) There is the kiss of the foot of Christ, and of the hand, and of the mouth of Christ, i. e. There are several sorts of kinde expressions; now the Spouse specifieth what kinde of Love-expression shee would have (as sometimes the soul doth, and may do) shee would have, not the kiss of the feet, but of the mouth, and Christ gave it her, as shee intimates, vers. 4. Minde it then, One while thy soul will have immediate Love-To∣kens, and the Lord will give you as you will. Ano∣ther while the soul cries out, as David in Psal. 35.3. Say thou unto my soul, thou art my salvation, &c. The childe will have bread, and it will have it upon the Mothers lap. Another while the soul is ready to say, Shew mee a token for good, that those that hate mee may see it, and bee ashamed, Psal. 86.17, 18.
Oh my Beloved, what infinite love is it in Jesus Christ, that hee should condescend so low, as to give us not onely what wee will, but as wee will! That expression is very full, in Psal. 145.19. Hee will fulfil the desire of them that fear him. The soul hath what hee will, and just as hee will have it, his whole desire. And so Jesus Christ will do; and therefore bear up your hearts, you that come to Christ, hee may deal harshly with you at first, but hee will let it bee as you will at last. Thirdly and lastly, Bee it unto thee. Christ is ve∣ry positive, very peremptory, hee speaks as one re∣solved to do. The Lord Jesus doth not say, I will think of it, or I will take it into consideration, and it may bee it shall bee so; but hee is positive, Bee it un∣to thee even as thou wilt. Two things there are that I eye in this expression, Bee it unto thee. First, It is a Commanding word. Secondly, It is a Creating word. First, It is a Commanding word. Bee it unto thee. The Lord doth as it were command, and say, Woman, I have commanded that it shall bee so. In Psal. 42.8. Saith the Psalmist there, The Lord will command his loving-kindness in the day time, and in the night his song shall bee with mee. The poor soul, while it is in the world, it must deal with means, as well as with grace; and the soul is ready to say, will the means give out? Just as the poor petitioner that deals with a Lord, but hee deals likewise with some of the Officers, though the Lord grant his request, yet hee doubts whether hee shall get it our of the Officers hand; why, saith hee, I have commanded it.
Remember, and rejoyce in this hint, O poor heart! who hopest Christ is free, but doubtest what means may do. Possibly thou hast said this, I have good hope the Lord will speak kindly to mee, but will the Ordinances give it out too? why, saith God, I have commanded it, it shall bee so; Bee it unto thee. My Beloved, Jesus Christ at last will say, I com∣mand every Ordinance, every Creature, every word thou readest, that it bee to thee as thou wilt. Time was at first, that Christ carried it so, as nothing did sub∣serve you, or yeeld unto you any respect; but when the Lord is reconciled, at last hee will command all to bee yours. Time was, when no Man, Means, Creature, Ordinance, had any commission to smile on you, or speak well to you, and then it was sad; But at length Christ will give a word, send a Com∣mission to all, and command them, saying, Bee it so and so to such a poor soul, as it will, as it wisheth. Secondly, As there is a Commanding, so there is a Creating Power in the Word; and that is much. Be∣leever! Beleever! though the Lord carry it at first like a man astonished, hee will create mercy at last. As in the Creation of the world, God said, Let there bee light, and there was light. &c. So in Isa. 57.7. saith God, I create the fruit of the lips, peace. The Lord that creates light out of darkness, peace out of trouble, sweet out of bitter; Hee will create for thee; bee it light unto such a soul; such a soul wants light, and there is light created for him; strength, bee thou created for him, &c. I remember the A∣postle Peter doth exhort Beleevers, as their last re∣fuge, to eye the creating power of Christ, and act
Faith upon him, not onely as a Redeemer, but as a Creatour. In 1 Pet. 4.19. Saith hee, Commit the keeping of your souls to him, in well doing, as unto a faithful Creatour. Soul, if Creating Mercy can help you, bee confident Christ will put it forth at length; there shall bee another fiat, another let there bee, this or that, for such a soul, and that with creating influence in it. And oh! how kindly doth Christ carry it now at last, that hee commands all, and will create (rather than fail) comfort for this poor Woman, Bee it unto thee even as thou wilt. Thus have wee in Christs speech to this Woman seen (as in a glimpse) what his last dealings will bee with those that come to him; And is not this enough to con∣firm your hearts, that at last Christ will bee kinde, however hee is at first? But I proceed to the o∣ther thing here in Christs Carriage to this Wo∣man. Thirdly, Her Daughter is made whole the same hour. Poor Creatures, you are full of unbeleef, and I must say to you, as John said, These things are written tht you might beleeve. Christ will deal so well with poor souls, that at last hee will give them their desires to the full. And that which may bee their request, in an eminent manner, more parti∣cularly, will the Lord Christ give them that. I pray mark it a little thus. The soul wants many mer∣cies, wishes all, but it hath some particular pinch for the present, &c. Now that shall bee given in to the soul. You have a fine expression to import the con∣descention of God to particular mercies, in Psal. 21.2, 4. Thou hast given him his hearts desire; and hast not with-holden the request of his lips. Hee asked life of thee, and thou gavest it him, even length of daies
for ever and ever. Why my Beloved, you that wait upon the Lord, and truly come to him, know and remem∣ber, however hee carries it, as if at first hee will grant nothing, yet at last hee will grant every thing; and in particular, that Mercy, that particular special Mercy, which thy heart is drawn forth to mention before the Lord. Oh, saith the soul, I would have all sin dead, but let this sin dye. Now the soul shall have his this thing; In this thing the good Lord bee merciful to mee; why the Lord will in that thing bee kinde. Let the soul single out its particular request! Oh in this matter, in that childe, in this cause, &c. And hee shall finde Christ at last will come down to that very thing. But I shall speak to this in the last Sermon by it self, therefore I will not urge it here. Onely now put all together, and tell mee if the point bee not certain, That Christ at last will deal very kindly with souls that truly come to him: how∣ever at first hee may seem to deal harshly. What could the poor soul wish more than shee had? hee spake kindly; now hee doth what shee will, and as much as shee will; now her Daughter shall bee whole in a moment, &c. This is all I shall say for the demon∣stration of the point. There are some Objections to bee answered, I shall at this time mention one. Object. I but will the soul say, This is a particular example; and particular examples they are not founda∣tions for general conclusions. Here is a Woman of Canaan, and the Lord deals well with her, what is this to mee? For, Answ. Beloved in the Lord, know this, That every example of Gospel-grace, is not so particular, but that it is a general pattern. All this was written that wee
might beleeve. And you know what the Apostle saith, in that same, Rom. 15. and the beginning; These things are written for our learning, &c. Do not say, This was a Woman of Canaan, and I am a poor o∣ther kinde of creature; Know, this was written for thee. In 1 Tim. 1.16. saith Paul there, That in mee first Jesus Christ might shew forth all long-suffer∣ing, for a pattern to them▪ which should hereafter beleeve on him to life everlasting. If the Woman of Canaan were alive, shee would say, I was a pattern for thee; shee would say, Christ dealt thus with mee first, to shew how hee would deal with other poor creatures afterwards. Let this bee an answer. But then the Second Answer is this, The account upon which shee had this grace, it was not particular, but common. A particular thing, with a particular account, is too streight to bee made a general Rule, but a particular example, upon a general account, may bee made a general Rule; remember that. Now this mercy was given to her, not upon any personal, particular account, but upon a general account; what is that account? Woman, great is thy Faith. Shee hath this mercy, not as a Woman, nor as a Woman of Canaan, nor as so and so speaking, but as a Beleever. Now up∣on this Reason, Because the Lord dealth thus with her upon the account of Faith; where-ever there is true Faith, the Lord will deal thus. It is the parti∣cular argument of Rom. 4. The Apostle proves, that Abrahams Justification was a general type to o∣thers. How doth hee prove it? because it came to him by Faith. The strength of the Argument lies thus, Abraham was not justified as such a man, up∣on any personal account, but because hee was a be∣leever;
and therefore hee argues, that all beleevers should bee justified as hee was. Therefore do not say, it was a particular example, it is a pattern, and it is upon a general account. There are onely two words of Application I shall make at present. First, I will gather one terrible Consequence from all this consolatory discourse. And, Secondly, I shall gather one Rational Caution from the whole. First, I shall gather a terrible Consequence from all this. When mercy is preached, and comfort is held out, wee have many snatch for it, that have nothing to do with it. And while I would comfort a Son or Daughter of Abraham, I would not strengthen the hands of any in sin; Well then, sinners, hear, and fear; Look about you (as I use to say) for certain∣ly, As Jesus Christ will deal kindly with those that truly come to him, at last: So hee will deal exceed∣ing terribly with those, who notwithstanding all his good carriage, carry it ill to him. If Jesus Christ, (Man or Woman) will deal well with that soul, that did tarry long, because it tarried out to the end, then hee will deal ill with thee (whoever thou art) who notwithstanding all his good carriage to thee, dealest perversly with him; though hee wooes you, and beseeches you now, yet at last hee will deal terribly with you; at last there shall bee two in one bed, the one shall bee taken, and the o∣ther left. Verily, my Beloved, Look as mercy and kindness will oblige the heart of Christ to bee kinde to waiters, and commers at last; so the justice and wrath of Christ, will, as it were, ingage Christ to bee dreadful to Rebels, and impenitent ones at last.
Husband! thy Wife came to Christ, and wait∣ed on him long, Christ will in the issue bee kinde to her; But thou standest it out still, art a Rebel to this day, Oh tremble to think what Christ will do at last. Hee will judge, and condemn, and de∣stroy thee upon whom hee hath waited long, and who yet at last wouldest not come in. The Jews are a sad example of this terrible Con∣sequence that I am upon. The poor Canaanites that Christ dealt so severely withall (all the Prophecies of the Messiah were sealed books to them, &c.) at last in the fulness of time Christ comes, and hee speaks mercy to the Gentiles; but how doth hee deal with the Jews? the Jews that hee had been kinde to, because they came not in, hee turns away from them to the Gentiles. Now therefore I beseech you look about you, Christ hath been dealing well with you many a day, beleeve it, the Lord will deal harshly with you that stand it out, and deal ill with him. As hee will bee merciful at last to the home-commers, so will hee bee cruel (and yet just) to you that have, and do stand it out to the last all your daies. Con∣sider this then, you that forget Christ, lest the Lamb prove a Lion to tear you in peeces, that yet continue in your sins and impenitence. A second word; I beseech you let mee give you all, one Rational Caution. If the Lord will deal so well at last, then pray now bee so wise, as not absolutely to conclude against this Truth. Is there a poor Woman of Canaan before the Lord, that hath had many a frown, and many a hard put off; many a frighting without, and fear within? Be∣ware how you conclude against everlasting mercy;
for Christ may bee kinde at last. That which I would press, is in allusion to the 77. Psalm, about the 7. vers. Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will hee bee favourable no more? &c. I observe that good man did never positively say so, but onely hee questions it; and before hee comes to conclude, in vers. 10. hee saith, It was his infirmity. Thou sayest, shall I cry, and never bee heard? shall I beg bread, and not have a crumb? know, that the Lord that hath a deaf ear at first, will have a hearing ear at last. Therefore it is but a reasonable request, you that are waiting upon the Lord, it is but a rea∣sonable thing I beg of you; Do not say the Lord will never bee gracious. I shall inlarge it more hereafter. But my thinks a Question is put now, and I will in a word answer it. Quest. But what shall I do in the mean time? I think the Lord will bee good at last, but I shall starve in the mean time? Answ. Pray look once more into the story of Jo∣seph, Joseph carried it very roughly at first, but hee carried it well at last; but what do they do in the mean time? Why they shall have bread to carry them unto their home. The Lord Jesus is every way Joseph, be∣fore hee doth reveal himself, and deal kindly with you, you shall have bread to live upon. Though the Lord seem to carry it strangely now, hee will do as Joseph did, Give you bread to support you in your journey. Look into the Scripture, there is bread enough for you. Never did the Lord let any perish, but hee gave them sufficient to carry them up; and to support them even in the way, beside the best, and abundance, which is kept till last. Therefore lift up thy hanging down hands, and stay thy soul even at
present; Jesus Christ will give in necessary, secret sup∣plies, before hee reveal himself in the open, ample mani∣festations of his grace. You shall (even while in the Journey, and the wilderness) have a Viaticum, tra∣velling necessaries; and at the end, you shall have the full possession and inheritance of the Milk and Hony in Emanuels Land. This I have proved, and shall next time give you grounds for it.
Sure Grounds that Christ will bee kinde at last. The Eighth SERMON. Matthew 15. vers. 28. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O Wo∣man, great is thy Faith: bee it unto thee, even as thou wilt, &c. THat all Persons, Conditions, Affairs, are exposed to alteration and change, is a truth no less sweet in some respects, than bitter upon others. Indeed, my Beloved, upon some accounts it is our misery that wee are mu∣table, but withall, upon other accounts it is our hap∣piness, that things shall not (as wee say) stand al∣waies at one stand. This present season, though it bee sharp and cold, an alteration will follow, and a warmer season will come. Our very bodies, though sometimes weak, yet a change doth come, and wee are rendered strong. And as it is thus with us in corporals, so, blessed bee God, it is thus with us in spirituals. Though for a time wee may lye under the wrath of man, and the frowns of God, yet a change will come; for God hath said, Hee will re∣strain the wrath of Man, as it is, Psal. 76.10. and for his own anger hee will take it away, so hee promi∣seth, Hosea 14.4. Though for a time this Woman
of Canaan was under the frowns of Christ, though hee seemed to take no notice of her, yet behold what a change is here, hee that before would not answer her a word, doth now answer her many words, and many comfortable words. Hee answered and said unto her, Oh Woman, great is thy Faith, bee it unto thee even as thou wilt. Wee are now come to the last thing in the story of this Woman of Canaan, and that is the consideration of that conclusion, that Jesus Christ doth here make with her. And you may re∣member the Observation wee did draw forth the last day, was this, Viz. Doct. That all those who truly come to Christ, shall in the issue finde his Carriage to bee sweet and gracious, however at the first it may seem rough and strange. Wee did then open the Point, and did go a good way in the confirmation of it. There were onely two things which I said I would speak to in the Ampli∣fication of the Doctrine. First, To shew you wherein Jesus Christ would ap∣pear sweet and gracious in the end, howsoever hee may carry it at first to poor souls. Secondly, Whence this should come to pass. Now, for the first of these, Wee told you wee need go no further than the instance of the Text. And wee did then indeavour to set out the kindness of Jesus Christ to the Woman of Canaan. Now here are many words to set it forth. First generally, Hee answered and said, Oh Wo∣man, great is thy Faith. Secondly particularly, Bee it unto thee even as thou wilt. And then,
Thirdly, Hee doth particularly grant her parti∣cular request that shee had made. And from that hour her Daughter was made whole. I did then speak to those distinctly. Two Objections there lye against this instance, which being cleared up, wee will come to the Rea∣sons of the Point. Object. 1. The first Objection was this; But this instance of the Woman of Canaan seems to bee so rare, that it doth not concern us. To that wee said two things. Answ. 1. That all Gospel-instances of Grace (I intend not instances of miracles, and extraordinary favours) are perpetual examples for after ages. And, Answ. 2. This kindness of Christ to the Woman of Canaan, was not upon any personal, or particular account, but upon a general account, namely, her Faith. But there is another Objection to bee clear∣ed up, and that is this. Object. 2. But though this example bee not so particular as to shut us out, Yet Secondly, There are some things in it so extraor∣dinary and special, as that wee cannot look for the same things in our cases. To this I shall say two things. Answ. 1. That however, some things indeed here may bee extraordinary, (and so not to bee expected) yet as to the MAIN of all things, wee may expect the like. This is certain, that those favours that God hath shewn in any one age, to any of his chil∣dren, though they might have some particular cir∣cumstance, wherefore wee may not expect the same, yet in the general, (and by proportion) wee may expect the same. As in the instance of Joshua, The
Apostle makes the kindness of God to Joshua, a ge∣neral example, in Heb. 13.5. Bee content with such things as yee have, for hee hath said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. Now wee cannot expect in a particular way, as Joshua did. In like manner, the same Apostle in the same place, doth argue from David, in vers. 6. And though wee cannot expect some rare circumstances, as David did, yet as to the main, wee may say, The Lord is our helper: So though possibly wee may not expect some particular circumstances of the kindness that this Woman of Canaan had; yet as to the main wee may bee certain to have the like. Secondly, However wee may not meet with all the particular Acts of kindness from Christ, that this Woman had; yet, there are usually these three things wherein wee shall certainly finde Christ to deal sweetly with us at last, however hee may deal with us at first. Or, There are three De∣monstrations, wherein the Lord will demonstrate himself to bee kinde to you at last, however hee may carry it at first. First, At last the soul shall finde this, that hee will not absolutely, and peremptorily reject the poor soul. Possibly thou wilt not finde so clear an entertainment, so comfortable an assurance, as this Woman had; I but this thou shalt finde, that Jesus Christ will ne∣ver absolutely cast thee off; hee will never perempto∣rily deny thee, or cast thee off. It is very remark∣able, hee did not peremptorily send the Woman a∣way; though hee did not answer her, yet hee did not bid them send her away. And this thou shalt finde, that though Christ may not seem to answer, yet hee will not absolutely deny; though hee may say, It is
not meet thou shouldest have mercy, yet hee will not deny chee mercy. That speech is an eternal Truth, in John 6.37. Him that cometh to mee, I will in no wise cast out. I remember an expression that wee have in the Prophecy of Isaiah, which I think is mistook, and therefore I shall mention it. Isa. 50. at the be∣ginning, Thus saith the Lord, Where is the bill of your Mothers divorcement, whom I have put away? &c. The meaning I take to bee this, That though God did as it were separate Israel from himself for a while for sin, yet hee did not divorce them; hee did never give them such a bill, as upon the account of which they might conclude I am divorced. And that which I gather from it, is this, that at last the soul shall not bee able to produce a bill of divorcement from Jesus Christ. No, soul, whoever thou art, take this for a certain comfort, Christ will not whol∣ly cast thee off, hee will not at last bid thee bee gone, though at first hee may not presently entertain thee. This is one thing. And then secondly, Howsoever Christ may deal with thee at present, for thy comfort, yet at last hee will insure thee of everlasting salvation. Possibly now hee will not give thee bread (so much as thou wouldest have) but yet hee will absolutely save thy soul, and have mercy upon thee to all eternity. Therefore, this is that Christ saith, in John 6.39. This is the will of him that sent mee, That of all which hee hath given mee, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. There lies this for certain, At the last day, Jesus Christ will raise up all those that come to him. Now this is spoken not of a bare corporal resurrection, but of a resur∣rection to life. It is spoken of such a resurrection,
as is peculiarly the portion of true Beleevers. Christ will at last raise up all Beleevers to life, and glory, albeit hee may not seem to carry it in this life to the poor soul, as it desires. So that is a second thing which wee may conclude in the general, about Christs kindness to us, however in some particulars hee may not deal with us as with others. A third thing wee shall bee sure to finde at last, is this, That Jesus Christ will give us something suffi∣cient to support us, though not, it may bee, to satisfie us in all our desires. Howsoever the Lord may seem to put us off for a while, and make as if hee would not give us a Morsel; yet secretly hee will give supports to the soul, as in Psal. 138.3. In the day when I cried, thou answeredst mee; and strengthenedst mee with strength in my soul. Secret, sufficient soul-strength, shall certainly bee given in by Jesus Christ, however hee may carry it at first; at last the soul shall bee able to say, All the while Christ did frown upon mee, I had some secret sup∣ports given: So that though the example bee rare, and though some things in it bee extraordinary, yet in these three particulars every soul at last, shall finde Christ will carry it kindely, however at first hee may carry it strange. To come now to give an account of the Reasons of the point. There are many Reasons, which (if need were) wee might dilate upon. I shall onely name these four or five. The first Reason whence it comes to pass that Je∣sus Christ will deal thus kindly at last, Is taken from God the Father. My Beloved, that same Will, Command, and Commission which Jesus Christ hath received from the Father, and which hee is careful
to observe, is the great reason of this Carriage of Je∣sus Christ. I pray mark it a little, Christ coming into the world, hee comes not onely as our Saviour, but as his Fathers Servant; and this hath an influ∣ence upon the heart, and upon the hand of Christ in all his carriage to us. This, i. e. That hee comes as the Fathers Servant, and because God the Father will have him do thus, and thus, therefore to bee certain hee will do it. As for instance, doth Jesus Christ come into the world to dye for sinners? what is the ground of it? because God the Father hath given him in Commission so to do: So, will not Christ break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoak∣ing Flax, as it is prophesied hee will not, Isa. 42? Why this is the Reason, because hee is his Fathers Servant, as it is there, vers. 1. and God hath charged him that hee shall not break the bruised Reed, &c. And so in this particular, Jesus Christ will at last deal kindly with all that truly come un∣to him, because this is the will of him that sent him. This is particularly the reason, in John 6.37, 38. (a Scripture that you may look upon as the foundation of your Faith, but I wish you did well understand what you did build your Faith upon) All that come to mee, I will in no wise cast off; What is the reason? Mark the 38. vers. For I came down from Hea∣ven, not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent mee. When you act your Faith upon Jesus Christ for his kindness, I pray look to God the Father like∣wise, and this will further strengthen your Faith. The poor soul is ready to say, why should Jesus Christ receive mee? why should Jesus Christ carry it kindly to mee? what is there in mee? nothing. But there is another ground, there is the will of him
that sent him; there is the Fathers will. God the Father deals well with us for Christs sake; and Jesus Christ deals well with us for the Fathers sake. So that now my Beloved, when the poor soul goes to Je∣sus Christ, you may imagine that God the Father saies thus, Son, deal well with that soul, it is my will that thou shouldest not cast him off. Indeed in this place, Christ doth intimate that hee doth car∣ry himself according to his Commission. The Com∣mission that was given to Christ, it was the ground of this whole carriage of Christ. But here is the Commission, Christ hee shall not give childrens bread to Doggs; yet if Doggs will come to him, and lye at the Fathers door, it is the will of his Fa∣ther that hee should not cast them off. Secondly, The innate kindness and tenderness of the heart of Christ, is the reason of this truth; that hee will deal well at last, though hee seem to carry it strange at first. My Beloved, the Lord Jesus hath that personal renderness in himself, that if his Fa∣ther should never have wished him, nor willed him to deal thus kindly with poor souls, his own bowels would have put him on to it. Indeed the bowe's of Christ are so tender, that the tenderest love is set out by the bowels. When Paul would have the Philip∣pians to know how much hee did love them, and long after them, saith hee, (Phil. 1.8.) I long after you in the bowels of Jesus Christ. My Beloved, the Lord Jesus Christ hee hath ten∣der bowels, and because of that it is that hee doth deal tenderly with poor souls that come to him. What is the particular nature and notion of bowels in the Scripture? it is this; For a person to bee moved at last, by the sense of a persons misery,
though at first hee may seem to stand off. You have many notable instances of this. That of Joseph, what was it which made Joseph deal kindly at last, though hee did deal roughly at first? In Gen. 43.30. His bowels yearned within him, and that made him to speak kindly to his brethren. O my Beloved, The Lord Jesus is full of bowels; hee doth pitty many times, when hee is not spoken to, as in Luk. 7.13. It is said there concerning a Woman, that Christ had compassion on her, hee was troubled, for his bowels did yearn towards her. The Lord Jesus ha∣ving therefore such tender bowels, thence it comes to pass, that though at first hee may carry it strangely, yet at last hee will carry it kindly. This poor Wo∣man of Canaan, once the Lord seemed to speak harshly to her, but his bowels did yearn, and upon that account hee dealt well at last. The third Reason in a word is this, Christ will car∣ry it thus well at last, because in a sense hee is very fear∣ful, and therefore very careful, that none do perish in a good way, at least through his neglect. My Beloved, Christ is fearful of the perishing of poor souls, especi∣ally in a good way, and most especially through his neglect. Sinners, look about you, if you will rebel, and run away from Christ, and wander from him, and perish, Christ cares not; but if thou hast a heart to look towards God, if thou goest after Jesus Christ, and criest to him, hee is very fearful lest thou shouldest perish in such a good way. Isa. 57.16. Saith God there, For I will not contend for ever, nei∣ther will I bee alwaies wrath: for the spirit should fail before mee, and the souls which I have made. If Christ should carry it tough alwaies, the spirit of the poor creature would fail. If so bee you will wander in
the high waies from Christ, then the speech of the Prophet may bee made good, in Isa. 51.20. Thy Sons have fainted, they lye at the head of all the streets, as a wilde Bull in a Net; they are full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy God. Yea, but if you come to him, that cries after you in the streets, (as it is, Prov. 1.) If you lye not still, but come at his cry, and upon his call, then will hee pour forth his Spirit on you (as in that place hee promiseth, Prov. 1.23.) If you perish in your own neglect to come, so it is; but if you come, Christ will not let you perish at his doors. Oh no; The Lord Jesus will never bee a Dives; a poor Lazarus at Christs door, shall never perish there; never did any that lay knocking, and begging for mercy there, go away and perish for the want of it. Fourthly, The Lord Christ will bee thus kinde at last, That hee may stop the mouths of all those that are ready to speak hardly of him. My Beloved, if Christ should alwaies carry it strangely (especially when the sould carries it humbly) soon you would hear that speech of the man in the Parable; I knew thou wert a hard Master. But God is resolved that never shall there bee a witness brought against him of his hard∣ness. This Woman of Canaan might have been brought in as a witness against Jesus Christ, if (after all this) hee should have cast her off: but God will bee true, and all men lyers; Hee will bee kinde at last to confure that report, and reproach, which Satan and unbeleef are ready to cast on him, truly I may say, Christ will bee kinde for his own credir. That none may slander him, hee will, and must bee sweet at last. Fifthly and lastly, Christ hath a particular design to
destroy the work of the Devil. Now my Beloved, up∣on this account it is, that hee will deal kindly at last; for if Christ should not at last deal well with those that truly come to him, the design of the De∣vil would not bee destroyed. I build the founda∣tion of this reason upon that Scripture, in 1 John 3.8. For this purpose was the Son of God manifested, that hee might destroy the works of the Devil. When a poor soul comes to Christ, and is roughly dealt withall, the Devil hath a three-fold design upon that score. Viz. One design is upon the soul it self, to lead the soul to despair. Another design is upon other sinners, to discourage them for ever, from comming to Jesus Christ. And a third design (which though last in execu∣tion, is first in intention) and that is to cast a dis∣grace upon Jesus Christ. If this poor Woman should have been sent away, and not been dealt kindly withall, The Devil would have said, now despair, now no body go to him, &c. How doth Satan say, it is in vain for you to pray, to beleeve, Nay, though you worship him, hee will not regard it? Now mark it, the Lord is resolved to destroy the designs of Satan, and that Satan may never prosper in these designs, Christ will carry it well at last, however hee may carry it ill at first. Doth Satan say, it is in vain to wait? No, it is not in vain to wait, for the Woman of Canaan waited, and was accepted; doth Satan say, go not to Jesus Christ, hee will not receive you? Yes, then say thou, and thou, O soul (every one that is not resolved to hearken to Satan for his own ruine) wee will go, hee will re∣ceive us at last; doth Satan say, hee is a hard Ma∣ster?
say no, hee will deal kindly at last. Well, to come to the Application, indeed the prime, and the proper Use of this point is but one, and that I shall principally stand upon; but I shall add ano∣ther, though briefly. Use, The prime Use of this Point is but one, Namely, for the comfort and the refreshing of all those, who, it may bee, are in the same condition that the Woman of Canaan was. Who is there a∣mong you, that feareth the Lord, and obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? Let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Isa. 50.10. What soul is there that hath found a want of Christ, and hath had a desire after Christ, and hath been a great while waiting upon Christ, and hath not had your desires satisfied; bee of good comfort, though the Lord tarry long, hee will come at last. The Lord that seems to carry it rough at first, at last, in the issue will carry it kindly. Therefore bear up your hearts, it may bee your issue is not yet come, and no marvel if Christ do not speak. Possibly you are but in the Treaty (as I spake in the Explication the last day) or it may bee you are not yet fully come, nor do really, and right∣ly cloze with Jesus Christ. For certain, if that were, hee would bee kinde unto you according to your hearts desire. It is a full and everlasting speech of comfort, that, that you have in Job, Job 8.20, 21. Be∣hold God, will not cast away a perfect man, neither will hee help the evil-doers, till hee fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips with rejoycing. Thou dost lye before Jesus Christ, and hee seems to reject thee; I but know, That hee will not cast thee away, till hee hath filled thy mouth with gladness. No, though at
present hee may seem to carry it strange, yet in the issue hee will carry it well. Because I would clearly hold forth this, I shall speak my thoughts by two or three steps. There are two things I would speak to all you, who, it may bee, are in the condition of the Woman of Canaan. First, Beware how thou thinkest thy estate too strange, and how thou inquirest after the cause of it too far. Secondly, Bee confident of this, how strange so∣ever thy case bee now, the conclusion shall bee very sweet. First, Beware how thou thinkest thy state too strange, and how thou inquirest after the cause of it too far. Was there ever sorrow like to my sorrow? and was there ever soul like to my soul? saith the poor soul, &c. and what is the matter, that I have knockt, and knockt, till I am weary of knocking? Oh what is the cause! &c. bee not too curious in looking after the cause; possibly there may bee a reason that at first you may not see, but you may see it hereafter. As Christ said to Peter, What I do thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know hereafter, John 13.7. Hereafter thou shalt know why the Lord did keep thee from childrens bread so long, and it may bee (by the way) it was to bring down thy proud stomach; hereafter the Lord will satisfie thee, but at present know, that no new thing hath happened to thee, others have lain as long as you. Secondly, Bee confident of this, how strange soever thy case bee, the conclusion shall bee very sweet. My Beloved, the Lord Jesus cannot shut up his bowels, the Lord Jesus cannot alwaies refrain himself,
Isa. 63.15. Where are the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy mercy towards us, are they restrained? That passage in Psal. 42. is remarkable, though David was very sad, yet saith hee, in vers. 8. The Lord will command salvation for mee, and yet I shall praise him. And verily at last, you shall see the good∣ness of the Lord in the Land of the Living; hee will command and create comfort for you. I but saith the soul, though David might say so, what is that to mee? still I say remember it is to thee. All that take hold of the Covenant of Grace, that God made with David; God makes with them the sure mercies of David (as it is in that precious Promise, Isa. 55.3.) But however mark the example wee are upon, con∣sider the Woman of Canaan; and when you consider the whole story of her, you may bee confident at last Christ will deal kindly with you. Minde (above, and besides what wee have said) Three things in this story, to comfort your hearts, that however Christ may deal harshly at first, yet in the end hee will deal kindly. First, You cannot bee further off from Jesus Christ, than the Woman of Canaan was. Secondly, You cannot bee dealt withall worse, than the Woman of Canaan was. But. Thirdly, Though wee should grant, you should bee further off than the Woman of Canaan was, and dealt withalt worse than shee was, yet there is hope in Israel for this thing. First, You cannot bee further off than the Wo∣man of Canaan was. My Beloved, There were no people visibly so far from the Covenant of Grace, and so much out of the Commission of Christ, as the Canaa∣nites, and the Samaritans, and yet it is observable,
you have two great instances, the one of a Canaanite, and the other of a Samaritan, that Christ must deal well withall. In John 4. It is said of Christ, That hee must needs go thorow Samaria; and what was it for, but to bring home a poor Woman of Samaria? now a Samaritan was far off from Christ, and such a one as shee was very far from Christ; yet the Lord at last must deal kindly with her. And so this Wo∣man of Canaan, shee was far off from Jesus Christ, shee was a Woman of Tyre and Sidon, yet shee came to the Lord, and the Lord dealt well with her. Secondly, Consider this for your comfort; Christ cannot deal worse with you, than hee dealt with the Wo∣man of Canaan. I beseech you in the Lords pre∣sence (you that have been under any darkness, clouds, or trouble) tell mee, did ever the Lord speak to you, as hee did to this Woman? when you said, Jesus, thou Saviour of sinners, have mercy upon mee, did hee ever say, I was not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel? when in the an∣guish of your spirits, you did turn into a corner, and lay in the dust grovling and crying for a crumb of comfort, did hee ever tell you, It was not meet to give you childrens bread? yet you see Christ said so to this Woman. Indeed I think Christ never dealt with any (all things considered) so seemingly ill, and rough, as with this woman: Certainly you can∣not bee worse dealt with, yet at last you see how well shee speed. But then, Thirdly, Suppose, suppose that you bee further off from Christ than the woman of Canaan was; and that you have been dealt withall worse, than the woman of Canaan was; Yet there is hope in Israel con∣cerning
this thing. Why, what hope? there is this hope, that the Lord will create a new thing in the world. It is often used in the Prophets that expres∣sion; among others I shall now minde you onely of one. In Isa. 43.18, 19. Saith the Lord there unto his people, Remember yee not the former things, nei∣ther consider the things of old. Behold I will do a new thing, &c. As if the Lord should say, My people, look back to the daies past; do not you remember former things? happily they may say, wee remem∣ber old experiences, but ours is a new case; wee re∣member what thou didst in the daies of old, but our case is worse than theirs; Behold (saith God) A new thing I will create; and what is that new thing God will create? Why the Beasts of the field shall ho∣nour him, &c. Time was when the Virgin Daughter of Sion did honour him; time was when Israel fol∣lowed him thorow the wilderness; I but now God will create a new thing, The Beasts of the field shall honour him. My Beloved, there is very much in this, viz. in the Creating-power, and the Creating-mercy of the heart of God. Suppose never was any so far off, nor never any so dealt withall, yet the Lord will create a new thing in the world: So that I say, it may much comfort the hearts of all those that are in the condition of the Woman of Canaan, that the Lord will deal well at last, however hee may deal at first. Object. But now my thinks I hear the poor soul say, But I am not like the Woman of Canaan; were I as the Woman of Canaan, then I should hope the Lord would deal well with mee, but I am not as shee. Why how is that? Answ. I have not that Grace as shee had, I have
not her Prayer, her Humility, I never worshipped the Lord, as the Woman of Canaan did, I never was so broken, as the Woman of Canaan was. I shall give two Answers. First, If you bee not so humble as the Woman of Ca∣naan, think of it now to bee as humble as shee was. But yet I tell you in the Second place, It was not the Woman of Canaan's Humility, nor her Patience, nor her Prayer, not the Worshipping; but the Woman of Canaan's Faith, upon which the Lord did all. And I take it to bee an un∣deniable truth, that that Grace unto which all kind∣ness is shewed, is the Grace of Faith. True, Humi∣lity is good, and so is Humiliation; and the Lord give us our measure; but yet I say, the great Pro∣mise is not to Humility, nor to Humiliation, but to Faith. Woman, great is thy Faith. Object. I but then secondly, saith the soul, But I have not the Woman of Canaan's Faith; If I had her Faith, I should think the Lord would deal well with mee. It is said, the Woman of Canaan had a great Faith, but the Lord knows I have but a little. Answ. I have answered already this, and shew∣ed, That it was not to the measure of the Grace, but to the Grace it self that Christ did this. Therefore I say, as often as you read the story of the Woman of Canaan, comfort your hearts with these words; do as the Prophet Habakkuk, chap. 2. vers. 1. I will stand upon my Watch-Tower, and observe what God will say, for the vision will speak at last. So say I to the Sons and Daughters of the Woman of Candan; Go upon your Watch-Tower, and observe, the vision will speak at last. I shall hint to you that speech, in Isa. 54.6. The Lord hath called mee as a Woman
forsaken, and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God. The Lord hath called thee (truly it was his anger, and wrath that was upon her, and yet hee had called her as a Wo∣man refused.) Poor heart, thou art as a woman grie∣ved in spirit, yet the Lord is kinde. Object. I but you will say, That is a Promise made to those who once were in the heart of Christ, who once were married to the Lord, and afterwards seem to bee separated. Answ. 1. That is true; and therefore by the way, if there bee any of you that once were married to the Lord, and by your sins are separated, bee of good comfort, the Lord doth cal thee. But secondly, Though the sixth verse speak to one that was once a Wife; yet the first verse speaks to one that was never a Wife. Sing O barren, thou that didst not bear, for more are the children of the desolate, than the children of the married Wife. So that mark it, put it either way, thou that once wast married to Christ, and thou that wast never married, there is a song of praise for you. Whosoever you are that come to Jesus Christ, whether it bee your first coming, in the day of conversion from an unregenerate e∣state, or second coming, in the day of your return from a backsliding estate, I say, which soever it is, if you come, Christ will bee kinde unto you. I will conclude. And two words I shall speak. First, Know, It is absolutely impossible that it should bee otherwise, but that Christ should deal well with you at last. You know the Apostles expression, Heb. 6.18. That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lye, wee might have strong consolation, &c. When you have the Lords Word,
and the Lords Oath; when you have the Lords Pro∣mises, and many Experiences; It is impossible now that God should fail; here are immutable things. You have the Experience of this Woman of Canaan, and you have the Experience of many thousands, be∣sides, the Promises, and Oath of God, and Christ: so that I say, it is impossible that it should change, and bee otherwise. It cannot bee but that Christ should deal well at last with those that come unto him. I say again (and Oh remember it) it cannot possi∣bly bee otherwise. Secondly, It is very probable your comfort may bee nearer than you are aware of. Possibly thou wilt say, It was never worse, never further off. Bee it so, upon this account thou wert never nearer to com∣fort. My Beloved, it is a certain Truth, When wee are ready to give up hope, and ready to perish, that is the time of our refreshing and reviving. Possibly now thou dost think thou art at the worst, the Lord may be rea∣dy to deal kindly with thee. When did the Lord re∣veal this kindness to the Woman of Canaan? when? after hee had spoken worst of all. Hee had said, It was not meet to give childrens bread to Doggs, and pre∣sently after this word, hee saith, Bee it unto thee even as thou wilt. It may bee the Lord tells thee, It is not meet to give thee bread; now bee of good com∣fort; now hee calls thee Dogg, and is ready to beat thee off; a thousand to one if hee do not give you childrens bread. Indeed this I observe as a particu∣lar thing in the story of Joseph; when was it that Jo∣seph brake out in his kindness to his brethren? See in Gen. 45.1. Then Joseph could not refrain himself, &c. When? truly when Judah had told him such a sad story, in chap. 44. vers. 18. As if Judah should
say, My Lord, great man, what shall I do if thou do not let Beamin go? &c. Then Josephs heart melted. Happily thou art brought to this question, Lord, what shall I do? Lord, I have waited, prayed, cried, and Oh Lord, what shall I do? why bear up thy heart, now thou art near sinking, the Lord may re∣veal himself to thee, as hee did to the Woman of Canaan. Well, that is the first, and the proper Use, To comfort those that are in the Woman of Canaans condition. I shall add but one word of Exhortation. If it bee thus, that the Lord Christ will deal thus kindly at last, however hee carry it at first, Then let the same minde bee in you, that was in the Lord Jesus. This you know is a great Rule, That wee should bee followers of Christ. Wherein shall wee bee fol∣lowers of Christ? First, Carry it thus one to another. Secondly, Carry it thus to Jesus Christ. First, Carry it thus one to another. If so bee through frailty, you have carried it too roughly one to another hitherto, carry it kindly now. Bee not of a rough spirit irreconcilably; It is time for Beleevers to lay aside their bitterness, which hath been their sin, and shame, many years. Oh that whatever un∣brotherly, ungospel-like carriage hath been amongst Saints (and too much hath been) may now at last end. Let us in this imitate Christ, to carry it well at last, for a long time wee have carried it harsh and ill. And in particular cases between one Relation and another, one friend and another, bee as Christ, sweet and kinde in the cloze, what ere you are, or have been at first. Secondly, And especially, Carry it so to Jesus
Christ. There is never a one of you but have carried it very strangely to Christ at first; the Lord help you to carry it well at last. Have not you carried it to Christ, as Christ carried it to the Woman of Canaan? The Woman of Canaan called, but hee would not answer; Christ comes to you, and calls you, but you will not answer; Christ calls you, you will not hear; Young man (saith Christ) turn to mee; it is not meet for mee to do so (hath the young man answered) I will not cast my youth and strength on a doting, disgraced way, as many do; so have your hearts said too often. And so for old, and rich, and great ones, how oft have they put off Christ with no answer, or at best with a delatory one? I may say to you all, that many a time, after many a call, and in many a case, you have dealt unkindly with Christ. Well, but however, though you have car∣ried it ill to Christ heretofore, yet pray carry it well at last. I shall allude to a speech, in Matth. 21.28. Christ speaks of two Sons of a certain man, and hee came and said to the first, Go work to day in my Vine∣yard, hee answered and said, I will not: but after∣wards hee repented, and went, &c. The Lord Christ shews in that parable how some, yea many deal with him. Hee calls, and commands the poor soul; hee saith to the sinner, Go to work, leave off sin, but the soul returns answer, No, I will not: Oh this is naughty carriage; yet now if wee recall our selves, and say as hee said at last, I go, (But afterwards hee repented and went) This will bee doing good at last; and however our former carriage hath been, Christ will accept and count this well, and say, Here is good carriage; So then O soul take this word to thy self; And if thou hast dealt unkindly with Christ,
and notwithstanding great wooings, great means, abun∣dance of favours bestowed upon you, yet thou wouldest not repent: Oh yet afterwards repent and do it And this is to draw out holiness, at well as comfort, out of the story of the woman of Canaan. And truly that is my desire, that wee should thus improve this example, not onely to Faith and Comfort, but also to Holiness and Obedience; and that in this particular, of being like-minded unto Christ, not onely to o∣thers, but especially to Christ himself, to deal well with him now at last, for as much as wee have dealt ill with him many a day.
Comings to Christ prevails for Corporals as well as Spirituals. The Ninth SERMON. Matthew 15. the last clause of vers. 28. And her Daughter was made whole from that very hour. WEE are come to the last part of the sto∣ry of the woman of Canaan; the prin∣cipal matter wee have already dis∣patched; and I shall at this time brief∣ly give you an account of these words, and so end the Discourse. VVithout looking back therefore to any thing wee have formerly delivered; wee shall presently speak to these words that I have now read. These words do particularly relate to the Daughter of the Woman of Canaan; and they do hold forth the kindness of Christ unto a childe, as a return of the Prayer, and Faith of a Parent for a childe. And there is one Note, that in the very entrance into the discourse wee shall take up in the general. And that is this, Doct. That the Prayer and the Faith of belee∣ving Parents, are very prevalent with the Lord Jesus on the behalf of children. My Beloved, little do wee know what our prayers
may procure at the hand of Christ, for ours. Thou hast oftentimes laid thy precepts upon thy childe, and that would do him no good; thou hast oftentimes (in a sense) made thy prayers to thy childe, and that would do him no good; Little dost thou know what the prayers that thou dost put up to God may yet effect. Verily, my Beloved, It is our folly and sin that wee are not more in prayer for our po∣sterity, than wee are. Many a soul-mercy, and body-mercy may bee procured at the hands of Christ up∣on the Parents prayers for the poor children. It is famously recorded of Austin, that hee was the Son of Prayers, and Tears. Oftentimes I say for the soul, and body, doth the Parents prayers prevail for the childe. To come to the words in particular, there is no difficulty in the Letter, and therefore wee shall not stand upon the Exposition. There are onely three Notes wee shall take up. The two first more particular; the last more general; and therefore that I shall spend the time in. First of all, in particular, Here are two Notes that do relate to the personal honour and glory of the Lord Jesus Christ; and upon that account, I shall mention them in two Observations. Doct. 1. That Jesus Christ hath power over all diseases, over all distempers. Her Daughter was sick, yea vexed with a Devil; shee praies to Christ, and her Daughter was made whole. You know what hee said in the Gospel, Mat: 8.8. Lord, if thou wilt but speak the word, my servant shall bee whole, &c. Any disease is at the command of Christ, to go, and to come, as hee pleases: So much may wee gather from the Centurions language,
Luk. 7.8, 9. That expression, in Mat. 4.23, 24. is full, where it is said, Hee went about healing all dis∣eases, &c. Indeed it is a fine question, Whether in these daies Christ do cure immediately, as hee did in the times of the Gospel? That hee can so cure is made no question; but whether hee do, is a question; yet this I will say, that sometimes I make no doubt, but the Lord Jesus doth immediately heal diseases. And it were no stretching the Truth to tell you, that more than one, or two, or scores of instances may bee given of persons, that have been given over for lost by man, by no means used, nothing done to re∣cover, many who have been yet immediately cured by Jesus Christ. However, it is a certain truth, that all diseases can bee cured by Jesus Christ. And the second Note is this (and I pray minde it.) Doct. 2. Jesus Christ is not tied to any time to do his work. The same hour her Daughter was made whole. My Beloved, the Lord Jesus hee can cure by one word, in one moment. That is a famous story, in John 4.49. You have one there that comes unto Christ, and saith hee, Sir, Come down ere my childe dye. Hee was afraid that Christ could not come away soon enough. Mark, saith Christ, Go thy way, thy Son liveth, and it is said, hee enquired of them the hour when hee began to amend; and hee knew that it was at the same hour, in which Je∣sus said unto him, thy Son liveth. The Lord Jesus is not tied to any time for any work. There are two sad words, which wee may truly speak of the best men, and means, which yet can never bee said of
Jesus Christ. The first word is this, That time is past. And the second word is this, That time is too short. But now you can never say any of these words to Christ. First, Of the best men, and the best means wee may say, time is past. Wee often do say, and cry out, Oh! If this Physician had come at such a time, the childe had been well; and if such means had been taken, the thing had been done; I but now time is past; But mark it, though you can say thus of men, yet you can never say the time is past to Jesus Christ. You have a very glorious instance of this, in the speech of Martha to our Lord Jesus Christ, in John 11.21, 22. Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my Brother had not died; but I know, that even NOW, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give it thee. Shee doth not say, If thou hadst come, my Brother had lived, but now it is too late; but saith shee, now I know, that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give it thee. My Beloved, when death is written upon any person, and it is too late for men to help, it is not too late for Jesus Christ; time is never past to the Lord Jesus. But then Secondly, As time is never past, so time is never too short for Jesus Christ. You may say of such men, if they had but time, they might do something; and of such means, if there were time, it might do some∣thing. I but you can never say, it is too little, or too short a space, or time, for Jesus Christ. In the same hour. Jesus Christ can do a great deal of work in a little time. Christ who is the mighty God, can do a great work in a day. That is a blessed word, in Rev. 18.8. and it bears upon this Notion that I now hint.
It is said of Babylon, That all her plagues shall come upon her in one day, &c. In one day, why the intirest of Pride, and Honour, Idolatry, and Persecution, that so many ages were winding up to a height; can this bee destroyed in so little time? shall this bee done in one day? Yes, For strong in the Lord God who judgeth her. A great God, is never confined to any time. Oh my Beloved! bear up your hearts in the Lord Jesus Christ; time can no way prescribe him, hee can do what hee will, and when hee will. But there is one general point that I shall take up from the place, and end this discourse. And the general Point is this. Doct. That faithful coming unto Jesus Christ, doth sometimes prevail even in Corporal Cases. This woman of Canaan came to Christ, and shee came in Faith; Here is a faithful commer to the Lord Jesus, and shee prevails for her own soul, I and shee prevails for her Daughters body; shee prevails eminently for her own spiritual concernments, I and shee prevails also for her Daughters corporal con∣cernments. That Faith prevails alwaies in spiritual concernments, that wee have often opened (and my Beloved, it is a mercy, that if it do not alwaies pre∣vail for our body, yet that it doth for our souls) But God hath provided, and doth so order it, that some∣times it shall prevail for body and soul too. Indeed going to Christ is good for every thing, and they who truly go to the Lord Jesus, shall one day have cause to sing the song of David, Bless the Lord, Oh my soul, who forgiveth all thy sins, and healeth all thy diseases. You that go to Jesus Christ,
you shall have cause to say, Blessed bee God, I have soul-mercy, and bodily-mercy too. If you look thorow the whole story of the Life of Christ, you shall see this truth. The whole history of the Gospel gives us instances; that faithful coming to Christ, did sometimes prevail with him for corporal-mercies, as well as for spiritual mercies. A double instance I shall give. First, An Instance of prevailing for our selves. Secondly, An Instance of prevailing for others. First, An Instance of prevailing for our selves; saith the Leper, in Matth. 8.2. Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make mee clean. And that of the blinde man (Barthomeus) in Luk. 18.41. saith Christ, What wilt thou that I shall do unto thee? and hee said, Lord, That I may receive my sight, and his sight was restored to him. Many a time the Lord Christ was prevailed withall for corporal mercies. But secondly, As many did prevail for them∣selves, so they did often prevail for others. As in Matth. 15.30. It is there said, Great multitudes came to him, having with them those that were lame, blinde, dumb, maimed, and many others; and cast them down at Jesus feet, and hee healed them, &c. The Lord did many corporal kindnesses for others. The like to this you have, in Matth. 9.1, 2. They brought to him one sick of the Palsie, and Jesus seeing their Faith, healed him. But now, here is one Ob∣jection against this. Object. But you will say, This was true of the times wherein Christ lived; Christ, when hee was up∣on Earth, healed Simon Peters wifes Mother of a fea∣vour; and such a ones Daughter, and such a ones Son; but now hee is in Heaven, such things are
not to beee expected; so some do think. Answ. For Answer, First, If wee speak of his mi∣raculous way of healing, then it may bee said, that miraculous way of healing diseases was a mercy more eminently put forth in those daies, of Christs being in the flesh. But if you speak of the thing it self, healing diseases, curing of bodies, I doubt not but wee may expect the same mercy from Jesus Christ now, that they did then. And the Reason is, Because there is the same ground for Christ to shew corporal kindnesses now, which was then. Where the ground of a thing is perpetual, moral, and eternally the same in all ages, the same things may bee done upon the same ground, But, &c. I finde in the Gospel a double ground, why Christ did heal corporal diseases. The first ground was his pitty and sympathy. And secondly, To fulfil Prophecie and Promise; Upon these two grounds did Christ heal, either upon the grounds of pitty and compassion, as a man, or else upon the ground of Prophecie or Promise. For the first ground you have it, in Matth. 14.14. It is said, Jesus went forth, and saw a great multitude, and was moved with compassion toward them, and hee healed their sick. Compassion did move Christ, and therefore hee healed them. Now ob∣serve, Jesus Christ now in Heaven, hath the same compassions that hee had here on Earth; and that is founded upon his keeping, or retaining of his humane nature still: If Christ had not now in Heaven our humane nature, hee would not have had this com∣passion; for you shall finde, that the compassion that was in Christ, it was not built upon his God-head, but upon his humane Nature. And therefore in Heb. 2.16, 17. It is said, Christ took not on him
the nature of Angels, but hee took on him the seed of Abraham; Why so? that hee might bee a merciful, and faithful High Priest, &c. Hee did therefore take Mans Nature, that hee might have compassion. Now this, Jesus retains for ever, and hee hath the same compassions now hee is in Heaven, that hee had when hee was upon the Earth. The second ground is that which I finde, in Isa. 53.4. compared with Matth. 8.17. I pray minde it (for it is good to know what is the ground of Faith.) In Isa. 53. Saith the Prophet there, Surely hee hath born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, &c. This was prophesied of Jesus Christ, that hee should not onely have compassion on our spiritual infirmi∣ties, our sins, but our corporal; and this was the ground why hee did heal diseases in the time of his flesh, Matth. 8.17. It is said, Hee healed all that were sick, that it might bee fulfilled which was spoken by Isaiah the Prophet, saying, Himself took our in∣firmities, and bare our sicknesses. Here was the ground why Christ did heal then, because it was pro∣phesied, hee should bear our sicknesses. Now this Prophecie is an eternal truth. And if in the time of his flesh hee did shew corporal kindnesses, that that Prophecie might bee fulfilled; hee will now do the same, that the same Prophecie might bee fulfilled. Even in these daies wee may expect, that our Lord Jesus Christ, upon our faithful coming to him, should shew corporal kindness to us, and ours, as well as spiritual. One Scripture I shall add for the Truth of it, and that is in James 5.14. Is any man sick among you? Let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, &c. and the prayer of Faith shall save the sick, &c. Here observe,
that faithful prayer shall prevail for the saving of the sick: Now a little to clear up this, you must know, first, that this is to bee understood of corpo∣ral sicknesses; and therefore the very two terms that are here used, for saving, and sick, are usually applied to corporal diseases. I but it is said, this was by virtue of the anointing of the Elders. To this I answer, this expression hath been abused; But how∣ever that this salvation doth not depend upon the anointing, will appear, if you observe the phrase, And the Prayer of Faith shall save the sick. Hee doth not say, the Anointing shall do it, but the Prayer of Faith; and further, observe, this is a general Scrip∣ture concerning all ages, built upon perpetual grounds, and to hold now, as well as then; That coming to Christ in Faith, will prevail with him for corporal kindnesses, both for our selves, and others. Wee shall add no more for the proof, but give you the Reasons. There are five Reasons whence it comes to pass, that sometimes our Lord Jesus Christ is prevailed withall by those that faithfully come to him, incor∣poral cases for themselves, and others. Reas. 1. That the Lord Jesus may shew that hee hath power in this particular. My Beloved, Jesus Christ will sometimes speak, and do such a word, and such a work, for this reason, that it may bee known what hee could do in that case. In Matth. 9. and the beginning, Why did hee say to the sick of the Pas∣sie, Bee of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee? but that they might know the Son of Man hath power on the the Earth to forgive sins. Beleevers, Beleevers, you shall know what your Saviour can do, you shall know what a Christ you have, and what hee can
do in every thing. You think hee can do for your souls, you do not question it; hee will make you know, hee can do for your bodies too. That hee may shew his power, hee will sometimes shew cor∣poral kindnesses. Secondly, That hee may shew himself to bee the same in all ages. My Beloved, poor hearts are too too ready to sing that doleful Psalm, Is the Lords mercy clean gone? is his loving kindness come to an end? &c. Poor hearts are too too ready to say, the Lord did such a mercy at such a time, but did hee not then resolve to do so no more? at such a time the Lord healed such a one, but did hee not end the work then? No, the Lord Christ is from everlasting to everlasting? thorow all generations, saith the Psalmist, Psal. 103.14, & 17. verses. For hee knoweth our frame; hee remembreth that wee are but dust; but the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, upon them that fear him: and his Righteousness unto chil∣drens children. That you may know that it is not onely a peculiar mercy to those times, therefore, thorow all generations hee will heal, as hee did then, that it may appear hee is the same in all ages. That Text is to bee understood of corporals. Thirdly, The Lord Jesus will sometimes shew corporal kindnesses to our selves, and others, that hereby hee may ingage us. Oh my Beloved, Jesus Christ doth love to ingage poor souls to himself; hee loves to lay his fair yoak upon your backs; hee loves to lay the cords of men (of humane love) upon their hearts, to binde them to himself. Now corporal kindnesses do much ingage. The truth is, it is our folly, and Christs kindness in a mystery, that a cor∣poral kindness works more sometimes than a spiritual,
and Christ therefore goes that way to work upon us. Wee finde in dealing with children (and the Lord knows silly children wee are the best of us) that wee do oftentimes more win by an Apple, than a better thing. Oh wee have a good Christ that condescends to our childishness, hee will have corporal kindnes∣ses, because hee sees they will prevail with us some∣times, when others will not. How stately is that Psalm, Psal. 116. Oh saith David there, I will love the Lord, &c. What did ingage David? I was in misery, the sorrows of death took hold of mee, and the Lord delivered mee, &c. Oh, for the Lord Jesus to shew a kindness to our poor carkasses, doth ingage much. At such a time I had a childe sick, a rela∣tion sick, I prayed to the Lord, and the Lord heard mee; I will love the Lord as long as I live. Fourthly, The Lord doth it, that hee may incourage Faith. Sirs, glorious things (as Doctor Sibbs ap∣plied that Scripture) are spoken of thee, O thou Grace of Faith! Now this is a great incouragement, when Faith shall prevail with Christ for body and soul too for inward and outward mercies, how is Faith incouraged? Pray will you turn to John 4.53. The kindness of Christ to the Noble mans childe, whom the Lord did cure upon his Fathers request, mark how it did work upon that great man, Hee enquired concerning the time, and hee knew that it was at the time that Christ said, his Son liveth, What follows? then, Himself beleeved, and his whole house. Why, did not the man beleeve, be∣fore Christ had cured his childe? Yes, in vers. 50. it is said, Hee beleeved, but the Master that belee∣ved before, beleeves more, I, and the whole Fami∣ly beleeved too. Verily Sirs, Faith is marvelously
incouraged by corporal kindnesses. What did in∣courage David against Goliah, but this? Thy servant slew both the Lion, and the Bear: and this uncircumcised Philistine shall bee as one of them. Oh, when the Lord shall hear us for our poor carkasses, this will incourage Faith. Many a person hath been wrought upon to come to Christ, by the kindnesses that hee hath shewed to others. There is a story of a poor Christian Maid (in the Ecclesiastical histories) whose Prayer and Faith cured a great Mans childe in a heathenish place. The Governour of the place had a childe sick, and every one was to give some∣what to help it, but nothing would do; at last a poor captive Christian was asked what shee could do; shee said, I can pray to my God, and hee can heal; shee did so, and the childe was healed; and it is said, it was the occasion to work upon many, to inquire after, and to embrace Jesus Christ, and the Christian Re∣ligion. And let mee appeal unto you, have you not known, at least have you not heard of some poor wretched creatures, that have been much wrought upon when they have observed that God hath heard the prayers of such a Minister, of such a poor Chri∣stian, when they were sick, and this hath drawn them on in the way of Faith and Holiness? Fifthly and lastly, Jesus Christ will sometimes shew corporal kindnesses, that so hee may make good all the Promises. In 1 Tim. 4.8. Godliness is said to have the Promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come. Why now you know what is said, in 2 Cor. 1.20. That in him all the Promises are Yea, and Amen. All Promises are made to Beleevers, but the fulfilling of all, doth depend upon Jesus Christ. Now my Beloved, That the Lord may fulfil tem∣poral
Promises, hee will upon the faithful coming of his servants, sometimes give them temporal mercies. Wee shall now come to the Use. There are but two Uses that I would make of this Point. First of all, therefore, Let this serve for a word of Conviction. And, Secondly, For a word of Instruction. First, It serves for a word of Conviction. To con∣vince the folly, and the mistake of many poor crea∣tures, who think, and say, that going to Jesus Christ may bee good for the soul, but they cannot tell what it is for the body. Repentance, Faith, real Conversion to the Lord Jesus, may save our souls, but they cannot see what it will do for their bodies. This kinde of Dutch-divinity is every where, to minde Mammon, and body, best, and most; and to think Religion is not for any profit or purpose in those particulars. But see here this folly, and know, that Religion is good for all things. Length of daies are in Christs right hand; and in his left, riches and honour. Oh souls, learn to see, going to Jesus Christ is good, not onely for our souls, but for our bodies. You shall go to the Lord Jesus Christ, and have the mercies of Hea∣ven, and the mercies of Earth too. Can the Son of Jesse give you Olive yards, and Vine-yards, &c.? Was the speech of Saul, 1 Sam. 22.7. So say the men of the world, Do you think to get any thing by being godly? Yes, if the Lord please, you may get for body, as well as for soul, by going to Jesus Christ. The world is mightily mistaken, that think godliness is good for nothing but salvation; it is good for this present world too. But then, Secondly, Let it serve for an Use of Instruction, To teach us all whither to go in all cases, whether spi∣ritual
or corporal; why, to go to the Lord Jesus. Whatever thy case bee, away to Christ; going to Christ is good for soul, and for body. What is your condition? Say some, I am a poor man, and I have a little estate, and a great charge, I hope beleeving in Jesus Christ will save my soul, but what shall be∣come of my Family? go to Jesus Christ, hee can give corporal, as well as spiritual mercies. Saith another, I am sick, &c. little do wee know what may bee expected from Christ even in corporal cases. You have a fine speech, in Proverbs 3.16. Length of daies are in her right hand: and in her left hand, riches and honour. Shee is a tree of Life, and shee is health to the Navel, and the Flesh, chap. 4.22. This is spoke of Wisdome, what Wisdome? why it is spoken of Es∣sential Wisdome, Jesus Christ; why, what of Christ? it is said, Length of daies are in his right hand; Eter∣nity of Life is a right-hand-mercy for Jesus Christ to give; I but how shall I live here? why, In his left hand are riches and honour. You go to Jesus Christ; and say, Lord, I have a dead soul, dead in tres∣passes and sins, Lord, Length of daies are with thee; But thy body is sick, why go to Christ, hee can cure bodies too; and is this onely for your selves? No, but for others too; you may go to the Lord Je∣sus, not onely for a morsel of bread for thy poor soul, but for some cure for thy childe. Object. But may I go to the Lord Jesus? will the Lord Christ accept mee, who come to him upon a carnal account? Answ. For answer. That Jesus that hath the mer∣cy of God, to pitty souls, hath the pitty of a man to pitty bodies; and humane compassions will prevail with him for bodily pitty.
Object. I but will the soul say, Is there then any hope that I may prevail with the Lord for my sick childe? Answ. My Beloved, I told you in the beginning, That the Prayers and Faith of the Parent will much prevail with Christ, for the good of the childe. In Gen. 17. Abraham goes to the Lord, and hee praies for Ishmael, Oh that Ishmael might live in thy sight. That is, that hee might bee the childe of the Pro∣mise; Hee was a Son of the Flesh, but not an Heir of the Promise; but yet mark what follows, though Ishmael should not bee the childe of the Promise, yet the Lord doth there assure Abraham of this, that Ishmael shall bee blessed. Isaac is the childe of the pro∣mised seed, yet Ishmael shall bee blessed too. Many a time doth the Lord hear the prayers of his servants, e∣ven for an Ishmael, i. e. for a childe, yea a carnal childe; and this is certain, even bad children have many corporal mercies for their Parents sakes; and wee may expect it. Object. But wee have known many a Parent that have gone in Faith to Jesus Christ for a poor childe, that never have prevailed. How then can you build us up in this Truth, when wee see the contrary? Answ. I answer, If thou goest to the Lord, and prayest for a childe, and dost not prevail, God deals no worse with thee than hee dealt with thy betters. Da∣vid, who was a man after Gods own heart, went to God for a childe, and hee prayed hard, but yet the Lord did not hear him. You have the story in 2 Sam. 12.16. David besought God for the childe, and fasted. &c. And if it bee so with you, yet are you as well in this respect, as David was; But more ful∣ly to answer the Objection. I pray mark it, that in
that place, there are two things might satisfie Da∣vid, and so any in the like case. First, It was not good for David that the childe should live. I make that appear thus; what was the childe that David did desire might live? you know the story, it was the base-begotten childe, which hee got upon Bathsheba. Certainly it was not good for David that the childe should live; had the childe lived, it would have been his Fathers shame, &c. When thou goest to God to begg the life of thy childe, if thy childe do not live, what is the reason? hee may live to bee thy shame. Some have begged of God the life of a childe, what ever came of it; God hath given it as a curse, and the childes life hath been a monument of their shame, and a perpe∣tual heart-breaking to the Parents all their daies. (As a good Woman once sadly said) So that is one thing, it may bee for good to the Parent, that God should not hear prayers for a childes life, and then that may satisfie us, if hee do not. But then, Secondly, Though the Lord did not hear David for the life of the childe; I perswade mee, Hee did hear David for the soul of the childe. I shall give you this account of it. Saith David, in v. 23. I shall go to him, but hee shall not return to mee. Whither is that? not so much, I shall go to him in my body to the grave, but in my soul to God. And my Beloved, that this is intended, doth appear upon this consideration; no∣thing but this could have so quieted the heart of Da∣vid, that the childe was happy. Indeed some think that the phrase, I shall go to him, is no more, but I shall bee dead, as hee is; and they say, David did acquiesce in this, that the will of God was fulfilled; and therefore David comforts himself in this, I shall
go to him. But if this had not been to Heaven, it could have been no great comfort. Alass! what comfort is this bare thought to a mourning Parent? my childe is dead, and I shall dye too. David might have had that comfort in Absolons death; but here was his comfort, I shall go to him, i. e. to glo∣ry; the bare grave is not comfort, nor was it to Da∣vid, but the glory beyond the grave is. And this is that comfort which doth stay the heart, I shall go to him. Though God did not hear him for his childes life, yet I think for his childes soul. So that is ano∣ther thing to satisfie any Christian in this case. I say, when Christ doth not hear prayers to restore a childe to life, and health; yet, in this case, in parti∣cular, go to the Lord Jesus, you may go, and you may prevail for corporal kindnesses for them, and if not for their bodies, who can tell but you may for their souls? Then, I beseech you all in the words of the Apostle, Phil. 4.6. compared with verse 19. Bee careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your request bee made known unto God. My God shall supply all your need, according to his riches, in glory, by Christ Jesus. Whatever your condition bee, bee not over careful, go to the Lord Jesus, and hee will supply all thy wants, hee will give a pardon to thy soul, and a plaister to thy body, and to thy childes body too; you may go to Jesus Christ for what you will, in a way of beleeving, and to bee sure you shall al∣waies prevail in spirituals, and sometimes in corpo∣rals. But there are two questions that wee must an∣swer. First, But in what cases may it bee lawful to put Prayer and Faith a working in going to Christ for corpo∣ral kindnesses?
Secondly, When may wee hope that wee may prevail with Christ for corporal kindnesses? First, In what cases may wee go to the Lord Jesus, and set Prayer and Faith on work for corporal kind∣nesses? It is a Case of Conscience, which is not of∣tentimes touched upon. Three things I shall tell you to regulate you, and then in any case you may go to Christ, and act Faith for corporal mercies. First, When the thing is lawful that you ask. There are many things that are not lawful for us to ask. Like Neroes Mother, ask, and say, I will have my Son King, though I dye for it. You may not begg of the Lord, that your childe may bee thus great, or thus honourable; but you may begg of the Lord, life, and health, creature accommodations, so far as ne∣cessary, these things you may begg, and go to Christ for. Secondly, You must look that your spirits bee not inordinately set upon the things. When ever thou findest thy heart inordinately set upon any thing, then do not pray for it. And then, Thirdly, When you can appeal to Jesus Christ, that the end, for which you begg a corporal kindness, it is for his glory, then you may begg it. As David there, in Psa. 119.17. Deal bountifully with thy servant; that I may live and keep thy Word. You may go and say, Lord Je∣sus, Let my childe live: for what end? that hee may bee a great man, a rich man? &c. No, the Lord will abhor it; But that my childe may live to serve the Lord; if that bee your end, you may pray for it. And then, Quest. 2. But you will say, When shall I know, or may I guess, that I shall prevail with Christ? What
are the signs of the time, and season when I may hope I shall prevail with Christ for mercy, &c? Answ. I answer, When the frame of your spirit, is as the frame of the spirit of the Woman of Canaan. I pray mark it a little, what the frame of the spirit of this Woman was; Take it in some particulars. I will name onely two, viz. First, Shee had this frame of spirit; That though shee mentioned her childes case, yet shee seems to minde her own soul most: And, Secondly, Shee had this as the frame of her spirit, To beleeve for both. Now to urge it in a few words to you. The first frame of her spirit was, That though shee did begg this mercy for her childe, yet the frame of her spirit was principally set upon her soul. This poor Wo∣man did desire her Daughters life; but however Lord, bread for my poor soul. Oh Sirs, when you can go to God, and say, Lord, I would have such a corpotal mercy, but however Lord, soul-mercy; when you can desire a sick childe may bee made well, but especi∣ally an evil heart mended; when your soul is set most∣ly upon your soul, and its concernments, then are you in a good frame. Secondly, This Woman was raised up to measure of Faith. Indeed some great and considerate Divines do think, that that Text of James 5. (where it is said, The prayer of Faith shall save the sick) is to bee un∣derstood in reference to a particular Faith. And my Beloved, howsoever, yet let mee tell you, it is not alwaies necessary wee should have a particular per∣swasion, yet when the Lord doth intend to answer in a corporal kindness, hee doth secretly, either out of the word, or by providence, hint some word that may bring
the soul to a beleeving frame. Something is presented to us, which raiseth up a Faith in us; so that when wee are in such a frame of heart, as to minde spi∣ritual things most, and yet to beleeve, that in a tem∣poral thing God will gratifie us, then may wee ex∣pect that wee shall not bee ashamed of our Faith, and that wee shall have the particular corporal mer∣cy granted to us. But to end, This is that I would press upon the whole; As ever you would have mercy for body and soul, go to Jesus Christ. But now there is some general word, that I would draw from the whole story. Wee have now dispatched this whole discourse of the Woman of Canaan. What is there that is upon my spirit to begg of the Lord for you, and for my own soul, but this? That this story may bee alwaies a good story to us. First of all, therefore, I say, Look about you, that the story of the Woman of Canaan may not bee a sad story to any. Is there any such as may have cause to fear that, you will say? Yes; man or woman, whoever thou art, who dost not faithfully go to Jesus Christ, the story of the Woman of Canaan shall condemn you; you have no excuse to keep you off from going to Jesus Christ, but this Woman will condemn you. Three Excuses some make. First, Alass, I am a poor man, or a poor woman, that have heard but a little of Christ, and am but a stranger to Christ: so was the Woman of Canaan. I but saith another, Secondly, I have something else to look after; a great family, or a sick childe, &c. The Woman of Canaan had a sick childe, but did that keep her from Christ? No, that brought her to Christ. If that speech had been spoke with gravity, that one said upon that in
the Parable, Luk. 14.15. Hee might have brought his Wife with him, it had been right enough; you should bring relations with you to Christ; do your indea∣vour to bring children; let not children keep back you. But thirdly, Alass, I cannot tell where to finde Christ. It is a marvelous hard thing now adaies to finde a Jesus Christ. Mark what the Woman of Canaan did; The Evangelist Mark (who records this story, Mark 7.24.) saith, that Christ entered into a house, and would have no man know it, but hee could not bee hid; for a Woman of Canaan found him out, &c. It was one of the tempting (but the gracious tempting) hours of Jesus Christ. But hee could not bee hid, for a Woman of Canaan found him out. The Lord doth look thou shouldest finde a Jesus Christ, and never leave looking, till you do finde him. The Woman of Ca∣naan will condemn such as these. Let not the story of the Woman of Canaan bee ever a sad story to you. But, Secondly, Let the story of this Woman bee a sweet story alwaies to your spirit. Let it bee a story, as a store-house, unto which you may go and fetch some comfort in your wants. Who of you have been wait∣ing upon Christ many a day, and have not what you begg? go to the Woman of Canaan, and eat out of her basket. There are three things in the story, that will speak comfort to you. First, That many sins, and great unworthiness, shall never finally keep the soul from Christ. Oh Sirs, you go to the Lord Jesus, and you knock, but your sins bolt the door; you cry, but your corruptions cry louder; the woman of Canaan will tell you, I was as bad as you, and the Lord heard mee.
Secondly, This story hath this in it for your com∣fort, That Prayers cast back, may have a blessed re∣turn afterwards. The Lord Jesus may now seem to be dumb, so that hee may make thee speak the more. Christ you see as in this womans case was silent (as to granting her request a long time) yet you see at last hee answers, and that largely and lovingly. Go to this story for that comfort; were the woman of Canaan alive, shee would tell you this experience: A soul may have a Prayer returned in mercy, that at first was seemingly cast off. Thirdly, The woman of Canaan will tell you this, That a mercy may come at last, of which the soul hath no assurance. What assurance had the woman of Ca∣naan? none, why the woman of Canaan will tell you; I had comfort in the end, though I had no assu∣rance; souls are much cast down for want of particu∣lar assurance; They pray, and hope, but are not as∣sured; why what assurance had this woman? Nay, had shee not the quite contrary? had not she a seem∣ing rejection at first, and no assurance at all? But be∣hold, shee hath the mercy, before any previous assu∣rance; And so may you have; though no assurance now, yet possibly you may have the mercy desired ve∣ry speedily. However learn and remember th. You may IN TIME have a mercy, of which you have as yet no assurance. Thus meditate on this story, and look into it, as I said, as into a store-house of comfort in many cases. To end all, Beloved, (as the Apostle James said, You have heard of the Patience of Job, and what end the Lord made with him) so say I, you have heard of the Practice of the woman of Canaan, and what end the Lord made with her. Let not this story bee forgot, as an old story is, but remember it many a
day, yea all your daies. For certainly there is much sweetness and refreshing which you may gather from this record of the Woman of Canaan. FINIS. Courteous Reader, These Books are printed for, and sold by Henry Mortlock, at the Sign of the Phoenix in Pauls-Church-yard, near the Little North-door. Folios A Commentary upon the whole Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians, wherein the Text is learnedly and fruitfully opened, with a Logical Analysis, spiritual, and holy Observations, Confuration of Arminianism and Popery. By Mr. Paul Bain. A Commentary on the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Can∣ticles, and the Major Prophets. By John Trap; M. A. Quartos. An Exposition of the Prophecy of Ezekiel. By Wil∣liam Green-hill. The dividing of the Hoof, or seeming Contradi∣ctions throughout sacred Scriptures, distinguished, resolved, and applied. By William Streat, M. A. Some Sermons preached upon several occasions. By Peter Sterry.
Large Octavos. A Treatise of the Divine Promises, in five Books: In the first, A general Description of their Nature, Kinds, Excellency, Right Use, Properties, and the Persons to whom they belong: In the four last, A Declaration of the Covenant it self, the bundle and body of all the Promises, and the special Promises likewise which concern a mans self, or others, both temporal, spiritual, and eternal. By Edw. Leigh, M. A. of Magdalen-Hall in Oxford. The Hypocrites Ladder, or Looking-glass, or a Discourse of the dangerous and destructive nature of Hypocrisie, the reigning and provoking sin of this Age; wherein is shewed how far the Hypocrite, or formal Professor may go towards Heaven, yet utter∣ly perish, by three Ladders of sixty steps of his As∣cending. By John Sheffield, Minister of the Word at Swithins, London. An Improvement of the Sea, upon the nine Nau∣tical Verses, in the 107 Psalm, wherein among o∣ther things you have a very full and delightful De∣scription of all those many various and multitudinous Objects, which they behold in their Travels (through the Lords Creation) both on Sea, in Sea, and on Land, viz. All sorts and kinds of Fish, Fowl, and Beasts, whether wilde, or tame; All sorts of Trees and Fruit; All sorts of People, Cities, Towns, and Countries. By Daniel Pell, Preacher of the Word. Small Octavos. Several Treatises useful for Christian Practice, viz. Warning to Backsliders, The way to true Hap∣piness, Mercies Memorials, A Sermon preached on the fifth of Novemb. Milk and Hony, first and se∣cond
Part, Orthodox Paradoxes, The New Com∣mandement, Divine Similitudes, or Mysteries and Revelations. By Ralph Venning. The exceeding Riches of Grace advanced by the Spirit of Grace in an Empty Nothing-Creature, viz. Mris. Sarah Wight. Published by H. Jessey, A Ser∣vant of Jesus Christ. A Latin and English Grammar. By Charls Hool, M. A. Physical Rarities, containing the most choice Re∣ceits of Physick and Chirurgery, for the Cure of all Diseases incident to mans body: Hereunto is an∣nexed the Physical Mathematicks of Hermes Tris∣megistus. Published by Ralph Williams, Practitioner in Physick and Chirurgery. Twelves. Spiritual Experiences of sundry Beleevers, with the Recommendation of the sound, savoury, and spi∣ritual worth of them, to the sober, and spiritual Rea∣der. By Vavasor Powell, Minister of the Gospel. The Saints Desire, or Divine Consolations, be∣ing a Cordial for a Fainting Soul, containing Ob∣servations, Experiences, and Counsels; The Saints daily Duty, the Life of Faith, and how a Soul may live in the sweet enjoyment of the Love of God, &c. By Samuel Richardson. FINIS.
