D575 e313_22 99861211 113339
A DECLARATION CONCERNING THE PUBLIKE DISPUTE WHICH Should have been in the Publike Meeting-House of Alderman-Bury, the 3d. of this instant Moneth of December; Concerning Jnfants-Baptisme. Together, with some of the Arguments which should then have been propounded and urged by some of those that are falsly called Anabaptists, which should then have disputed. Viz. By BENJAMIN COXE. HANSERD KNOLLYS. WILLIAM KIFFEN, &c. Published for the satisfaction of those that desire information 2 COR. 10.3.4, 5. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnall, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1645.
A Declaration, concerning the Publike Dispute, which should have been in the Pub∣like Meeting House of Alderman-Bury, the 3. of of this instant December. A Merchant of this City, taking knowledge of diffe∣rent doctrines and Administrations of Baptisme, publikely held forth both in preaching and pra∣ctice; some doubts did arise in his minde, which of the said Doctrines and Administrations was according to the will of God; who being desirous to try all things, and hold fast that which is good; searched the Scriptures daily, and upon examination found, The doctrine and administration of baptisme touching Believers, who make profession of faith, and manifest the fruits of repentance, to be more agreeable to the Scriptures, then the doctrine and administra∣tion of baptisme touching the Infants of Believers, so farre forth as he could discern. Yet because he would not lean to his own under∣standing, he earnestly desired, and at length (after much paines and entreaties) obtained a conference and private disputation between us, and Mr. Callamy, and some of his Brethren, at the Merchants own house (unto which were admitted divers of his friends) and some stran∣gers,) that he might hear both parties face to face, maintain their own doctrine and practice about baptisme, for his own and his wives sa∣tisfaction (being great with childe) at the end of which private dis∣pute, the Merchant and divers others present, not having received sa∣tisfaction, touching the lawfulnesse of baptizing the Infants of Belie∣vers; There was appointed another day for dispute at Mr. Mascals house, and Mr. Callamy undertook to prove, That some of the Infants of Believers ought to be baptized. But the multitudes of people that
came thither, hindered that dispute; for we could not get in to dis∣pute, for the croud of the people; whereupon we all agreed, to crave leave of the civill Magistrate, to have liberty to dispute in some pub∣like place. And it is not unknown to many in this City, That a publike dispute touching the lawfulnesse of Paedobaptisme, between us, and Mr. Cal∣lam, Mr. Cranford, with some others, was agreed upon; and ha∣ving first obtained leave of the Lord Major, by the request of three Common councell men (whom we joyntly intreated to move his lordship in all our Names) we privately consulted together, at Mr. Callamy's house, how we might mannage that publike dispute, to the glory of God; and the satisfaction of the people: And we mutu∣ally agreed to hold that publike Disputation, in the Parish Church (as men call it) of Alderman-bury, upon the third day of this instant December, from nine a clock in the morning, untill three a clock in the Afternoon: There should have been sixe on each partie, whereof two were to be appointed Moderators: One of the Moderators was to begin with prayer, and the other to conclude with prayer, after the Dispute was ended: Also both parties chose. Mr. Hide to be our No∣tary, whom we all desired, that (prayer being ended) before we begun to dispute, he would reade this following Agreement in the eares of all the people there present. The Agreement. IT is agreed on both sides, that this Disputation shall conti∣une for sixe houres; they that begin to dispute, shall dispute for two houres, and then the contrary partie for two houres more; and then the first partie shall dispute again the fifth hour, and the other partie the sixth hour; with this proviso, that if any do desire liberty to exceed the time allotted, the same liberty shall be granted to the other side, not exceeding half an hour. It is likewise agreed, that at the end of each dispute, the Mo∣derator on that partie that disputes, shall faithfully and conscien∣tiously give the result, both of the Arguments and the Answers.
Its likewise agreed, that the Disputation shall be Logicall, and each side shall endeavour to make his answers as short as he can possibly. Jt is also much desired by both parties, that there be no distar∣bance offered by any one whatsoever, either by hissing, or hum∣ming, or laughing, or talking. It is likewise professed, that both sides are willing to declare, and will as occasion shall serve, declare ingenuosly what they hold, according as they shall be desired in the disputation about the subject-matter of the dispute. And lastly, both parties do seriously and solemnly professe, that they come hither with a resolution to give or receive light, ac∣cording as God shall offer it; and not to dispute for Vistory, but truth. The Question to be disputed this day is; Whether the Infants of believing Parents ought to be bapti∣zed, or no? Mr. Callamy is to prove, That all or some Infants of Belie∣ving Parents, ought to be baptized. And the other parties are to prove; That no Infants ought to be baptized. But the Evening before the day agreed upon for that publike Dis∣pute, some of us passing over the Exchange, saw an Order published by the Lord Major, to this effect; That his Lordship thought fit upon serious consideration, for prevention of the inconveniencies that might happen thereby, to forbid the same Meeting and Disputation, upon that day, or at any other time, in a publike way; before his Lordship shall re∣ceive the pleasures of the Honourable H uses of Parliament tou∣ching the same; which with all coveniency, his Lordship will endeavour to know, lest otherwise there might be hazard of the disturbance of the publike Peace.
Whereupon, we (who are falsely called Anabaptists) being as ready to obey our Civill Magistrates, as to professe our subjection to his Authority in all lawfull commands; [Whatever is preached or printed of us by any to the contrary; and whosoever have, or shall accuse us, either to the Magistrates, or to the Common people, that we will not obey Authority, are false accusers of the B ethren; and we hope, that both the Magistrates, and the People have found them lyars, and will finde them so to be still, so often as just occasion shall be offered to manifest our willing and loyall subjection to the Magi∣strates Civill Authority] we were constrained in obedience to his Lordships lawfull power, to forbeare that intended and earnestly de∣sired Disputation, and waite untill Mr. Callamy and his Brethren ob∣taine leave from Authority, to have liberty of a publique Dispute with us and our Brethren, which we hope the Lord Major will with all conveniency endeavour, according to his Lordships promise and ingagement; hoping also, that when they have said what they can by way of Argument, for their doctrine and practise, touching the Baptizing of the Infants of Beleevers, we shall obtaine the like equall liberty, both from the Civill Magistrates, and themselves, as publique∣ly to say what we can from the Scripture of truth, for our doctrine and practise, touching the baptizing of Beleevers; That they who shall heare our publique Disputations, may try all things, and hold fast that which is good. But, lest that some reports of us or our Brethren, which have beene given out, (by whom we know not) nay, we care not, with respect to our selves; for, we have learned to passe through good and evill reports, through the strength of Christ) yet lest, we say, those reports comming to the eare of Autho∣rity, should hinder them from granting this so much desired liberty of publique Dispute, we are forced to make this short Apologie. We will onely at this time make mention of two Reports amongst others, which we conceive are pertinent to the matter; to wit, First, it was reported as if we intended to mannage that Dispute with our Swords, Clubs and Staves. Secondly, that if Mr. Callamy escaped with his life, it would be well. And here we think meete; First, to declare how we came to get some Hinc of these two base and scandalous reports. We could not but take notice of the Reason expressed by the Lord Major, why his Lordship thought fit to prohibit our publique Dispute; (after he had
granted that favour) to wit, The hazard of the disturbance of the pub∣lique Peace: And, for the prevention of the inconveniences that may happn thereby. Whereupon, we went to Mr. Callamy, and asked him, If he knew what occasioned the Lord Major to feare the distur∣bance of the Peace by such a Disputation, especially seeing we had his Lordships leave, and had agreed to mannage it in so peaceable a man∣ner. Mr. Callamy told us, That it was reported at the Lord Majors Table by some body (be knew not whom) that an Anabaptist, but he knew not who, said that he would bring his sword with him to the Di∣spute, or he would not come without his sword; or words to that pur∣pose: And Mr. Callamy also told us, That a woman told him, that some (no body knows who) should say, That if the publique Dispute hld, Mr. Callamy would scarce escape with his life: And other strange re∣ports are whispered touching that Dispute, as if we were the cause of the Lord Majors forbidding of it; when as we were, and still are most desirous to have liberty to dispute publiquely with Mr. Callamy, and his Brethren. Now, as concerning those two Reports before mentio∣ned, we do abhorre the thoughts of such a thing; as to mannage our Dispute with any other sword, then the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God; For, the weapons of our warfare are not carnall, but mighty through God, to the pulling downe of strong holds. And our agreement may give a sufficient testimony of the contra y, especi∣ally in these words, it is much desired by both parties, that there be no disturbance offred by any one whatsoever, &c. And truly, we cannot but marvell, that either the Magistrates, or Inhabitants of this City, (who have had so much experience of the peaceable conversation of us, and our Brethren, called Ana∣baptists) should at any time heare such reports of us, without a just reproofe to those that doe bring them; yea, let any rationall man judge, whether we, who thinke it an unreasonable thing, that we should be beaten with Club-law instead of Arguments, should goe about to doe that to others, which we would not have them to doe to us. And, as for that other Report, concerning, Mr. Callamy, It ap∣peared to us, that Mr. Callamy neither feared, nor apprehended any such danger; for, he professed himselfe to be very willing and de∣sirous that the Dispute should have held, and told us, he was much grieved that it was put off, and that he went to the Lord Major, and desired his Lordship not to forbid it, but could not prevaile with his Honour; onely the Lord Major promised Mr. Callamy to en∣deavour
to know the pleasure of the honourable Houses of Parliament about it: And, Mr. Callamy told us, That Mr. Recorder would take a fit opportunity to move the honorable house of Commons con∣cerning it; that so the Lord Major might know the pleasure of both the honourable Houses of Parliament: And, for as much as these reports, with divers others, are dispersed, both in the City, and also in the Army, we are constrained to publish to the view of the world, some of the Arguments which we intended to have propounded to Mr. Cal∣lamy and his Brethren at that publique Dispute; which were all the Swords and Clubs, or weapons, with which we intended to pull downe that strong hold of Infant-baptisme. That part of the Que∣stion which we were to maintaine against Mr. Callamy and his Bre∣thren was, That no Infants ought to be baptized.
No Jnfants ought to be baptized. IF onely Believers themselves ought to be baptized, then none of their Infants: But onely Believers themselves ought to be ba∣ptised: Ergo, none of thents, &c. That Believers onely ought to be baptized, we thus prove: Such persons as we reade in the Scripture of truth, Iohn, Christs Disciples and Apostles administred Baptism unto, such onely ought we to administer Baptisme unto; But we reade in the Scripture of truth, that Iohn, Christs Disciples, and Apostles, administred Baptisme to such of the Jews only as repented, and to such of the Gentiles only as beleeved, Ergo, Such only ought we to administer Baptism unto, who do believe and repent. That Iohn administred Baptisme to such onely as re∣pented, appeares both by his doctrine and practice; his doctrine you may reade, Matt. 3.1, 2. and Acts 19.4, 5. And Iohns practice was sutable to his doctrine, Matth. 3.5, 6. and Luke 3.3.12, 13, 16, 18. And when some came to Iohns Baptisme, who thought that they might have beene baptised, because they were the children of Abra∣ham; Iohn said unto them, Bring forth fruit meet for repentance; and, thinke not to say within your selves, We have Abraham to our Father, Matth. 3.7, 8. Giving them thereby to understand, that they must not have this Gospell Ordinance of Baptisme administred unto them (though they were the children of Abraham) untill they did actually repent, Acts 2.38. as if he had said, What though you be the fleshly seed of your beleeving Father Abraham, must you there∣fore be baptized before you repent? Thinke not so, Hereupon the Pharisees rejected the Counsell of God against themselves, not be∣ing baptized of him, Luke 7, 29, 30. For, they are not all Israel which are of Israel; neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children; that is, they which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God, but the children of the promise are coun∣ted for the seed, Rom. 9.6, 7, 8. and Gal. 3.26, 27, 29. That Christs
Disciples, and Apostles did administer Baptisme unto such onely as beleeved and repented, also appeares by their doctrine and pra∣ctise: Their doctrine you may reade, Acts 2.38. Acts 8.35, 36, 37. Act 16.30, 31, 32, 33. Also their practise was according to their do∣ctrine, both in Judea, Acts 2.41. and in Sanria. Acts 8.12. Also in Cesarea, Acts 10.44, 47, 48. and in Macedonia, Acts 16.32, 33, 34. and in Achaia, Acts 18.8. and in Asia the lesse, Acts 19.1, 3, 4, 5. And wheresoer there is mention made in the Scripture of their admini∣stration  Baptisme, it was according to their doctrine of Baptisme, and both  doctrine and practise was according to the Commis∣sion and tion of Christ; Mat. 28.19. Make  Nati∣ons, baptizing them; to wit, who are made Disciples by preaching. Joh. 4.1, 2. so expounds  Disciple ye,  he made and baptised Disciples. Also Marke 1.15, 16. de∣clares what our Saviour intended by the word Disciples, to wit, Be∣leevers. He that beleeveth the Gospell preached unto him, and is ba∣ptised, shall be saved. Thus the unprejudiced Reader may plainly per∣ceive, that the harmony of Scriptures do witnesse, that Beleevers themselves (and not their Infants) ought to be baptized, according to the doctrine and practise of Iohn the Baptist, the Disciples and A∣postles of Christ, also according to the institution of Baptisme by our blessed Saviour. Every administration of Baptisme, that differeth essentially from the doctrine of Baptisme taught by Christ, his Disciples, and A∣postles, is unlawfull; But your administration of Infant-Baptisme differeth essentially from the doctrine of Baptisme, &c. Ergo, your administration of Infant-Baptisme is unlawfull. That your admini∣stration of Infant-Baptisme differeth essentially from the doctrine of Baptisme taught by Christ, his Disciples and Apostles, we thus prove. Whatsoever administration of Baptisme differeth from the do∣ctrine of Baptisme, in respect of the subject-matter, or forme, diffe∣reth essentially; But your administration of Infant-Baptisme diffe∣reth from the doctrine of Baptisme, in respect of the subject-matter, and in regard of your forme; Ergo, It differeth essentially. The subject matter of Baptisme, according to the doctrine of Christ, Matth. 28.19. compared with John 4.1, 2. are such men and women as are made Disciples, (viz) Beleevers, by preaching, Mark 16.15, 16. The subject matter of your Baptisme, are the Infants of your Pari∣shioners, whom you dreame are borne Christians, and are children
of beleevers, because their Parents are members of Alderman-Bury Church, or some other Parish Church: The subject matter of Ba∣ptisme, according to the doctrine of the Disciples and Apostles of Christ, Acts 2.38. compared with Acts 8.12.35, 36, 37. and Acts 19.4, 5. are such men and women as actually repent and beleeve. And all the Ministers of England, have with one consent acknow∣ledged this truth; witnesse against them, that passage in their Church-Catechisme, where they used to aske their Communicants, What is required of persons to be baptized? and taught them th answer; to wit, Repentance, whereby they forsake sin, [that tuall re∣pentance] and faith, whereby they stedfastly beleeve the promises of God, [which is faith that comes by hearing the word] And then they ask them another Question, wherein they all confesse, that Infants cannot performe that which is required, and Quere, Why then are Infants Baptized? to which they taught them an answer, whereof, both themselves and their people are ashamed: And now they have invented another, whereof they will in time be more ashamed; to wit, The Infants of Beleevers are Christians, and faderally holy before they be baptized, and therefore to be baptized; And these are the subject matter of your Baptisme; to wit, Infants borne in sin, and children of wrath, who neither do actually beleeve nor repent, whom you say must be baptized, though there be no warrant in the word of God for such an administration. The forme or manner of Ba∣ptisme, according to the doctrine of Christ, his Disciples, and Apo∣stles, is such a dipping, or washing of the person baptized in or with water, as holdeth forth their communion with Christ in his Death, Buriall, and Resurrection, as appeares by these Scriptures, Matth. 28.19. Acts 8 38. Heb. 10.22. Rom. 6.3, 4. Col. 2.12. 1 Cor. 15.29. But your Babe-Baptisme is administred after the invention of men, by sprinkling their faces with water, not dipping or washing their bodies in water; which we affirme is to Rantize, and not to Baptize. The Greek word , signifieth to dip, or wash, but never to sprinkl, 2 Kings 5.14.  Et wersit se in lord∣ne spties. And he dipped himselfe seven times in Jordane. So the Septuagint. Nonnus paraphrasis in John, pag. 8. lin. 12. . Et tu our immgas, unde equâ hominem munaificas. Also Vossius in his Dispute, Thes. 1. Hist. Theolog.  Notat mergere, and there he saith, it is more then  and lesse then . And our Reasons why Baptisme ought to be thus administred by dipping or washing the body in wa∣ter, are these; to wit,
1. Because, It was administred in much water; Joh. 8.23. 2. Because, It must represent a death, buriall, and resurrection; Rom. 6.34. 1 Cor. 15.29. Col. 2.12. 3. Because, The Parties baptised are to go into the water; Matth. 3.13.16. and Acts 8.38, 39. Thus the judicious Reader (if not prejudiced) may plainly perceive, That your administration of Infant Baptisme, differeth essentially from the doctrine of baptisme which was taught by Christ, his Dis∣ciples, and Apostles; Ergo, Unlawfull. And your own mouthes and doctrine to your communicants have born witnesse against your selves; in that you have taught your people, that truth which the Scriptures bear witnesse of: viz. That actuall repentance and faith, is required in persons to be baptized: And you and all your Bre∣thren have with one mouth confessed, that Infants cannot perform that which is required. And yet you go about to invent a reason why they should be baptized; contrary to Scripture, and your own confession; Christs doctrine, and your own. That religious worship, for which there is no command nor ex∣ample in the Scripture of truth, is Will-worship, and unlawfull. But your Infant baptisme is a religious worship, for which there is no command, nor any example, written in the Scripture of truth; Ergo, Your Infant baptisme is Will-worship, and unlawfull. Here Mr. Callamy and his brethren are put hard to it,The Rea∣der may here take notice, that these distincti∣ons were given us by Mr. Cal. and M. Porter, at our pri∣vate Dis¦pute at Mr. Priggs. and know not how to give a satisfying answer, to either of the propositions of this Syllogisme. Some of his Brethren being perswaded in their hearts, that the Major is a truth; dare not deny it, but would answer to the Minor. Mr. Callamy not knowing how to avoid the truth of the Mi∣nor, would answer to the Major. And when the light of truth, that is in both the Major and Minor, did so shine forth, that Mr. Cal. and his Brethren could not deny either proposition, yet they did distin∣guish upon both propositions, and would grant neither, although true; And they thus distinguish. Mr. Porter saith, Though there be no expresse command nor example written in the Scripture to baptize Infants, yet there is an implicite command; which distin∣ction was in our Dispute thus taken away. If there be any command at all to baptize Infants, it is written either in the Old or New Testa∣ment; But there is no command at all to baptize Infants, neither ex∣presse, nor implied, written in the Old or New Testament; Ergo. And we say further, that seeing secret things belong to God, and things that are revealed belong to us and to our children. Let the
indifferent Reader judge, how such an un-written Tradition as In∣fant baptisme is (which is no where revealed either in the Old or New Testament) can belong to us and our children. But Mr. Cal. not liking his Brothers distinction, and answer to our Minor propo∣sition; He gave us this answer to our Major: which in his own words we will set down. I would deny their Major, For if a thing by just consequence, by necessary consequence, what ever it be, pro∣ved out of the Scripture by necessary consequence; Though there be no command, nor no example, yet it is Scripture, as much as if there was command or example. Although we grant, That the necessary consequences which the Apostles and Prophets (who were inspired by the holy Spirit of God) did deduct from the Scriptures of the Old Testament, and left recorded in the New Testament, are Scrip∣ture; and written for our instruction: Yet we do deny that the consequences, which Mr. Cal. or his Brethren (being men subject to like infirmity as our selves, and may erre) do deduct from Scriptures [not by divine inspiration, but by naturall or artificiall Logick] which Mr. Cal. calleth, necessary consequences, are Scripture: And the rea∣son of our denying of such necessary consequences to be Scripture, is; Because, They are no where written in the Scripture of Truth, but brings in that Popish Tenent of Non-written Verity; and so ushers in all Popish Innovations; as Prelacy, Common-prayer-book, Ce∣remonies, &c. and therefore is unsound, absurd, and sinfull: Which we make good by this Syllogisme. Every Tenent, that brought in Prelacy, Common-prayer-book, and all Popish ceremonies, hath proved to be unsound, absurd, and sinfull, and is not now once to be named (without an Odium) by any of the Teachers of Gods people. But this, to wit, That necessary con∣sequences (as Mr. Cal. cals them) are Scripture, is one of those Tenents that brought in Prelacy; &c. Ergo. This was the Tenent by which the Parish Ministers subjected their people to Prelacy and bound their consciences by their necessary con∣sequences. They used thus to argue from; Rom. 13.1, 2. Every soul ought to be subject to the higher Powers; But the Archbishops and Lord Bishops are higher powers, Ergo, Every soul ought to be sub∣ject to the Archbishops & Lord Bishops. By this Tenent also, they brought the people to worship God by the Common-prayer-book; and proved it lawfull by their necessary consequences. They used thus to argue; from, Matth. 6.9. If a set form of prayer be lawfull, then, the Common-prayer-book is lawfull; But
a set form of prayer is lawfull; Ergo, It followes by necessary con∣sequence, That the Common-prayer-book is lawfull. And by this Tenent they brought their people to submit to all their Popish Ce∣remonies, viz. Surplice, Crosse in baptisme, and bowing at the Name of Jesus, &c. They used thus to argue from, 1 Cor. 14.40. All things in the Church ought to be done decently and in Order: But it is very de∣cent to wear a Surplice, Cope, and Hood, to signe the Infant with the Crosse in Baptisme, and to bow at the naming of Jesus, and to kneel at the receiving of the Sacrament; also the uniformity of Pews in the Church, and the setting of the Table Altar-wise, and rayling it in; is both very decent and orderly: Ergo, All these ceremonies ought to be in the Church. Thus any who will not shut their eyes against the light, may cleerly see, that mens necessary consequences, have ushered in all Po∣pish Innovations, and thereby the Parish Ministers have subjected their Parishioners consciences, unto their own Traditions; and have greatly endangered the damnation of many of their Parishioners souls thereby, whilest they have taught for doctrine the commandements of men. And we dare not but tell the people, that if they will beleeve Mr. Cal. and his brethren, that their necessary consequences are Scripture, & whatsoever they can prove by their necessary cōsequence from the Scripture, bindes their consciences, and they ought to obey and practice whatsoever they so teach, though there be no command nor example in the Scripture for the same: They will still be brought into as great an observance of the traditiōs of men, under the Classical Presbytery, as ever they were under Lordly Episcopacy. And we dare affirm and maintain (if we may have liberty of publike Dispute with them by the leave of Authority) that the Presbyters have nothing else perswade the people to subject their consciences unto their Synodi∣call and Classicall Authority, their new-devised-parish-Church-wor∣ship their Rantizing of the Babes of their Parish Believers, & all the rest of their old and new traditions, but such necessary consequences: For we dare say, the Presbyters (whensoever we shall dispute with them) will be forced to confesse; that there is no command nor ex∣ample written in the Scripture of Truth, for all these things: But (yet, it is likely they will say) that they can prove all these by neces∣sary consequences from the Scripture, and these necessary consequen∣ces are Scripture, and binde the consciences of their Parishioners to observe them. The time was, when Mr. Cal. and his Brethren did
think, that this was a good Argument against the Crosse in baptism, because there was no command nor example for it in the Scripture; and it was an adding to the Word, to bring in such a thing, and men could not make it an action of faith, because they have no warrant for it in the Word of God, and therefore it was sinne. This was a good Argument against the Bishops. Whatsoever is not  Faith, is sinne. Whatsoever we have no command nor example for written in the Scripture of Truth, we have no Faith for; Ergo, Was it a sinne to signe a childe in the fore-head with a Crosse in the Bishops time? because there is no Word of God for it; And is it not a sin now in the Presbyters, to sprinkle a little water upon a childes fore-head or face, and say; I baptize thee in the Name, &c. seeing they confesse there is no Word of God for it, but their own necessary consequences? That which doth deny Christ to be come in the flesh, ought not to be done: But the Baptizing of Infants doth deny Christ to be come in the flesh; Therefore ought it not to be done. We know that no man can deny the Major, which is so clearly confirmed, 1 Iohn 4.3. with divers other places. We will prove the Minor, That baptizing of Infants doth deny Christ to be come in the flesh. That which doth take from Christ that which the Holy Spirit gives to Christ, considered come in the flesh; That denies Christ come in the flesh. But the baptizing of Infants doth take from Christ that which the Holy Spirit gives to Christ, considered come in the flesh: Therefore it denies Christ come in the flesh. And for the proofe of this, we shall declare to you what we mean by that which the Holy Spirit gives to Christ considered come in the flesh. The Holy Spirit gives to Christ a pre-eminence above all others that were before him in his Propheticall and Kingly Office.Col. 1.13. Phil. 2.9. In his Propheticall Office,Joh. 6.63. Mat. 11.9. Luk. 24.19 that neither Moses not the Proph were to be compared with him, but far inferiour to him, and his Office; So inferiour, that he was not to be expounded by them; but in giving out his mind considered come in the flesh, he was to ex∣pound and unfold them. But now men in their going about to plead for the baptizing of Infants, do exceedingly undervalue Christ's Pro∣pheticall
Office in this, that they make the old Testament expound the new;Mat. 5.21, 22, 27, 28. whereas the new should expound the old; Christ should, and doth expound Moses; But there is no warrant for us to bring Christ under the Exposition of Moses: And men do undervalue the Lord Christ, in making Moses speake that which Christ speakes not, or bringing Moses to Christ, as a greater light to unfold the lesser: They do (we say) exceedingly undervalue Christ, and that thus. The Light unfolding, or the Wisdome unfolding, must be greater then the matter unfolded; And therefore, he that goeth about to make Moses mouth to speake out Christs minde, in things that con∣cerne Christ as come in the flesh, sets up Moses above Christ, and de∣nies Christ to be come in the flesh. Secondly,Isai 9.6, 7. Rev. 15.3. They exceedingly take from Christs Kingly Office; whereas, the Holy Spirit sets up Christ a King in his Church, and a Law-giver, as equall to, so transcending all others that were before him: But, that men in the Baptizing of Infants do undervalue the Kingly Office of Christ, in giving Laws to his people. That's cleere in these two things. First in this,,Heb. 3.2, 3. That they say, it is a duty to Baptize Infants, and Answers the minde of Christ, and yet cannot shew a command from Christ; whereas the Apostle saith, Christ was as faithfull in his house, as Moses. And you know the faithfulnesse of Moses did consist in this, That he gave Laws and Commands to the Israelites, to declare their duty; and layes nothing upon them as a duty, but what they had a cōmand for. And seeing he gave them Laws for every thing they were to observe, and if Christ was as faithfull in his house as he; we will leave this to the judgement of the wise, whether or no that this doth not undervalue the Kingly Office of Christ to say, that Baptizing of Infants is a duty that they owe to Christ; and yet can shew no command for it from Christ. Secondly, They undervalue the Kingly Office of Christ, in giving Laws to his Church in this; That they go about to performe (as they say) a duty to Christ, but can shew no command for it from Christ; but must use their owne Art and Reason to make Christs Law strong enough to hold it out to be a duty. And whether the joyning of mans Art, Policy, and Reason, to the Laws of Christ, doth not exceeding∣ly undervalue Christ, as though his Laws were not perfect enough for his people, we leave the wise to judge. And in so doing they do exceedingly take (as before we said from the Propheticall,  here in the Kingly Office of Christ) that Honour and Preheminency from
him, which the Holy Spirit gives to him, considered as come in the flesh: And therefore so to do, denies Christ as come in the flesh. That which is no part of Righteousnesse, ought not to be obser∣ved: But the baptizing of Infants is no part of Righteousnesse. And therefore it ought not to be observed. The Major Proposition none can deny: I will prove the Minor, and that thus: Whatsoever is considered as a part of Righteousnesse, was seen ei∣ther in the person or practise of Jesus Christ. But neither in the person nor practise of Jesus Christ, is the bapti∣zing of Infants seen or held forth: Therefore it is no part of Righteousnesse. And that whatsoever is a part of Righteousnesse, was seen in the person or practise of Jesus Christ, is clear from this Scripture, Matth. 3.15. And Iesus said, suffer it be so: for thus is to becommeth us to ful∣fill all Righteousnesse. If all Righteousnesse, then there was no Righ∣teousnesse but was considered either in the person or practise of Christ. And that the Baptizing of Infants is not held out in the per∣son or practise of Christ; We leave the wise to judge. He himself was not baptized when he was an Infant, though he might pleade the same priviledge as they do, who say they are children of belie∣vers: Had it been a part of Righteousnesse, Christ would, nay, Christ should have done it. If you Object, and say, There was none to baptize him before. We answer, had it been a part of Righteousnesse, God in a provi∣dence would have provided one before, as well as then; for he was to fulfill all Righteousnesse. And for his practise (though he bapti∣zed not, but his Disciples, Ioh. 4 2.) yet, in all their baptizing where Christ was, you never hear that ever they Baptized any Infant, or gave any command for it; And therefore it is no part of Righteous∣nesse, and ought not to be done. Those onely ought to be baptized, who are accounted the seed of ABRAHAM, either after the flesh, or according to the Faith. But none of the Infants of Believing Gentiles, are accounted the seed of ABRAHAM, either after the flesh, or according to the Faith; Ergo, they ought not to be baptized. The Major proposition Mr. Cal. and his Brethren will not deny; Because, It is their own doctrine, and one of their principles, where∣by they would prove; That the Infants of Believers ought to be
baptized: We do but borrow their own weapon, to give their In∣fant baptisme its deadly wound. The Assumption, to wit, that none of the Infants of Believing Gentiles, are acaccounted the seed of ABRAHAM, either after the flesh, or according to the Faith, we thus prove. First, Because the Jews or Israelites onely, and not any of the Gentiles, are counted the seed of ABRAHAM after the flesh; to wit, by naturall generation or off-spring: So then none of the In∣fants of Believing Gentiles, are accounted for the fleshly seed of A∣BRAHAM. Secondly, Because Believers onely themselves, and not their In∣fants, are accounted the spirituall seed of ABRAHAM, or his seed ac∣cording to the Faith, Gal. 3.29. If you be Christs, then you are ABRAHAMS seed, and heires according to the promise. And A∣BRAHAM is called, Rom. 4.12. The father of all them that be∣lieve. But it is no where said in Scripture, that ABRAHAM is the father of all their children too. Nay, the contrary is witnessed by the Apostle Paul, Rom. 9.6, 7, 8, 9. They which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God; but the children of the promise are counted for the seed. We conceive, that this Scripture doth expound, Gen. 17. God made an everlasting covenant of Grace with ABRAHAM and his seed. Now the Scriptures declare, that ABRAHAM had two kindes of seed; the one born after the flesh, the other born after the Spirit, Gal. 4.29. The question is, who are counted for Abrahams seed according to the covenant of Grace? We answer, not Ismael, nor any one born after the flesh, but Isaas, and every one born after the spirit. And the Apostle delivers this, as the minde of God, Rom. 9.7, 8. Neither because they are the seed of ABRAHAM, are they all children; but in Isaac shall thy seed be called: That is, saith the Apostle, they which are the chil∣dren of the flesh, these are not the children of GOD; but the children of the promise are counted for the seed. Also Paul further cleers this truth, in the 4. chapt. to the Gal. vers. 22. to the end. For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, the one by a Bond∣woman, the other by a free-woman; But he who was of the bond∣woman [to wit, Ishmael] was born after the flesh; but he of the free-woman [to wit, Isaas] was by promise; which things are an Allego∣ry: For these are the two Covenants &c. vers. 24. So that the Apo∣stle
witnesseth, that there are two Covenants, which GOD made with ABRAHAM and his seed; to wit, a covenant of Workes with Abrahams fleshly seed, and a covenant of Grace with Abra∣hams spirituall seed; which was set forth Allegorically, in Ishmael and Isaac. And here hath Mr. Cal. and his brethren been mistaken, in bringing an Argument to prove Infant baptisme, drawn from A∣brahams fleshly seed; affirming, that there is but one Covenant in that Scripture, and that is a covenant of Grace. And so have concluded; That all the fleshly seed of Abraham (and by their necessary consequences) all the fleshly seed of believing Gentiles, are the children of God, and are to be counted for the seed with whom God hath made an everlasting covenant of Grace. Contrary to these Scriptures, Rom. 9.6, 7, 8, 9. and Gal. 4.22, 23, 24. to the end. Neither doth that promise, Gen. 17.7. in the least concern the seed of the Gentiles; but the Jews onely, who were Abrahams seed after the flesh. Thus then we understand the Scripture; That the children of the flesh, to wit, those who are born after the flesh, or of the flesh, are flesh; Joh. 3.6. That is, are sinfull; being conceived in sin, and sha∣pen in iniquity, Psal. 51. and by naturall generation, are the children of wrath as well as others: Ephes. 2.3. They are not the children of God, untill they be born again, or born of God; Joh. 1.13. and Joh. 3.3.5, 6. But the children of the promise, that is, those who are in Christ, are counted for the seed. Gal. 3.29. And we brethren (to wit, who are believers) as Isaac was, are children of the promise. Gal. 4.28. But some may think, that this will put the children of Believers into as bad a condition, as the children of Turkes, Heathens, and any other wicked men; and this they are perswaded is an horrible thing, and a dangerous opinion. We put not the children of Believers into as bad a condition as the children of Turkes, &c. It was Adams dis∣obedience in eating the forbidden fruit, that put all his posterity equal∣ly into a sinfull and miserable condition, Rom. 5.12.19. And the doctrine which Mr. CAL. and his brethren teach, doth the like. They say (and it is truth) that all the Infants of Believers, are shapen in ini∣quity, and in sin doth their mothers conceive them; Yea they are born in sin, and are by nature children of wrath as well as others. And now let the Reader judge, Whether this their own doctrine, do not put the children of Believers into as bad a condition, as any
Turks, Heathens, or wicked mens children; Why then should they go about to perswade the people, that our Opinion, That the In∣fants of Believers should not be baptized, is by no meanes to be re∣ceived; because (they say) it puts their children into as bad a condi∣tion, as the children of Turks, Heathens, &c. when as their own do∣ctrine doth the like. And some of their doctrines touching the In∣fants of Believers, puts them into a worse condition; to wit, into a condition of falling away from grace. For they affirm, that the In∣fants of Believers are within the covenant of Grace, and therefore are to be baptized; So Mr. Marshals Sermon about Infant-baptisme, Pag. 8 & 37. And Mr. Blake Pag. 16. Also, this their judgement appears by the Directory; where the Parish Ministers are directed at baptizing of Children, to teach; That the promises of the covenant of Grace, is made to believers and their Infants. And that the Scrip∣ture which they continually produce, tends to prove this their opi∣nion, to wit, Acts 2.39. And yet they are forced to confesse, that some of the child en of Believers prove very prophane, and notorious∣ly wicked, yea live so, and dye so, and are damned. So then by their own doctrine and confession, some of the in∣fants of believers who are in the covenant of Grace, may perish in their sins, and be damned. Doth not this uphold that Arminian Te∣nent of falling away from Grace? and the Popish doctrine, That persons may be in the state of Peter to day, and in the state of Judas to morrow? We would have said more to this thing, but Mr, Tombes in his Examen of Mr. Marshals Sermon about Infant-baptisme; Pag. 45.46. unto the 54. page, hath handled this point very osundly. And we could earnestly desire every one, who questions Infant-baptisme, to reade over Mr. Tombes his Booke very se∣riously. It is not lawfull, to apply or administer any Ordinance of Christ otherwise then according to the Rule of the Word. But to baptize any Infants, is to apply or administer an Ordi∣nance of Christ, otherwise then according to the Rule of the Word: Ergo, It is not lawfull to baptize any Infants. The truth of the Proposition appears; 1. All will-worship is expresly condemned in the Scripture; See Coloss. 2.23. But every administration and application of an Ordi∣nance of Christ, otherwise then according to the Rule of the Word, is manifestly will-worship.
2. It is such an adding to that which God hath commanded, as is forbidden in Deut. 12.32. 3 In this case we should be found to revive for doctrines the commandements of men; and our fear towards God would be found to be taught by the precepts of men: the evill whereof, appears in Isaiah 29.13. and Matth. 15.9. 4. In doing this, we shall never be able to answer the demand in Isaith 1 12 Who hath required this at your hands? But we shall be found doers of those things which God commanded not, neither came they into his heart; touching which, see Jerem. 7.31. 5. If Christ have not given compleate directions in his Word, con∣ceming the use of his Ordinances, how then is he faithfull to him that appointed him, (not onely as the high-Priest, but also as the A∣postle of our profession, and as the Prophet whom God raised up like unto Meses,) even as Moses also was faithfull in all Gods house? See Deut. 18.15. and Heb. 3.1, 2. And if he have given such compleate directions, Is it not then un∣lawfull to apply or use his Ordinances, otherwise then according to his owne directions? 6 If it be lawfull to apply or use the Ordinances of Christ, other∣wise then according to the rule of the Word, or otherwise then may be warranted and justified by the Word; then both Jews and Turks, and other such, both young and old, may be admitted to the Ordi∣nances: But this they all acknowledge unlawfull to be done. Now, that the Baptizing of Infants is an applying or administring of Baptisme, (which is an Ordinance of Christ) otherwise then ac∣cording to the rule of the Word, and otherwise then may be warran∣ted and justified by the Word; and so now proved unlawfull, we thus confirme. 1. There is in the Scripture no precept enjoyning us, no rule di∣recting us, nor any example shewing it lawfull for us to baptize Infants. 2. The onely written Commission to Baptize (which is in Matth. 28.19.) directeth us to baptize Disciples onely, Goe ye and Di ciple all Nations, baptizing them; that is, the Disciples: for this is the onely construction and interpretation that the Greek word can there beare; and Infants cannot be made Disciples, because they cannot learne. 3. Those onely of the Jews might be baptized that did repent, as
appeares in Acts 2.38. and they onely of the Gentiles that did sincere∣ly beleeve; as appeares in Acts 8.37. 4. In Acts 8.12. it is fully related who were baptized in Samaria, viz. not Infants, but men and women, when they believed. 5. Then onely is Baptisme administred according to the rule of the Word, when a Disciple is Baptized into the Name of the Father, and of the Son, &c. Matth. 28.19. that is, into the profession of faith in the Father, Son, and holy Spirit; so the Apostle minds the Corin∣thians, that they had not beene baptized into the Name of Paul, 1 Cor. 1.13. that is, into the profession of faith in Paul: this neces∣sarily excludes Infants, who can make no such profession. The supply of this want of profession, by the profession of those that have beene called Sureties, doth now appeare to all wise men, to be as ridiculous and absurd as Paedo-rantisme (now falsely called, Infant-Baptisme) will shortly appeare to be, to all the godly. 6. All those that are baptized according to the rule of the Word, are looked upon as persons submitting themselves to the use of Ba∣ptisme by the direction of the holy Spirit; 1 Cor. 12.13. This also manifestly excludes all Infants. If Christ commanded not his Apostles to practise or teach the ba∣ptizing of Infants, then Infants ought not to be Baptized. But Christ commanded not his Apostles to practise, &c. Ergo, That Christ commanded not his Apostles to practise, or teach Infants Baptisme, is manifest; because the Apostles, in obedience to Christs word, Mat. 28.20. taught the faithfull to observe all things that Christ commanded them. But no man can say that the Apostles taught the faithfull to observe the baptizing of Infants, unlesse with the Papists he will flye to unwritten Traditions, falsly so called Apostolicall. If the doctrine maintaining Infants Baptisme, be no part of the re∣vealed counsell of God, then Infants ought not to be baptized; For things that are revealed belong to us and to our children. But it is no part of the revealed counsell of God, as appeares by the Apostles not declaring it. See Acts 20.27. Ergo, Infants ought not to be baptized. FINIS.
