d582 e422_22 99864271 161392
A DECLARATION From his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, And the Generall Councell of the ARMIE, Of their Resolutions to adhere to the PARLIAMENT, in their Proceedings concerning the KING. Presented to the Honourable House of Commons, by Col. Sir Hardres Waller, Col. Whaley, Col. Baxter, and Col. Okey, January 11. 1647. Together with the Parliaments Answer thereun∣to. And Ordered to be forthwith printed and published. Hen. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com. BY the Appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Gene∣rall Councell of the Army. JOHN RUSHWORTH Secr. LONDON. Printed for George Whittington, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Blue Anchor in Cornhill; near the Royall Exchange.
A DECLARATION From his Excellency; Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, And the Generall Councell of the ARMY, &c. NOtwithstanding the high violations of the King∣doms Rights and Liberties, and the indeavours to swallow up the whole interest of the Kingdom in∣to the power and will of a King, which the pre∣sent Kings Reigne hath afforded; we have observed, That the Parliament was (through his necessities,) and against his declared intentions to the contrary, called and put into a condition of vindicating the Kingdom in those things, hath yet and acted with that tendernesse towards the King, (as to any thing of right that might be in him, or duty towards him) as that in the Protestation, Covenant, and many Declarations published by them; They have
held forth a carefull regard to the preserva∣tion of the Kings Person, and just Rights with, and in the preservation and vindicati∣on of the publike interests and safety of the Kingdom. And by the whole series of their actions, and their manifold humble addres∣ses to him, for the preservation and settle∣ment of all, They have, we conceive, abun∣dantly demonstrated the realty and inno∣cency of their intentions towards him: In all which; we have stil understood, the sence and intention to be no other then that the preservation of the Kings Person, and perti∣cular Rights, should be so indeavoured as it might be consistent with, & not distructive to those great & more obliging publike in∣terests of Religion, and the rights, liberties, and safety of the Kingdom, and not other∣wise. And accordingly, in the late Declarati∣ons and papers that have occasionally past from this Army, as to our desires of settle∣ment to the Kingdom, we have exprest our reall wishes, that if the King would in things necessary, and essentiall to the clearing, set∣ling,
and securing of those publike interests, give his concurence to put them past future disputes, then his rights should be consider∣ed, and setled, so far as might be consistent with those superiour interests of the pub∣like, and the security thereof for future. And that by an addresse to the King upon things so purely essentiall to those publike ends it might once more come to a cleare Tryall; whether we could with the preser∣vation of the Kings Person, and perticuler interests have a security to the other, hath been our earnest desire, our great expecta∣tion, and our indeavour that we and others might be kept in a patient wayting for such an issue. Now in the Parliaments last addresse to the King, we find they have insisted onely upon some few things so essentiall to that interest of the Kingdom, which they have hitherto engaged for, as that without be∣traying the safety of the Kingdome and themselves, and all that had engaged with them in that Cause; without denying that which God in the issue of the Warre hath borne such
Testimony unto; they could not go lower, and (those things granted,) they have offer∣ed to treate for all the rest. Thus we account, That great businesse of a settlement to the Kingdom, and secu∣rity to the publike interest thereof, by and with the Kings Concurrence, to be brought to so cleare a Tryall as that (upon the Kings denyall of those things) we can see no fur∣ther hopes of settlement or security that way. And therefore understanding, that up∣on the consideration of that denyall, added to so many other. The Honourable House of Commons, by severall votes on Munday last, have resolved not to make any further addresse or application to the King, nor re∣ceive any from him, nor to suffer either in others. We do freely and unanimously de∣clare, for our selves and the ARMIE; that we are resolved through the Grace of God, firmly to adhere with, & stand by the Par∣liament in the things voted on Munday last concerning the King, and in what shall be further necessary for prosecution thereof,
and for the setling and securing of the Par∣liament and Kingdom, without the King & against him, or any other that shall here∣after pertake with him. Windsor Ian. 9. 1647. By the Appointment of his Excel∣lency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Generall Councell of the Army. Iohn Rushworth Secr.
