D688 E669_18 99866107 118369
THE DECLARATION OF THE HOLLANDERS Concerning, The English Fleet now under the command of General Blake; With the Rising of the people against their Ma∣gistrates, and declaring for a war with England: And the States Proclamation, prohibiting all Mer∣chants and Sea-men to touch upon the Eng∣lish Coasts. Also, Vantrumps putting forth to Sea with one hundred and seven Men of War, and his Orders and Instructions given to the Captains of his Fleet. LIKEWISE, The State of affairs in France, and the Declaring of the Ci∣tizens of Paris Rebels and Traytors, by the King and Councel. Together with the proceedings of the Parliaments Forces in Ireland: Sent in several Letters from divers personages of Honour to certain Member of the Councel of STATE. July .9th. LONDON: Printed by B. A. 1652.
The DECLARATION Of the HOLLANDERS Concerning The English Fleet, and the States Proclamation prohibi∣ting Merchants and Sea-men to touch upon the Coasts of England. SIR, THe States of Holland find the people here to be so importunate and clamorous, and in especiall manner the Zealanders, (who as if they were in a frenzy, talk high and rave) that they have been forced to publish in print the instructions which they gave to the Lord Hemstead at his departure for England, (by which
we suppose our Embassadours are near home) he was principally to demand of the Parl. of England four con∣ferences; therein, To excuse the carriage of Admiral Vantrump towards the English Fleet upon the Downs, to desire a cessation of all acts of hostility, nd a restaura∣tion of all the ships taken by the English, and to bring the final answer and demands of the Parliament, and in case of delay upon the fourth conference to return back; this was the sum of their instructions, by which it is plainly apparent, that he wanted power to conclude the Treaty, so that from his return we can gather no hope of peace forasmuch as he and his fellows have performed their task, in discovering the strength, counsels, and resolutions of England. The publishing of these instructions, seemed for the present to give som small content to the people, allaying, but not extirpating their fury, which now boils in their breasts more then before, insomuch that nothing will now content them but a war with England, especially the Zealanders, who ever were, and still are more violent then the others. Their rage is come to so high a pitch, that they openly declare, that if their Deputies at the Hague return home, without letters of Mart for them against the English, they will kill them: the effects of their rage be∣gins to break forth already; for as certain Officers went about in Middleburgh beating of drums for souldiers in the name of the States of Holland and Zealand, because the Prince of Orange was not also named, a great tumult a rose among the people, who laid violent hands upon the officers and drummers, and threw them into the water. The Yonckers (alias Gent.) vapour much, and seem to set light by the power of the English at sea, and have de∣clared, That they have not yet shewed how formidable they are, because they judge the English Fleet at sea to be of small
force and scarce worth the regarding; but yet if they conti∣nue to take and seize their ships as now of late they have done, they will rise up with all their power, and sink, burn, and destroy them every one. This is their dayly talk, al∣though they know, that if they had not had the help of the English, they had been long ago swallowed up by their enemies. The States in the mean while, are not insensible of the danger approaching near them, as appears by their forti∣fying of Scheveling, and many other places and building of forts round about them, to hiner and impede the lan∣ding of the English, in case they should prevail against their Fleet, and beat them; and to scure the Hague, which is defended with nothing but a graft and draw bridge. The Elector of Brandenburgh hath promised to aid them with ten thousand men, although I believe he will hardly make good his promise, which sprung onely out of a Bravado, by the perswasions either of the old Princess of Orange, his mother in law, or Count William his brother in law; his small feats the last summer against the Duke of New∣burgh discovers of what temper he is. The States have published a Proclamation throughout all the Cities in Holland, wherein they prohibit all Mer∣chants and sea-men whose trade lies West-ward, to passe any more by the Cliffs of Dover and Callis; but to leave that narrow Channel where they must needs be in dan∣ger of ships, Ports and Castles, and so to steer about the Orkneys, not touching (if they can possibly avoid it) any of the English coasts. But this is a very uncouth & far fetcht passage, which our men who have tasted the sweetness and convenience of your Harbours, are very sensible of. Vantrump is out at sea with three squadrons of ships consisting of about 70 sail, which are to secure our Coast and trade with the fishing, if there be occasion; besides he
hath 24 ships which attend upon the East-India Fleet, all which, together with such as are cming to him are 107 sail, besides fire ships, amongst whom he hath given this order, That in case any one be attacht, and that the next might have relieved him and did not, that offendour shall die without mercy. Hague, Iuly 3. 1652. A Letter from the Lord Broghil to a Member of the Councel of State. Right Honourable, IN my last, I gave you a full account of all our trea∣ty in Kerry, with the Lord Muskerry and his party; since which I returned into the County of Cork, to send all requisites to our forces in Kerry for reduction of Ross, and to attend the Rebels in those Fastnesses, where they had six hundred horse, one Regiment of Dragoons, and one of Foot embodied, and every day fresh forces marching to joyn with them. This made me last Satur∣day night with five good troops of Horse, and five foot companies march towards them, resolving to engage them in their Camp, if providence should not offer a more promising place to do it in. The last Sabbath in the morning, under the favour of a mist, after 22 miles march, we fell into their Camp, where the Lord owned us, and by us dispersed all their force; but our men were so tyred, the countrey so bad, and the fog so thick, that the execution was followed above two miles, yet it was not bloudy; they lost Mr. Herbert of horse, and others:
We took near 100 horse, two Colors, and a good quan∣tity of arms, a prey of above 200 Beeves they had taken out of our quarters to supply Ross with, which were re∣turned freely to the Country people. We took Lievt. Col. Supple, one of their three Commanders in chief; a col. of horse, and some troopers, this submission of the Lord Muskerry will probably restore this miserable country to peace: We have now received letters that Slego is sur∣rendred to Sir Charls Coot, and that Clenrickard desires some terms for himself and party. Also we have letters that Col. Ingoldsby, hath routed Col. Graces horse, and surrounded his foot in a Bog. Cork 25 Iune 1652. Broghil. A Letter from Major Smith. SIR, WE hear that Col. Ingoldsby hath lighted on Gra∣ces party in a great Fastness, after he was beaten of from Lougreah, which he attempted to storm, but mis∣sed, and lost there about 80 men, Col. Ingoldsbies men disputed the passe into the Fastness near half an hour which was justified with 1200 foot, and 150 horse of the enemies, but at length forced them, and killed up∣wards of 200, about 60 horse taken. Grace fled over the Shanon, Collonel Redman Seark, and Collonel Mac Gawley are killed, and some other field officers, besides sixe or seven Captains, some few prisoners were taken, which are with Collonel Abbot to exchange, we lost but three men that we can hear of, and nine Dragoons woun∣ded, with some few Troopers. It is hoped 1500 Irish will be shipt for Spain. Limrick. Iune 23. 1652.
A Letter from Paris, dated Iuly the 11, stilo novo. Sir, In my last I acquainted you with the affairs here, and that an act of union was agreed upon between the Princes, Parliament, and City, against the Cardinal and his adherents, and consequently against the King, It is now signed by all parties, and they have proceeded already to change many officers of State who favoured Mazarine, placing others of their own faction in their rooms, they are now about to make the Duke of Orleans Regent of the Kingdome, as soon as the Deputies of this Parliament are returned from the Court. All the great officers of the City are fled in much fear, (being Mazarinists) to the Court; the King and Cardinal seem not to be greatly mo∣ved at these things, but proceed to re-inforce their army which is much augmented by the addition of 3000 men under Gen. Rosa, who hath united himself to Marshal Thuren. It is reported that some eminent persons have been executed at St. Dennis by the Kings command, who with the advice of his Councel hath passed a sentence, de∣claring the City of Parts, and all others that shall adhere unto the Princes, Rebels and Traitors, and still keepeth all provisions from comming to the City, so that bread is excessive dear, but the Duke is providing 4000 horse to be a guard for provisions, that so the wants of the City may be supplied. FINIS.
