d732 e1005_7 99866926 119215
A DECLARATION OF THE OFFICERS OF THE ARMY IN SCOTLAND To the Churches of Christ in the three NATIONS. EDINBƲRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins in Harts-Close, over against the Trone Church, Anno Dom. 1659. 9ber 2
A Declaration of the Officers of the Army in Scotland to the Churches of Christ in the three Nations. ALL the great works the Lord Jesus hath been doing in these three poor Nations, hath been to make his Churches in them a glory, that he might establish Jerusalem a praise in the Earth, and we are confident his heart will never be at rest, nor his providences shortned till upon this Glory he cre∣ates a defence, and that so strong that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it: The establishing of his Churches we conceive to stand upon a double foundation, Truth, and Peace, the Defence he will create upon it, is his own presence with them in Christ, and the Instruments in his hand which he has raised to be a shelter to them in the worst of times. Of this latter we may speake it to the praise of free-grace, that no persons in their capacity have been more Instrumental in the hand of God then the Army, through whose faithful endeavours for Christ and his Ordinances, and the Liberties of his people, God has been pleased to redeem the preci∣ous
priviledges of his Saints, (upon whose account all other Rights are onely valuable,) from mixture in their Ordinances, from un just and Antiscriptural u∣surpation upon their consciences, to a State of Free∣dome, to professe and practice any thing that is war∣ranted by the word, though diversly interpreted according to that measure of the spirit, which Jesus Christ the head is pleased to dispense. The prosecution of which, while God gives us an opportunity to serve our Generation, we must still hold forth to be the principle and practise of the Army, however different they may seem in the ways they pitch upon to promote it. The blessing also that has followed it, though it is not the alone motive to make us at this time declare it to you, because we know Christs work is wages (let it be sucess'd how he pleases, by sowing in teares or reaping in joy) Yet is it enough to encourage us as to the issue let it be what it will, the work carrying in it acceptance with him whom we would onely please, and engagements of your selves, as to your prayers coincident with the end of all his glory, which the Churches are to hold forth in all ages. In order to this we do (as in the omniscient eye of our dear Lord Jesus who walkes in the midst of you) declare. First, That we own & assert the Authority of this present Parliament which is now through sad mistakes and misapprehensions interru∣pted; and principally, because We do judge that a well regulated Commonwealth is the
safest Government to secure the just Liberties of all the Churches of Christ though in diffe∣ring forms, and to ball ance the Lamented and circumstantial differences (whose wounds are yet bleeding) in the great scale of Christian and spiritual Love, and as far as we know our own hearts, the security it may give to our civil rights as men, are dear to us onely as they relate to this most desired and promised unity amongst Gods people though very divers in their judgements. Secondly, That to this end, if the Lord again please out of reserved mercy to his poor Chur∣ches, to unite the Parliament and Army toge∣ther, We do declare, that we shall assert it as the undoubted right of the Churches, and hum∣bly represent it to the Parliament as our great request, that an impartial and just countenance according to the Word, and the nature of their Priviledges, may be afforded to all that may encourage the Ministry of the Churches, and that may hedge about the flock of Christ, that they may feed quietly in all godlinesse, and this with the largest allowance that Gods Word will admit of both to Pastors
and people in what way soever constituted and congregated. Thirdly, As further conducing to this end, We do professe our selves to be persons that would follow Truth in Love, and therefore can readily and heartily allow that in affe∣ction to all who profess Christ, and walk in him as they have received him, which we may not possibly in Judgment; for as far as we have attained we would walk up, and where we think not the same things, we shal til God re∣veal further, pray for a Spirit to practice that which is unquestionably revealed, that we love one another even as Christ hath loved us. Fourthly, We do further Declare, however the present exigent may enforce us to the re∣straint of some of our Brethren and Friends, whose mistakes about their way to this end, ap∣pear to our Consciences to be such as we can∣not reconcile either by the Word or their pro∣mises and protestations to such a purpose as we Declare for, That it is not upon the least account out of disrelish of their Judgements as to any profession of Christ, which they hold forth, but onely to preserve the civil peace
and unity of the Army, that there may be a due time left to the Parliament the supreme Authority of the Nation, to put in Ex∣ecution the forementioned Ends which they have promised and obliged themselves to, to settle this birthright, which we have asserted in the possession of the Churches, as a fundamental we prize and value as part of the Testament in the blood of Jesus Christ, and we should account it a greater mer∣cy to have it as free born sons of Christs visi∣ble Kingdome, then whatsoever we as meer Subjects of this Commonwealth may challenge were our Outward Liberties never so much advantaged. Of which, that we may see the Topstone as well as the foundation. We would desire all the Lords Remembrancers to give him no rest till he makes Sion a praise in the Earth, and shall account it no small encouragement to our endeavours, let what difficulty soever attend them, to have your prayers as our strength in the Lord, whose cause and work we hope we own: however we can truely say we really intend it, and shall believe God will pardon the upright in heart, and if we be mistaken so ought you: forgiving one another even as God for Christs sake hath forgiven you. Edinb. Octob. 20. 1659. FINIS.
