E1095 E1075_27 99867538 119854
Anno Regni CAROLI IJ. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, & Hiberniae, DUO DECIMO. At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Five and twentieth day of April, An. Dom. 1660. In the Twelfth Year of the Reign of Our most Gracious Soveraign Lord CHARLES, By the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, &c. LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1660. CUM PRIVILEGIO.
Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis. An Act for the better or∣dering the selling of Wines by Retail, and for preventing Abuses in the Ming∣ling, Corrupting, and Vitiating of Wines, and for setting and limiting the prices of the same. FOr the better Order∣ing of Selling of Wines by Retail in Taverns, and other places, and for pre∣venting of abuses therein, Be it Enact∣ed by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the con∣sent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That no person or persons whatsoever, from and after the Five and twentieth day of March One thousand six hundred sixty one, unless he or they be authorised
and enabled in manner and form, as in this pre∣sent Act is prescribed and appointed, shall sell or utter by retail, that is by the Pint, Quart, Pottle or Gallon, or by any other greater or lesser retail measure, any kinde of Wine or Wines to be drunk or spent within his or their Mansion-house or houses, or other place in his or their tenure or occupation, or without such Mansion-house or houses, or such other place in his or their tenure or occupation, by any co∣lour, craft, or mean whatsoever, upon pam to forfeit for every such offence the sum of Five pounds; the one moyety of every such penalty to be to our Soveraign Lord the King, the other moyety to him or them that will sue for the same, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information in any of the Kings Courts of Record, in which Action or Suit▪ no Essign, Wager of Law or Protection shall be allowed. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful, to and for His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, from time to time, to issue out under His or their Great Seal of England, one or more Commission or Commissions directed to two or more persons, thereby authorizing them to Licence, and give Authority to such person and persons, as they shall think sit, to sell and utter by retail, all and every or any kinde of Wine or Wines whatsoever, to be drunk and spent as well within the house or houses, or other place, in the tenure or occupation of the party so Licenced, as without, in any City, Town, or other place within the King∣dom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town and Port of Berwick upon Twede;
and such persons as from time to time or at a∣ny time hereafter shall be by such Commission or Commissions as aforesaid in that behalf appointed, shall have power and authority, and hereby have power and authority to treat and contract for licence, authority and dispensati∣ons to be given and granted to any person or persons for the selling and uttering of Wines by retail in any City, Town or other place as aforesaid, according to the rules and directions of this present Act, and the true Intent and meaning thereof, and not otherwise, any Law, Statute, usage or custome to the contra∣ry in any wise notwithstanding. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such persons as shall be com∣missioned and appointed by his Majesty, His Heirs or Successors as aforesaid shall be, and be called His Majesties Agents for granting Licences for the selling and uttering of Wine by retail; And his Majesties said Agents are hereby authorized and enabled under their Seal of Office, the same to be appointed by his Majesty, to grant Licence for the selling and uttering of Wines by retail to any person or persons, and for any time or terme not exceed∣ing One and Twenty years, if such person and persons shall so long live; and for such yearly rent as they can or shall agree, and think fit, so as no Fine be taken for the same; But that the Rent and summs of Mo∣ney agreed upon and reserved, be payed and an∣swered half yearly by equal portions during the whole Term. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such Licence shall not be gi∣ven
or granted, but to such who shall perso∣nally use the Trade of selling or uttering of Wines by retail, or to the Landlord and own∣er of the house where the person useing such Trade shall sell and utter Wine by retail, nor shall the same be assignable nor in any wise beneficial or extensive to indempnifie any per∣son against the penalties of this present Act, except the first taker. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall & may be lawful to and for his Majesty, his Heirs & Successors, to con∣stitute and appoint such and so many other Of∣ficers and Ministers, as a Receiver, Register, Clerk, Controller, Messenger or the like, for the better carrying on of this service, as He and they shall think fit, so as the Sallaries and Wages of all such Officers to be appointed, together with the Sallary or Wages of His Majesties said. Agents do not exceed six pence in the pound of the Revenue that shall hence arise. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Rents, Revenues, and sums of Money hence arising, except what shall be allowed for the Wages and Salla∣ries of such Officers and Ministers, which is not to exceed Six pence out of every Pound thereof, shall be duly and constantly paid and answered into His Majesties Receipt of Ex∣chequer, and shall not be particularly charged or chargeable, either before it be paid into the Exchequer or after, with any Gift or Pensi∣on. And His Majesties said▪ Agents are hereby enjoyned and required to return into the Court of Exchequer every Michaelmas and
Easter Terms, upon their Oaths (which Oaths the Barons of the Exchequer, or any one of them, are hereby authorized to admini∣ster) a Book fairly written, containing a true & full account of what Licences have been granted the preceding half year, and what Rents and sums of money are thereupon re∣served, and have been paid, or are in arrear, together with the Securities of the persons so in arrear, to the end due and speedy Process may be made out according to the course of the Exchequer, for the recovery of the same. Provided always, That this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise be prejudicial to the priviledge of the two V∣niversities of the Land, or either of them, nor to the Chancellors or Scholars of the same, or their successors; but that they may use and enjoy such priviledges as heretofore they have lawfully used and enjoyed, any thing herein to the contrary notwithstanding. Provided also▪ That this Act, or any thing therein contained shall not extend or be preju∣dicial to the Master, Wardens, Freemen and Commonalty of the Mystery of Vtners of the City of London, or to any other City or Town-Corporate but that they may use and enjoy such Liberties and Priviledges as here∣tofore they have lawfully used and enjoyed, any thing herein contained to the contrary not∣withstanding. Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise ex∣tend to debar or hinder the Major and Bur∣gesses of the Burrough of St. Albans in the
County of Hertford, or their successors, from enjoying, using and exercising of all such Li∣berties, Powers and Authorities to them heretofore granted by several Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, by Queen Elizabeth and King James of famous memo∣ries, for the Erecting, Appointing, and Li∣censing of Three several Wine-Taverns within the Burrough aforesaid, for and to∣wards the maintenance of the Free-School there; but that the same Liberties, Powers and Authorities shall be, and are hereby esta∣blished and confirmed, and shall remain and continue in and to the said Major and Burges∣ses and their successors, to and for the Chari∣table use aforesaid, and according to the tenor of the Letters Patents aforesaid, as though this Act had never been made, any thing here∣in contained to the contrary in any wise not∣withstanding. Provided also, That it shall not, nor may be lawful to or for any Officer or Officers to be appointed by His Majesty for the carrying on of this service, to take, demand, or receie any Fees, Rewards, or summs of money what∣soever, for or in respect of this Service, other then Five shillings for a Licence, Four pence for an Acquittance, and Six pence for a Bond, under the enalty of Ten pounds, one moiety thereof to the Kings Majesty, the other moiety to the person or persons who shall sue for the same, by action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or In∣formation, wherein no Wager of Law, Essoign or Protection shall be allowed, Any thing herein, or any other matter or thing to the contrary notwithstanding.
And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Merchant, Vintuer, Wine-Cooper or other person, sel∣ling or retailing any Wine, shall mingle or utter any Spanish Wine, mingled with any French Wine, or Rhish Wine, Sider, Perry, Hony, Sugar, Syrops of Sugar, Molasses, or any other Syrops whatsoever, nor put in any Isinglass; Brimstone, Lime, Raisins, Iuice of Raisins, Water, nor any other Li∣quor nor Ingredients, nor any Clary, or other herb, nor any sort of Flesh whatsoever; And that no Merchant, Vintner, Wine-Cooper, or other person selling or retailing any Wine, shall mingle or utter any French Wines mingled with any Rhinish Wines or Spanish Wines, Sider, Perry, Stummed Wine, Vitriol, Hony, Sugar, Syrop of Sugar, Molasses, or any Syrops whatso∣ever, nor put in any Isinglass, Brimstone, Lime, Raisins, Iuice of Raisins, Water, nor any other Liquor or Ingredients, nor any Clary or other herb, nor any sort of flesh whatsoever; And that no Merchant, Vint∣ner, Wine-Cooper or other person selling or retailing any Wine, shall mingle or utter any Rinish Wine mingled with any French Wines, or Spanish Wines, Sider, Perry, Stummed Wine, Vitriol, Hony, Sugar, Syrops of Sugar, Molasses, or any other Syrops whatsoever, nor put in any Isin∣glass, Brimstone, Lime, Raisins, Iuice of Raisins, Water, nor any other Liquor or In∣gredients, nor any Clary or other herb, nor any sort of flesh whatsoever: And that all and every person and persons committing any
of the offences aforesaid, shall incur the pains and penalties herein after mentioned: That is to say, Every Merchant, Wine-Cooper, or other person selling any sort of Wines in gross, mingled or abused as aforesaid, shall forfeit and lose for every such offence, One hundred pounds; And that every Vintner or other person selling any sorts of Wine by re∣tail, mingled or abused as aforesaid, shall for∣feit and lose for every such offence, the sum of Forty pounds; of which forfeitures, one moyety shall go unto the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and successors, the other moyety to the Informer, to be recovered in any Court of Record by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoigne, Protecti∣on, or Wager of Law shall be allowed. Provided always, and be it Enacted, That from and after the First day of September, One thousand six hundred sixty and one, no Canary Wines, Muskie or Alegant, or other Spa∣nish or sweet Wines, shall be sold or uttered by any person or persons within His Maje∣sties Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Twede, by retail, for above Eighteen pence the quart: And that no Gascoigne or French Wines whatsoever, shall be sold by retail, above Eight pence the quart; And that no Rhinish Wines whatsoever shall be sold by retail, above Twelve pence the quart; (And according to these Rates, for a greater and lesser quan∣tity, all and every the said Wines shall and may be sold) upon pain and penalty that every such person and persons who shall utter or sell any of the said Wines by retail, that is
to say, by Pint, Quart, Pottle, or Gallon, or any other greater or lesser retail-measure▪ at any rate exceeding the rates hereby limited, do and shall forfeit for every such Pint, Quart, Pottle, Gallon, or other greater or lesser quantity so sold by retail, the sum of Five pounds; the one moyety of which forfeiture shall be to our Soveraign Lord the King, His Heirs and successors, and the other moye∣ty to him or them that will sue for the same, to be recovered in manner and form as afore∣said. Provided nevertheless, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Lord Chancellor of England, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings Council, Lord Privy Seal, and the two Chief Iustices, or Five, Four, or Three of them; And they are hereby Autho∣rized yearly and every year between the Twentieth day of November, and the last day of December, and no other times, to set the Prises of all and every the said Wines to be sold by retail as aforesaid, at higher or lower rates then are herein contained, so that they or any of them cause the Prises by them set to be written, and open Proclamation thereof to be made in the Kings Court of Chancery year∣ly in the Term time, or else in the City, Bur∣rough▪ or Towns Corporate where any such Wines shall be sold; And that all and every the said wines shall and may be sold by retail at such Prises as by them, or any Five, Four, or Three of them shall be set as aforesaid, from time to time, for the space of one whole year, to commence from the First day of February next after the setting thereof, and no longer,
and no greater prises under the pains and pe∣nalties aforesaid, to be recovered as aforesaid, and afterwards: And in default of such setting of prises by the said Lord Chancellor of Eng∣land, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings Council, Lord Privy Seal, and the Two Chief Iustices, or Five, Four, or Three of them, as aforesaid, at the respective Rates. and Prises set by this Act, and under the pe∣nalties as aforesaid, to be recovered as afore∣said.
Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis. An Act for the Levying of the Arrears of the Twelve Moneths Assessment commencing the 24th. of June 1659, and the Six Moneths As∣sessment commencing the 25. of Decem∣ber 1659. WHereas there are se∣verall great summs of money, yet un∣collected and in Ar∣rear, And divers summs of money in the hands of the Collectors and not payed in, due upon the twelve moneths Assessment com∣mencing the Twenty fifth of December One Thousand six Hundred Fifty nine, for pay∣ment of the Arrears of his Majesties Army now disbanding, and to be disbanded, not∣withstanding
all former Orders, and His Ma∣jesties Proclamation for the speedy levying and collecting thereof. Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majestie, and the Lords and Com∣mons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the Commissioners nominated and appointed in the respective Counties, Cities and Corpora∣tions of this Kingdome, the Dominion of Wales, and the Town of Berwick, in an Act made this present Parliament for the speedy provision of money for disbanding and pay∣ing of the Forces of this Kingdome both by Land and Sea, do forthwith cause all the said▪ Arrears to be levied & collected by such wayes and means, as the same was formerly appointed to be levied and collected; And like∣wise all such summs of money as remain in any Collectors hands to be speedily payed in, to Iames Nelthorp and Iohn Lawson Esquires late Treasurers at war, for and towards the speedy disbanding and paying off the said Forces. Provided alwayes, That the summe of Five Hundred and Twenty Pounds and Twelve Shillings disbursed by Robert Qua∣rum Receiver Generall of the County of Corn∣wall, by the desire and direction of the Commis∣sioners of Assessments, and other Gentle∣men of the said County, for the publique ser∣vice of the Kingdome. And also the summe of Seventy Pounds disbursed by the Town of Lyme Regis in the County of Dorset for the same service, shall be and are hereby dischar∣ged and allowed unto the said Receiver and
Town of Lyme Regis, as if the same had been actually payed in to the Treasurers appointed to receive the same, Any thing in this Act to the contrary thereof in any wise notwith∣standing.
Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis. An Act for granting unto the Kings Majesty, Four hundred and twenty thousand pounds, by an Assesse∣ment of Threescore and ten thousand pounds by the Moneth, for six Moneths, for Disbanding the remainder of the Ar∣my, and paying off the Navy. WHereas it was well hoped, That the moneys Enacted to be raised by several Acts of this Par∣liament, That is to say, One Act Entituled, An Act for the speedy provision of money, for Disbanding and Paying off the Forces of this Kingdom both by Land and Sea. And one other Act Entituled, An Act for supplying and explaining certain defects in an Act, Entituled, An Act for the speedy provision of money for the disbanding and paying off the Forces of this Kingdom both by Land and Sea. And
one other Act Entituled, An Act for raising Sevenscore thousand pounds for the compleat disbanding of the whole Army, and paying off some part of the Navy, would have effectu∣ally sufficed to have compleatly disbanded the Armies and paid off the Navy; But by the slow coming in of the same moneys, the grow∣ing charge being still kept on, the same cannot be effected without further supply; And if no further supply should be made, the growing Charge would become insupportable: The Commons Assembled in Parliament, do there∣fore give and grant unto Your most Excellent Majesty, for the uses herein after expressed, and no other, the sum of four Hundred and twenty thousand pounds to be raised & levyed in manner following: And do humbly pray Your most Ex∣cellent Majesty, That it may be Enacted, and be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the advice and consent of the Lords and Commons in this present Par∣liament Assembled, That the sum of Three∣score and ten thousand pounds by the Moneth, for six Moneths, beginning from the first day of January, One thousand six hundred and sixty, shall be Assessed, Taxed, Collected, Levyed and Paid in the several Counties, Cities and Bur∣roughs, Towns and Places within England and Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, according to such rates, rules, and pro∣portions, and by the same Commissioners, as in and by a certain Act past this Parlia∣ment, Entituled An Act for raising of Seven∣score thousand pounds for the compleat dis∣banding of the whole Army, and paying off some part of the Navy, which said Commissioners shall meet on, or before the twelfth day of Ianu∣ary,
One thousand six hundred and sixty, and are hereby enabled to use and execute all and e∣very the like Rates▪ Rules, Proportions, Pow∣ers and Authorities, as in and by the said Act are mentioned and referred unto, or expressed, as fully and amply, as if the same had been particularly inserted in this present Act. And be it further Enacted, That the sum of Two hundred and ten thousand pounds, being one moyety of the six months Assessment, here∣by imposed, shall be assessed, collected, levyed and paid in to the Receiver or Receivers Gene∣ral, who shall be appointed by the said Com∣missioners, upon or before the first day of Febru∣ary, One thousand six hundred and sixty. And the other Two hundred and ten thousand pounds residue thereof, upon or before the first day of April, One Thousand six hundred sixty one. And be it further Enacted, that all and every the sums to be collected and levied by vertue of this present Act, shall be paid at the Guild-Hall of the City of London, unto Sir George Cart∣wright, Sir Richard Brown Lord Mayor of the City of London, Sir Iames Bunce, Sir William Wheeler, Sir William Vincent, Thomas Rich Esq; and the Chamberlain of the City of Lon∣don for the time being, who are hereby appoint∣ed Treasurers for the Receipt thereof, and the Acquittances of them, or any threé of them, shall be a sufficient discharge for so much as shall be received by vertue of this Act, to any person or persons who shal pay in the same. And whereas there is a present necessity of raising of Eighty thousand pounds, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or persons of the City of London, or any other
place, who hath or have advanced any monies upon the Credit of an Act of this Parliament, Entituled, An Act for raising Sevenscore thou∣sand pounds, for the compleat disbanding of the whole Army, and paying off some part of the Na∣vy, shall continue the Loane of such monies upon the Credit of this Act, and Declare the same under his or their hands, unto the Trea∣surers by this Act appointed, before the One and thirtieth day of December, One thousand six hundred and sixty; And if any other person or persons shall advance one hundred pounds or upwards upon the Credit of this Act, and before the Tenth day of Ianuary, One thousand six hundred and sixty, pay the same unto the said Treasurers, then every such person and per∣sons so continuing or advancing as aforesaid, shall not only do a very acceptable service, but shall also receive from the said Treasurers out of the last One hundred and ten thousand pounds, which shall be received upon the se∣cond payment appointed by this Act, his and their principal money, with Interest, at the rate of Ten pounds per cent. per annum, from the time of such declaration and advancement re∣spectively, any Law, Act or Statute to the contrary notwithstanding. And the said Trea∣surers are hereby required to make payment accordingly, and not to receive any more money to be advanced as aforesaid, then what with the money so to be continued will amount to Eighty thousand pounds. And be it further Enacted, That the Trea∣surers by this Act appointed, shall receive for them, and those to be employed under them in this Service, One penny in the pound, in such manner as they ought to receive by the Act last before mentioned.
And be it further enacted, That all and e∣very the sums of money which by vertue of this present Act shall be paid to or received by the Treasurers aforesaid, shall from time to time be issued out according to such War∣rants and Directions onely, as they or any three of them shall receive from the Commissi∣oners named in one Act of this present Parlia∣ment, Entituled, An Act for the speedy disband∣ing of the Army and Garisons of this Kingdom, or threé of them, who are hereby required and enjoyned at their perils, to take care and pro∣vide, that the moneys so as aforesaid to be issued out, be employed onely to the uses, in∣tents and purposes hereafter following, and to no other use, intent, or purpose whatsoever, that is to say, Principally and in the first place, for and towards the total disbanding of the present Army and Garrisons, until that work be fully perfected and compleated according to such Rules and Instructions, as touching the disbanding of the Army in the said Act last mentioned, are contained. And after the Army shall be wholly disbanded, then the residue of the moneys to be raised by vertue of this pre∣sent Act, or due, or behinde on any former Act, shall be employed for and towards the paying off of the Fleét and Navy, according to such Rules. Orders, and Instructions, as touch∣ing the payment of the Navy, are herein after∣mentioned, and not otherwise. And be it further enacted, That an accompt of all the moneys by vertue of this Act to be re∣ceived, shall be given by the said Treasurers to this or any other succeéding Parliament, which shall require the same, or to such person
or persons, as by this or any other succeéding Parliament shall be thereunto appointed: Provided always, and it is hereby declared, That nō Mannors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments which were formerly assessed and taxed for and towards former Assessments and Land-Taxes, and are now in the possession or holding of His Majesty, or of the Queéns Highness, or of any Ecclesiastical person or persons, or His, Her, or their Farmers and Te∣nants, shall be exempted from the payment of the several sums of mony in this Act comprized; but that the said Mannors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, shall be rated, assessed and taxed for and towards the said several sums of money in this Act comprised, in such manner and form as they were of late rated, taxed, and assessed for and towards the said former Land-Rates, any Law, Statute or Custom to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. Provided also, that nothing herein contained shall be drawn into example to the prejudice of the ancient Rights belonging to the Peers of this Realm. And be it declared and enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that these persons hereafter named shall be added Commissioners for their several Counties, Places and Precincts respectively, and shall exercise the same powers as the other Commissioners intended by this Act are authorised and impowered to do, That is to say;
Berks. For the County of Berks, Peregrine Hobby, Richard Harrison Esqs; John Fecciplace of Ferne∣hamEsq; Samuel Woodcox. Borrough of New Windsor. For the Borrough of New Windsor, Andrew Plumpton, Richard Fishburne, Gent. Bucks. For the County of Bucks, William Tirringham Esq; Sir Tomas Hampson Baronet, Sir Philip Palmer Baronet, Anthony Ratcliff Esq; Cambridge. For the County of Cambridge, Sir Thomas Dayrel, John Bennet Esq; Sir Anthony Cage, Levinus Bennet. Isle of Ely. For the Isle of Ely, Roger Jennings Esq; Chester. For the County of Chester, Sir George Warburton Baronet, Edward Warren, Jeffery Shakerley, Henry Leigh, Esqs; City of Chester. For the City and County of the City of Che∣ster, The Major for the time being.
Cornwal. For the County of Cornwal, Robert Roberts Esq; Sir William Tredinham, Joseph Tre∣dinham, Thomas Penhallow, the Knights and Burgesses that serve for the said County, and Iames Eirsey Gent. The Major of Lostwithel for the time being, Iohn Mollesworth Esq William Williams of Trenythen. Cumberland. For the County of Cumberland, Mr. Anthony Bouch, Mr. Richard Uriell, Mr. Thomas Cros∣what, Mr. Robert Webster. Devon. For the County of Devon, Nicholas DaviesDoctor of Physick, William Jennens Gent. Ed∣mond Tremayne, William Putt, John Kellond, William Bogan, George Howard, Iohn Kelly, Iames Rodd Esquires, Walter Jago, Francis Drew,Esq; William Walrond Esq; John Blagdon Gent.Iohn Hamm Gent. Henry Newte. York. For the West-Riding in the County of York, Welbury Norton, Robrt Wivell Esquires, Ri∣chard Roundhil Gent. William Hamond, Walte Hawksworth Esquires, Cuthbert Wade, Iohn Preston Gent. Arthur Ingram Esq; Edward Atkin∣son, William Witham Gent. Samuel SunderlandEsq; Thomas Ward Gent. Sir William Ingram
Knight, Sir John Goodrick Baronet, Sir Tho. Wentworth, Sir Edward Rodes, Knights, God∣frey Copley of Sprotsbrough, John Clayton, Ioshua Horton, Thomas Stringer Esqs. The Alderman of Ledes for the time being. York Northriding. For the Northriding in the County of York,Sir William Caley, Arthur Caley Esq. William Wivell Esq. Sir Tho. Gower Baronet, Thomas VVorsley, Charles Tankred Esqs. Sir William Francklyn Baronet, the Bailiffs of Scarboroughfor the time being, Tristram Fish, Robert Belt,Esq. Thoms Robinson, Thomas Scudamore Esq. York City. For the City and County of the City of York, all the Aldermen of the City of York. Kingston upon Hull. For the Town of Hull, Mr. George Crowle. Essex. For the County of Essex, Mr. Edward Glas∣cock,Mr. Mles Hubbert, Mr. Iohn Smart, Capt.Hunter, Dean Tindal Esq. Isaac Wincall, Thomas Clopton, Thomas Peck, Peter Iohnson, Thomas Manby Esq. Gloucester. For the County of Gloucester, Thomas Freame, Tho. Floyde, Samuel Sheppard, Phillip Sheppard, VVilliam Morgan, Richard Daston, Iohn TookeEsq. Robert Lord Tracy, Thomas Morgan Esq. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton Knight, VVilliam Bromage Gent. VVilliam VVinter of DimmockGent. Richard Matchen Gent. Iohn WynnyattGent. Thomas Aylway Gent.
Hereford. For the County of Hereford, Sir Herbert Par∣retKnight, John Barnaby of Brookehampton esq.Thomas Baskervile of Collington Gent. John Boothof Hereford Esq. City of Hereford. For the City of Hereford, Thomas Davies Esq. Major, James Lawrence Gent. Tho. Clerk Gent. Hertford. For the County of Hertford, Marmaduke Raw∣den, Iames Willimott Iunior Gent. Thomas ArrasDr. of Physick, Richard Coombes Esq. Sir Ro∣bert Ioslyn Knight, Thomas Cappin, Edward Bris∣coe, Iohn Halsie Esq. Mr. Fetherston of Blacke∣swere, Edward Brograve, Ralph Gore, Thomas Bro∣grave, Edward Cason, Thomas Bonest, Henry Be∣cher, Henry Chancey, George Bromley, Alexander Meade, Iohn Crouch, Iames Willimort Iunior,George Poyner Gent. Iohn Iesson Esq. St. Albans. For the Borrough of St. Albans, William Fox∣wistEsq. Recorder, Mr. Iohn New, Mr. Edward Eames, Mr. Thomas Cawley Senior, Mr. William Marston, Sir Henry Connyngsby, Edmond Smith, Alban Cox, Richard Combes Esq. Thom. Mar∣stonGent. Kent. For the County of Kent, Sir William Mann, Sir Edward Masters, Thomas Peake esq. Sir Tho. Godfrey, The Major of Maydston for the time being, Sir William Meredeth Baronet, Sir Thomas Preise Baronet, Mr. Richard Manley, Mr. Thomas Manley.
Sandwich. For the Town of Sandwich, Iohn Verrier, Pe∣ter Peke Gent. Lancaster. For the County of Lancaster, Henry BanisterEsq. Ieoffry Rushton Gent. Richard FleetwoodGent. Iohn Molineux esq. VVilliam Fif esq. SirGeorge Middleton Knight and Baronet, Ma∣thew Richardson esq. Robert Heywood Esq. Roger Stowton of the City of London, Thomas Butler, Rchard Farrington, VVilliam VVall, William Turner, Henry Brabin, VVilliam HodgkensonGent. Lincoln. For the County of Lincoln, and City and County of the same, Edward Turney, William Lister, Esqs, Sir Robert Dallison Baronet, SirCharles Dallison Knight, William Draper, Samuel Poctor, William Thompson, Humphrey Walcot, Thomas Mills, Maurice Dalton, Iohn Watson, William Willoughby, Henry Heron, Marmduke Darrel, Iohn Ogle, Anthony Treadway, William Skipwich, Thomas Browne of Eastkirby; Iohn Al∣more,Mr. Skinner of Thornton Colledge, Tho. Harrington, William Whichcot, Charles PelhamIunior, Roger Pelham, Mr. Iohn Lockton, Mr.Iohn Hobson Iunior, Mr. Henry Hall, Mr.Charles Bawdes, Mr. Iohn Colthurst, Mr. William Bishop, and Mr. Edward Blaw, Aldermen, Mr.William Perkins, Mr. Thomas Mills, Mr. Pere∣grine Buck, Mr. William Dowman, Mr. Thomas Dickenson, Mr. Iohn Thornton, and Richard We∣therel,Aldermen.
London. For the City of London, Nicholas Delves Esq.Benjmin Albin, Richard Spencer. Middlesex. For the County of Middlesex, Sir Iohn Robin∣sonBaronet, Lieutenant of the Tower, SirRichard Browne, Thomas Bride, Thomas Harrisonof South-Mins, Sir VVilliam Bareman, Lieut. Col. Powel, Charles Pitfeild Esq. Robert Peyton, Iohn Iones, Iohn Limbrey, Edward Chard, Richard Shelton Esq. VVilliam Page Esq. Roger IennynsEsq. Sir Heneage Finch Baronet His Majesties Sollicitor General, Cheney of HackneyEsq. Lieut. Col. Powel, Charles Cheney of Chel∣sey, Christopher Abdy Esq. Sir Allen Broadricke, Iohn Barton Esq. Westminster. For the City of VVestmiuster, and Liberties thereof, Gabriel Beck Esq. Mr. Graham, Peter Maplesden, George Plunknett, Thomas Kirke, VVill. Greene, George Farewell, Ralph Darnall. Monmouth. For the County of Monmouth, VVilliam Ionesof Frowen Esq. Iames Proger, Charles Proger. Northampton. For the County of Morthampton, Edward Onely Iohn Thorton, Iohn VVilloughby Esqs.
Norfolk. For the County of Norfolk, George Wind∣ham, Robert Doughty of Hanworth, Robert Legar,Esquires, Henry Scarborough Gent. Mr. John Roops, Mr. Thomas Talbot, Mr. Henry Black∣borne,Gent. Borough of Lyn Regis. For the Borough of Lyn Regis, John BassetMajor, Robert Steward Esq; Recorder, Tho∣mas Greene, William Wharton, Henry Bell, Ro∣bert Thorowgood, Alderman Holley. Great Yarmouth. For the Town of Great Yarmouth, Nicholas Cutting, James Simons Bailiff there, Sir John Potts Knight and Baronet, Sir William DoyleyKnight, Sir Thomas Meow Knight, Thomas Gooch, George England, John Carter, Nathaniel Ashby, Thomas Lucas, Iohn Woodroff, Iames Iohnson Esquires, George Tilyard Gent. Thetford. For the whole Borough and Corporation of Thetford, the Major for the time being, John Kendal Gent. Mr. Bourage Martin, Maurice Shel∣ton, Esquires, Robert Keddington Gent. Mr. Nicholas Rookwood, Mr. Robert Wright of Kil∣veston. Newcastle upon Tine. For the Town and County of Newcastle upon Tine, Sir Nicholas Cole Knight and Baronet, Sir Francis Bows Knight, Sir Francis Anderson Knight, Sir Iohn Marley.
Nottingham. For the County of Nottingham, Francis SandiEsq; Thomas Bristow, William Newton, Gentle∣men. East-Retford. For the Borrough of East-Retford, the Bai∣liffs for the time being. Oxon. For the County of Oxon, William Glyn, John West, Esquires, Iohn Coker Gent. Iames Herbertesq; Sir Thomas Tippin. University of Oxford. Mr. Robert Withers, Mr. Edward Master, Mr.David Thomas, Mr. Gregory Ballard, Mr. Timo∣thy Horton. The City of Oxford. For the City of Oxford, Francis Holloway, Wil∣liam Cornish. Salop. For the County of Salop, Charles Baldwin, Sa∣muel Baldwin, esquires, Mr. Moore of Middleton,Mr. Bushop of the Moore, Benjamin Buckley. Stafford. For the County of Stafford, Thomas Rudiardesq; Iohn Colelough, Timothy Edge, Gentle∣men. Somerset. For the County of Somerset, William Orangeesq; VVilliam Bacon Senior, Gent. Iohn Crid∣land
Gent. Mawdley Samborne, Iohn Carew, Roger Newborough, Iames Haise, esquires. For the City of Bristol. For the City and County of the City of Bri∣stol, The Major and Sheriffs for the time be∣ing, Iohn Knight the elder, VVilliam Coulston, Iohn Bradway, VVilliam Coles. For the City of Bathe. For the City of Bathe, Iohn Vane, Iohn Masters, Aldermen. Southampton. For the County of Southampton, with the Town and County, Mr. Essex Powlet, Richard Lucy, Gabriel VVhistler, esq; Isle of Wight. For the Isle of VVight, Thomas Bowremanesq; Iohn Oglander of Newport Gentleman. Suffolk. For the County of Suffolk, George VViniffe, William Blumfield, esquires, Mr. Iohn Brooke,Mr. Milton of Ipswich, Mr. Edmond Bedingfield,Mr. Francis Langley, Mr. Thomas Read, Mr.Rabbit of Bramfield, Isaac Matham esquire, Gardi∣ner Web Gent. St. Edmunds Bury. For St. Edmonds Bury, Francis Smith, Robert Sharpe, Samuel Hustler.
Surrey. For the County of Surrey, Edward Evelin, Iohn Yates, Richard Knipe, esquires, Mr. Iohn Parker,Sir Purbeck Temple, Sir Thomas Bludworth,Knights, Thomas Rogers, Charles Good-Harman-Atwood,esquires, Iohn Parker of Rigate. Rye in the County of Sussex. For the Town of Rye, Samuel Bembrigg, Iames VVelsh, Thomas Osmonton. Worcester. For the Town of Worcester, Sir Iohn Pack∣ingtonBaronet, Sir Rowland Berkley Knight, Sir Iohn Winford Knight, Samuel Sandys, Henry Townsend, Iohn Bearcroft, esquires, Sir Ralph Clare, Knight of the Bath. Worcester City. For the City and County of the City of Wor∣cester, Edward Soley Alderman, Samuel Smith, Thomas Twitty, Gentlemen, Henry Townsendesq; Sir William Mooreton Knight, Humphrey Tyrer, Richard Heming, Stephen Richardson, Gen∣tlemen, Sir Iohn Packington, Sir Rowland Berkley, Sir Ralph Clare, Sir Iohn Winford, Samuel Sandys esq;
Warwick. For the County of VVawick, Listerof Alveston Esq. Richard Bishop of Statford Esq. Coventry. For the City and County of the City of Co∣ventry,Sir Arthur Caley Knight, The Maior of Coventry for the time being, Hnry Smith Al∣man,Sir Richard Hopkins Knight, William Iesson, Thomas Norton Esqs. Mr. Thomas Love, Mathew Smith, Samuel Snell, William Ielliffe, Ro∣bert Beak, Iames Naer Aldermen. Town of Warwick. For the Town of Warwick, Sir Henry Pucker∣ingBaronet, Sir Clement ThrockmortonKnight,  Rouse, Nathaniel Stoughton, Iohn Stanton Esqs. Lister of Alveston Esq. Rich∣ard Bishop of Straford. Wilts. For the County of Wiltes, Waltes Buckland, Thomas Mompesson, William Caley esqs. Mathew Rayman Gent. Tho. Hunt Gent. Robert Chand∣ler, Robert Nicholas of Alcainings, William Broome∣wichGent. Samuell Eyre Gent. Simon SpatchurstEsq. Christopher Gardiner Gent. Mr. Francis Pary. Sarum. For the City of New Sarum, Samuel Eyre Gent.Symon Spatchurst esq. Christopher Gardiner Gent. Anglesey. For the Isle of Anglesey, Robert Lord Vis∣count Bulkley. Brecon. For the County of Brecon, William Iones, Iohn Gwyn, Henry Stedman, Edward Powell. Cardigan. For the County of Cardigan, Iames Phillips,
Morgan Herbert, Thomas Ienkins, Erasmus Lloyde, Thomas Evans, Henry Vaughan, Thomas Price the elder, Esquires; Thomas Lloyde of Yinshen, Morris Vaughan, Iohn Price, Gent. Thomas Par∣y, Reighnold Ienkins, Iohn Bowin, Thomas Lewis, ector Phillips, Nicolas Lewis, VVilliam Iones, Abel Gffin, Esqs; VVactkin Lloyde, Iohn Griffith of Noyadd, Gentlemen; The Major of Cardi∣gmfor the time being, Rees Gwin, David Mor∣gan,Aldermen. Carmarthen. For the County of Carmarthen, Jonathan Lloyde, Walter Lloyde, Walter Mansell. Carnarvon. For the County of Carnarvon, Griffith Bodurda, John Lloyd of Naugwhnadale, Robert Wynn ofConway, William VVynn of Pengwoone, VVil∣liam Thomas of Carnarvon, Ionathan Lloyde, VValter Lloyde, VValter Mansell. Denbigh. For the County of Denbigh, Francis Manly Esq; Flint. For the County of Flint, Kenick Eaton, Esq; Glamorgan. For the County of Glamorgan, Iohn Price,of Courtcarne, Morgan Morgan, Esq; Mountgomery. For the County of Mountgomery, VVilliam Oakely, Edmond VVareing of Oldbury, David Morrice, Esqs; Iohn Matthews, Henry Pusel, Iohn Kiffin, VVilliam Price of Lanligan, Iohn Lloyd of Conway. Haverford-West. For the Town and County of Haverford-west, Sir Herbert Perrot, Knight, VVilliam Browne, Alderman.
Rules, Orders, and Instructions for the discharging and paying off the Navy, and other Debts relating thereunto. I. THe Commissioners hereby appointed for disbanding of the Army, and discharging the Navy, shall proceed therein in manner fol∣lowing, viz. First they are to disband the re∣maining part of the Army according to the for∣mer Rules in that behalf made; which done, they are then first to discharge and pay off those Sixty five ships which are now out of Imploy∣ment, and of them in the first place, those whose Commanders, Officers and Seamen, have the least pay due to them; And after them they are to pay off the men aboard those Thir∣ty six ships now in His Majesties Service, who entred on his pay the Twenty fourth of June last. II. That all the Commanders, Officers and Mariners who served in person, and were in Service upon any of the Sixty five of his Ma∣jesties ships, on the Twenty fifth of April, One thousand six hundred and sixty, and have taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, or shall take the same, when they shall be there∣unto required, and have not since deserted the Service, nor been discharged for Misdemeanor, shall with all convenient speed have their Ac∣compts stated (by the Auditors hereafter ap∣pointed) and thereupon receive all their Ar∣reats of their pay from the fourteenth of March One thousand six hundred fifty eight, to the day
of their discharge; And the Commanders Of∣ficers, and Mariners of the aforesaid Thirty six ships which were in service on the Twenty fifth of April, One thousand six hundred and sixty, and have taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, or shall take the same as a∣foresaid, and have not deserted the Service, shall have their Accompts stated as before, and receive their pay from the said Fourteenth of March, One thousand six hundred fifty eight, until the Twenty fourth of Iune, One thou∣sand six hundred and sixty next following. And the Commissiners appointed by this Act, shall upon sight of the Accompts so stated as before, cause the send Captains, Officers and Mari∣ners Wages, successively to be payed by the Treasurers appointed by this Act, out of the money which shall come in of the six Months Assessment, or any other money, heretofore appointed for the paying or disbanding the Ar∣my, and discharging the Navy. And if any further Arrears shall be claimed and appear to be due to any such Commanders, Officers or Mariners in service as aforesaid for service at Sea, from or after the fourteenth of March, One thousand six hundred fifty seven, and to, or before the fourteenth of March, One thou∣sand six hundred fifty and eight, That in such case the Auditors hereby appointed, shall exa∣mine all such Arrears, and draw up a State thereof to be presented to the next Parliament in order to their satisfaction. III. That no money be paid or allowed to any person before-mentioned for any short allow∣ance
of Victuals, made or pretended to be made them, either at Sea, or in Harbor: And if it shall appear, That any Money, Clothes, Goods, Wares, or Merchandices, have beén paid or sold by any Publick Minister, Officer, or other person, to any Commander, Officer, or Seaman of the aforesaid Ships, upon accompt of their pay, since the Fourteenth of March, One thou∣sand six hundred fifty eight; in such case, all the said moneys so paid, and the value of the Clothes, Goods, Wares, and Merchandices so sold and delivered within the time of their said service, shall be defaulked out of their pay aforesaid: And the sums so defaulked shall be paid by Warrants of the Commissioners, charged on the Treasurers, unto such person and persons to whom the same of right be∣longeth, out of the money that shall come in of the six moneths Assessment, or any other moneys heretofore appointed for paying or disbanding of the Army and Navy, in course next after the Commanders, Officers, and Seamen are paid. IV. That after the accompts of the Command∣ers, Officers, and Seamen are stated, then the Auditors shall state the accompts of the Ship-Keépers: And of all Officers on shore in the Yards, and Store-houses, at Deptford, Wool∣wich, Chatham, Portsmouth, Harwich, and other places, to be stated from the Fourteenth of March One thousand six hundred fifty eight, to the Twenty fourth of June last past; after the Rates accustomed to be paid by His Majesty, and according to their several Capacities, at which
time the said Commissioners are to give them Warrants, charged upon the Treasurers, to pay them their several sums out of the money that shall come into their hands of the six moneths assessment, or any other money here∣tofore appointed, for paying or disbanding of the Army and Navy in course next after the Common Marriners, Seamen, Commanders, Officers, and their Servants, are discharged and paid, and the money from them defaulked as before, fully satisfied. V. That the said Auditors shall state the ac∣compts of the Victuallers from the said Four∣teénth day of March, One thousand six hundred fifty eight, to the day of the several Ships dis∣charge, for as many as are out of employment as before; and to the Twenty fourth day of June, for the remaining part of the Navy now in His Majesties service in the Winter Guard, and assign them payment in course on the Trea∣surers before-mentioned, to be paid out of the money remaining in their hands, out of the six Moneths Assessment, or any other money here∣tofore appointed for the paying or disbanding of the Army and Navy, next after the sums for∣merly ordered are paid. VI. That the Auditors shall from the said Four∣teenth of March, One thousand six hundred fifty eight, state the accompts of all men that shall or may justly claim any money for Quarters, and Cures of the Sick, and Wounded Sea∣men ser a shore out of His Majesties Ships in
any Town or Corporation in this Kingdom; And for the Quarters and Cures of the Sick and Wounded Soldiers sent over from Flanders; which being so stated, the said Commissioners shall assign them their money by Warrant on the Treasurers, to be paid in course next after the Commanders, Officers, and Marriners aforesaid, and the Officers and Ship-keépers aforesaid, are paid and satisfied. VII. That if in case any Commanders, Officers, or Marriners, shall have died or beén discharged by Ticket out of any the said Ships, and their Arrears of Pay not satisfied: In such case the Auditors shall state the accompts of the per∣sons so dead or discharged from the said Four∣teénth day of March, One thousand six hundred fifty eight, to the day of their death or discharge, according to their several capacities; And the Commissioners shall thereupon give Warrants upon the Treasurers, by this Act appointed for the payment of the sums to them, or their As∣signs in course, when the Commanders and Officers of the several Ships, to which they did belong at the time of their death or dis∣charge, and the debts for curing the Sick and Wounded, are satisfied. VIII. That the said Auditors shall also state the several accompts of all other persons, which can or may justly claim any debt to be due unto him or them, for any provision, maintenance of Prisoners, Goods, Wares, Merchandises, Stores, Ammunition, and other necessaries sold
and delivered to any Publick Minister, to and for the use of the Navy aforesaid, from the Fourtéenth of March One thousand six hun∣dred fifty eight, to the Twenty fourth of Iune One thousand six hundred and sixty, and order them payment in course, after the before men∣tioned sums are paid by Assignation on the Treasurers to be paid out of the money re∣maining in their hands, out of the six Moneths Assessment, or any other moeys heretofore appointed for paying or disbanding of the Ar∣my and Navy. IX. That for the better stating the accompts of the Commanders, Officers, and Mariners of the said Navy, and the several other ac∣compts before recited, and hereafter mentioned, Arthur Sprey, William Iessop, Ralph Darnal, Sa∣muel Atkins, Richard Kingdon, and Bartholomew Fillingham Esquires, and Iohn Walker Gentle∣man, shall be and are hereby appointed, consti∣tuted, and authorized to audite, and cast up the accompts of the aforesaid Commanders, Offi∣cers, Mariners, and all other mens accompts relating to the debt of the said Navy as before, and shall respectively before they enter thereon, take an Oath in these words following. I Do swear, that to the best of my skill and judg∣ment, I shall examine, and truly state all such ac∣compts as shall be committed to my care and trust by the Commissioners, for disbanding the Army, and discharging the Navy, or any three, or more of them; and shall and will to the best of my knowledge, make true Certificates of all such accompts to the said Com∣missioners, or any three of them. So help me God.
Which said Oath, the said Commissioners, or any three of them as aforesaid, are hereby au∣thorized to administer accordingly. Which ac∣compts so certified by the said Auditors, or any two of them, then the said Commissioners, or any three of them, shall have power and autho∣rity, and are neeby authorized and impower∣ed to issue out Warrants from time to time, to the respective Treasurers aforesaid, for the pay∣ment of the several sums so audited, and due as aforesaid: Which Warrants, together with the acquittance of the persons to whom the same is payable thereupon, shall be to the said Treasurers respectively a sufficient Warrant and discharge. X. That the Chief Officers of His Majesties Navy do with all convenient speed deliver un∣to the Commissioners appointed by this Act, a perfect List of the names of all the aforesaid Ships that are to be discharged, and the places in which they lie; And the names and sirnames of the Commanders, Officers, Marriners, and common Seamen to each ship belonging; and a particular accompt of the time that every person hath served, and what Money or Goods every or any one of them hath received. XI. That the Pursers and Checks of the several Ships of the Navy, do from time to time when they shall be required thereunto, attend the Au∣ditors aforesaid, and deliver unto them a true and perfect accompt of all the Commanders, Officers, Marriners, and Seamen belonging
to the said ships, and shall produce the original Muster-Book and Pay-books, wherein the names of the said Commanders, Officers, and Sea-men were entered, and give an exact ac∣compt of what Arrears is due unto them, and how and in what manner the same becomes due; the which Books and Accompts, shall by the said Pursers and Checks be delivered upon Oath, which said Oath the Commissioners aforesaid, or any thrée of them, are hereby or∣dered to administer accordingly. XII. That in case any Purser shall be found to make any false Muster, or shall muster any Captain, Officer, or Mariner by a false name, or make any false Ticket, Such Purser shall forfeit his or their respective Wages, and be im∣prisoned the space of six Moneths, and in such Case the Commissioners appointed by this Act, or any two of them, are hereby impowred to commit them to prison accordingly. XIII. That upon discharge of any of the Comman∣ders, Officers, and Mariners of the Navy aforesaid; all the said Commanders, Officers, and Mariners, shall deliver up all their respec∣tive Ships, Guns, Masts, Sayles, Yards, Anchors, Cables, Tackle, Apparrel, Provi∣sions, Ammunition and Stores, which are in their possessions, for his Majesties use, unto such person or persons, as his Majesty, or the Lord High Admiral of England, shall appoint to receive the same; And if any Commanders, Officers, or Sea-men, shall refuse to be dis∣charged, or to deliver up the Stores aforesaid, or shall be found, upon due proof, to have embez∣led
any part thereof, or do disswade others from being discharged, he or they so offending, shall forfeit all his and their Arrears, and be fur∣ther proceeded against, according to their de∣merit. XIIII. That the said Commissioners, or any thrée of them as aforesaid, shall have power to nomi∣nate, appoint, and imploy such Clerks, Agents, Messengers and Servants, as shall be necessa∣ry for the said Work, and to make and give to them such reasonable Sallaryes, Allowances and satisfactions as they shall think fit; And also to provide all other necessaries, and to de∣fray all other charges relating to the fame. XV. That the Commissioners formerly nomina∣ted by the House of Commons, and by this Act continued and appointed for this Service, shall have and receive for their charge and pains in and about this Service, one penny in the pound, and no more, out of all such monies as shall be issued by vertue of this Act; and each of the Auditors aforesaid shall receive for his pains and Charges, in and about this Service, the sum of twenty shillings per diem, during the continuance of this Service, which the Trea∣surers of the aforesaid monies, are hereby en∣abled and required to issue and pay accord∣ingly. XVI. That the Commissioners shall direct the said Treasurers from time to time to grant Assignations (who are hereby re∣quired to observe the same) for such and so many sums of money on the respective Receiv∣ers or Treasurers for raising money by the Act
aforesaid in the several Counties, Cities, or places, where they understand any of the said Money lies, as the Commissioners for disband∣ing the Army and Navy, or any threé or more of them as aforesaid, shall direct and appoint to such persons, and in such manner as the said Commissioners, or any threé or more of them as aforesaid, shall direct and appoint. XVII. That the Commissioners herein named, or any thrée of them, shall and are hereby autho∣rized to call to accompt the present Treasurers in this Act named: And Iames Nelthorpe, and Iohn Lawson Esquires, late Treasurers at Wars, or any other former Treasurers, or Commissioners of the Army, or Navy; for all such sums of money, as they or any of them stand accomptable for, and to certifie the same accompts into His Majesties Exchequer.
Anno Regni CAROLI IJ. REGISAngliae, Scotiae, Franciae, & Hiberniae,DUO DECIMO. At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Five and twentieth day of April, An. Dom. 1660. In the Twelfth Year of the Reign of Our most Gracious Soveraign Lord CHARLES, By the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, &c. LONDON, Printed by IOHN BILL, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1660. CUM PRIVILEGIO.
Anno XII. CAROLI. II. Regis. An Act for further sup∣plying and explaining certain defects in an Act, Intituled, An Act for the speedy pro∣vision of money for disbanding and pay∣ing off the Forces of this Kingdom, both by Land and Sea. WHereas through some doubts ari∣sing upon or by negligence in the execution of one Act of this pre∣sent Parliament, Intituled, An Act for the speedy provision of mo∣ney for the disbanding and paying off the Forces of this Kingdom both by Land and Sea: And also of one other Act, Intituled, An Act for supplying and explaining certain defects in the aforesaid Act: The same Acts do not an∣swer the ends aforesaid, in such measure as was expected, without some further explana∣tion of the sence thereof, and a review of the several Assessments made thereby, so that some persons may not escape without pay∣ment at all, or go away at very small proporti∣ons, whilst others pay their just and full due.
It is therefore Enacted and Declared by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the consent and advice of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the ame, That all and every person and persons of the several Ranks, De∣grées, and Qualifications in the said Act or Acts mentioned, shall contribute and pay the several and respective sums of money therein appointed to be paid (any pretence of eempti∣on, being the Kings Majesties Servants, to the contrary notwithstanding:) And also that every person and persons, Ecclesiastical and Temporal, Bodies Politick and Corporate, shall pay for their Estates, both real and per∣sonal, the sum of Forty shillings for one hun∣dred pounds per annum, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser Estate, And for every hundred pounds personal Estate, after the rate of five pounds per annum; Provided it extend not to Estates under five pounds per annum. And to the intent the same may be equally and indifferently Assessed and Taxed, Be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authori∣ty aforesaid, That the several Commissioners in the said Act named, or any three of them, within their several and respective Counties, Limits and Precincts, shall have power to no∣minate and appoint two or more of the most able and discréet persons in every Parish, Vil∣la or Hamlet, to review the several Rates Assssments that have been made in their several and respective Parishes, Villages and Hamlets. And where they shall finde that by the negligence, or default of any former Asses∣sors, any persons or Estates have béen under
Rated, or omitted to be Rated, That then they shall Rate and Assess all such persons and E∣states, so under-rated or omitted, to the full va∣lue they are to be rated and assessed at, either for their degrées, persons, or estates, by this or the former Acts to that purpose made in this present Parliament, or shall by the appoint∣ment at the discretion of the said Commission∣ers make new Assessments or Rates, and shall return the same or their said Additional Rates at such places and times as the said Commissi∣oners; or any thrée of them shall appoint. And it is further enacted and declared by the Authority aforesaid, That every sworn Attor∣ney, or Clerk in the Office of the Clerk of the Pipe in the Exchequer; and euery Attorney belonging to the Office of the Lord Treas∣rers Remembrancer, shall pay Twenty nobles apéece. And be it further enacted and declared, That every Barrester at Law, and every other per∣son or persons that hath or have subscribed to any Deed or Writing wherein he or they have béen written or entituled Esquire, or that hath or have acted by vertue of any Commission or pretended Commission, Act, or pretended Acts of Parliament, wherein they have before the sitting of this Parliament, béen written or entituled Esquire, shall pay as reputed Es∣quires within the said Acts. And to the intent that none that have or shall pay his or their due proportions. that he or they ought to pay in respect of his or their quality or degrée, may be doubly charged, every person that hath or shall pay his full proportion for his or her de∣grée, and quality, the same excéeding the propor∣tion
of his or her estate, real and personal, shall by certificate under the hands and seals of or more of the Commissioners within the same County or Precinets where such sum hath o shall be paid, be discharged from further payment for his or her estate, so that it be par∣ticularly expressed in every such Certificates where such estate lieth, and the several and re∣spective values thereof; so that it may appear, that his or her proportion for his or her degrée or quality doth exceed that of his or her estate; and also where any person or persons, Bodies Politick or Corporate, have paid, or shall pay for his, her, or their estate, in one or more Coun∣ties, he or they shall by like Certificate or Cer∣tificates be discharged in other places for so much and such values specially mentioned to be paid in the said Certificates, and no more. And be it enacted and declared by the Autho∣rity aforesaid, That the said Commissioners or any threé or more of them within their several Precincts, shall and may have power to inquire of, hear and determine all abuses, neglects, and misdoings of all and every the Assessors and Collectors to be imployed by vertue of this or the said precedent Acts; and shall have power to impose any Fine or Fines upon them or any of them, whom they shall be well informed (by the oath of two or more credible witnesses, which oath they or any two of them are hereby impowred to administer) to offend from and after the Twentieth day of December, One thousand six hundred and sixty, in not perform∣ing their duties in their respective employ∣ments. Provided, That no such Fine shall ex∣céed
the sum of five pounds for one offence; and that such Commissioners who shall set or im∣pose such ine or ines, shall have full power by Warrant under their hands and seals, to com∣mand the several Constables or Tythingmen, which in the several and respective places where such person or persons have their habitation or above, upon whom such fine or fines is or are imposed, to levy the same by Distress upon the Goods of such person or persons refusing to pay the same, and to return the overplus thereof (if any be) deducting also reasonable charges for taking such Distress, to the owner or own∣ers of such Goods; and every such fine shall be imployed to the same purposes as the moneys raised by the said former Acts are appointed: And also in case no Distress can be found or had for satisfying such fine, and in case no Distress can be taken by the Collectors or other Officers appointed to Distrain, for the Taxes or Assess∣ments by vertue of the said former Act or Acts, that in every such default, upon complaint to the said Commissioners, or any threé of them, within their several and respective limits, the said Commissioners, or any thrée of them, shall have full power and authority to cause every such person from whom no Distress can be had, to be committed to the next Common Gaol, there to remain until he hath fully satisfied and paid such sum or sums of money, which ought to be charged upon him, by vertue of this and the said former Acts, without Bail or Main-prize. And be it further enacted and declared, That the Commissioners of every County and place respectively shall make up a true accompt of the
sums onely of every Hundred, Lath, Wapen∣take or Ward, Rated and Assessed by the said former Acts, together with the additional sums that shall be rated by vertue of this pre∣sent Act severally within their several Coun∣ties, Limits, and Precincts, without naming the particular persons or estates, and shall shew what hath been paid thereof, and to what per∣son and persons and what hath been discharged by such Certificates as are appointed by this Act, and what is in arrear and upaid, and shall return the same unto His Majesties Court of Exchequer, before the Second day of March next; and in so doing they shall not be compell∣ed to make or return any other Accompt, Du∣plicate, or Certificate. And it is further enacted and declared. That the true and full yearly value of all Lands, Tenements, Rents, Tithes, and other Here∣ditaments, shall be rated and assessed in manner aforesaid, in the several Parishes, Villages, or Hamlets, where the same are scituate, lying, or arising. And be it further declared, That every sum charged upon, and paid by any person, by vertue of the said former Acts or either of them, by reason of estate, degrée, or quality, shall be al∣lowed and deducted out of such further charge, as shall be imposed upon him or her, by vertue of this present Act. Lastly, It is enacted and declared, That whosoever is sued at Law for any Act done, or to be done in the due execution of this or either of the said former Acts, he may plead the Ge∣neral Issue, and give the special matter in evi∣dence: And if the Plaintiff be Nonsuit, or a
Verdict pass against any such Plaintiff or Plaintiffs in any such Action, the Defendant shall and may recover his double costs. Pro∣vided always, and be it enacted, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to any Peer of this Realm, in point of Assessment Imprisonment, Distress, or other∣wise, provision being made in the said first re∣cited Act, for the Assessing of the said Péers, by certain Péers, who are therein named and ap∣pointed in that behalf. And be it further enacted, That the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Ste∣ward of His Majesties Houshold, Lord Cham∣berlain of His Majesties Houshold, the Earl of Northampton, Lord Howard of Charleton, the Lord Roberts, the Lord Grey of Wark, the Lord Craven, the Lord Mohun, and the Lord Hatton, be added to the Péers named in the said first re∣cited Act for the Assessing of the Péers, accord∣ing to the said recited Act: Which said Lords Commissioners, or any five of them, in this and the former Act named, shall have power to As∣sess, Levy, and Collect; and shall Assess, Levy, and Collect, all such sums of money as shall be assessed according to the tenor of this and the former Act, upon such Péers who have not paid proportionably to their estates. And be it declared and enacted by the Autho∣rity aforesaid, That these persons hereafter named, shall be added Commissioners for their several Counties, Places, and Precincts re∣spectively, and shall exercise the same power as if they had béen named in the said former Acts, or either of them.
Berks. For the County of Berks, Perigrine Hobby, Richard Harrison Esqs. Iohn Fettiplace, of Fern∣hamEsq. Burrough of New Windsor. Andrew Plumton Gent. Richard Fishborne Gent. Bucks. For the County of Bucks, Sir Thomas Hamp∣son Baronet, Sir Phillip Palmer Baronet, Anthony Racliffe Esq. Cambridge. For the County of Cambridge, Sir Thomas Dayrell, Iohn Bennet Esq. Sir Anthony Cage, Levinus Bennett. For the Isle of Ely. For the Isle of Ely, Roger Jennings, Esq. Chester. For the County of Chester, Sir George War∣berton Baronet, Edward Warren Esq. Jeffery Shakerly Esq. Henry Lee Esq; City of Chester. For the City and County of the City of Chester, the Major for the time being.
Cornwall. For the County of Cornwall, Robert Roberts, Esq. Sir William Thredinham, Joeph Tredin∣ham, Thomas Penhallow, The Knights and Burgesses that serve for the said County, and Iames Eirsey Gent. Cumberland. For the County of Cumberland, Anthony Bouch, Richard Urial, Thomas Croswhat, Robert VVebster. Devon. For the County of Devon, Nicholas DaviesDoctor of Physick, VVilliam Jennins Gent.Edmond Tremaine, VVilliam Putt, Iohn Kellond, VVilliam Bogan, George Howard, Iohn Kelley, VVilliam Kelley, Iames Rodd Esqs. York. For the West Riding in the County of York, VVestbury Norcon Esq. Robert VVivell Esq.Richard Roundhill Gent. VVilliam Hamond Esq.VValter Hawkesworth, Esq. Cutbert VVade. Iohn reston Gent. Arthur Ingram Esq, Edward Atkin∣, VVilliam VVitham Gent. Samuel Sonder∣nd,Esq. Thomas VVard Gent. Sir William gram Knight.
York Northriding. For the Northriding in the County of York, Sir William Caley, Arthur Caley Esq. William Wivell Esq. Sir Tho. Gower Baronet, Thomas VVorsley Esq. Charles Tankred, Sir William Francklyn Baronet, the Bailiffs of Scarborough for the time being, Tristram Fish, Robert Belt, Esquires, Thomas Robinson, Thomas Scudamore Esquires. York. For the City and County of the City of York, all the Aldermen of the City of York. For the Town of Kingston upon Hull, George Crowle. Essex. For the County of Essex, Mr. Edward Glas∣cock,Mr. Miles Hubbert, Mr. Iohn Smart, Capt.Hunter, Dean Tindal Esq. Isaac Wincoll, Thomas Clapton, Thomas Peek, Peter Iohnson, Thomas Manby Esqs. Gloucester. For the County of Gloucester, Thomas Freame, Tho. Floyde, Samuel Shepard, Phillip Shepard, VVilliam Morgan, Richard Daston, Iohn TookEsqs. Robert Lord Tracy.
Hereford. For the County of Hereford, Sir Herbert Par∣retKnight, John Barnaby of Brookehampton esq.Thomas Baskervile of Collington Gent. John Boothof Hereford Esq. City of Hereford. For the City of Hereford, Thomas Davies Esq. Major, James Lawrence Gent. Tho. Clerk Gent. Hertford. For the County of Hertford, Marmaduke Raw∣den, Iames Willimott Iunior Gent. Arras Dr. of Physick, Richard Combes Esq. St. Albans. For the Borrough of St. Albans, William Fox∣wistEsq. Recorder, Mr. Iohn New, Mr. Edward Eames, Mr. Thomas Cowley Senior, Mr. William Marston, Henry Conningsby, Edmond Smith, Alban Cox, Richard Combes Esq. Kent. For the County of Kent, Sir William Mann, Sir Edward Masters, Thomas Peake esq. Sir Tho. Godfrey, The Major of Maydston for the time being, Sir William Merideth Baronet, Sir Thomas Peirce Baronet, Mr. Richard Manley, Mr. Thomas Manley. Sandwich. For Sandwich, Iohn Verrier, Peter Peake Gent.
Lancaster. For the County of Lancaster, Henry Banister Esq. Ieoffry Rushton Gent. Richard Fleetwood Gent. Iohn Molineux esq. VVilliam Fife esq. Sir George Middleton Knight and Baronet, Ma∣thew Richardson esq. Robert Heywood Esq. Roger Stoughton of the City of London, Alderman. Lincoln. For the parts of Linsey in the County of Lincolne, Edward Turney, William Lister, Esqs, Sir Robert Dallison Baronet, Sir Charles Dalli∣son Knight. Great Grimsby. For great Grimby, William Draper, Samuel Proctor. For the parts of Kestivan, William Thompson, Humphrey Walcot. London. For the City of London, Nicholas Delves Esq. Middlesex. For the County of Middlesex, Sir Iohn Robin∣sonBaronet, Lieutenant of the Tower, SirRichard Browne, Thomas Bide, Thomas Harrisonof South-Mims, Sir VVilliam Bateman, Lieut. Col. Powel, Charles Pitfield Esq. Robert Peyton, Iohn Iones, Iohn Limbrey, Edward Chard, Richard Shelton Esqs. VVilliam Page Esq. Roger Gen∣ningsEsq. Richard Meney.
Westminster. For the City of VVestminster, and Liberties thereof, Gabriel Beck Esq. Mr. Graham, Peter Maplesden, George Plunknet, Thomas Kike, William Greene, George Farewell, Ralph Darnell. Northampton. For the County of Northampton Edward Onely, Iohn Thornton, Iohn VVilloughby esqs. Norfolk. For the County of Norfolk, George Wind∣ham, Robert Doughty of Hanworth, Robert Legar,Esquires, Henry Scarborough Gent. Mr. John Ripps, Mr. Thomas Talbot, Mr. Henry Black-borne,Gent. Borough of Lyn Regis. For the Borough of Lyn Regis, John BassetMajor, Robert Steward Esq; Recorder, Tho∣mas Greene, William Wharton, Henry Bell. Great Yarmouth. For the Town of Great Yarmouth, Nicholas Cutting, James Simonds Bailiff there, Sir John Potts Knight and Baronet, Sir William DoyleyKnight, Sir Thomas Medow Knight, Thomas Gooch, George England, John Carter, Nathaniel Ashby, Thomas Lucas, Iohn Woodroff, Iames Iohnson Esquires, George Tilyard Gent.
Thetford. For the whole Borough and Corporation of Thetford, the Major for the time being, John Kendal Gent. Mr. Bourage Martin, Maurice Shel∣ton, Esquires, Mr. Robert Keddington Gent. Mr. Nicholas Rookwood, Mr. Robert Wright of Kil∣veston. Newcastle upon Tine. For the Town and County of Newcastle upon Tine, Sir Iohn Marley. Nottingham. For the Town of Nottingham, Francis SandisEsq; Thomas Bristow, William Newton, Gentle∣men. East-Retford. For the Borrough of East-Retford, the Bai∣liffs for the time being. Oxon. For the County of Oxon, William Glyn, John West, Esquires, Iohn Coker Gent. Iames Herbertesq; Sir Thomas Tippin. University of Oxford. Mr. Robert Withers, Mr. Edward Master, Mr.David Thomas, Mr. Gregory Ballard, Mr. Timo∣thy Horton.
The City of Oxford. For the City of Oxford, Francis Holloway, Wil∣liam Cornish. Salop. For the County of Salop, Charles Baldwin, Sa∣muel Baldwin, esquires, Mr. Moore of Middleton, Mr. Bishop of the Moore, Benjamin Buckley. Stafford. For the County of Stafford, Thomas Rudiardesq; Iohn Colclough, Timothy Edge, Gentle∣men. Somerset. For the County of Somerset, William Orangeesq; VVilliam Bacon Senior, Gent. Iohn Crid∣landGent. Mawdley Samborne, Iohn Carew, Roger Newborough, Iames Haise, esquires. The City of Bristol. For the City and County of the City of Bri∣stol, The Major and Sheriffs for the time be∣ing, Iohn Knight the elder, VVilliam Coulston, Iohn Bradway, VVilliam Cole. For the City of Bathe, Iohn Vane, Iohn Masters, Aldermen. Southampton. For the County of Southampton, with the Town and County, Mr. Essex Powlet, Richard Lucy, Gabriel VVhistler, esqs;
Isle of Wight. For the Isle of VVight, Thomas Bowreman esq; Iohn Oglander of Newport Gentleman. Suffolk. For the County of Suffolk, George VViniffe, William Blumfield, esquires. Surrey. For the County of Surrey, Edward Evelin, Iohn Yates, Richard Knipe, esquires, Mr. Iohn Parker,Sir Purbeck Temple Knight, Earle of An∣cram, Henry Capel. Dalinahey esq. Iohn Fare∣well,Doctor Windebanck. For the Town of Rye. Samuel Bembrigg, Iames VVelsh, Thomas Os∣monton. Coventry. For the City and County of the City of Co∣ventry, Sir Arthur Caley Knight, The Major of Coventry for the time being, Henry Smith Al∣derman. Town of Warwick. For the Town of Warwick, Sir Henry Pucker∣ingBaronet, Sir Clement ThrockmortonKnight, Iohn Rouse, Nathaniel Stoughton, Iohn Stanton Esquires.
Wilts. For the County of Wilts, Waltor Buckland, Thomas Mompesson, William Caley esqs. Mtthew Rayman Gent. Tho. Hunt Gent. Robert Challo∣ner, Robert Nicholas of Alcainings, William Broom∣wichGent. Samuel Eyre Gent. Simon SpatchhurstEsq. Christopher Gardiner Gent. Sarum. For the City of New Sarum, Samuel Eyre Gent.Simon Spatchhurst esq. Christopher Gardiner Esq. Anglesey. For the Isle of Anglesey, Robert, Lord Vis∣count Bulkley. Cardigan. For the County of Cardigan, Iames Phillips, Morgan Herbert, Thomas Ienkins, Erasmus Lloyde, Thomas Evans, Henry Vaughan, Thomas Price the elder, Esquires; Thomas Lloyde of Ymshen, Maurice Vaughan, Iohn Price Gentmen. Carnarvan. For the County of Carnarvan, Griffith Bodurda, John Lloyde of Nagwnnadale, Robert Wynn ofConway, William VVynn of Pengwoone, VVil∣liam Thomas of Carnarvan, Ionathan Lloyde, VValter Lloyde, VValter Mansell.
Denbigh. For the County of Denbigh, Francis Weanly Esq; Flint. For the County of Flint, Kenrick Eaton, Esq; Mountgomery. For the County of Mountgomery, Haverford-West. For the Town and County of Haverford∣west, Sir Herbert Perrot, Knight, VVilliam Browne, Alderman.
Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis. An Act for the raising of Seventy Thousand pounds for the further supply of his Majesty. THe Commons Assembled in Parlia∣ment do give and grant unto Your most Excellent Majesty, the sum of Seventy thousand pounds to be raised and le∣vyed in manner following, and do pray Your Majesty, that it may be Enacted, & be it Enacted by Your most Excellent Majesty, by & with the advice & consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That the sum of Threescore and ten thousand pounds, for one month only, beginning from the First day of Iuly, One thousand six hundred sixty and one, shall be Assessed, Taxed, Collected, Levied and paid in the several Counties, Cities, Bur∣roughs, Towns, and Places within England and Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon Tweede, according to the several Rates, Rules, and Proportions, and in such manner and form,
and by the same Commissioners, as in and by a certain other Act, passed this Parliament, for raising the like sum of Seventy thonsand pounds for one month only, beginning from the Twenty ninth of September, One thousand six hundred and sixty, Entituled An Act for the speedy raising of Seventy thousand pounds for the present supply of His Majesty, are mentioned or referred unto and intended, which Commissi∣oners shall meet-upon or before the fifth day of Iuly, One thousand six hundred sixty and one, and are hereby enabled and required to use and execute all and every the like Powers and Au∣thorities, as in and by the said Act are menti∣oned, or referred to, and intended as fully and amply, as if the same Rates, Rules, Propor∣tions, Powers and Authorities had been parti∣cularly inserted in this present Act. And be it further Enacted, by the Authori∣ty aforesaid, That all and every the sums of money charged by this Act, upon the several Counties, Cities, Towns, Burroughs and Places aforesaid, shall be raised, levied, and paid into His Majesties Receipt of the Exche∣quer, upon or before the first day of August, One thousand six hundred sixty one, by the seve∣ral Receive General, who shall be appoint∣ed by the said Commissioners; Provided al∣ways, and it is hereby declared, That no Man∣nors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, which were formerly assessed and taxed for and towards former Assessments, and Land-taxes, and are now in the possession or holding of His Majesty, or of the Queens Highness, or of any Ecclesiastical person or persons, or his, or their Farmers and Tenants, shall be exempted from the payment of the several sums of money in this Act comprized, but that the said Man∣nors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
shall be rated, assessed, and taxed for and to∣wards the said several sums of money in this Act comprized, in such manner and form as they were of late rated, taxed, and assessed for and toward the said former land-Rates, any Law, Statute or Custome to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding. Provided always, that neither this Act, nor any thing therein-contained, shall be drawn into example to the prejudice of the antient Rights belonging to the Peers of this Realm. And be it Declared and Enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid, That these persons hereafter named, shall be added Commissioners for their several Counties, places and precincts respect∣vely, and shall exercise the same powers as the other Commissioners intended by this Act, are Authorized and impowred to do; That is to say, Berks. For the County of Berks, Peregrine Hobby, Richard Harrison, Esqs; John Fettiplace of Ferne∣amEsq; and Samuel Woodcox. Borrough of New Windsor. For the Borrough of New Windsor, Andrew Plumpton, Richard Firshburne, Gent. Bucks. For the County of Bucks, William Tirringham Esq; Sir Thomas Hampson Baronet, Sir Philip Palmer Baronet, Thomas Ratcliff Esq; Cambridge. For the County of Cambridge, Sir Thomas Dayrell, John Bennet Esq; Sir Anthony Cage, Levinus Benner. Isle of Ely. For the Isle of Ely, Roger Jennings Esq;
Chester. For the County of Chester, Sir George Warburton Baronet, Edward Warren, Jeffery Shakerley, Henry Leigh, Esqs; City of Chester. For the City and County of the City of Che∣ster, The Major for the time being. Cornwal. For the County of Cornwal, Robert Roberts Esq; Sir William Tredinham, Joseph Tre∣dinham, Thomas Penhallow, the Knights and Burgesses that serve for the said County, and Iames Eirsey Gent. The Major of Lostwithel for the time being, Iohn Mollesworth Esq William Williams of Trenythen. Cumberland. For the County of Cumberland, Mr. Anthony Bouch, Mr. Richard Uriell, Mr. Thomas Cros∣what,Mr. Robert Webster. Devon. For the County of Devon, Nicholas DaviesDoctor of Physick, William Jennens Gent. Ed∣mond Tremayne, William Putt, John Kellond, William Bogan, George Howard, Iohn Kelly, Iames Rodd Esquires, Walter Jago, Francis Drew,Esq; William Walrond Esq; John Blagdon Gent.Iohn Hamm Gent. Henry Newte. York. For the West-Riding in the County of York, Welbury Norton, Robert Wivell Esquires, Ri∣chard Roundhil Gent. William Hamond, Walter Hawksworth Esquires, Cuthbert Wade, Iohn Preston Gent. Arthur Ingram Esq; Edward Atkin∣son, William Witham Gent. Samuel SunderlandEsq; Thomas Ward Gent. Sir William Ingram
Knight, Sir John Goodrick Baronet, Sir Tho. Wentworth, Sir Edward Rodes, Knights, God∣frey Copley of potsbrough, John Clayton, Ioshua Horton, Thomas Stringer Esqs. The Alderman of Leedes for the time being. York Northriding. For the Northriding in the County of York,Sir William Caley, Arthur Caley Esq. William Wivell Esq. Sir Tho. Gower Baronet, Thomas VVorsley, Charles Tankred Csqs. Sir William Francklyn Baronet, the Bailiffs of Scarboroughfor the time being, Tristram Fish, Robert Belt,Esqs. Tho. Robinson, Thomas Scudamore Esqs. York City. For the City and County of the City of York, all the Aldermen of the City of York. Kingston upon Hull. For the Town of Kingston upon Hull, Mr. George Crowle. Essex. For the County of Essex, Mr. Edward Glas∣cock,Mr. Miles Hubbert, Mr. Iohn Smart, Capt.Hunter, Dean Tindal Esq. Isaac Wincall, Thomas Clopton, Thomas Peek, Peter Iohnson, Thomas Manby Esqs. Glocester. For the County of Glocester, Thomas Freame, Tho. Floyde, Samuel Sheppard, Phillip Sheppard, VVilliam Morgan, Richard Daston, Iohn TookeEsqs. Robert Lord Tracy, Thomas Morgan Esq. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton Knight, VVilliam Bromage Gent. VVilliam VVinter of DimmockGent. Richard Matchen Gent. Iohn WinnyatGent. Thomas Aylway Gent.
Hereford. For the County of Hereford, Sir Herbert Par∣retKnight, John Barnaby of Brookehampton esq.Thomas Baskervile of Collington Gent. John Boothof Hereford Esq. City of Hereford. For the City of Hereford, Thomas Davies Esq. Major, James Lawrence Gent. Tho. Clerk Gent. Hertford. For the County of Hertford, Marmaduke Raw∣den, Iames Willimott Iunior Gent. Thomas AasDr. of Physick, Richard Combes Esq. Sir Ro∣bert Iolyn Knight, Thomas Coppin, Edward Bris∣coe, Iohn Halsie Esqs. Mr. Fetherston of Blackes∣were, Edward Brograve, Ralph Gore, Thomas Bro∣grave, Edward Cason, Thomas Bonest, Henry Be∣cher, Henry Chancey, George Bromley, Alexander Meade, Iohn Crouch, Iames Willimott Iunior,George Poyner Gent. Iohn Iesson esq. Sir Edward Alston Knight. St. Albans. For the Borrough of St. Albans, William Fox∣wistEsq. Recorder, Mr. Iohn New, Mr. Edward Eames, Mr. Thomas Cowley Senior, Mr. William Marston, Sir Henry Conningsby, Edmond Smith, Alban Cox, Richard Combes Esq. Thom. Mar∣stoGent. Kent. For the County of Kent, Sir Willim Mann, Sir Edward Masters, Thomas Peake esq. Sir Tho. Godrey, The Major of Maydston for the time being, Sir William Merideth Baronet, Sir Thomas Peirse Baronet, Mr. Richard Manley, Mr. Thomas Manley.
Sandwich. For the Town of Sandwich, Iohn Verrier, Pe∣ter Peke Gent. Lancaster. For the County of Lancaster, Henry BanisterEsq. Ieoffry Rushton Gent. Richard FleetwoodGent. Iohn Molineux esq. VVilliam Fife esq. SirGeorge Middleton Knight and Baronet, Ma∣thew Richardson esq. Robert Heywood Esq. Roger Stowton of the City of London, Thomas Butler, Richard Farrington, VVilliam VVall, William Turner, Henry Brabin, VVilliam HodgkensonGent. Lincoln. For the County of Lincoln, and City and County of the same, Edward Turney, William Lister, Esqs, Sir Robert Dallison Baronet, SirCharles Dallison Knight, William Draper, Samuel Proctor, William Thompson, Humphrey Walcot, Thomas Mills, Michael Dalton, Iohn Watson, William Willoughby, Henry Heron, Marmaduke Darrel, Iohn Ogle, Anthony Treadway, William Skipwith, Thomas Browne of Eastkirby, Iohn Al∣more,Mr. Skinner of Thornton Colledge, Tho. Harrington, William Whichcot, Charles PelhamIunior, Roger Pelham, Mr. Iohn Lockton, Mr.Iohn Hobson Iunior, Mr. Henry Hall. Mr.Charles Pawdes, Mr. Iohn Colthurst, Mr. William Bishop, and Mr. Edward Blaw, Aldermen, Mr.William Perkins, Mr. Thomas Mills, Mr. Pere∣grine Buck, Mr. William Dowman, Mr. Thomas Dickenson, Mr. Iohn Thornton, and Richard We∣therel,Aldermen.
London. For the City of London, Nicholas Delves Esq.Benjamin Albin, Richard Spencer. Middlesex. For the County of Middlesex, Sir Iohn Robin∣sonBaronet, Lieutenant of the Tower, SirRichard Browne, Thomas Bide, Thomas Harrisonof South-Mins, Sir VVilliam Bateman, Lieut. Col. Powel, Charles Pitfield Esq. Robert Peyton, Iohn Iones, Iohn Limbrey, Edward Chard, Richard Shelton Esqs. VVilliam Page Esq. Roger IennynsEsq. Sir Heneage Finch Baronet, His Majesties Sollicitor General, Cheney of HackneyEsq. Lieut. Col. Powel, Charles Cheney of Chel∣sey, Christopher Abdy Esq. Sir Allen Broadricke, Iohn Barton Esq. Westminster. For the City of VVestminster, and Liberties thereof, Gabriel Beck Esq. Mr. Glaham, Peter Maplesden, George Plunknet, Thomas Kirke, VVill. Greene, George Farewell, Ralph Darnell. Monmouth. For the County of Monmouth, VVilliam Ionesof Frowen Esq. Iames Proger, Charles Proger. Northampton. For the County of Northampton, Edward Onely, Iohn Thorton, Iohn VVilloughby Esqs.
Norfolk. For the County of Norfolk, George Wind∣ham, Robert Dougty of Hanworth, Robert Legat,Esquires, Henry Scarborough Gent. Mr. John Kepps, Mr. Thomas Talbot, Mr. Henry Black∣borne,Gent. Borough of Lyn Regis. For the Borough of Lyn Regis, John BassetMajor, Robert Steward Esq; Recorder, Tho∣mas Greene, William Wharton, Henry Bell, Ro∣bert Thorowgood, Alderman Holley. Great Yarmouth. For the Town of Great Yarmouth, Nicholas Cutting, James Simonds Bailiff there, Sir John Potts Knight and Baronet, Sir William Doyley Knight, Sir Thomas Meow Knight, Thomas Gooch, George England, John Carter, Nathaniel Ashby, Thomas Lucas, Iohn Woodroff, Iames Iohnson Esquires, George Tilyard Gent. Theftford. For the whole Borough and Corporation ofTheftford, the Major for the time being, John Kendal Gent. Mr. Bourage Mrtin, Maurice hel∣ton,Esquires, Robert Keddington Gent. Mr.Nicholas Rookwood, Mr. Robert Wright of Kil∣veston. Newcastle upon Tine. For the Town and County of Newcastle upon Tine, Sir Iohn Marley, Sir Nicholas Cole Knight, and Baronet, Sir Francis Bows Knight, SirFrancis Anderson Knight.
Nottingham. For the County of Nottingham, Francis SandisEsq; Thomas Bristow, William Newton, Gentle∣men. East-Retford. For the Borrough of East-Retford, the Bai∣liffs for the time being. Oxon. For the County of Oxon, William Glyn, John West, Esquires, Iohn Coker Gent. Iames Herbert esq; Sir Thomas Tippin. University of Oxford. Mr. Robert Withers, Mr. Edward Master, Mr.David Thomas, Mr. Gregory Ballard, Mr. Timo∣thy Horton. The City of Oxford. For the City of Oxford, Francis Holloway, Wil∣liam Cornish. Salop. For the County of Salop, Charles Baldwin, Sa∣muel Baldwin, esquires, Mr. Moore of Middleton,Mr. Bishop of the Moore, Benjamin Buckley. Stafford. For the County of Stafford, Thomas Rudiardesq; Iohn Colclough, Timothy Edge, Gentle∣men. Somerset. For the County of Somerset, William Orangeesq; VVilliam Bacon Senior, Gent. Iohn Orid∣land
Gent. Mawdley Samborne, Iohn Crew, Roger Newborough, Iames Haise, esquires. For the City of Bristol. For the City and County of the City of Bri∣stol, The Major and Sheriffs for the time be∣ing, Iohn Knight the elder, VVilliam Coulston, Iohn Bradway, VVilliam Coles. For the City of Bathe. For the City of Bathe, Iohn Peirce, Iohn Masters,Aldermen. Southampton. For the County of Southampton, with the Town and County, Mr. Essex Powlet, Richard Lucy, Gabriel VVhistler, ess Isle of Wight. For the Isle of VVight, Thomas Bowremanesq; Iohn Oglander of Newport Gentleman. Suffolk. For the County of Suffolk, George VViniffe, William Blumfield, esquires, Mr. Iohn Brooke, Mr. Milton of Ipswich, Mr. Edmond Bedingfield, Mr. Francis Langley, Mr. Thomas Read, Mr. Rabbit of Bramfield, Isaac Motham esquire, Gardi∣ner Web Gent. St. Edmonds Bury. For St. Edmonds Bury, Francis Smith, Robert Sharpe, Samuel Hustler.
Surrey. For the County of Surrey, Edward Evelin, Iohn Yates, Richard Knipe, esquires, Mr. Iohn Parker,Sir Purbeck Temple, Sir Thomas Bludworth,Knights, Thomas Rogers, Charles Good-Harman-Atwood,esquires, Iohn Parker of Rigate. Rye in the County of Sussex. For the Town of Rye, Samuel Bembrigg, Iames VVelsh, Thomas Osmonton. Worcester. For the County of Worcester, Sir Iohn Pack∣ingtonBaronet, Sir Rowland Berkley Knight, Sir Iohn Winford Knight, Samuel Sandys, Henry Townsend, Iohn Bearcroft, esquires, Sir Ralph Clare, Knight of the Bath. Worcester City. For the City and County of the City of Wor∣cestor, Edward Soley Alderman, Samuel Smith, Thomas Twitty, Gentlemen, Henry Townsendesq; Sir William Mooreton Knight, Humphrey Tyrer, Richard Heming, Stephen Richardson, Gen∣tlemen, Sir Iohn Packington, Sir Rowland Berkley, Sir Ralph Clare, Sir Iohn Winford, Samuel Sandys esq;
Warwick. For the County of VVarwick, Listerof Alveston Esq. Richard Bishop of Stratford Esq. Coventry. For the City and County of the City of Co∣ventry,Sir Arthur Caley Knight, The Major of Coventry for the tune being, Henry Smith Al∣derman, Sir Richard Hopkins Knight, William Iesson, Thomas Norton Esqs. Mr. Thomas Love, Mathew Smith, Samuel Snell, William Ielliffe, Ro∣bert Beak, Iames Nailer Aldermen. Town of Warwick. For the Town of Warwick, Sir Henry Pucker∣ingBaronet, Sir Clement ThrockmortonKnight, Iohn Rouse, Nathaniel Stoughton, Iohn Stanton Esqs. Lister of Alveston Esq. Rich∣ard Bishop of Stratford. Wilts. For the County of Wilts, Walter Buckland, Thomas Mompesson, William Caley esqs. Mathew Rayman Gent. Tho. Hunt Gent. Robert Chand∣ler, Robert Nicholas of Alcainings, William Broome∣wichGent. Samuel Eyre Gent. Simon SpatchhurstEsq. Christopher Gardiner Gent. Mr. Francis Parry. Sarum. For the City of New Sarum, Samuel Eyre Gent.Simon Spatchhurst esq. Christopher Gardiner Gent.
Anglesey. For the Isle of Anglesey, Robert Lord Vis∣count Bulkley. Cardigan. For the County of Cardigan, Iames Phillips, Morgan Herbert, Thomas Ienkins, Erasmus Lloyde, Thomas Evans, Henry Vaughan, Thomas Price the elder, Esquires; Thomas Lloyde of Yinshen, Morris Vaughan, Iohn Price Gentmen, Tho Par∣ry, Reighnold Ienkins, Iohn Bowin, Thomas Lewis, Hector Phillips, Nicholas Lewis, VVilliam Iones, Abel Griffin, Esqs, VVactkin Lloyde, Iohn of Noyadd, Gentlemen; The Major of Cardi∣ganfor the time being, Rees Gwin, David Mor∣gan,Aldermen. Carmarthen. For the County of Carmarthen, Jonathan Lloyde, Walter Lloyde, Walter Mansell. Carnarvon. For the County of Carnarvon, Griffith Bodurda, John Lloyde of Nangwimadale, Robert Wynn ofConway, William VVynn of Pengwoone, VVil∣liam Thomas of Carnarvon, Ionathan Lloyde, VValter Lloyde, VValter Mansell. Denbigh. For the County of Denbigh, Francis ManlyEsq; Flint. For the County of Flint, Kenrick Eaton, Esq;
Glamorgan. For the County of Glamorgan, Iohn Price,of Courtcarne, Morgan Morgan, Esq; Mountgomery. For the County of Mountgomery, VVil∣liam Oakely, Edmond VVareing, David Mor∣rice,Esqs; Iohn Matthews, Henry Pursel, Iohn Kiffin, VVilliam Price of Lanligan, Iohn Lloyd of Conway. Haverford-West. For the Town and County of Haverford∣west, Sir Herbert Perrot, Knight, VVilliam Browne, Alderman.
Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis. An Act for the Attainder of several Persons guilty of the Horrid Murther of his late Sacred Majestie King CHARLES the First. IN all humble manner shew unto Your most Excellent Majestie, Your Majesties most dutifull and loyall Subjects the Lords and Commons in Par∣liament assembled, That the Horrid and Execrable Murther of Your Majesties Royal Father, our late most Gracious Soveraign Charles the First, of e∣ver blessed and glorious memory, hath been committed by a party of wretched men, desperately wicked, and hardened in their im∣piety, who having first plotted and contrived
the ruine and destruction of this excellent Mo∣narchy, and with it of the true, Reformed Prote∣stant Religion which had been so long protected by it and flourished under it, found it necessary in order to the carrying on of their pernicious and traiterous designs, to throw down all the Bullwarks and Fences of Law, and to sub∣vert the very being and constitution of Parlia∣ment, that so they might at last make their way open for any further attempts upon the Sacred Person of His Majesty himself; And that for the more easie effecting thereof, they did first seduce some part of the then Army into a compliance, and then kept the rest in subjecti∣on to them, partly for hopes of preferment, and chiefly for fear of losing their imploy∣ments and arrears; until by these, and other more odious arts and devices, they had fully strengthened themselves, both in Power and Faction; which being done, they did declare against all manner of Treaties with the Per∣son of the King, even then while a Treaty by advice of both Houses of Parliament was in being, Remonstrate against the Houses of Parliament for such proceedings, seize upon His Royal Person while the Commissioners were returned to the House of Parliament with His Answer, and when His Concessions had been Voted a ground for eace, seize upon the House of Commons, seclude and imprison some Members, force out others, and there being left but a small remnant of their own Creatures (not a tenth part of the whole) did seek to shel∣ter themselves by this weak pretence, under the name and authority of a Parliament, and in that name labored to prosecute what was
yet behinde and unfinished of their long intend∣ed Treason and Conpiracy;  ppose they prepared an Ordinance for erecting la w∣dgious and unheard of Tribunal, which they called An High Court of Justices, for Tyal of His Majesty; and having easi procur it to pass in their House of Commons, as it then stood moulded, ventured to send it up from thence to the Peers then sitting, who totally rejected it; whereupon their rage and fury in∣creasing, they presume to pass it alone as an Act of the Commons, and in the name of the Commons of England; and having gained the pretence of Law, made by a power of their own making, pursue it with all possible force and cruelty, until at last, upon the Thir∣tieth day of January, One thousand six hundred forty and eight, His Sacred Majesty was brought unto a Scaffold, and there publickly Murthered before the Gates of His own Royal Palace; And because by this horrid action the Protestant Religion hath re∣ceived the greatest wound and reproach, and the People of England the most insupportable shame and infamy that it was possible for the enemies of God and the King to bring upon uswhilst the Fanatick Rage of a few Miscre∣ants (who were as far from being true Pro∣testants, as they were from being true Sub∣jects) stands imputed by our Adversaries to the whole Nation: We therefore your Maje∣sties said Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons in Parliament assem∣bled, do hereby renounce, abominate, and pro∣test against that Impious Fact, the execrable Murther, and most unparallel Treason com∣mitted
against the Sacred Person and Life of our said late Soveraign, Your Majesties most Royal Father, and all proceedings tending thereunto: And do beseech Your most Excel∣lent Majesty that it may be declared, And be it hereby declared, That by the undoubted and Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, nei∣ther the Peers of this Realm, nor the Com∣mons, nor both together in Parliament, or out of Parliament, nor the People collective∣ly or presentatively, nor any other persons whatsoever ever had, have, hath, or ought to have any Coercive power over the persons of the Kings of this Realm; And for the better vindication of our selves to posterity, and as a lasting Monument of our otherwise inexpres∣sible detestation and abhorrency of this vila∣nous and abominable Fact, We do further be∣seech your most Excellent Majesty, that it may be Enacted, And be it hereby Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords and Com∣mons in this present Parliament assembled, That every Thirtieth day of January, unless it falls out to be upon the Lords day, and then the day next following, shall be for ever hereafter set apart to be kept and observed in all the Churches and Chappels of these Your Majesties Kingdoms of England and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Twede, and the Iues of Jersey and Guernsey, and all other Your Majesties Do∣minions, as an Anniversary day of Fasting and Humiliation, to implore the Mercy of God, that neither the guilt of that Sacred and Innocent oud, one those other sins by
which God was provoked to deliver up both us and our King into the hands of cruel and unreasonable men, may at any time hereafter be visited upon us or our posterity. And whereas Oliver Cromwel deceased, Henry Ire∣ton deceased, John Bradshaw deceased, and Tho∣mas Pride deceased, John Lsle, William Say, Sir Hardress Waller, Valentine Wauton, Tho∣mas Harrison, Edward Whally, William Heven∣ingham, Isaac Pennington, Henry Martin, John Barkstead, Gilbert Millington, Edmond Ludlow, Sir Michael Livesey, Robert Tichborne, Owen Rowe, Robert Lilborne, Adrian Scroop, John Okey, John Hwson, William Goffe, Cornelius Holland, Thomas Challoner, John Carew, Carew, John Jones, Miles Corbet, Henry Smith, Gregory Clement, Thomas Wogan, Edmond Harvy, Thomas Scot, William Cawley, John Downes, Nicholas Love, Vincent Potter, Augu∣stine Garland, John Dixwell, George Fleetwood, Simon Meyne, James Temple, Peter Temple, Da∣niel Blagrave, Thomas Waite, John Cooke, An∣drew Broughton, Edward Dendy, William Hewlet, Hugh Peters, Francis Hacker, Daniel Axtel, are notoriously known to have been wicked and active instruments in the prosecu∣tion and compassing that Trayterous Mur∣ther of His late Majesty, for which the said sir Hardress Waller, Thomas Harrison, William Heveningham, Isaac Pennington, Henry Martin, Gilbert Millington, Robert Tichborne, Owen Rowe, Robert Lilborne, Adrian Scroop, John Carew, John Jones, Henry Smith, Gregory Cle∣ment, Edmond Harvy, Thomas Scot, John Downes, Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland, George Fleetwood, Simon Meyne, James Temple,
Peter Temple, Thomas Waite, John Cook, Wil∣liam Hewlet, Hugh Peters, Francis Hacker, and Daniel Axtell, have already received their Try∣al at Law, and by Verdict, or their own Con∣fession, have been convicted, and by Iudge∣ment of Law thereupon had, do now stand duely and legally attainted; of whom, ten per¦sons, that is to say, Thomas Harrison, Adrian Scroop, John Carew, John Jones, Thomas Scot, Gregory Clement, John Cook, Hugh Peters, Fran∣cis Hacker, and Daniel Axtell, have most deser∣vedly suffered the pains of death, and been ex∣ecuted according to Law; and the said John Lisle, William Say, Valentie Wauton, Edward Whally, John Barkstead, Edmond Ludlow, sir Michael Livesey, John Okey, John Hewson, William Goffe, Cornelius Holland, Thomas Chal∣loner, Miles Corbet, William Cawley, Nicholas Love, John Dixwell, Daniel Blagrave, Andrew Broughton, and Edward Dendy, are fled from Iustice; not daring to abide a legal Tryal: May it therefore please your Maiesty that it may be Enacted, And be it Enacted by Autho∣rity of this present Parliament, That the said Oliver Cromwell deceased, Henry Ireton deceas∣ed, John Bradshaw deceased, and Thomas Pride deceased, shall by vertue of this Act, be adjudg∣ed to be Convicted and Attainted of High Trea∣son, to all intents and purposes, as if they, and every of them respectively had been At∣tainted in their lives: And also that John Lisle, William Say, Valentine Wauton, Edward Whally, John Barkstead, Edmond Ludlow, sir Michael Livesey, John Okey, John Hewson, william Goffe, Cornelius Holland, Thomas Chal∣loner, William Cawley, Miles Corbet, Nicholas
Love, John Dixwell, Daniel Blagrave, Andrew Broughton, Edward Dendy, and every of them, stand and be adjudged, and by Authority of this present Act Convicted and Attainted of High Treason; And that all and every the Mannors, Messnages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Remainders, Possessi∣ons, Rights, Conditions, Interests, Offi∣ces, Fees, Annuities, and all other the Here∣ditaments, Leases for years, Chattels real, and other things of that nature, whatsoever they be, of them the said Oliver Cromwell, Hen∣ry Ireton, John Bradshaw, Thomas Pride, John Lisle, William Say, Valentine Wuton, Edward Whally, John Barkstead, Edmond Ludlow, sir Michael Livesey, John Okey, John Hewson, William Goffe, Cornelius Holland, Thomas Chal∣loner, William Cawly, Miles Corbet, Nicholas Love, John Dixwell, Daniel Blagrave, Andrew Broughton, Edward Dendy, Thomas Harrison, Adrian Scroop, John Carew, John Jones, Thomas Scot, Gregory Clement, Hugh Peters, Francis Hacker, Iohn Cook, Daniel Axtell, sir Hardress Waller, William Heveningham, Isaac Penning∣ton, Henry Martin, Gilbert Millington, Robert Tichborne, Owen Rowe, Robert Lilborne, Hen∣ry Smith, Edmond Harvy, Iohn Downs▪ Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland, George Fleetwood, Simon Meyne, Iames Temple, Peter Temple, Thomas Wayte, which they, or any of them, or any other person or persons, to their or any of their uses, or in trust for them, or any of them, had the Five and twentieth day of March, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and six, or at any time since, shall stand and be forfeited unto Your Majesty, Your
Heirs and Successors, and shall be deemed, vested, and adjudged to be in the actual and real possession of Your Majesty, without any Of∣fice or Inquisition thereof hereafter to be taken or found: And also, That all and every the Goods, Debts, and other the Chattels per∣sonal whatsoever, of them the said Oliver Crom∣well, Henry Ireton, Iohn Bradshaw, Thomas Pride, whereof at the time of their respective deaths, they, or any of them, or any other in trust for them or any of them, stood possessed in Law or Equity, and all the Goods, Debts, and other the Chattels personal what∣soever of them the said Iohn Lisle, William Say, Valentine Wauton, Edward Whalley, John Barkstead, Edmond Ludlow, Sir Mi∣chael Livesey, John Okey, John Hewson, William Goffe, Cornelius Holland, Thomas Challoner, William Cawly, Miles Corbet, Ni∣cholas Love, John Dixwell, Andrew Brough∣ton, Edward Dendy, Thomas Harrison, Adrian Scroope, John Carew, John Jones, Thomas Scot, Gregory Clement, Hugh Peters, Francis Hacker, Iohn Cook, Daniel Axtell, sir Hardress Waller, William Heveningham, Isaac Penning∣ton, Henry Martin, Gilbert Millington, Robert Tichborne, Owen Rowe, Robert Lilborne, Hen∣ry Smith, Edmond Harvy, Iohn Downs, Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland, George Fleetwood, Simon Meyne, Iames Temple, Peter Temple, Thomas Wayte, whereof upon the Eleventh day of February, One thousand six hundred fifty nine, they or any of them, or any other in Trust for them or any of them, stood possessed either in Law or Equity, shall be deemed and adjudged to be forfeited unto, and are
hereby vested, and put into the actual and real possession of Your Majesty, without any fur∣ther Office or Inquisition thereof hereafter to be taken or found. Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid, That no Conveyance, Assu∣rance, Grant, Bargain, Sale, Charge, Lease, Assignment of Lease, Grants and Surrenders by Copy of Court-Roll, Estate, Interest, Trust, or limitation of any Vse or Vses of or out of any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Heredita∣ments, not being the Lands nor Hereditaments of the late King, Queen or Prince, or of any Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, nor being Lands or Hereditaments sold or given for the Delinquency, or pretended Delinquency of any person or persons whatso∣ever, by vertue or pretext of any Act, Order, Or∣dinance, or reputed Act, Order or Ordinance since the First day of Ianuary, One thousand six hundred forty and one, nor any Statute, Iudge∣ment or Recognizance, had, made, acknowledg∣ed or suffered to any person or persons, Bodies Politick or Corporate, before the Twenty ninth day of September, One thousand six hundred fif∣ty nine, by any of the Offenders before in this Act▪ mentioned, or their Heirs, or by any other person or persons claiming by, from, or under them or any of them, other then the wife or wives, childe or children, heir or heirs of such person or persons, or any of them, for money bona fide, to them or any of them paid or lent, nor any Conveyance, Assurance, Grant or Estate made before the Twenty fifth of April One thou∣sand six hundred and sixty, by any person or persons to any of the Offenders aforesaid in
Trust; And for the benefit of any other per∣son or persons not being any of the Offenders aforesaid, or in trust for any Bodies Politick or Corporate, shall be impeached, defeated, made void or frustrated hereby, or by any of the Convictions and Attainders aforesaid; but that the same shall be held and enjoyed by the Purchasers, Grantees, Lessees, Assigns, Cestuy que usu, Cestuy que trust, and every of them, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns respectively, as if this Act had not been made, and as if the said Offenders had not been by this Act, or by any other course or proceedings of Law convicted or at∣tainted; so as the said Conveyances, and all and every the Grants and Assurances which by vertue of this Act, are, and ought to be held and enjoyed as aforesaid, shall before the First of Ianuary, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, be entred and enrolled of Record in His Maje∣sties Court of Exchequer, and not otherwise; Any thing in this Act herein before contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and singular the Mannors, Lands, Tenements and Heredi∣taments, which at any time heretofore were the Lands and Possessions of Henry late Mar∣quess of Worcester, and Edward now Mar∣quess of Worcester, and Henry Lord Herbert, Son and Heir apparent of the said Edward Marquess of Worcester, or any of them; where∣of or wherein the said Oliver Cromwell, or any other person or persons in trust for him, or to his use, or any other the persons attainted by
this Act, or otherwise, or any person or per∣sons in trust for them or any of them, had or claimed, or pretended to have any Estate, Right, Title, Possession or Interest, at any time before or since the decease of the said Oliver Cromwell, shall be, and hereby are vested and setled in, and shall be held and enjoyed by the said Marquess of VVorcester, and the said Hen∣ry Lord Herbert, in such manner and form, and for such Estate and Estates, with such Powers and Priviledges as they formerly had in the same respectively; Any thing in this present Act contained, or any Act, Conveyance or As∣surance heretofore made or acknowledged by the said Edward Marquess of VVorcester, and Henry Lord Herbert or either of them, unto the said Oliver Cromwell, or any other person or persons in trust for, or to the use of the said Oliver Cromwell, or any Act or Conveyance made or done by the said Oliver Cromwell, or by any in trust for him, to any person what∣soever, to the contrary notwithstanding. Saving always to all and every person and persons, Bodies Politick and others, their respective Heirs, Successors, Executors and Administrators, all such Right, Title and Interest in Law and Equity, which they or any of them have or ought to have, of, into, or out of any the premisses, not being in trust for any the said Offenders, nor derived by, from or under the said Offenders, since the Twenty fifth day of March, which was in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hun∣dred forty six; And that they the said person and persons, Bodies Politick, and other their respective Heirs, Successors, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, in all and every such case where his and their Entry was lawful, upon such Offender or Offenders, or the Heirs or Assigns of such Offender or Of∣fenders, in or upon the said Twenty fifth day of March, One thousand six hundred forty and six, or at any time since, may without Petiti∣on, Monstrans de droyt, Onster le maine, or other Suit to His Majesty, enter on the Premisses in His Majesties Possession, or in the Possessi∣on of His Successors and Patentees, their Heirs or Assigns, in such manner to all in∣tents, as he or they might have done on the Possession of the said Offenders, their Heirs or Assigns, in or upon the said Twenty fifth day of March, or at any time since; Any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise not∣withstanding. Provided also, That all and every person and persons which have received any of the Rents or mean profits, of, in, or out of any the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, Chattels real, or Possessions of any the Of∣fender or Offenders in this Act mentioned, before the Eleventh day of February, One thou∣sand six hundred fifty and nine, and have paid or accounted for the same before the said Ele∣venth day of February, One thousand six hun∣dred fifty and nine, unto the said Offender or Offenders, or their Assigns, or to any claim∣ing from or under them, shall be clearly and for ever acquitted and discharged of and from the same, against the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, any thing herein con∣tained to the contrary notwithstanding.
Provided always, That it shall and may be lawful to and for Richard Ingoldsby to re∣tain and keep, or otherwise to sell and dispose all and singular the Goods and Chattels formerly belonging to sir Hardress Waller, in the Kingdom of Ireland, until Two thousand pounds, for which the said Richard Ingoldsby in the year One thousand six hundred fifty eight, stood joyntly bound with the said six Hardress Waller, unto Iames Brooks of the City of York, Alderman, and was then coun∣ter-secured by a Iudgement upon his Lands, and since by a Deed of Bargain and Sale of the said Goods and Chattels in Ireland, be fully paid, together with the Interest thereof; he the said Richard Ingoldsby accounting for, and paying the full overplus thereof, if any shall be, unto our Soveraign Lord the King; Any thing herein before contained to the con∣trary notwithstanding.
Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis. An Act for Confirma∣tion of Leases and Grants from Col∣ledges and Hospitals. WHereas since the be∣ginning of the late Troubles, divers Masters, Provosts, Presidents, War∣dens, Governours, Rectors, Princi∣pals, and other Heads, Fellows, and Scholars of Colledges, Halls, or Houses of Learning, in either of the Vniversities of Oxford and Cambridge, and the Dean, Canons and Pre∣vends of the Cathedral or Collegiat Church or Colledge of Christ-Church in the Vniversity of Oxford, and Provest, Warden, or other
Head-Officer, and Fellows or Scholars of the olledges of Eaton and Winche∣ster, and Masters and Governors, Brethren, Brothers and Sisters of divers Hospitals have been amoved ejected or sequestred by the Lords and Commons assemled in Parlia∣ment, or by certain Visitors by them appoin∣ted, or by some Conventions sitting at West∣minster under the name or stile of a Parlia∣ment, or by some Authority or pretence of Au∣thority derived from them or the late pretended and usurped powers, stiled Keepers of the Li∣berty of Egland by Authority of Parliament, or Protectors of the Common-wealth of Eng∣land Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominion or Dominions and Territories thereunto be∣longing. And whereas also after these Amo∣tions, Ejections or Sequestrations, several o∣ther persons have been either by election of the said Colledges, Halls, Houses of Learning, Church or Hospitals, or by some of the powers or pretended powers above mentioned placed and substituted in these Masterships, Head∣ships, Fellowships Deanary, Canories, Pre∣bendaries, Governorships and other places a∣foresaid, who have actually exercised the same places and been de facto Masters, Provosts Presidents, Wardens, Governours, Rectors, Principals and other Heads, Fellows, Scho∣lars, Brethren, Brothers and Sisters, Dean Canons or Prebends of such respective Col∣ledges, Halls Houses of Learning, Hospitals, Cathedrall Church or places, and have made divers Grants by Copy of Court-Roll, and Leases and Licences to let or assign Grants and Presentations to, and Elections of divers
persons, Re-entries for non-payment of Rent or breach of Conditions, whereupon divers Questions may in time to come arise. For prevention whereof, It is Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, with the Ad∣vice and assent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same, That all Grants by Copy of Court-Roll, and Leases and Licences of set∣ting and Assigning Grants and Presentati∣ons; And all Elections of Heads, Masters, Fellows, Scholars, Students and Officers of the said olledges, Halls, Church, & Houses of Learning and Hospitals aforesaid, into dead or other places then or since Vacant, Receipts and Acquittances of Rents incurred, Entries for forfeitures or Conditions broken, had made or given since the Five and Twentieth day of March in the year of our Lord One Thousand six Hundred Forty two, and before the Five and Twentieth day of July in the year of our Lord One Thousand six Hundred and Sixty, by any such Masters, Provosts, Presidents, Wardens, Governors, Rectors, Principalls and other Heads de facto of the said Colledges, Halls and Houses of Learning, and Fellows, and Scho∣lars de facto of the same respectively in either of the said Vniversities, or Dean and Canons or Prebends de facto of Christ Church afore∣said, or Master, Provost or Warden and Fel∣lows de facto of the Colledges of Eaton or Winchester, or by such Master, Warden or Go∣vernors de facto, or Master, Warden or Go∣vernors, Brethren Brothers or Sisters de facto of any Hospital, by whatsoever particular name or stile of Foundation the said Colledges,
Church, Hospitals, Masters, Governors, Fellows, Deans and Canons, or Prebends are stiled, founded, known or incorporated, and all Leases granted by the Master, Warden, Brethren, Brothers or Sisters of any Hospi∣tals of the Patronage of any Bishop, Dean, or Dean and Chapter, and all surrenders to them made to inable such Leases, Grants and presentations, shall stand and be of the same and no other force and effect, as if the said Ma∣sters, Provosts, Presidents, Wardens, Go∣vernors, Rectors, Principals, Heads, Fel∣lows, Scholars, Dean, Canons, Prebends, Brethren, Brothers or Sisters had been such de jure, and duly and de jure Intituled in and to the said Colledges, Halls, Houses of Learn∣ing, Church, Hospitals, Offices or places re∣spectively, And as if such Leases granted by the Master & Brethren of any Hospital of the patronage of any Bishop, Dean or Chapter had been confirmed by the said Bishop, Dean or Chapter; And that notwithstanding such defect in the said Lessors or Grantors, & notwith∣standing the restitution of any of the persons so ejected, the Rents, Covenants and Condi∣tions contained in such Leases and Grants shall go in succession, as if such Lessors or Grantors had been de jure Masters, Provosts, Presidents, Wardens, Governors, Reetors, Principals, Heads, Fellows, Scholars, Dean, Canons, Prebends, Brethren, Brothers and Sisters of such Colledges, Halls, Houses of Learning, Church, Hospitals and places re∣spectively; Any former Law, Custome or Statute to the contrary notwithstanding. Provided alwayes and be it Enacted, That
nothing in this Acc contained do or shall ex∣tend to the confirming or making good of any Lease or Leases of any parcel or parcels of Lands, Tenements, Pastures, Houses, Or∣chards, Gardens or Barns, or any of the pos∣sessions of or belonging to the Hospitall of Saint John Baptist and the Evangelist in the Town of Northhampton, made between the first day of September in the Year of our Lord One Thousand six Hundred Fifty & Five, and the Five and Twentieth day of July in the year of our Lord One Thousand six Hundred Fifty and eight, by the pretended Master George Godman and his Co-brethren of the afore∣said Hospital, by colour of any pretended Grant or Patent whatsoever, or notwith∣standing the Seal of the said Hospital or Corporation was to them or any of them set or affixed. Provided alwayes, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to make good in Law or equity any Lease or Leases made by Simon Moore Clerk, late Master or pretended Master of the Hospitall of Saint Oswald in the County of Worcester, of any the Lands, Tenements and Heredita∣ments of or belonging to the said Hospital, to Richard Moore son of the said Simon Moore, or to any of the children or grand children of the said Simon Moore, or to any other person or persons in trust or for the use or uses of the said Simon Moore, or his wife, children or grandchildren, or any or either of them. Provided alwayes, that no person or persons shall be confirmed in any Mastership, Provost∣ship, Headship, Fellowship, or Chaplains place
in any Colledge or Hall in either of the Vni∣versities of Oxford or Cambridge, or in the Colledges of Eaton and Winchester, that is not ordained Minister by Bishops or Presby∣ters (or being ordained, hath since renounced his Ordination) where by the local Statutes of the said respective Colledges or Halls Or∣dination is required. Provided alwayes, and be it Enacted, That this Act shall not extend to confirm any Lease or Leases of the Rectories and Parsonages of Randall and Littlecoates in the county of Lincolne, which have long since been in the te∣nure or occupation of John Lord Culpeper, as by several Leases under the Seal of the Ma∣ster and Fellows of the Colledge of the holy and undivided Trinity within the Town and Vniversity of Cambridge of King Henry the Eights Foundation may appear, and are now Leased over the head of the said John Lord Culpeper the antient Tenant, to one John West, though according to usage he claimed to renew his Lease three years before the expi∣ration thereof at the usual Fines or more. But that the said John Lord Culpeper, his Execu∣tors or Administrators, reimbursing the said new Tenant or Lessee so much money as hath been really paid to the said Colledge for the Fine for such Lease, they shall be admitted to renew the said Lease for the said Fine. Provided alwayes, That whereas Doctor Owen late reputed Dean, and the Chapter of the Cathedral Church of Christ in Oxon of the Foundation of King Henry the Eight, by their Indenture dated the seventh day of Au∣gust, in the year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred fifty seven, did Lease and demise unto John Arthur Clerk, Thomas Bromefield of Lon∣don Esquire, and Laurence Marsh of Darking in the County of Surry Esquire, certain Tyths and Lands parcel of the Mannor and Par∣sonage of Kirkham in the County of Lancastr, And by several other Indentures did Lease and demise unto several other persons many other parts and portions of the said Parson∣age of Kirkham (which had long been in the tenure or occupation of Thomas Clifton Esquire and his Ancestors, by severall succes∣sive Leases under the Abbot and Covent of Vale Royal, and the Colledge of Christ Church aforesaid respectively) for severall terms of years yet unexpired: Be it Enacted and ordained, That Thomas Clifton now of Litham in the County of Lan∣caster Esquire, his Executors and Administra∣tors, (paying the several and respective Rents reserved unto the said Colledge, and securing unto the said John Arthur, Thomas Bromefield, and Laurence Marsh, or the Survivors or Survivor of them, or the Executors or Exe∣cutor of the Survivor of them, for the uses in the said Lease expressed and not otherwise, out of the Premisses, the yearly summ of Four hundred pounds, to be paid half yearly by e∣quall portions, for the terme of Eleven years next ensuing, And reimbursing unto the said several other Lessees respectively or their re∣spective Assigns so much money as was by them respectively and truly paid for their re∣spective Fines,) shall have and enjoy the said several demised premisses for the residue of the said several termes of years yet to come,
as if the said several Leases made unto them the said John Arthur, Thomas Bromfeild, and Laurence Marsh, and unto the said severall o∣ther persons as aforesaid, had been legally made unto the said Thomas Clifton by a law∣full Deane and Chapter, This Act or any other thing to the contrary notwith∣standing. Provided alwayes, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to confirm the Election of any Head, Fellow, Scholar or Chaplain of any Colledge or Hall in either of the Vniversities, that upon any other ground besides the want of Episco∣pal Ordination, is or was not capable of be∣ing elected into such place or places by the Sta∣tures of the said Colledge or Hall, into which he or they were chosen. Provided also, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shal not extend to prejudice the Title of any person or persons, who by Letters Patents under the Great Seal since the first day of May, and before the twenty sixth of August One thousand six hundred and sixty, have obtained from his Majesty any Grant of any Deanery, Headship of any House, Rectorshiy of any Colledge, Canons place, Prebendary, Fellowship or Scholarship with∣in either of the Vniversities, or the Colledges of Eaton, Westminster, or Winchester; But that all and every the said Grants and Let∣ters Patents shall be of such, and no other Force and effect, as the same should have been if this Act had not been made, Any thing in this Act contained to the contrary notwith∣standing.
Provided also, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to confirm any Lease or Estate made by John Tombes Clerk, of any Lands, Tenements, or Here∣ditaments, belonging to the Hospital of Saint Katharines in Ledbury in the County of Here∣ford, to any of the children of him the said John Tombs, or to any other person or persons in Trust for him or them, or any of them. Provided alwayes, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall in any wise extend to confirm, or make good, any Lease or Leases made by VVilliam Lenthal, pre∣tended Warden of the House of Converts, be∣longing to the Master of the Rolls, since the thirtieth day of January, One thousand six hundred forty and two, of any Houses or Te∣nements thereto belonging, to the prejudice of John Lord Culpeper, his Successors, Les∣sees, or Assigns, the said Lord Culpeper pay∣ing or reimbursing unto the said Lessee or Lessees of such Houses or Tenements, such monies as they or any of them have paid, with Interest for the same, he or they discounting for the mean profits thereof. Provided alwayes, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend to confirm VVilliam Hook in the Mastership of the Kings Majesties Hospital of the Savoy, nor to confirm or make good any Lease of any Lands or Tenements belonging to the said Hospital, made between the thirtieth day of January, in the year of our Lord One thou∣sand six hundred forty eight, and the first day of June, One thousand six hundred and sixty;
The Master of the said Hospital for the time being, allowing and reimbursing to all such Lessees all such summ or summs of money, as they or any of them paid to the then Master of the said Hospitall by way of Fine, at the time of such Lease making, and Interest for the same, And the said Lessees and every of them discunting for the mean profits of the same. Provided alwayes, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act, or any thing herein contained, shall not extend to confirm or make good any Lease or Grant made, or mentioned to be made to any person or persons by John Owen late Dean, and o∣thers, Canons, or pretended Dean and Ca∣nons of the Colledge of Christ Church in the Vniversity of Oxford, or by any of them, of any the Rectories, Tythes, or Gleab Lands of Hampton, Wickenford, Badsey, Aldington, Uffenha, South-Littleton, North Littleton, and Middle Littleton, in the County of Wor∣cester, heretofore the possessions of Henry late Marquess of Worcester, and Dame Anne his Wife, or either of them, and whereo the said Henry was dispossest for his Allegiance and Loyalty to his late Majesty of Blessed Memo∣ry; But that the Executor or Administrator of the said Henry, shall and may be admitted to renew the Leases of the said Tythes, for such terme or terms, as the said Dean and Chapter of Christ Church are by Law enabled to grant the same, the said Executors or Ad∣ministrators satisfying and reimbursing to such person or persons, all such summ or summs of money, as he or they have payd
for the said Lease or Leases, by way of Fine, with Interest for the same, the said person or persons discounting to the said Executors or Administrators, for the mean Profits received thereupon. Provided also, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to confirm or make good any Lease, Leases, or Estate made by any pretended Dean and Chapter, Master or Head of any Colledge or Hall in either of the V∣niversities, or of any pretended Master or Go∣vernors of any Hospital, which said Lease, Leases or Estate had not been good or effectual in Law, had they been made by a lawful Dean & Chapter, Master, Head or Governor of any Colledge, Hall or Hospital aforesaid; This Act, or any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding. Provided also that this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to con∣firm or make good any Leafe or Leases of the Rectory or Parsonage of Arrington in the County of Cambridge, which hath long been in the tenure and occupation of Thomas hicheley Esq; and his Ancestors, by several successive Leases from the Master and Fel∣lows of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge; Nor shall confirm or make good any Lease or Leases of the Rectory or Parsonage of Soham in the said County of Cambridge, which hath likewise been, and still is in the occupation and possession of the said Thomas Chicheley, by Lease from the Master and Fellows of Pem∣broke Hall in Cambridge, but that the said Thomas Chicheley (paying and reimbursing the several and respective Tenants or Lessees,
the several and respective sums of money by them severally and respectively paid to the said Colledge and Hall, for or in the name of any Fine or Fines, for the making or granting such new Lease or Leases, with Interest, discounting such Rents and Profits as by them respectively have been taken or received out of the premisses) shall be restored to his said an∣cient Possessions. And the said Colledge and Hall respectively shall be enabled to Lease the said several Rectories and Parsonages, with their respective Appurtenances, unto the said Thomas Chicheley; This Act, or any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. Provided alwayes, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend to restore any person or persons to any Head∣ship, Fellowship, or Scholarship of any Col∣ledge or Hall, or to any Chaplains or place, in any Colledge or Hall, in the Vniversities, or to any Lecture or Rea∣ders place, that is or shall be before the first day of January, One thousand six hundred and sixty, eiected out of their respective Headship, Fellowship, Scholarship, Chaplain or Clerks-place, or out of any Lecture in the said Vniversities, by his Majesties Com∣missioners under the Great Seal, for not ha∣ving been legally and according to the severall Statutes of the said respective severall pla∣ces nominated, elected or admitted in or to the same; Any thing in this Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.
Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis. An Act for prohibiting the Exportation of Wooll, Woolfels, Fullers Earth, or any kind of Scouring Earth. FOr the better prevent∣ing and avoiding of such Losses and Inconveniencies as have happened, and daily do and may happen to the King∣dome of England, and Dominion of Wales, and to the Kingdome of Ireland by and through the se∣cret and subtile exportation and transportati∣on, and by and through the secret and subtle carrying and conveighing away of Wooll, Woolfells, Mortlings, Sherlings, Yarn
made of Wooll, Woolflocks, Fullers Earth, and Fulling Clay, out of and from the King∣dome and Dominion aforesaid, and for the better setting on work the poor people and In∣habitants of the Kingdomes and Dominion aforesaid. And to the Intent that the full and best use and benefit of the principal native Commodities of the same Kingdomes and Dominion may come, redound, and be unto and amongst the Subjects and Inhabitants of the same, and not unto or amongst the Subjects and Inhabitants of the Realm of Scotland, or of any Foreign Realms or States, as the same now of late in some great measure hath done, and is further like∣ly to do, if some severer punishment then heretofore be not speedily inflicted upon such Offenders, as shall be Actors or Assistants in and to such Exportation and Transporta∣tion, and in and to such carrying and convey∣ing away thereof as aforesaid; Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excel∣lent Majesty, the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That no person or persons whatsoever, from and after the four∣teenth day of January One thousand six hun∣dred and threescore, shall directly or indirect∣ly, Export, Transport, carry or convey, or cause or procure to be Exported, Transported, carried or conveyed out of, or from the King∣dome of England, or Dominion of Wales, or Town of Barwick upon wede, or out of or from the Isles of Jersey or Guernzey, with Sarke and Alderney, being under the Govern∣ment of Guernzey aforesaid, or out of or from
any of them, or out of, or from the King∣dome of Ireland aforesaid, into any parts or places out of the Kingdomes, Isles or Domi∣nion aforesaid, any Sheep or Wooll what∣soever, of the breed or growth of the King∣domes of England or Ireland, or Isles or Do∣minion aforesaid; Or any Wooll fells, Mort∣lings or Shorlings, or any Yarn made of Wooll, or any Woolflocks, or any Fullers Earth, or any Fulling Clay whatsoever; nor shall directly or indirectly pack or load, or cause to be packed or loaded upon any Horse, Cart, or other Carriage, or Load, or lay on board, or cause to be loaden or laid on board in any Ship or other Vessel, in any place or Port within the Kingdomes of England or Ireland, or Town of Berwick, or Isles, or Dominion aforesaid, any such Sheep, Wooll, Woolfells, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wooll or Woollflocks, or any Ful∣lers Earth or Fulling Clay, to the intent or purpose to export, transport, carry or convey the same, or to cause the same to be exported, transported, carryed or conveyed out of the Kingdomes of England or Ireland, Town of Berwick, Isles or Dominion aforesaid, or with intent or purpose, that any other person or persons should so export, transport, carry or convey the same into any parts or places out of the Kingdomes of England and Ireland, Town of Berwick, Isles or Dominion afore∣said, into the Kingdome of Scotland, or any Foreign parts. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Wooll, Woolfells, Mort∣lings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wooll,
Woollflocks, or any Fullers Earth, or Ful∣ling Clay, shall be from and after the four∣teenth day of January, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and three∣score, exported, transported, carried or con∣veyed out of the Kingdome of England and Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick, or Kingdome of Ireland, or out of any Port or place of the said Kingdomes respectively un∣to the Isles of Jersey or Guernzey, or to Sarke or Alderney, Except as in this Act shall be hereafter limited or appointed. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the Offender & Offenders, offence and offences aforesaid, shall be subject and lyable to the respective pains, penalties and forfeitures hereafter following, That is to say, The said Sheep, Woolls, Woolfels, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wooll, Woolflocks, Fullers Earth, and Fulling Clay, so exported, transported, carryed, conveyed, packed or loaden contrary to the true intent of this Act, shall be forfeited, and that every offender and offenders therein shall forfeit Twenty shillings for every such Sheep, and Three shillings for every pound weight of such Wooll, Woolfels, Mort∣lings, Shorlings, Yarn made of wool, wool∣flocks, Fullers earth, or Fulling Clay. And also the owners of the said Ships or Vessels knowing such offence, shall forfeit all their Interest in the said Ships or Vessels, with all their Apparel and furniture to them and every of them belonging. And that the Ma∣ster and Mariners thereof, knowing such of∣fence, and wittingly and willingly aiding
and assisting thereunto, shall forfeit all their Goods and Chattels, and have Imprison∣ment for the space of three moneths without Bail or Main-prise; the one moiety of which said penalties and forfeitures shall be to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; and the other moiety to him that will sue for the same by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of his Majesties Courts of Record, or before the Iustices of Assize, or in the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace: In which Suit, no Essoyn, protection or wa∣ger of Law shall be allowed. And be it further Enacted, That if any Merchant or other person or persons shall af∣ter the said fourteenth day of January trans∣port or cause to be transported, any Sheep, Wool, Wool-fels Mortlings, Shorlings, Woollen-yarn, Wool-flocks, Fullers-earth or Fulling-clay, contrary to the true intent of this Act, and be thereof lawfully convicted, That then he shall be disabled to require any debt or Accompt of any Factor or others for or concerning any Debt or Estate properly belonging to such offendor. Provided alwaies and it is nevertheless declared, That this Act or any thing therein contained shall not be construed to take away any greater pains or penalties inflicted or to be inflicted for any the offences aforesaid by vertue of any former Act of Parliament now in force. And be it also further Enacted by the autho∣rity aforesaid, That every offence that shall be done or committed contrary to this Act, shall and may be inquired of and heard, exami∣ned, tryed and determined in the County
where such Sheep, Wooll, Wool-fels, Mort∣lings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wooll, Wool-flocks, Fullers-earth, or Fulling-clay respectively shall be so packed, loaden, or laid aboard as aforesaid contrary to this Act, or else in the County where such offenders shall happen to be apprehended, or arrested for such offence, in such manner and form, and to such effect to all intents and purposes as if the same offence had been wholly and altogether done and committed at and in such Coun∣ty. Provided alwaies and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, That no person or persons whatsoever shall at any time hereafter be im∣peached for any offence aforesaid, unless such person or persons shall be prosecuted within the space of one year next ensuing such of∣fence committed. And be it further Enacted by the Autho∣rity aforesaid, That it shall and may be law∣full to and for any person or persons to seize, take and challenge to his or their own use and behoof, and to the use of the King, his Heirs and Successors, all and all manner such Sheep, Wool, Woolfels, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool, Wool∣flocks, Fullers-earth and Fulling clay, as he or they shall happen to see, finde, know or discover to be laid aboard in any Ship or other Vessel or Boat, or to be brought, carried or laid on shore at or near the Sea or any Navigable River or Water, to the intent or purpose to be exported, transported or conveyed out of the Kingdoms of England, or Ireland, Town of Berwick, Isles or Dominion afore∣said
contrary to the true meaning of this Act, or to be packed or loaden upon any orse, Cart or other Carriage, to the intent or pur∣pose to be conveyed or carried into the King∣dome of Scotland aforesaid; and that such per∣son or persons as shall happen so to seize, take or challenge any such Sheep, Wooll, Wool-fells, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wooll, Woolflocks, Fullers Earth or Fulling Clay as aforesaid, shall have the full moiety thereof, to all intents and pur∣poses. Provided alwayes, That such person or persons as shall make any such seizure or Challenge as aforesaid to his or their own use, shall not be admitted or allowed to give in E∣vidence upon his or their Oath or Oathes a∣gainst any person or persons, which shall happen to be indicted, accused or questioned by vertue of this Act, or any thing therein con∣tained. And furthermore be it Enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid. That all and every Ship, Vessel, Hulke, Barge or Boat, of what kinde soever, whereof any Alien born, or whereof any naturall born Subjects not in∣habiting within the Realm of England, shall be owner or part owner, and wherein any Sheep, Wooll, Wool-fells, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wooll, Wooll-flocks, Fullers Earth, or Fulling Clay shall happen to be Shipped, put or laid aboard con∣trary to the true meaning of this Act, shall be forfeited to the Kings Majestie, his Heirs and Successors.
Provided alwayes, That this Act shall not extend to any Lamd skin ready drest, and prepared fit and usefull for Furr or Ly∣nings. Provided also, That this Act shall not in any wise extend to the transporting, carry∣ing or conveying away of any such Wool-fells or Pelts, with such VVooll upon them, or to any Beds stuffed with Flocks, which shall be carryed or imployed in any Ship or other vessel for necessary use onely, of and about the Ordnance or other thing in or con∣cerning such Ship or Vessel, or onely for the necessary use of any the persons in such Ship or Vessell, passing or being, and which shall not be sold or uttered in any Foreign parts, out of the Kingdomes of England or Ireland, or Town of Berwick, Istes or Dominion aforesaid; nor to the exporting, transporting, carrying or conveying of any Weather-sheep, or of the VVooll growing upon any such VVeather-sheep, to be carryed alive in any Ship or other Vessell, for and towards the onely necessary food or diet, of or for the Com∣pany or Passengers or other persons therein, and for and towards none other purpose. Provided alwayes, and be it further En∣acted, That this Act or any thing therein con∣tained shall not extend to any such Wooll to be exported or transported out of or from the Port of Southampton, onely unto the afore∣said Isles of Jersey and Guernzey, by, or for the onely use or behoof of any the Inhabitants of the said Isles of Jersey and Guernzey, or either of them, or to any such VVooll to be
shipped or loaden aboard in any ship or other vessel, by, or for the only use or behoof of any the Inhabitants of the said Isles of Jersey or Guernsey, or either of them in the Port afore∣said, to be exported and transported into the said Isles of Jersey or Guernzey or either of them; so as such person and persons that shall so ship or lay aboard such Wooll into any ship or other vessel, do before the shipping or laying aboard such VVooll, deliver un∣to the Customer, Comptroller, Surveyor or Searcher of the Port of Southampton afore∣said (out of which the same VVooll is to be ex∣ported) a writing under the Seal or Seals of the respective Governors of the same Isles of Jersey and Guernzey, unto which the said Wool is to be transported, or of his or their Deputy or Deputies respectively, the which writing shall purport and express that the party named in such writing is authorised and appointed to export or to cause to be exported out of the Port aforesaid so much Wooll, ex∣pressing the number of the Tods, to the same Isle, to be used or manufactured in one of the same Isles, or in some of the members or parts of the same, and that such party so authorised and appointed to export or cause to be expor∣ted that Wool, hath before the making and sealing of that writing, entred sufficient Bond to his Majesties use for the landing of the said Wool in that Isle. And to the intent that the quantity of Wooll to be exported out of the Port of Southampton aforesaid into the said Isles or either of them in any one year, accompting the year to begin from the first
day of January next ensuing, and so yearly from the first day of January, may not exceed the Quantity hereunder specified; that is to∣say, unto the Isle of Jerey Two thousand Tods and no more of unkeamed Wool, and unto Guernzey One thousand Tods and no more of unkeamed Wool, and unto Alderny Two hundred Tods and no more of unkeamed Wool, and unto Sarke One hundred Tods of unkeamed Wool and no more, every Tod not exceeding thirty two pounds. And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Governor of the said Isle of Jersey or his Deputy for whom he will answer, shall not make to any person or persons any wri∣ting or writings such as is above specified, to authorise or appoint such person or persons as aforesaid, to fetch, eport, or transport out of the Port of Southampton aforesaid unto the said Isle of Jersey in one year, accompting the year from the first day of January, One thou∣sand six hundred and sixty aforesaid, any grea∣ter quantity of VVool then Two thousand Tods in any one year; and that the Gover∣nor of the said Isle of Guernzey, or his De∣puty for whom he will answer, shall not make to any person or persons any writing or writings, such as is above specified, to au∣thorise and appoint such person or persons as aforesaid, to fetch, export, or transport out of the Port above specified unto the said Isles of Guernzey, with Alderny and Sarke, in any one year, accepting the year from the first day of January aforesaid, any greater quantity of VVooll then One thousand Tods for Guern∣zey,
Two hundred Todds for Alderney, and One hundred Todds for Sarke in any one year; and that the Customer of the Port of Southampton aforesaid, shall keep a true ac∣compt of all the said quantity of Woolls so by him permitted to be loaden by vertue of this Act, and shall not permit any greater quantity of VVoolls to be loaden then by this Act is prescribed in any one year to ei∣ther of the said Islands respectively under any pretence whatsoever, upon the penalty of the forfeiture of his place, and the summe of One hundred pounds in money, one moyety whereof to the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and the other moyety to him or them that will sue for the same in any Court of Record, wherein no Essoyne, prote∣ction or wager of Law shall be allowed. And if any of the Governors aforesaid, or any their or either of their Deputy or Deputies of the said Isles, or either of them, shall give, grant, or make any Licence or Licen∣ces for exporting from Southampton afore∣said, into the said Isles respectively, of any greater quantity of such VVooll, then is be∣fore by the true meaning of this Act limit∣ted and appointed in that behalf; That then the respective Governor or Governors of such of the said Isles, shall forfeit and pay to the Kings Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, the summ of Twenty pounds of lawful mo∣ney of ngland, for every Todd of VVooll which shall be so licenced to be exported, over and above the rate or proportion of VVooll in and by this Act, or the true meaning thereof limited or appointed.
And be it further Enacted by the Authori∣ty aforesaid, That the respective Governors aforesaid, or their respective Deputies, or any their Clerks, Officers or Servants, for the Granting, making, or Sealing of every such writing of Licence as is aforesaid, and for the entring a Remembrance of the same into some book, which they shall have and keep for that purpose, may have and take the summ of Twelve pence, and no more, upon pain of Forfeiting to be partie grieved the summ of Five shillings for every penny which shall be taken over and above the said summ of twelve pence, in and by this Act allowed to be ta∣ken, and so after that proportion, the said pe∣nalty or Forfeiture for the taking above Twelve pence as aforesaid, to be recovered by Bill, Plaint or Information in any Court of Record at Westminster or elsewhere, wherein no Injunction, Protection, Priviledge, Essoyne or wager of Law shall be admitted or al∣lowed.
Anno Regni CAROLI IJ. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, & Hiberniae, DUODECIMO. At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Five and twentieth day or April, An. Dom. 1660. In the Twelfth Year of the Reign of Our most Gracious Soveraign Lord CHARLES, By the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, &c. LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1660. CUM PRIVILEGIO.
Anno XII. CAROLI. II. Regis. An Act for Confirmati∣on of Marriages. WHereas by vertue or colour of cer∣tain Ordinances, or certain pre∣tended Acts or Ordinances, di∣vers marriages since the begin∣ning of the late troubles, have bee had and solemnized in some other manner then hath been formerly used and accustomed: Now for the preventing and avoyding of all doubts and questions touching the same, It is Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, with the advice and assent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the ame, That all Marriages had or Solemnized in any of his Majesties Dominions since the first day of May, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and two, before any Iustice of Peace, or reputed Iustice of Peace, of Eng∣land or Wales, or other his Majesties Domini∣ons, and by such Iustice or reputed Iustice, so pronounced or declared. And all Marriages within any of His Majesties Dominions, since the same first day of May, in the year of our
Lord, One thousand six hundred forty two, had or solemnized according to the direction or true intent of any Act or Ordinance, or reput∣ed Act or Ordinance, of one or both Houses of Parliament, or of any Convention sitting at Westminster; under the name Stile or Title of a Parliament, or assuming that name, Stile or Title, shall be, and shall be adjudged, esteemed, and taken to be, and to have been of the same and no other force and effect, as if such Marriages had been had and solemnized accor∣ding to the Rites and Ceremonies established, or used in the Church or Kingdom of England, any Law, Custome, or Vsage to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. And be it further Enacted, that where in any Suite commenced or to be commenced in any of the Courts of the Common Law, any issue hath beén joyned, and not already tryed or de∣termined, or shall be joyne upon the point of Bastardy, or lawfulness of marriage, for or concerning the marriages had and solemnized as aforesaid, the same issues shall be tryed by Iury of twelve men according to the course of Tryal of other issues tryable by Iury at the Common Law, and not otherwise, any Law, Statute, or Vsage to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding.
Anno XII. CAROLI. II. Regis. An Act for Prohibiting the Planting, Setting, or Sowing of To∣bacco in England and Ireland. YOur Majesties loyal and obedient Sub∣jects, The Lords and Commos in this present Parliament Assembled consider∣ing of how great concern and impor∣tance it is, That the Columes and Plan∣tations of this Kingdom in America, be defen∣ded, protected, maintained, and kept up, and that all due and possible encouragement be given unto them; and that not onely in regard great and considerable Dominions, and Countries, have been thereby gained, and added to the Im∣perial Crown of this Realm; But for that the strength and welfare of this Kingdom do very much depend upon them, in regard of the em∣ployment of a very considerable part of its Shipping and Seamen, and of the vent of very great quantities of its Native Commodi∣ties
and Manufactures, as also of its supply with several considerable Commodities which it was wont formerly to have onely from For∣raigners, and at far dearer Rates: And for∣asmuch as Tobacco is one of the main products of several of those Plantations, and upon which their welfare, and subsistence, and the Navigation of this Kingdom, and vent of its Commodities thither, do much depend; and in regard it is found by experience, That the To∣baccoes Planted in these parts are not so good, and wholsome for the Takers thereof; And that by the Planting thereof your Majesty is deprived of a considerable part of Your Re∣venue arising by Customes upon Imported Tobacco; Do most humbly pray that it may be Enacted by your Majesty: And it is hereby Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same: That no person or persons what∣soever shall, or do from and after the first day of January, in the year of our Lord, One thou∣sand six hundred and sixty, Set, Plant, im∣prove to grow, make or cure any Tobacco ei∣ther in Seed, Plant, or otherwise, in or upon any Ground, Earth, Field, or Place, within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, Islands of Guernsey or Jersey, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or in the Kingdom of Ire∣land, under the penalty of the Forfeiture of all such Tobacco, or the value thereof, and of the sum of forty shillings for every, Rod or Pole of Ground to Planted, Set, or Sowen as a∣foresaid; and so portionablely for a greater or quantity of Ground, One Moyety there∣of to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors:
And the other Moyety to him or them that shall Sue for the same, to be recovered by Bill, Plaint, or Information in any Court of Re∣cord, wherein no Essoign, Protection, or Wa∣ger in Law shall be allowed. And it is hereby further Enacted, That all Sheriffs, Iustices of the Peace, Maiors Bai∣liffs, Contrables, and every of them, upon In∣formation or Complaint made unto them, or any of them, by any the Officers of the Cu∣stomes, or by any other person, or persons whatsoever, That there is any Tobacco Set, Sowen, Planted, or growing within their Iurisdictions, or Precincts, contrary to this Act, shall within Ten days after such Infor∣mation or Complaint, cause to be burnt, pluck∣ed up, consumed, or utterly destroyed, all such Tobacco so Set, Sowen, Planted or Growing. And it is hereby further Enacted, That in case any person or persons shall resist, or make forcible opposition against any person or per∣sons in the due and through Execution of this Act, that every such person or persons for every such offence, shall forfeit the sum of five pounds to be divided and recovered in manner aforesaid. And in case any person or persons shall not pay the sums of money, by them to be paid, by vertue of this Act, That in every such case, Destress shall be made and Sale thereof, returning the Over-plus to the Owners; And in case no Destress be to be found, That then every such party shall be committed to the Common Gaol in the County where such Offence shall be committed, there to remain for the space of two Moneths, without Bail or Main-prize.
Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted, That this Act, nor any thing therein contain∣ed, shall extend to the hindring of the Planting of Tobacco in any Physick Garden of either University, or in any other private Garden for Physick or Chirurgery, onely so as the quan∣tity so Planted exceed not one half of one Pole in any one place or Garden.
Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis. An Act for erecting and establishing a Post-Office. WHereas for the main∣tenance of mutual Correspondencies, and prevention of many Inconveni∣ences happening by private Posts, severall publique Post-Offices have been heretofore ere∣cted for carrying, and recarrying of Letters by Posts, to, and from all parts and places within England, Scotland, and Ireland, and severall parts be∣yond the Seas; the well-ordering whereof, is a matter of general concernment, and of great advantage, as well for preservation of Trade and Commerce, as otherwise: To
the end therefore that the same may be mana∣ged so, that speedy and safe dispatches may be had, which is most likely to be effected, by ereting one general Post-Office for that purpose; Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That there be from henceforth one general Letter-Office ere∣cted and established in some convenient place within the City of Londn, from whence all Letters and Pacquets whatsoever may be with speed and expedition sent unto any part of the Kingdomes of England, Scotland, and Ireland, or any other of his Majesties Domi∣nions, or unto any Kingdome or Countrey beyond the Seas, at which said Office all Returns and Answers may be likewise recei∣ved; And that one Master of the said General Letter-Office shall be from time to time ap∣pointed by the Kings Majesty, His Heirs, and Successors, to be made or constituted by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, by the name and style of his Maje∣sties Post-Master Generall; which said Ma∣ster of the said Office, and his Deputy, and Deputies by him thereunto sufficiently au∣thorised, and his and their Servants, and A∣gents; and no other person or persons whatso∣ever, shall from time to time have the recei∣ving, taking up, ordering, dispatching, send∣ing Post or with speed, and delivering of all Letters & Pacquets whatsoever, which shall from time to time be sent to and from all and every the parts and places of England, Scot∣land,
and Ireland, and other his Majesties Dominions, and to and from all and every the Kingdomes and Countreys beyond the Seas, where he shall settle or cause to be set∣led Posts or running Messengers for that pur∣pose. Except such Letters as shall be sent by Coaches, common known Carryers of Goods by Carts, Waggons, or Packhorses, and shall be carried along with their Carts, Waggons, and Packhorses respectively; And except Letters of Merchants and Masters which shall be sent by any Masters of any Ships, Barques, or other Vessel of Mer∣chandize, or by any other person imployed by them for the Carriage of such Letters a∣foresaid, according to the respective directions; And also except Letters to be sent by any pri∣vate Friend or Friends in their wayes of jour∣ney or travel, or by any Messenger or Mes∣sengers sent on purpose, for or concerning the private affairs of any person or persons: And also except Messengers who carry and recar∣ry Commissions or the Return thereof, Affi∣davits, Writs, Process, or Proceedings, or the Returnes thereof, issuing out of any Court. And be it furtther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such Postmaster Generall for the time being, as shall from time to time be made and constituted by His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and the respective De∣puties, or Substitutes of such Post-master General, and no other person or persons whatsoever, shall prepare, and provide Hor∣ses and Furniture to let to Hire unto all Through-Posts, and persons riding in Post
by Commission, or without, to and from all and every the parts and places of England, Scotland and Ireland, where any Post-roads are, or shall be setled and established. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful to and for such Post-master General to be consti∣tuted and appointed as aforesaid, and his Deputy or Deputies by him thereunto suffici∣ently authorized, to demand, have, receive and take for the Portage and conveyance of all such Letters which he shall so convey, carry, or send Post as aforesaid, and for the provi∣ding and furnishing Horses for through-Posts, or persons riding in post as aforesaid, accord∣ing to the several Rates and Summs of law∣ful English money hereafter mentioned, not to exceed the same (that is to say) For the Port of every Letter not exceeding one sheet, to or from any place not exceeding fourscore Eng∣lish Miles distant from the place where such Letter shall be received, Two pence; And for the like port of every Letter not exceeding two sheets, Four pence; And for the like Port of every Pacquet of Letters proportionably unto the said Rates; And for the like Port of every Paquet of Writs, Deeds, and other things after the Rate of Eight pence for eve∣ry ounce weight; and for the Port of every Letter not exceeding one sheet, above the di∣stance of fourscore English Miles from the place where the same shall be received, Three pence; And for the like Port of a Letter, not exceeding Two sheets, Six pence; and pro∣portionably to the same rates, for the like port of all pacquets of Letters, and for the like
port of every other Pacquet of Writs, Deeds, or other things, after the rate of Twelve pence of English money for every Ounce weight; and for the port of every Letter not exceeding One sheet, from London unto the Town of Berwick, or from thence to the City of Lon∣don, Three pence of English money; And for the like port of every Letter not exceeding two sheets, Sir pence; and proportionably unto the same Rates, for every Pacquet of Letters, and for every other Pacquet of grea∣ter bulk, One shilling and Six pence for eve∣ry Ounce weight; And for the port of such Letters and Pacquets as shall be conveyed or carried from the Town of Berwick unto any place or places within forty English Miles distance from Berwick, or any other place where such Letter shall be received, Two pence; and for every Letter not exceeding two sheets, Four pence; and proportionably to the same rates for every pacquet of Letters, and for every other pacquet or parcel, Eight pence for every Ounce weight; and for every Letter not exceeding One sheet to be conveyed or carryed a further distance then Forty Eng∣lish Miles, Four pence; And for the like port of every double Letter, Eight pence: And propor∣tionably unto the same Rates for the like port of every pacquet of Letters, and for the like port of every other pacquet, One shilling for every ounce weight; and for the port of every Letter not exceeding one sheet from England unto the City of Dublin in Ireland, or from the City of Dublin in Ireland unto Eng∣land, Six pence of English money; and for the like port of every Letter not exceeding two
sheets one shilling, and proportionably to the same Rates for every Pacquet of Let∣ters; and for the port of every other pacquet of any kind of greater Bulk, Two shillings for every Ounce weight; and for the port of such Letters or pacquets as shall be convey∣ed or carryed from the City of Dublin, unto any other place or places within the Kingdme of Ireland, or from any other place unto the said City, or to, or from any other place with∣in the said Kingdome, according to the Rates, and summs of English money here∣after following, viz. For every Letter not exceeding one sheet, to or from any place with∣in Forty English Miles distance from Dublin, or any other place where such Letter shall be received, Two pence; And for every Letter not exceeding two sheets, Four pence, and proportionably to the same rates for every pacquet of Letters, and for every other pacquet of greater Bulk, Eight pence for every ounce weight; and for every Letter not exceeding one sheet to be carryed or conveyed a further distance then Forty English miles, Four pence; and for the like port of every Letter not exceeding two sheets, Eight pence; and proportionably unto the same Rates for the like port of every pacquets of Letters, and for the like port of every other pacquets of greater Bulk, One shilling for every ounce weight; and for all and every the Letters, pacquets, & parcels of goods that shall be carried or con∣veyed to, or from any of his Majesties said Dominious, to or from any other parts or places beyond the Seas, according to the se∣verall and respective Rates, that now are,
and have been taken for Letters, Pacquets, and parcels so conveyed, being rated either by the Letter, or by the Ounce weight, That is to say,     d Morlaix, Saint Maloes, Caen, Newhaven, and places of like distance, port paid to Roan is for Single vi Double xii Treble xviii Ounce xviii     d Hamburgh, Cullen, Frank∣fort, port paid to Antwerp is Single viii Double xvi Treble xxiv Ounce xxiv     s d Venice, Geneva, Legorne, Rome, Naples, Messina, and all other parts of Italy, by way of Venice, franct pro Mantua Single o ix Double i vi Treble ii iii Ounce ii viii     s d Marcelia, Smerna, Con∣stantinople, Aleppo, and all parts of Turkie, port paid to Marcelia Single i o Double ii o 3. q••. of an ounce ii ix Ounce iii ix     s d Genoua, Legorn, Rome, and other parts of Italy, by way of Lyons, franct pro Lyons Single i o Double ii o 3 q••. of an ounce ii ix Ounce iii ix And of Letters sent outwards,     s d To Bourdeux, Rochel, Nantes, Orleans, Byon, To∣wers, and places of like di∣stance, port paid to Paris Single o ix Double i vi Treble ii iii Ounce ii o
    s d And for Letters brought from the same places into England Single i o Double ii o 3. q••. of an ounce iii o Ounce iv o Also Letters sent outwards,     s d To Norembergh, Bremen, Dantswick, Lubeck, Lips∣wick, and other places of like distance, Post paid to Hamburgh Single i o Double ii o 3. q••. of an ounce iii o Ounce iv o     s d And for Letters brought from the said places to England Single o viii Double. i iv Treble ii o Ounce ii o And for the Port of Letters brought into England from     s d Calais, Diepe, Bulloigne, Abbeville, Amiens, Saint Omers, Montrell Single o iv Double o viii Treble i o Ounce i o     s d Rouen Single o vi Double i o Treble i vi Ounce i vi     s d Paris Single o ix Double i vi Treble i iii Ounce i o     s d Dunkirk, Ostend, Lille, Ipte, Courtrey, Gheandt, Bruxells, Bridges, Antwerp, & all other parts of Flanders Single o viii Double i iv Treble ii o Ounce ii o     s d Sluis, Flushing, Middleburgh, Amsterdā, Roterdam, Delph, Hagh, and from all other parts of Holland & Zealand Single o viii Double i iv Treble ii o Ounce ii o
Provided alwayes, That all Mercha Accompts not exceeding one sheet of paper, and all Bills of Exchange, Invoyces, and Bills of Lading, are, and shall hereby be understood to be allowed without Rate in the Price of the Letters, and likewise the Covers of Letters not exceeding one fourth part of a sheet of Pa∣per sent to Marseilles, Venice or Ligorne, to be sent forward to Turky, shall be understood to be allowed to pass without Rate or payment for the same; and according to the same Rates and proportions for the port of Letters, Pack∣quets & parcels to or from any of the parts or places beyond the Seas, where Posts have not been heretofore setled, and may hereafter be setled by the said Post-Master General for the time being, his Executors or Assignes: And it shall and may be lawful to and for such Post-Master General, & his Deputy and Deputies, to ask, demand, take and receive of every per∣son that he or they shall furnish and provide with Horses, Furniture and Guide to ride, ost in any of the Post-roardes as aforesaid, Three pence of English money for each Horses Hire or Postage for every English Mile, and Foure pence for the Guide for every Stage. And whereas upon the arrival of Ships from parts beyond the Seas into several Ports within his Majesties Dominions, many Letters direct∣ed to several Merchants and others, have been detained long to the great damage of the Mer∣chants, in want of that speedy advice and intel∣ligence which they might have had if the same had been forthwith dispatched by the sd posts, and sometimes such Letters have been delivered by the Masters or Passengers of sh
Ships to ignorant and loose hands, that un∣derstand not the way and means of speedy con∣veyance and delivery of Letters, whereby great prejudice hath accrued to the affairs of Mer∣chants and others, as well by the miscarry∣age of many Letters so brought, as oftentimes by the opening of the same to the discovery of the correspondencies and secrets of the Mer∣chant. Be it further Enacted by the Authority a∣foresaid, That all Letters and Pacquets that by any Master of any Ship or Vessel, or any of his Company, or any Passengers therein shall or may be brought to any Port-Town within his Majesties Dominions, or any of the Members thereof, other then such Letters as are before excepted, or may be sent by com∣mon known Carriers in manner aforesaid, or by a friend as aforesaid; shall by such Master, Passenger, or other person be forthwith deli∣vered unto the Deputy or Deputies only of the said Post-Master General for the time be∣ing by him appointed for the said Port-Town, and by him or them to be sent Post unto the said General Post-Office to be delivered according to the several and respective directions of the same. And be it further Enacted by the aforesaid Authority, That no person or persons whatso∣ever, or Body politick or Corporate other then such Post-Master General, as shall from time to time be nominated and appointed by his Majesty, his Heires or Successors, and con∣stituted by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England as aforesaid, and his Deputy and Deputies or Affignes, shall presume to
carry, recarry & deliver Letters for Hie, other then as before excepted, or to set up or imploy any Foot-post, Horse-post, Coach-post, or Pac∣quet-Boat whatsoever for the conveyance, car∣rying, and recarrying of any Letters or Pac∣quets by Sea or Land within his Majesties Dominions, or shall provide and maintaine Horses and Furniture for the horsing of any Thorow-posts, or persons riding in Post with a Guide and Horne, as usuall for hire, upon paine of forfeiting the summe of Five pounds of English money for every severall offence against the Tenor of this present Act, And also of the forfeiture of the summe of One Hundred pounds of like English money for every weeks time that any Offender against this Act shall imploy, maintaine, and con∣tinue any such Foot-post, Horse-post, Coach-post or Pacquet-Boat as aforesaid: which said several and respective Forfeitures, shall, and may be sued for, and recovered by Action or Actions of Debt, Plaint, or Information in any of his Majesties Courts of Record, wherein no Essoigne, Priviledge, protection, or Wager of Law shall be admitted; and the said several and respective Forfeitures that shall happen from time to time to be recovered, shall be and remaine the one moiety thereof to his Majestie, & his Heires and Successors, and the other moiety thereof to such person or per∣sons, who shall or will inform against the Offender or Offenders against this present Act, and shall or will sue for the said Forfei∣tures upon the same. Provided alwayes, That if any Post-Ma∣ster of any respective place, doth not, or can∣not
not furnish any person or persons riding in Post with sufficient Horses within the space of one half hour after demand, That then such person or persons are hereby understood to be left at liberty to provide themselves, as con∣veniently they can; And the persons who shall furnish such horses, shall not therefore be liable to any Penalties or Forfeitures con∣tained in this Act. Provided alwayes, That if through default or neglect of the Post-Master Generall afore∣said, any person or persons riding in Post shall fail as aforesaid of being furnished with a sufficient Horse or Horses, for his or their use, after demand as aforesaid; That in every such case, the said Post-master Generall shall forfeit the summ of Five pounds sterling, the one moiety to his Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety to him or them who shall sue for the same in any Court of Record, to be recovered by Bill, plaint, or other Information, wherein no Essoigne, Protection or other Wager in Law shall be admitted. Provided alwayes, and be it Enacted, That nothing herein contained shall be understood to prohibit the carrying or recarrying of any Letters or pacquets, to or from any Town or place, to or from the next respective Post-road, or Stage appointed for that purpose; But that every person shall have free liberty to send and imploy such persons as they shall think fit, for to carry the said Letters or Pac∣quets as aforesaid without any forfeiture or penalty therefore, Any thing contained in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.
Provided alwayes, That if the Pacquet or Maile shall be carried out of England into any part beyond the Seas in any Ship or Vessel which is not of English built, and navigated with English Seamen, That in every such case, the said Post-master General shall for∣feit the summ of One hnndred pounds Ster∣ling; The one moiety to his Majestie, his Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety to him or them, who shall sue for the same, in any Court of Record, to be recovered by Bill, plaint or other Information, wherein no Es∣soign, Protection, or other Wager in Law shall be allowed. Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid, That no person or persons shall be capable of having, using, or exercising the Office of Post-master General, or any o∣ther imployment relating to the said Office, unless he or they shall first take the Oathes of Allegiance and Supremacy, before any two Iustices of the Peace of the respective Coun∣ties wherein such person or persons are or shall be resident, which said Iustices are here∣by authorized to administer the said Oathes accordingly. Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid, That a Letter or pacquet-post shall twice every week come by the way of Trurow and Penrin to the Town of Ma∣ketiew alias Marhasion in the County of Corn∣wall; and once a week to Kendal by the way of Lancaster, and to the town of Penrith in Cumberland by the way of Newcastle and Car∣ssile; and to the City of Lincoln, and the Bur∣rough of Grimoby in the County of Lincolne,
Any thing in this Act contained to the contra∣ry thereof in any wise notwithstanding. Provided also and be it Enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid, That such Post-master Ge∣nerall to be from time to time appointed by his Majesty, His Heirs and Successors as afore∣said, shall continue constant posts for carriage of Letters to all places, though they lie out of the post-Roads, as hath been used for the space of three years last past, at the rates here∣in before mentioned, under pain of forfeiture for every omission Five pounds, to be recovered by Action, suite, or plaint, in any his Maje∣sties Courts of Record, the one moiety to the use of his Majesty, the other moeity to the use of the Informer. And for the better man∣agement of the said Post-Office, and that the people of these Kingdomes may have their in∣tercourse of Commerce and Trade the better maintained, and their Letters and Advises conveyed, carried & recarried with the greatest speed, security, and convenience that may be; Be it further Enacted, That the said Post-Master General so nominated, appointed and constituted as aforesaid, and his Deputies, shall from time to time observe and follow such Orders, Rules, Directions and Instructi∣ons for and concerning the settlement of con∣venient Posts and Stages upon the several Roads in England, Scotland and Ireland, and other his Majesties Dominions, and the pro∣viding and keeping of a sufficient Number of Horses at the said several Stages, as well for the carrying and conveying of the said Letters and Pacquets, as for the Horsing of all Tho∣row-Posts and persons Riding in Post by Warrant or otherwise as aforesaid, as his
Majestie, his Heires and Successors shall from time to time in that behalf make, and ordaine; And that his Majesty, his Heires and Successors may grant the said Office of Post-Master General, together with the pow∣ers and Authorities thereunto belonging, & the several Rates of Portage above mention∣ed, and all profits, priviledges, fees, perquisites & Emoluments thereunto belonging, or to be∣long, either for Life or Term of Years, not ex∣ceeding One and twenty Years, to such person or persons, and under such Covenants, Con∣ditions and Yearly Rents to his said Majesty, his Heires and Successors reserved, as His said Majesty, His Heirs and Successors shall from time to time think fit for the best advan∣tage and benefit of the Kingdome. Provided alwayes, and be it Enacted by the Athority aforesaid, That no person shall have power to take, use, or seize any Horses for the service mentioned in this Act, without the con∣sent of the Owners thereof; Any usage or pre∣tence, or any thing in this Act contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Inland letters sent by any Packet-post established by this Act as aforesaid, do and shall pay the rates and prices before mentioned, at such Stage where they are last delivered only, unless the party that delivers the Letters desireth to pay els∣where; Any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding. Provided always, That all Letters, and other things, may be sent or con∣veyed to or from the two Vniversities in man∣ner as heretofore hath been used; Any thing herein to the contrary notwithstanding.
Anno XII. CAROLI. IJ. Regis. An Act impowering the Master of the Rolls for the time being, to make Leases for years, in order to new Build the old Houses belonging to the Rolls. WHereas the Mansion-House, Ground, and Tenements, with the Appurtenances belonging to the Master of the Rolls, as Master of the Rolls, are much out of Repair, and not capable of Im∣provement, in regard the former Masters of the Rolls were not enabled to grant such Leases, and for such Terms as might encourage Te∣nants to Build and to Repair: Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
and the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled; And it is hereby En∣acted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Master of the Rolls for the time being, and his Successors, Masters of the Rolls, shall have good right, full power, and lawful Au∣thority, during the time he or they shall con∣tinue Master of the Rolls, by writing inden∣ted, under Hand and Seal, to Grant and make Leases for one and forty years, or for any lesser term, to commence from the making of any such Leases, of all and singular the Premis∣ses, or any part thereof, the Chappel of the Rolls with a convenient Mansion-house, Court, Yard, Garden, Stable, Coach-house, and other Our-houses and Buildings, fit for the use and habitation of the Master of the Rolles, onely excepted; which Lease and Leases, so to be made, shall be good and effectu∣all in Law to all intents and purposes, as if such Master of the Rolls for the time being, as shall so make the same, had beén seized of the premisses of a good Estate in Feé simple. Provided, That in Leases where provision is made for new building of Houses or Tene∣ments, that the yearly Rent of Twenty shil∣lings at the least shall be reserved upon every Lease of such a quantity of the said Premisses, as shall be set out and Assigned by the Master of the Rolls for the time being for any one house or Tenement to be built upon; And that in Leases where there is no provision for new building, the like usual Rent that hath beén paid or reserved for the greater part of seven years now last past, or more, shall be yearly re∣served.
Provided also, That the Master of the Rolls for the time being, or any succeéding Master of the Rolls, after the Prenusses have beén once Letten, according to the power given as abovesaid, shall not grant or make any new or concurrent Lease untill within seven years of the expiration of the Lease then in being, nor for any lesser Rent then was reserved upon the former Lease, nor for any longer term, then for the term of one and twenty years from the making of such new Lease. Jo: Browne Cleric. Parliamentorum.
1. AN Act for the restoring of Henry Lord Arundel of Warder to the possession of his estate. 2. An Act for restitution of Thomas Earl of Arundel, Surrey and Norfolk, to the Dig∣nity and Title of Duke of Norfolk. 3. An Act to restore to Wentworth Earl of Roscomon, of the Kingdom of Ireland, all the Honors, Castles, Lordships, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in Ireland, whereof James Earl of Roscomon his Great-Grand Father, or Iames Earl of Roscomon his Father, &c. 4. An Act for restoring of Sir George Ham∣ilton unto his Lands and Estate in Ireland. 5. An Act for maintenance of the Vicar for the time being of the Vicaridge of Royston in the Counties of Hertford and Cam∣bridge, and of his Successors, Vicars of the said Vicaridge. 6. An Act for enabling Sir William VVray to sell Lands for payment of his debts, and raising of Portions for his younger Chil∣dren. 7. An Act for naturalizing of Gerrard Van∣heuthusen, Daniel Demetrius, and others. 8. An Act for enabling of Iohn Newton the younger, and William Oakeley, to make sale of Lands for payment of debts, and rai∣sing of Portions, &c.
9. An Act for the levying of certain moneys due upon the collection for the Protestants of Piedmont. 10. An Act for the Naturalization of John Boreell Esq; Eldest Son of Sir William Borreell Knight and Baronet. 11. An Act for the Naturalization of Abra∣ham Watchtor born beyond the Seas. 12. An Act for restoring of Sir Thomas Crimes Baronet, to his Estate. 13. An Act for enabling George Fawnt of Fo∣ston in the County of Leicester Esq; to sell and conveigh part of his Lands, for payment of several Debts and Legacies charged upon his Estate by Sir William Fawnt Knight deceased, aud for the rai∣sing of Portions for his younger children, and making his Wife a Joynture. 14. An Act for Naturalizing Francis Hide, and others. 15. An Act to enable Joseph Micklethwaite an Infant, and his Trustees, to sell Lands for payment of his Fathers Debts. 16. An Act for raising portions, and making provision for maintenance for the younger children of Sir Edward Gostwicke. 17. An Act for confirming the Sale of the Mannor of Hitcham, sold to Charles Doe, by Sir Iohn Clarke Knight and Baronet, and
for setling and disposing other the Lands of the said Sir Iohn Clarke and Dame Phila∣delphia his Wife. 18. An Act for the setling of some of the Mannors and Lands of the Earl of Cleave∣land in Trustees, to be sold for the satisfy∣ing of the Debts of the said Earl, and of Thomas Lord VVentworth his Son. 19. An Act for the disappropriating of the Rectory appropriate of Preston, & uniting and consolidating of the said Rectory, and of the Vicaridge of the Church of Pre∣ston; and for assuring of the Advowson, and right of Patronage of the same unto the Master, Fellows, and Scholars of E∣manuel Colledge in Cambridge, and their Successors. 20. An Act for making the Precinct of Covent Garden Parochial.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the KING's most Excellent MAJESTY. 1660. At the KING'S Printing-House in Black-Fryars.
