E263 E984_1 99866824 168588
EIGHTEEN NEW COURT-QUAERIES HUMBLY OFFERED To the serious consideration, and mature de∣liberation of all the good honest hearted people of the Three Nations: of great concernment towards the stopping our Breaches, and the making up of the Divi∣sions amongst us. By several well-wishers to our Settlement. LONDON, Printed in the year MDCLIX.
EIGHTEEN COURT-QUERIES, &c. I. WHether this Lord Protectors Patience in letting go his old so calmly, and tamely, were in him a Vertue, or not? and if it were a Vertue, whether Necessity did not make it so? II. Whether eight thousand pounds per annum, and withall free liberty to take the Country Air, be not very sufficient an reasonable considerations, and stipend, for the old Pro∣tectress; as a very gratefull acknowledgment from our Free-State, of the good service which her husband in his life time did for this Commonwealth? and whether or no she ought in conscience to flight and undervalue this ample testimony of the Officers good afection, and charity to her? III. Whether if the Sky should fll there world be any work for a Lark-catcher at Whitehall?
IV. Whether the Army ought not to have given to them, new Red Coats, and black buttons now, to mourn for the De∣par ure of this Protector, as well as they had for the Decease of he Old one? V. That seeing so it is, and must, and shall be, that the Cour∣tiers must of necessity repair all of them to their respective dwelling, and habitations, bag and baggage; whether it would not be a greater expence and burthen to the States (upon whose hands they yet lye) to send for Mules out of Egypt for their Convoy; than  them their next neigh∣bours in James his Park (the Asses) to perform that piece of drudgery? VI. VVhether or no Peter Sterry, the Court Confessur, when he preach'd in the Chapell the very next Lords day after his Hghuesse cied, and uttered in that his Sermo there, words, either these, or to this effect, (viz.) [As certainly as I hold the word of God in my left hand, so certainly is his late Highnesse now at the right hand of God, interceding for the iniquities of this sinfull Nation:] did not commit an high, and most horrid piece of blasphemy? And then, whether He does not therefore very well deserve to be a fellow-seeler o James Naylour's Sentence, and to be as coarsly used as He, who yet continues at his expiatory task of pounding hemp in the House of Correction? VII. VVhether or not, Dr. John Owen, and Dr. Thomas Good∣win, would make it any  of matter of Conscience to
accept of the two Archbishopricks of York and Canterbury if the State could think fit to reward their endeavours with so rich a profer? VIII. VVhether it be not very fitting, and necessary, and much tending to the gladding of the Hearts of many men, that the Banquetting house at Whitehall be spee∣dily remoov'd from thence, and carried crosse the way to Wallingford-house, for the noble Officers of our invin∣cible, and successefull Armies, to triumph in, after all their encounters, and valiant atchievements? And whether the State would not do well as to that end and pur∣pose, with all expedition possible, to make all the Ci∣tizens Pioneers for the carrying on of that Great Work. IX. VVhether these Proverbs following 1. That some man man may better steal a Goose, than another pluck a feather? 2. That bought wit is best? 3. That Occasion makes the thief? be all most true and authentick, and confirm'd by modern ex∣perience, yea, or no? X. VVhether it may consist with the tender, and de∣licate education of our new Ladies of Honour, to dab∣ble through the Country dew these Summer mor∣nings with a milking pail on their heads? and con∣sequently, whether it is not likely to be very much prejudicial to their beauties, to go (after this tate) out of God's blessing, into the Warm Sun?
XI. VVhether illiterate men, partial, covetous, worldly min∣ded, self-ended greedy of gain, having mens persons in ad∣miration, naughty, an hypocritical, be competent judges (according to the Cano of the oly VVrit) of Students in both Universities of our Land, for the discharge of the most sacred Ministerial Function? XII. VVhether Mr. Hugh Peters, when he kept daily and ightly correspondence with the Gentleman's wife in the Low-Countries, during the absence of her husband, upon service in the worres, did punctual y perform that read∣full threatning of his, in the hear of his Zeal against Po∣pery, That He would lay the whore of Babylon upon hr back? And whether that mad  Spirit wherewith he seems alwayes possess'd, becomes a man of peace, or suits with the meeknesse, and humility of the glorious Gospell? XIII. VVhether Mr. Needham the Curranto-maker, the Court Pamphleteer, being an impudent fellow, a lye, and forger of forein leters; a mercenary inormer, an abuser, and base vilifier of worthy and eminent persons; an insulter over gal∣lant mens afflictions, and miseries; A murtherer of mens ame, credit & reputation, to their utter and most inevitable ruine and destruction; does not very well deserve to forfeit his Eares to the Pillory? XIV. VVhether all the men of the three Nations that lately made  to his Highnesse; are dead or alive?
XV. VVhether now, Whitehall be not a place commodious to make a Play-house of, having been accustomed for these many yeares to such alteration of Scaenes? and the pensio∣ners, &c. well accomplisht to turn Stage-Players? First, be∣cause it is conceiv'd they have now little else to do. Second∣ly, because they have been bred up upon that Stage, and can act any part; and Thirdly, because they never wear good cloaths longer than the Play continues. XVI. VVhether the old Protector's Cradles standing in Westmin∣ster Abby in the same place where the High Altar, or Com∣munion Table formerly stood, is not the setting up of one Su∣persttion where another Superstition (as 'twas termed) was pull'd down? and whether the Essigies, when it was there, might not be call'd, without any abuse of Scripture, the abho∣mination of desolation in the holy place? XVII. VVhether the wainscot Presse that is made in Henry the se∣venth his Chapell, for reception of the aforementioned Idoll, being as yet empty, and thought unfitting for that Employ∣ment, would not serve a great deal better to keep in it the sa∣cred Reliques of VVell-affected Persons in the Common∣wealth? as for example, The Lord Brooks's Eye; The flappets of Mr. William Prynn's Eares; My Lord of Essex's Prolifick Instrument; Sir John Hotham's Head; Lundsford's teeth; Mildmaye's Jewels; Dr. Dorislaus's four quarters; Alderman Hoyle's Rope; the dagger that kill'd Watt Tyler; The Lord Pride's slings and tallies; the Lord Hewson's shooing-horn; the Lord Barkstead's thimbles and bodkins; with many other remarkable things of this nature, which it may be else may happen to be lost or forgotten?
XVIII. VVhether all these eighteen Queries, are not worthy the perusal of every sober, melancholy man? and very main∣ly effectnal (if they may but be answered according to the earnest longings, gapings, and expectations of the honest peo∣ple of this Commonwealth) to remove a great many scurvy, base incommodities, dammages, and inconveniences, which otherwise may chance to fall upon us? FINIS.
