E2754 E400_10 R201744 99862244 114395
THE VOTE in the House of COMMONS Made July 26. For the Kings Majesties comming to LONDON. VVith the severall VOTES of both Houses, for Nulling the Declaration against the CITY Petitioners. AND For Re-establishing the new Militia of the City of London, notwithstanding the late Ordinance: VVith a Copy of the said Ordinance, And also of the Declaration. July 29 Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson. 1647.
A DECLARATION OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. Die Sabbathi 24 Julii, 1647. THe Lords and Commons having seene a printed Paper intituled, A Petition to the right Honour∣able the Lord Major, the right worshipfull the Alder∣men and Commons of the City of London in the Com∣mon or Guild hall of the City of London assembled, un∣der the name of divers Citizens, Commanders, Of∣ficers, and Souldiers of the Trained Bands, Auxilia∣ries, and others, young men and Apprentices, Sea-Commanders, Sea-men, and Water-men, together with a dangerous engagement of the same persons by Oath and Vow concerning the Kings present comming to the Parliament upon tearmes far different from those which both Houses after mature deliberation, have de∣clared
to bee necessary for the good and safety of this Kingdome, casting reflections upon the proceedings both of the Parliament and Army, and tending to the im∣broiling the Kingdome in a new Warre: And the said Lords and Commons taking notice of great endeavours used by divers ill-affected persons to procure Subscrip∣tions thereunto, whereby well-meaning people may be mis-lead, doe therefore declare, That whosoever after publication or notice hereof shall proceed in, or pro∣mote or set his name to, or give consent that his name be set unto, or any way joyne in the said Engagement shall bee deemed and adjudged guilty of high Treason, and shall forfit life and estate as in cases of high Trea∣son, accustomed. H. Elsying Cler. Par. Dom. Com. Die Lunae 26 July 1647. BE it Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, that the Declaration of the twenty foure of this instant. July, which declares all those Traytors, and so to forfeit Life and Estate, who shall after publication thereof, act thereupon to get Subscriptions, bee Null and Void, any thing in the said Declaration to the contrary notwithstanding. Joh. Browne Cler. Par. Hen. Elsynge Cler. Par. Dom. Com.
Die Veneris 23 Julii. 1647. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assem∣bled in Parliament. THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assem∣bled, taking into their serious consideration the present state and condition of the kingdome of En∣gland, and particularly of the City of London, do Or∣daine and Declare, and be it Ordained and Declared by the authority of Parliament, That the Lord Ma∣jor and Sheriffes of the City of London, for the time being, Sir John Wellaston, Isaac Pennington, Thomas Atkin, John Warner, James Bunce, John Fowke, Wil∣liam Gibbs, John Kendrick, John Langham, and Ri∣chard Chambers, Aldermen, Field Marshall Skippon, Randall Manwaring, Francis Peck, Samuel Warner, James Russell, Nathaniel Wright, William Barkley, Alexander Normington, Stephen Estwick, Owen Rowe, Richard Turner, sen. William Hobson, Richard Bateman, Richard Turner, Jun. Robert Tichborne, Tempest Mil∣ner, William Antrebus, Tho. Player sen. Samuel Harsnet, Francis Allen, Colonell Wilson, Colonell John Bella∣my, Alexander Jones, Citizens, or any nine or more of them, be, and are hereby constituted and appoint∣ed a Committee for the Militia of the City of Lon∣don and Liberties thereof, and all other places within the Lines of Communication, and weekly Bills of Mortality; And shall have power, and are hereby authorized, to assemble and call together all and sin∣gular person and persons of the said City of London, and Liberties thereof, within the Lines of Commu∣nication,
and weekly Bills of Mortality, that are meet and sit for the warres, and them to train, exercise, and put in readinesse, and them after their abilities and fa∣culties, wel and sufficiently from time to time, to cause to be arrayed, and weaponed, and to take the Musters of them in places most fit for that purpose: & that they shal have power to lead, conduct, & imploy the per∣sons aforesaid, arrayed & weaponed, for the suppres∣sion of all Rebellions, Insurrections, and Invasions, that may happen within the said City and Liberties thereof, or within the Lines of Communication, and weekly Bills of Mortality; And likewise shall have further power and authority to lead conduct, and im∣ploy the persons aforesaid, arrayed and weaponed, as well within the said City, as within any other part of this Realme of England, or Dominion of Wales, for the suppression of all Rebellions, Insurrections, and Invasions that may happen, according as they shall from time to time receive directions from the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament. And that the said Committee, or any nine or more of them, as aforesaid, shall have power, and hereby authorized, to constitute and make Colonels, Cap∣taines, and other Officers; and shall have power to remove and displace Colonels, Captaines, and o∣ther Officers from time to time, as they or any nine of them as aforesaid, shall see cause and thinke fit: And that the said Committee, or any nine or more of them, as aforesaid, shall have the same powers and authorities, to all intents and purposes, and in the same manner and forme, as any Committee for the Militia of the City of London had the twenty day of July, Anno Dom. 1647. by any Order or Ordi∣nances
of Parliament; And that all and every per∣son and persons who have heretofore acted or done, or hereafter shall act or doe any act or thing what∣soever by vertue of this or any former Ordinance or Ordinances of Parliament concerning the said Mili∣tia, shall be saved harmlesse, and indempnified, for and concerning the same, by authority of Parliament. And it is hereby further Ordained, That no Citi∣zen of the City of London, nor any of the Forces of the said City or Liberties thereof, shall be drawne forth, or compelled to goe out of the said City, or Liberties thereof, for Military service, without his or their free consent. And it is lastly Ordained and declared by authority aforesaid, that the Ordinance of Parliament of the fourth day of May 1647. for the Militia of London, shall from henceforth cease and be determined to all intents and purposes whatsoe∣ver. And this present Ordinance is to continue du∣ring the pleasure of both Houses of Parliament. Jo-Brown Cler. Par. Die Lune 26 Julii, 1647, BE it Ordered and Ordained by the Lords and Com∣mons in Parliament assembled, That the Ordinance of the 23 of this instant July for the setling of the Mi∣litia of the City of London be and shall be hereby revo∣ked and made void to all intents and purposes; and that the said Ordinance of the fourth of May 1647. for the said Militia of London be in full force and vertue, any thing in the said Ordinance of the 23 instant, to the con∣trary notwithstanding. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl, Dom. Com.
Die Lunae 26 July 1647. The House of Commons having adjourned untill the morrow and Mr. Speaker risen out of his Chaire, and the Members going out, divers Petitioners mo∣ved them to sit again, and the Speaker returning to his Chaire, and the Members sitting in their places, the Petitioners desire them to Vote that the Kings Ma∣jestie should come to London, whereupon it was Resolved upon the Question. That his Majesty shall come to London. July 27. Resolved by the Commons in Parliament as∣sembled, that they adjourn their House untill Fri∣day next. July 26. 1647. Resolved by the Lords in Parliament assem∣bled, That they doe adjourn their House untill Friday next. Jo. Browne Cler. Par. Jo. Browne Cler. Par. FINIS.
