e2977a r229812 99895702 153196
ENGLAND's Happiness IMPROVED: OR, AN Infallible Way to get Riches, Encrease Plenty, and promote Pleasure. CONTAINING The Art of making Wine of English Grapes, and o∣ther Fruit, equal to that of France and Spain, &c. with their Physical Virtues. To make Artificial Wine, and Order all sorts of Wine to keep well, and recover what is faded, &c. The whole Art and Mistery of Distilling Brandy, Strong-waters, Cordial waters, &c. To make all Sorts of Plain and Purging Ales, Cy∣der, Mead, Matheglin, Rum, Rack, and many other useful Liquors. To Gather, Order, and Keep Fruit, in all Seasons. The Art and Mistery of Pickling Flowers, Fruits, Herbs, Buds, Roots, Fish, Flesh, &c. To Recover tainted Flesh, and make sundry sorts of Vinegars. The whole Art and Mistery of a Confectioner▪ The Compleat Market-man, or Woman, to know all sorts of Provisions; as Poulterer's Ware, Fish, Flesh, whether Young or Old, New or Stale, &c. and all other matters relating to Marketing. Particular Rules for good and frugal House-keeping, and to destroy all sorts of Vermin; with many o∣ther things very profitable, and never before made publick. The Second Edition. LONDON, Printed for Roger Clavill, and sold by D. Midwinter, and T. Leigh at the Rose and Crown in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1699.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. Reader, IN this Book, though small, you will find so ample a Recompence of your Money layed out in buying, and your Trouble in Reading it, that I am constrained to believe you will conclude them both well bestowed. I here present you with what is delight∣ful and profitable, many of the things layed down are altogether new Experi∣ments, and the rest known but to a few: Here you may behold the Product and Manufacture of your Native Country, vy∣ing
with those of other Nations, if not in many particulars, exceeding them; You have here exact Methods, plain, and at Cheap Rates to make Natural and Artificial Wines, more agreeable to Eng∣lish Bodies than others, and they may well contend with those of France and Spain for Preheminence. I have also given their proper Virtues, and how in the best man∣ner to Order and Preserve them, and all other Wines. The whole Art and Mistery is herein set down of Making Brandy, Spirits, Low-wins, and all Strong-waters from the Weakest to the Richest Cordials. Directions to draw, Colour, and order them, with many rare Receipts practised but by a very few; also their proper Virtues are treated of, likewis many rare Physical Cordial-waters highly in Esteem; with Essences, and other Curious things, the approved way. To make Ales, plain and purging, with other useful and pleasant Liquors, many in number, as Perry, Cyder, Ma∣theglin Mead, Mum, &c. with their Vir∣tues.
The Art of Pickling, in all its Kinds, with other Attendants. The Mistery of Confectioning, in Preserving, Conser∣ving, Candying, making Gellies, and Syrups, &c. Of Fruits, Flowers, and the like, with all accomplished Sweetmeats, fit to furnish out the rarest Banquet. The Art and Mistery of the Fruiterers, in gathering and keeping Fruits in all Sea∣sons; with Instructions to such as go to Market, to buy Poulterer's Ware, Fish, Butcher's meat, Fruit, and many other necessary things: How to know the Good∣ness or Badness of them, and avoid be∣ing cheated, or Imposed on. To these I have joined Instructions for a decent and frugal House-keeping, under which Head are included so many things, that for Brevity sake I am con∣strained to omit Particulars, and draw to a Conclusion of my Preface, lest I should too long detain you from what is more material; for herein you have what never any one Volume contained, and over and above a great many rare Ex∣periments,
and things never before made publick, so that taking it all together it is a Rich Store-House, furnished with such Curious Wares, that cannot but prove advantagious to all, and Exceedingly so to those; who by Industry will put in practice what is set down for their good Improve∣ment in Knowledge, Vale.
THE CONTENTS Of CHAP. I. THe Improvement of English Vines, and making Wine of Grapes equal to the Growth of France, and the due Ordering it. To make Wines of several other sorts of English Fruits, viz. Wine of Gooberries, Currans, Rasberries, Mulberries, Elderberries, Black∣berries, Straw-berries, Dew-berries, Ap∣ples, Pears, Cherries, Peaches, Apricots, Quinces, Plums, Damasceens, English Figgs, Roses, Cowslips, Scurvy-Grass, Mint, Morella, Baum, &c. with their particular Medicinal Virtues. The Contents of CHAP. II. SMall Wines meliorated. To make Artificial Claret. Artificial Malligo, Canary, Ribella, Tent, Ra∣pidavia, &c.
To restore Prick'd Wines, a Wines decayed by too much Vent. Musty Wines tang'd by the Cask. To hinder Wine from Turning. To take away the ill Scent of Wines. To Remedy a bitter, or sower Scent. Green Wine to soften. To keep Wine from sowring. To sweeten Wine. To make Artificial Malmsey. To make Wine settle well. To make Wormwood-wine. To make Rough Claret. To recover the Colour of White or Rhenish Wines. Lowring Wine, to prevent its decay. To make Wines well scented, and give them a curious Flavor. To mend Wines that Rope, To mend White or Rhenish Wines. Another way to mend and colour White-Wines, &c. To Meliorate Viscious VVines. Some further Considerations on these Matters in Particular and General. Ice for cooling Wines.
The Contents of CHAP. III. TO Distill Aqua Vitae, and Low-Wines, &c. The Dutch way to distill these Spirits. To make a good Sort of Brandy. To make Brandy little inferiour to French Brandy, &c. Another cheaper way to make Brandy. Of Malt Spirits, and what may be Drawn off. Of Honey, Molassus, Sugar, &c. proper for Spirits. Rasins, and other things used in Distillation, to make good Brandy, or proof Spirits. Of Low, Dead Wines, and their Dregs, &c. To make Anniseed-water, Hearts-Ease, Cin∣namon-water, and others, for usual Sale as sold by Distillers. The proper way for Colouring and Perfuming or∣dinary Strong-VVaters. A Syrup to make Red-Water, excelling that of London. Simples proper for colouring Waters. Right Usquebaugh, according to the Receipt of that made for the King when he was in Ireland.
To make Aqua Corroberance, or the Heart, strengthening-water. From approved Receipts to make the follow-Waters, viz. Stomach-water, Plague-wa∣ter, Aqua Multiferia, Aqua Triplex, the powerful united Spirit of Scurvy-Grass, the like of Elder, the like of Rosemary, Flixire Salutis, Elixire Proprietatis, Marigold Flower-water, Dr. Stevens's Golden Cor∣dial, Orange-water, Surfeit-water, Treacle Water, with their particular Virtues. The Contents of CHAP. IV. TO make Perfum'd Waters, &c. viz. Rosasolis, Essence of Hypocrass, O∣range-flower-Water, Milleflower-Water, Angel-water, Hungarian-water. To reduce Spirits for making Cordials. An Excellent Cordial-VVater; and their Vir∣tues, &c. The Contents of CHAP. V. TO make high proof Spirits for China, Ja∣pan and Varnish, Lac— and to know their proof and goodness.
To use this Spirit to prepare Varnish, as Gold, Lac, &c. To make China Varnish. To make Black Ground for Japan-work. To make Red Varnish. To make Varnish for Silver. To make another China Varnish. To make White Varnish. To make Raw Varnish for Mu Instru∣ments. To Black Wood. To Gild, &c. The Contents of CHAP. VI. TO make divers sorts of wholesom, plea∣sant, English Liquors, &c. viz. Dr. Butler's Ale, to make Hypocrass a nw Way, Lemonade, a good sort of Mum, Punch Royal. To make the best Cyder, and order it for keeping. Summer Cyder for present spending. To procure the Spirit of Cyder without Di∣stilling. Perry, to make it. Metheglin, the best way. Mead, the best way; white, brown Mead. &c,
Coffee, to make it the best way. Tea, the best way. To make Sage Tea. Chocolate, the best way. To make Chocolate Cakes. A curious Drink of Services. Cock-Ale, to make it the best way. Covent-Garden Purging Purl, to make it the right way. East-India Rack, as made here. Rumm, to make it. Variety of Ales in Use, and great Esteem, to make them. A moderate Purging-Ale. To make New Ale stale, or any other Liquor that is New or Sweet. To Recover Sower Ale, &c. Of Ales generally brought from divers Parts of England and sold in London. Rules for Well-bottling any Liquors. The Contents of CHAP. VII. THe Mistery of Fruiterers, &c. Of Gathering Fruit in Season, &c. To order them that they may keep Sound, and well Tasted, an extraordinary length of time, viz. Apples, Pears, Quinces, Wardens, &c.
with the Manner and Management of the Fruit, Loft, Shifting, Turning, Strawing, Carriage by Land or Water, &c. To keep Grapes, Goosberries, Apricots, Peaches, Nectarines, Cherries, Currans and Plums, a whole Year. To keep Figs, and any Stone-Fruit, sound all the Year. To keep Strawberries, Rasberries, Currans, Mulberries, &c. and other things relating to the Fruiterers Calling. The Contents of CHAP. VIII. THe curious Art of Pickling Fruits, Flowers, Roots, Herbs, Buds, &c. To Pickle Cowcumbers, to keep green the Year: As also French-Beans, Barberries, Mushroms, Artichoaks, Broom-buds, Purslain, Asparagus, Green Peas, or Beans, Samphire, Clove-gille-flowers, Cowslips, Prim-roses, and other Flowers. Grapes, Plumes, Apples, Quinces, Turnips, and many other things proper of Fruits, Herbs, Roots, Buds, &c. To Pickle Oysters, and Salmon. To Salt Neats-Tongues To make English Hams in colour and tast, like those of Westphalia. To make Saucages equal to those of Bolonia.
To recover the lost flavour of Oil. To recover Anchoves, Rusty by loss of Pickle. To recover Sturgeon, or Salmon decayed. To make good Vinegar for Pickling. To make Elder Vinegar, Rose Vinegar, and of other Flowers. The Contents of CHAP. IX. THe Art and Mistery of Confectioning, &c. Of Sugars. To make Macaroons, Geneua Bisket, Na∣ples Bisket, Pasts of Fruit, Jelly of Quinces, Geneua Past, Marchpains like Bacon, Mar∣malade of Grapes, of Currans, of Damas∣sceens, of Quinces, white and red; Pepins, Permains, and other Fruits. To Preserve Medlars and Services, and A∣pricots. Cakes of Apricots. To Dry Apricots, or Peaches, Citron Flowers to Conserve. To Preserve Damesceens. To Candy Clove-gilleflowers, and other Flowers. To make Mulberry-Honey. To make Musk, Sugar or Perfume Sweat-meats. To Candy Nutmegs. To Candy Orange, Chips and Peels; Limon and Citron the like. Orange Marmalade; Transparent Quince-Cake;
Syrup of Quinces; of Rasberry; of Clove-Gilleflowers. The Contents of CHAP. X. THe Market-man, or Woman's best In∣structor, &c. A Capon to know whether Young or Old; the like of a Cock and Hen Turkey, also whe∣ther New or Stale; and so of all manner of Fowl, usually sold Wild, or Tame; Hares, Rabbets, Leverits, &c. How to know whether divers sorts of Fowl are fat, or not; whether with Egg, or not, &c. In Reference to each Particular at large. The Contents of CHAP. XI. TO know several Sorts of Fish, whether New or Stale, and distinguish Kinds of likeness; as Sturgeon, Prawns, Crab-fish great and small, boiled Salmon, Anchoves, Pickled-Herrings, Red-Herrings, Cod-fish, Old-Ling, Place, Flounders, Fresh-Her∣rings, Mackerill, Maids, Thorn-backs, Carps, Pikes, Breem, Trout, Grayling, Chub, Tench, Barble, Fresh Salmon, Whiting, Smelts, &c. To keep Fish near Tainting some time.
The Contents of CHAP. XII. RUles and Directions for Marketing, i buying Butcher's Meat, &c. Lamb, New or Stale. Veale, the like. Mutton, young or old, new or stale, healthy or unhealthy; Ram, Yew or Weather. Beef, new or stale, young or old; Cow-beef, Ox-beef, or Bull-beef, &c. Pork, or Brawn, young or old, good or bad, d∣seased or not; how to salt, pickle, and keep Flesh, &c. A Discovery of the Defects of Hams and Bacon Of Venison, new or stale, old or young; to re∣cover tainted Flesh. Butter and Eggs, good or bad; to discover the like of Cheese, Bread, &c. Observations on English and Outlandish Fruits, to know by certain Marks and Tokens, whe∣ther they are good or bad, &c. The Contents of CHAP. XIII. PRofitable Rules and Instructions for good House-keeping, &c. To make Bread cheap, and more substantial than ordinary. To make Bread keep moist and good very long.
To make Water-Gruel, Milk-Porridge and Flumery. To make salt Porridge fresh. To Pouder a Goose in Roasting. To make any Fowl very tender. To make Jellies of Fruit; Jelly-broth; Oyster Jelly. Sundry kinds of Sawces and Garnishes, curious of Relish, and proper for Flesh, Fish, &c. To make Craw-fish red. To preserve Fowl from Tainting a long time. To preserve Fresh Lard. To fatten any sort of Fowl in 15 days. To raise a Sallade in a few hours from the Seed fit for the Table. To make abundance of Cream. Excellent Syl∣labubs. Cream of sundry kinds of Fruits. Cream Pudding. To keep all sorts of Flowers fresh out of their proper Season. To make an excellent White-pot. An excellent Baked Pudding. White Puddings, the best way to make▪ English Sausages, to make. The Contents of CHAP. XIV. EXcellent Receipts, &c. A good Pomatum for Beautifying. Essence of Cinnamon.
To make a Perfume burn and well scenta House. Pastills to perfume Cakes. Grounds for Hair Pouder. To scent Pou∣ders; also to make Wash-balls, Perfumes, and Sweet-bags for Cloaths. Violet Pouder for Cassinets, and Sweet-bags to lay among Linen. To whiten Teeth. To make Hair grow. To take Spots of Oil out of Woollen, Silks or Stuffs; the like of Pitch, Rosin, Bees-wax, or Tar. To take Iron-moulds out of Linen; also Spots of of Ink or Stains of Fruit. To take Spots of Oil or Grease out of White or Red Silk, without injuring them. To make brass Utensils look of a golden colour. To cleanse Silver, and give it a curious Luster. To set a Gloss on faded Paintings. To Refresh faded Hangings. To whiten Linen Cloath. To destroy Vermin infesting Houses, Out-houses, Gardens, &c. viz. Mice, Rats or Weasles. To prevent Weasles sucking Eggs. To destroy Bugs, Fleas, Lice, Flies, &c. Moths, Worms, Spiders, Ticks, and to drive away all venomous Creatures.
England's Happiness Improv'd: OR, AN Infallible Way to get Riches, Encrease Plenty, and promote Pleasure. CHAP. I. To Improve the Planting of Vines, and making Wine of Grapes equal to that of France; to Fine and Order it; with choice Receipts for making Wines of most sorts of English Fruits, and their peculiar Virtues, and singular Ex∣periments. THat England's Fertility and Pro∣duct, equals any Nation under Heaven, in what conduces to the Subsistance and Health, and Riches of its Inhabitants is not, at this day, after so many Proofs and Demonstra∣tions, to be questioned. Long since it was stiled by Forreigners the Store-house and Granery of Europe, and nothing, but want of Skill and Industry, can at present hinder us from making those wholsom Liquors,
among many other things that Equal, i not Exced, what with the hazard of the Seas, and the great Exhausting of our Treasure, to the hindering the Circle o Inland Trade particularly, we have for many Years fetch'd from abroad; nay, I must take leave to affirm, those Liquors pro∣duced, from our natural growth, are not only as pleasant in Tast, if rightly made and prepared, as any other, but are far more agreeable to the Constitution of English Bodies, contributing to Health and lively Vigor, and if not taken in excess, which, indeed in all things is hurtful, they lengthen Years, and free Old Age from those Ca∣lamities that adulterated Wines and For∣reign Liquors, make it obnoxious to, in the Pains Aches and many Diseases that their Sediments Entail, by corrupting the good, or creating bad Humours in the Body. Therefore I have thought it, among other things, very profitable to all, that I am designed to Treat of it in this Book, in the first place to give choice and approved Directions for planting Vines, making Wines, and other Liquors of English Fruits, &c. after the newest Experiments, and how they may be preserved to be used in all Seasons.
Of Vines, and Planting them. THat Vinyards have been frequent in England is apparent, upon the ac∣count of many places now bearing Corn and Pasture retaining that Name; and it is the Opinion of the most Experienced in this way, that the Southern parts of this Island, with the Industry of the Natives, might produce Vines equal to those of France, either for Claret or White-Wines: But before I come directly upon the Mak∣ing, and Ordering these sort of Wines, I think it proper to say something in rela∣tion to the Planting and Managing those Vines, that are to bring forth the Grapes of which Wine is to be made. It is the Planter's business, in the first place, to consider what Soil is most pro∣per, and that which is so, must be of a niterous, Sulpherous Nature; black, loose and moist, proceeding from its Oyly Qua∣lity, or Fatness, of which there is great store in this Kingdom, even in wast places, that with a little good manuring, would be well improved into Vinyards, and ren∣der a very great Encrease; and the pro∣per Manure is a little Lime, mixed with well
rotten Cow-dung, the one Cherishing, an the other heating the Roots of the Vines when well mingled with the Mould i which they are to be planted, and it i the most proper to plant them on gradua rising Hills not high, but very much ex∣posed to the South Sun, and sheltering off the cold North Winds; or in Orchards and Gardens, against warm Walls, or in Rows supported on Rails, or Layers, of a mode∣rate hight, and when the Vines are planted from slips of old Roots, Layers, &c. and have well taken Root, yearly open the Roots, not exposing them too much; if the Weather be sharp or cold in February, and cover them up about the middle of March with new soil, or compos'd of Dung, and mellow mould; of the first, about a quarter part, and they will bear abundantly many years, and when you cover them, or sooner, if it is a proper Season, to cut, or prune them, and of the sprags cut off, by laying them in bundles in a pit of mel∣low Earth, 7 or 8 Weeks will produce Sciens, or Succours, capable of being planted at a fit distance in such regular form, that they may have a convenient dist∣ance to spread, and having well taken Root, you may, as you see convenient, remove
them to more convenient places, to be∣come standing Dards, and all things answer your Expectation; a week before Easter loosen the ground about them every year, which will let in the nourishing air, which is, in some manner, the Life of Vegitables, as of Living Creaturs, and destroy the Weeds that encumber them; take off the by-shoots that grow not downward on the Roots, and however these of pluck Roots are not to be taken out, unless in repairing old Vines, and are then called Wortlings, because they are gotten about the over-grown Vines, or Heads, and the best Root on the neither part is very fine to behold; you may also cleanse them from Superfluous Roots, and set them in for a Vine, and such prepared Roots, and over-grown Vines, prove far better than others, for the Wortlings, after they have their Roots well together, are the better able to endure bleak Winds and Frosts, when others high hanging about the Elme with roots are often killed with them, or at least are more weakened, and become like old Vines; besides such a stock in the driving is stronger than such as are put in the ground immediately after they are cut from the Vine, where they must take Root, not taken out till they are set in the Rebstock.
If you chuse a place of Ground for a Vinyard, that has been huskey before it wa cleared of them, the first new set of Twigs will drive so strongly, that a double number of them must be layed in, as 8 or 10 in one place, which may, by Transplanting as they come to a moderate growth, be flou∣rishing Vines to bear Graps, for to one stock, are layed 3 or 4 Twigs called Pal∣mites, and that for some years together must be done in a new Break; for without such ordering, the Blossoms will yearly fall off, because the driving in such a new Plat, if the ground be rich, is too strong, thrusting too violently out of the blossoms: But if you let your stock grow into wood, it spreadeth in such new Titled Ground, and is much weakened thereby, and is brought to a Temprature, for each Twig receiveth so much strength and driving, as it hath need of to the full seed, and enough for the saving of it. And thus have I given you a true Insight of ordering Vinyards, because it now may prove a nice mattter, as not having been a long time well practiced in England; but as for other fruit-bearing trees of the Wine, of whose Fruits I shall hereafter have occasion to speak, I shall pass over their manner of planting, and come nearer to what is immediate profitable.
To make Wine of Grapes of the Growth of England. WHen the Vines are well grown, so as to bring full Clusters, be careful o disencumber them of some part of their Leaves that too much shade the Grapes, but not so in the hot Season that the Sun may not too swiftly draw away moisture, and wither them: Stay not till they are all ripe at once, for then some will be over-ripe, or burst, or incline to rot before the Under∣lings come to perfection, but every two or three days pick of the choice and Ripest Grapes, and spread them in dry shady places on sideways, that they contract not a heat, and must, and so those that remain on the Clusters having more Juyce to nourish them will grow bigger, or be sooner ripe, and when you have gotten a sufficient quantity put them into an open Vessel, and bruise them well with your hands, or if they be too many for you, gently press them with a Flat wooden Beater, that is, a thick board fastened at the end of a staff; as for tread∣ing of them with the Feet, though used in in other Countries, I approve it not, it being a nasty, slovenly way; take care
you break the Stones as little as may b for that will make the Wine of a bitteri Tang. Having bruised the Grapes well, so tha they are become Pulp, or Mash, havin a Tap at the bottom of your Cask, tye  hair Cloath over the Faucet, and let ou that which will run voluntary of it self, a the best Wine: Then take out the Pulp, and gently press it by degrees in a Cyder-pres till the Liquor is sufficiently drained out▪ then having a new Cask well seasoned, and Aired with a Lighted Rag diped in Brim∣stone till it become dry, pour the Liquor in through a sieve-funel to stop the dregs, and let it stand only with a pebble stone lightly layed on the Bung-hole to ferment, and re∣fine it self 10 or 12 days, then draw it gently off into an other Cask well seasoned, that the Lees, or Dregs, may remain in the first Cask, and stop it no otherways than before, till it has quite passed over its ferment, which you may know by the Coolness, and plea∣sant Tast; and thus of your ordinary white Grapes, you may make a good white sort of Wine, of the red Grapes a Claret, and if want of Colour, heighten it with a little Brazeile, boiled in about a quart of it, and strained very clear. The white Grapes not
too ripe give a good Rhenish-Tast, and are wonderful cooling, and a sort of Muscadel Grapes growing now in many parts of Eng∣and, may be brought by the help of a little oaf-sugar to feed on, to produce a curious weet Wine, little differing from Canary, and altogether as wholsome and pleasant, so hat with some charge, labour and industry we might well furnish our selves with what we now are beholding to Strangers for at great Expence, hazard of the Seas, and a vast deal more toil and Labour than this would require. If the Wine requires Racking, the best time to do it is when the Wind is in the North, and the Weather temperate and clear in the Encrease of the Moon, and when she is under the Earth, and not in her full height. If the Wine Rope, to alter it take a course Linen Cloath, and when you have set the Cask a broach, set it before the bore, then put in the Linnen, and Rack it; in a dry Cask, put in 5 or 6 Ounces of Allom in powder, and jumble them so that they may well mix, and so upon settling, it will be fined down, and become very clear and pleasant Wine; but of sining and order∣ing Wine; and other Liquors, I shall take
occasion to treat more at large here∣after. Wine of Goosberries, to make it. OF Goosberries may be made a curious Cooling Wine, after the following Directions. Take Goosberries just beginning to turn to ripeness, but not those that are ripe, bruise them well, as you did the Grapes, but not so as to break their stones, then pour to every Eight pound of Pulp a Gallon of clear Spring-water, or rather their own Distilled water, made in a cold Still, and let them stand in the Vessel covered in a cool place 24 hours, then put them into a strong Can∣vas or Hair Bag, and press out all the juyce that will run from them, and to every quart of it put 12 Ouncs of Loaf, or other fine Sugar, stiring it till it be throughly melted; Then put it up into a well seasoned Cask, and set it in a Cool place, for too much heat will sower it, and when it has purged, and setled about 20 or 30 days, fill the Vessel fll, and Bung it down close, that as little air as possible may come at it. When you find it is well wrought and settled, then is your time to draw it off into
smaller Casks, or Bottles, keeping them al∣o in cool places, for there is nothing more lamages any sorts of Wines than heat. And as the Wine of Grapes has many Virtues, in comforting and strengthening the Heart, reviving and restoring the faded Spirits, so this has not a few proper to it, conducing to the Health of Man. Its Virtue. This is a curious Cooling Drink, taken with great success in all hot Diseases, as Fevors, Small-pox, the hot fit of the Ague; it stops Laxation, and is good in the Bloody-flux, cools the heat of the Liver and Sto∣mach, stops Bleeding, and mittigates Infla∣mations; it wonderfully abates the flushings and redness of the Face, after hard drink∣ing, or the like: It provokes Urin, and is good against the Stone, but those that are of a very Phlegmatick Constitution, it is not so proper for them. Currant-Wine, to make, and order it. TAke four Gallons of curious cooling Spring, or Conduit-Water, let it gently simper over a moderate fire, scum it well and stir into it 8 Pound of the best Vir∣gin-Honey, and when that is thoroughly
dissolved, take of the Water, and stir it w about to raise the scum, which take cle off, and cool it. When it is thus prepared, press out t like quantity of Juyce of Red Curran moderately ripe, without any green on among them, which being well strained, m it well with the Water and Honey, th put them up in a Cask, or large Earth Vessel, and let them stand upon the ferme 24 hours, then to every Gallon add tw pound of Loaf, or other fine Sugar, st them well to raise the Scum, and then whe well settled take it off, and add half a Ounce of Cream of Tartar, with a litt fine flower, and the Whites of 2 or 3 Egg which will refine it, and when it is well se∣tled and clear, draw it off into small Vessel or Bottle it up, keeping it in a cool place. Of White Currants, a Wine after th same manner may be made, that will equa in strength and pleasantness, a good sort o white Wine; but as for the Black ones, o Dutch Currants, I approve not of them, bu in Medicinal Wines, of which I shall have some occasion to speak hereafter. Their Virtues. They allay the burning Eagerness of Thirst, are cooling in Fevors, resist Putre∣ion
stay Vomiting, Corroberate the art, and fortify the Stomach; they are nk with success by those that have the s of the Mother, they divert Epilepsy,  provoke the Courses in Women. ine of Rasberries, to make it the Eng∣lish way. TAke what quantity you please of Red Rasberries when they are meanly ripe, r if they grow over ripe, they will lose uch of their pleasant scent, and clearing e Husks and Stalks from them, soak them  the like quantity of fair Water that has een boiled and sweetened with fine Loaf ugar, a pound and an half to a Gallon; hen they are well soaked about 12 hours ke them out, put them up into a fine inen pressing Bag, press out the Juyce into e Water, then boil them up together, and cum them well twice or thrice over a gen∣e fire, take off the Vessel, and let the iquor Cool, and when the scum arises ake off all that you can, and pour off the Liquor by inclination into a well seasoned Cask, or Earthen Vessel, then boil an ounce of Mace very well in a point of Whitewine ill the Third part of the Wine be consumed,
strain it, and add it to the Liquor; let settle two days, and when it has well settle and Fermented draw it off into Cask,  Bottles, and keep it in cool places. The French way to make this Wine. Steep two Gallons of Rasberries in a gallo of Sack 24 hours, then strain them, an put to the Liquor three quarters of a poun of Rasins of the Sun well stoned, and so l them continue four or five days, som times stiring them well, then pour it o by Inclination, that the clearest may b taken away, and only the dross and Settling remain in the bottom, and bottle that u you pour off, and if you find it not swee enough for your pallate, you may ad some Sugar about half a pound to a gallo will be sufficient; keep these in a coo place. Teir Virtues. These Wines either way are a great Cor∣dial, they cleanse the Blood, prevent pesti∣lential Air, comfort the Heart, ease pai in the Stomach, dispel gross Vapours from the Brain, cause a free breathing, by re∣moving Obstructions from the Lungs, and are successfully taken in Appoplexies.
Wine of Mulberries, to make it. TAke Mulberries when they are just changed from their redness to a shi∣ning black, gather them in a dry day when the Sun has taken off the dew, spread them thinly on a fine cloath on some floor or table for 24 hours, boil up a gallon of wa∣ter to each gallon of Juice you press out of these; scum the Water well, and add a lit∣tle Cinnamon grosly bruised, put to every gallon 6 Ounces of white Sugar-candy fine∣ly beaten, scum and strain the Water when it is taken off and settled, then put to it the Juice of Mulberries, and to every gallon the mixture of a pint of White or Rhenish Wine; Let them stand in a Cask to purge and settle 5 or 6 days, then draw off the Wine, and keep it cool. Its Virtue. This is a very rich Cordial, it gives vi∣gour to consumptive Bodies, allays the heat of the Blood, prevents Qualms and Peu∣kins in Women, makes the Body soluble, helps Digestion, and eases Distempers in the Bowels.
Morello Wine, to make it. TAke two gallons of White-wine, and 20 Pound of Morello Cherries, take a∣way the stalks, and so bruise them that the stones may be broken, press the Juice into the Wine, put Mace, Cinnamon and Nutmeg each an Ounce in a Bag grosly bruised, hang it in the Wine when you have put it up in a Cask, and it will be a rich Drink. Vinum Sambuceum; or Wine of Elder∣berries, how to make it. TAke Elder-berries when pretty ripe, plucked from the green stalks, what quantity you please, and press them that the Juice may freely run from them, which may be done in a Cyder-press, or between two weighty Planks, or for want of this op∣portunity you may mash them, and then it will run easily; this Juice put up in a well seasoned Cask, and to every Barrel put 3 gallons of water strong of Honey boiled in it, and add some Ale-yest to make it fer∣ment, and work out the grossness of its body, then to clarify it add Flower, whites of Eggs, and a little fixed Nitre, and when
it has well fermented, and grows fine, draw it from the settlings, and keep it till Spring, then to every Barrel add five pound of its own Flower, and as much Loaf-sugar, and then let it stand 7 days, at the end whereof it will grow very rich, and have a curious flavour. Its Virtues. It is an excellent Febrifuge, cleanses the Blood of Acidity, Venom and Putrefaction, good in Measles, Small-Pox, Swine-Pox, and Pestilential Diseases; it contributes to rest, and takes away the Heat that afflicts the Brain, easing Pains in the Head. Wines of Black-berry, Straw-berries or Dewberries, how to make them. TAke of these Berries in their proper Seasons moderately ripe what quan∣tity you please, press them as other Berries, boil up Water and Honey, or Water and fine Sugar, as your pallate best Relishes to a considerable Sweetness; and when it is well scumed, put the juyce in, and let it Sim∣per to encorporate it well with the Water, and when it has done so, take it off, let it cool, and scum it again, then put it up in a Barrel, or rather a close glazed Earthen
Vessel, to ferment and settle, put then to every Gallon half a pint of Mallaga, and draw it off as clear as may be; bottle it up, and keep it cool for use. Their Virtues. These Liquors are agreeably good in Fe∣vors, afflictions of the Lungs, prevent the Infection of pestilential Aires; get a good Appetite, and much helps digestion, ex∣cellent in Surfeits, and cause good Blood. Wine of Apples and Pears, to make them. AS for Apples, make them first into good Cyder, by beating and pressing, and other orderings, as I shall direct, when I come to treat of those sort of Liquors, after I have ended this of Wines; and to good Cyder when you have procured it, put the herb Scurlea, the Quintisence of Wine, and a little fixed Nitre, and to a Bar∣rel of this Cyder, a pound of the Syrup of Honey; let it work and ferment at Spurge holes in the Cask Ten days, or till you find it clear and well setled, then draw it off, and it will not be much uncomparable to Rhenish-Wine in Clearness, Colour and Tast.
To make Wine of Pears, procure the Tartest Perry, (but by no means that which is Tart by Sowering, or given that way) but such as is naturally so, put into a Bar∣rel about 5 Ounces of the juyce of the Herb Clary, and the Quintisence of Wine, and to every Barrel a pound, or Pint of the Syrup of Black-berries, and after fermen∣tation, and refining, it will be of a curious Wine-tast, like Sherry, and not well di∣stinguishable, but by such as have very good Pallates, or whose Trade it is to deal with it. Their Virtues. These Wines have the nature of Cyder and Perry, though in a higher degree, by the addition and alteration, being Cooling, Restorative, easing pains in the Liver, or Spleen, Cleansing the Bowels, and creating a good Appetite. Wine of Cherries, to make it. TAke Cherries indifferently ripe of any red sort, clear them of the Stalks and Stones, and then put them into an Earthen glazed Vessel, and with your clean hands Squeeze them to pulp, or you may do it with a wooden Ladle, or presser, and so let
them continue Twelve Hours to ferment, then put them into a Linen Cloath, not too fine, and press out the Juyce with a pressing-board, or any other Conveniency, then let the Liquor stand till the scum arise, and with your Ladle take it clean off, then pour out the clearer part by inclination into a Cask, where to each gallon put a Pound of the best Loaf Sugar, and let it ferment, and purge 7 or 8 days, so draw it off when you find it clear into lesser Casks, or Bottles, keep it cool, as other Wines, and in 10 or 12 days it will be ripe. Its Virtues. This is a great cooler of the Body in the heat of Weather, chears the heart, and much enlivens Nature in its decay; it is good a∣gainst violent Pains in the Head, and swoun∣ing Fits. Wine of Peach and Apricots, to make it. TAke of Peaches, Nectarins, &c. when they are full of juyce, pare them, and quit them of their stones, then slice them thin, and put about a gallon to two gallons of Water, and a quart of White-wine, put them over a fire gently to simper a consi∣derable time, till the sliced fruit become soft
then pour off the Liquid part into other Peaches that have been so used and bruised, but not heated, let them stand Twelve hours, sometimes with stiring, and then pour out the Liquid part, and press what remains through a fine hair bag, and put them together into a Cask to ferment, then add of Loaf Sugar a pound and an half to each Gallon; boil well an ounce of beaten Cloves in a quart of White-wine, and add it to give a curious flavour. Wine of Apricots may be made with only bruising, and pouring the hot Liquor upon, not requiring so much sweetning, by rea∣son they are of a more dulcid, or Lucious Quality, only to give it a curious flavour, boil an Ounce of Mace, and half an Ounce of Nutmegs in a Quart of White-wine, and when the Wine is on the ferment, pour the Liquid part in hot, and hang a bunch of fresh Borage well flowered into the Cask by a string at the Bung for three days, then draw it off, and keep it in Bottles, which are most proper to preserve these sorts of Wines. Their Virtues. They are moderately warming and re∣storative, very good in Consumptions, to create an Appetite, and recover decayed
and wasting Bodies; they loosen the hard∣ness of the Belly, and give ease to the pain of the Stomach. Wine of Quinces, to make it. GAther the Quinces when pretty Ripe, in a dry day, rub off the Down with a clean Linen Cloath, then lay them in Hay, or Staw, for Ten days to sweat, so cut them in Quarters, and take out the Cour, and bruize them well in a Mashing Tub with a Wooden beetle, and squeeze out the liquid part, by pressing them in a hair bag by de∣grees in a Cyder-press, strain this Liquor through a fine sieve, then warm it gently over a fire, and scum it, but suffer it not to boil, sprinkle into it Loaf-Sugar reduced to Powder, then in a gallon of Water, and a quart of White-wine, boil a dozen or four∣teen large Quinces thinly sliced, add two pound of fine Sugar, and then strain out the liquid part, and mingle it with the natural Juyce of the Quinces, put it into a Cask not to fill it, and jumble them well together, then let it stand to settle, put in juyce of Clary half a pint to five or six gallons, and mix it with a little flower and whites of Eggs, so draw it off, and if it be not sweet
enough add more Sugar, and a quart of the est Malmsey; you may to make it the bet∣ter, boil a quarter of a pound of stoned Rasins of the Sun, and a quarter of an Ounce of Cinamon in a quart of the Liquor to the Consumption of a third part, and straining the Liquor, put it into the Cask when the Wine is upon the ferment. Its Virtues. This Wine is a good Pectoral, cooling and refreshing the Vital parts; it is good, moderately taken, in all hot Diseases, allays the flushing of the Face, and St. Anthony's-Fire, takes away Inflamations, and is much available in Breakings-out, Botches, Boils, or Sores. Wine of Plums, Damascens, &c. to make them. TO do this take what Plumbs you please, mix those of a sweet Tast with an al∣lay of those that are somewhat sower, tho' they must be all Enclyning to Ripeness, slit them in halves, so that the Stones may be taken out, then Mash them gently, and add a little Water and Honey the better to moi∣sten them, boil to every gallon of pulp of your Plumbs, a gallon of Spring-water, in
it a few Bay-Leaves and Cloves, add  much Sugar as will well sweeten it, scu off the froth, and let it Cool, then press th Fruit squeezing out the Liquid part, strai all through a fine strainer, and put the Wa¦ter and juyce up together in a Cask, let  stand and ferment three or four days, sin it with white Sugar, flower and whites o Eggs, and draw it off into Bottles, so cork¦ing it up that the Air may not prejudice i and in 10 or 12 days it will be ripe, and ta like sherry, if not a nearer flavour of Ca¦nary. Damascens may be ordered as othe Plumbs, though they produce a Tarte Wine, more clear and longer lasting, but put not so much Water to them, as to lucious Plumbs, unless you mix some sweet Wine with it, as Mallago, Canary, or the like, or infuse Rasins in the Sun in it, which will give it a Rich and Mellow Tast. Their Virtues. These, as other Wines made of English Fruit, are moderately cooling, purefy the Blood, and cleanses the Reins, cause a free∣ness of Urin, and Contribute much to soft slumbers, and a quiet rest, by sending up gentle refreshing Spirits to the Brain, which dispel heat and noxious Vapours thence,
and put that noble part into a right Tempe∣ture. Wine of English Figs, to make it. TO do this take the large blue Figs, pretty ripe, steep them in White∣ine, having made some slits in them that ey may swell, and gather in the sub∣ance of the Wine, then slice some other igs, and let them simper over a fire in air water till they are reduced to a kind of ulp, strain out the water pressing the pulp ard, and pour it as hot as may be to those igs that are infused in the Wine, let the quantities be near equal, the Water some what more than the Wine and Figs, then aving infused 24 hours, mash them well ogether, and draw off what will run Vo∣untarily, then press the rest, and if it prove not pretty sweet, add Loaf Sugar to ren∣der it so; let it ferment, and add a little Honey, and Sugar-Candy to it, then fine it with Whites of Eggs and a little Ising-glass, and so draw it off, and keep it for use. Its Virtues. This is chiefly appropriated to Derects of the Lungs, helping shortness of Breath, re∣moving Colds or Inflamations of the Lungs;
it also comforts the Stomach, and eas pains of the Bowells. Wine of Roses, to make it. TO do this fit a Glass Bason, or Body,  for want of it a well glazed Earthe Vessel, and put into it three gallons of Rose water drawn with a cold Still, put into  a convenient quantity of Rose Leaves, cove it close, and put it for an hour in a kett or Cauldron of Water, heating over th fire to take out the whole strength and Tinct¦ure of the Roses, and when cold, press th Rose-Leaves hard into the Liquor, and stee fresh ones in, repeating it till the Liquo has got a full strength of the Roses, and then to every gallon of Liquor add three Pound of Loaf-Sugar, stir it well that it may melt and disperse in every part, then pu it up into a Cask, or other Convenien Vessel to ferment, and to make it do so the better, add a little fixed Nitre and flower and two or three Whites of Eggs, and let it stand cool about 30 days, and it will be ripe, and have a curious flavour, having the whole strength and scent of the Roses in it, and you may add to Meliorate it some Wine and Spices, as your Tast or Inclination leads you.
And by this way of Infusion, wine of Car∣ations, Clove-gilly-flowers, Violets, Prim∣oses, or any Flower, having a curious cent, may be made, to which to prevent epetition, and go on with as much brevity s conveniently may be, I refer you. The Virtues. Wines thus made, are not only pleasant n Tast, but rich and medicinal, being ex∣cellent for strengthning the Heart, refresh∣ng the Spirits, and gently cooling the Bo∣y, making it Lenitive, and so purges the irst digestion of Flegm, sometimes Chol∣ar, abates the heat of the Fevor, quenches Thirst, mittigates the Inflammation of the ntrails, and may, on sundry occasions, serve for a good Counter-poison. Cowslip Wine, to make it. PUt 5 pound of Loaf-sugar to 4 Gallons of fair water, simper them over a fire half an hour to well dissolve the Sugar, and when it is taken off, and cold, put in half a peck of Cowslip-flowers clean pickt, and gently bruised, then put two spoonfuls of new Ale-yest, and a pound of Syrup of Li∣mons beaten with it, with a Limon-peel or two, and so in a well seasoned Cask or Ves∣sel,
let them stand close stopped for thre days that they may ferment well, then p in some Juice of Cowslips, and give it  convenient space to work, and when it h stood a month draw it off into Bottles, pu¦ting a little lump of Loaf-Sugar into eac and so you may well keep it the space of  Year; and thus you may make Wine o such other like Flowers that are of pleasa Tast and scent, as Oxlips, Gesmine, Peach blooms, Comfry, Scabeons, Fetherfew, Fu¦mitary, and a number more, as your Fancy and Gust leads you, for I have shewed yo different ways to let you know that yo need not exactly keep to one certain Rule but please your Pallate by such additions a you think convenient, though by stray¦ing too far, you may happen to mar th whole design; therefore, in all things, keep as near as you can to the Rules I have given. Its Virtues. Cowslip-Wine moderately drunk much helps the Palsey, Cramp, Convulsion, and all other Diseases of the Nerves and Sinners▪ also eases pains of the Joints and Gout, and contributes mainly to the curing of Rup∣tures.
Scurvy-Grass Wine, to make it. SCurvy-Grass, or Spoon-wort, is a very Soveraign medicinable Herb, appropri∣ted chiefly to the health of English Bodies,  many Medicins chearfull, the Wine made f it containing all its Virtues with addition, ust needs be very acceptable to make it en. Take the best large Scurvy-Grass Tops nd Leaves in May, June, or July, bruise hem well in a Stone Mortar, then put it in a well-glazed earthen Vessel, and sprinkle it over with some pouder of Christal of Tartar, hen smeer it over with Virgin-honey, and eing covered close let it stand 24 hours, hen set water over a gentle fire, putting to every Gallon three Pints of Honey, and when the scum rises take it off, and let it cool, then put your stamped Scurvy-Grass into a Barrel, and pour the Liquor to it, setting the Vessel conveniently endways, with a Tap at the bottom, and when it has been infused 24 hours, draw off the Liquor, and strongly press the juyce and moisture out of the Herb into the Barrel, or Vessel, and so put the Liquor up again, then put a little new Ale-yest to it, and suffer it to
ferment three days, covering the place of th Bung, or Vent, with a piece of Bread sprea over with Mustard-seed downward in a co place, and so let it continue till it is fin and drinks brisk, then is your time to dra off the finest part, leaving only the dreg behind; add more Herbs, and so fermen with White of Eggs, Flower, and fixe Nitre Verjuce, or the Juice of green Grape if they be to be had, to which add 6 Poun of the Syrup of Mustard, all mixed and we beaten together to refine it down, and i will drink brisk, but is not very toothsom Being here incerted among Artificial Wine rather for the Health of Persons, than fo the delightfulness of Gust. Its Virtues. It helps Digestion, warms cold Stomachs carries off Phlegm, purefies the Blood purges out salt watery Humours, cleanse the Bowells from cold slimeyness, eases pain in the Limbs, Head, Heart and Stomach; as also those pricking pains, that are occasioned by Scorbutick Humours, &c. Of Mint, Balm, and other Herbs, &c. TO come more briefly to a conclusion of this Chapter, know that the Wine
of Mint, Balm, and other Fragrant Herbs, are best made after this manner, viz. First, distil the Herb in the cold still, then add Honey to it, and work as in Scurvy-Grass, and then refine it, and work it down by a due proportion of its own Syrup, and so the Wine will become very fragrant, and continue the whole virtue of the Herb: Wormwood-wine, Wine of Rue, Cardus, and such strong physical Herbs, may be made by Infusion, only in small White-Wines, Cyder, Perry, or the like, adding a little Sweets to palliate them, that they may be more agreeable to the Tast. That of Black Currants may be made as of other Currants, and are very proper to be kept in all Families. Their Virtues. They indifferently all of them resist Pesti∣ential Airs, are good in Agues, and cold Diseases; prevent Mother-fits and Vapours, and ease Pains in the Joints and Sinues, cleansing the Blood, and are great hinde∣ers of Appoplexies, Epilepsies, and the like; nd the Wines have not only the Virtues of he Herbs, but an addition to heat, streng∣hen and revive decaying Nature.
CHAP. II. The ingenious Art and Mistery of the Vintners, in making Artificial Wines; as Mallaga, Claret, Rhenish, &c. recovering faded Wines, and such as have lost their Colours; Rack∣ing, Sweetening, and many other things that appertain to their Trade, and have hitherto been kept as Secrets to the Publick, &c. Of Small Wines meliorated. IT is the opinion of many, that weak Wine may be raised, and improved on the Rich Lees of Wine that is drawn off; and indeed we know it is common to draw off such small Wines, and put them on such Lees, whereby the Vintner's gains arise; we also see that Wine is fed with proper Food, as sweet Flesh, salt of Tartar, or more principally the sweet and Volatil Spirit of Tartar, and yet higher with the Quintisence of Wine, by Essential Salts, prepared Oyls, Herbs, and things of an Aromatical nature, why then may not small Wine be greatly bettered by the Animal, or Quintisence, extracted from other Wines, for the Ani∣mal of Wine only, and nothing else, can increase the strength of Wine.
If the Quintisence be drawn out of one small Wine, and added to another, it will make that rich, though the other is altoge∣ther Impoverished, and better one be lost, which may however serve for Vinegar, than both remain useless, which cannot be so well demonstrated in Words, as practice, wherefore I shall hasten to what is more plain to be understood. To make Artificial Claret. TAke the Juyce, or Water of Clary, di∣still it in a cold Still one part; Red streak Syder half a part, Malago Rasins beaten in a Mortar six Pounds, the fat Mother of Claret one Pound, and these being covered in a close Vessel let them ferment 15 days, then draw off the Liquor into another Vessel, and to every Gallon add half a pint of the Juyce of Mulberries, or Blackberries, or Goosberries, and a pint of the Spirit of Clary, to the whole then take three Spoonfuls of Flower, and the White of two New-layed Eggs, a Dram of Ising-glass, beat these to∣gether, and add to the Liquor two Pounds of the Syrup of Clary, and it will Refine down, and be very rich, not distingushable from right Claret, unless by those very well Skilled in Wines, and of this there is great quantities
sold, now French Wines are dear, and scarce to be come by. Artificial Malago, to make it, Canary, &c. TAke a Cask that has been well seasoned with right old Malligo, new trim it, and hoop it strong, leaving it open at one end, to which open end a close cover must be fitted, to take off and put on at pleasure, and keep it in all Seasons in a warm place, sill it with Spring, or Conduit-water, and to every gallon of Water add 6 Pound of the best Mallago Rasins, grossly bruised, and sprinkle on every Twenty Gallons a handful of Calx Wine, then place the cover close, and keep it warm with Cloaths fastened about it, and so let it continue four or five days to work and ferment; after that open it, and see if the Rasins are floating on the top of the Water, and if you find they are, press them down again, and so do every four or five days, letting them stand three weeks, or a month, then Tap the Vessel 3 or 4. Inches above the bottom, and try if the Liquor tastes likewise, and if it do's not, let it stand longer, till it has got the true flavour, then draw it off into another Cask that has had Mallago in it, and to every 20
Gallons put a pint of the best Aqua-vitae, a quart of Alligant, and 2 new-layed Eggs beaten together, and let it stand in a Vaulted Cellar, or some such like place till it be fit to be drunk; if it want sweetness, put in a little fine Loaf-Sugar, and it will abundantly answer your Expectation, and this dashed with a little good White-wine, or curious brisk Pepin-Cyder, may well pass for Canary. And thus not only Artificial Mallago may be made, but other Artificial Wines, for it cannot but be supposed an ingenious Person may, by these Examples, invent and pre∣pare other sorts of Wines different from these in Tast; for having once got the Knowledge of the different Herbs that bear a Signiture with the different Sulphers of the true Wine, whether stiptick, acid, mild, Lucious, fat or Balsamick, so must the Im∣itation of the different sorts of Wines be, whether Ribella, Tent, Rapadavia, Canary, or any others; as for White-wine, or Rhe∣nish, you may make them of Sweeter or Tarter Cyders, as is directions given for making Artificial Claret, bating the co∣louring, though you must be at the Labour and charge to fine them more, and keep up in them a good Body.
To restore Prick'd Wines. TO do this take the Wine down to the Lees in an other Cask where the Lees of good Wine are fresh, then take a pint of strong Aqua-vitae, scrape half a pound of yellow Bees-wax into it, and by heating the Spirit melt the wax over a gentle fire, then dip in it a cloath, and set it on fire with a brimstone Match, put it flaming in at the Bung, and stop the Cask close. To restore Wines decayed by too much Vent, or Sowring. STir and ferment it well with a flat-end∣ed stick, till you have removed it in all parts, and made it ferment, but touch not the Lees; then pour in a pint of Aqua-vi∣tae, and stop it up close, and at the end of ten day it will be tollerably restored. Wine that is decayed by too much vent, may be recovered by putting burning hot Crusts of Bread into it. For Musty-wine, or Tang'd of the Cask. TO remedy this, rack it off upon Lees of rich Wine of the same sort, then put into a Bag four Ounces of the Pouder of Lenerel Berries, and two Ounces of the Fi∣lings
of Steel, let it hang by a string to the middle of the Wine, and so by degrees low∣er it, as you draw it off. To hinder Wine from Turning. Put a pound of melted Lead, that has been melted, into fair water into your Cask, pretty warm, and stop it close. To take away the ill Scent of Wine. BAke a long Rowler of Dough, when it is stuck well with Cloves, let it thor∣rowly bake, and hang it in your Cask, and it will remove the ill Scent from the Wine, by gathering it to its self. To remedy a bitter or sour Scent. TAke half a peck of Barley, and boil it in two quarts of Water, till one half of the water be wasted; strain it, let it well settle, and pour it into the Wine Cask, stir∣ing it well without touching the Lees. Green Wine, how to soften it. PUt in a little Vinegar wherein Litharge has been well steeped, and boil some Honey to draw out the Wax, and strain it through a cloath, and put a quart of it in∣to a Terce, and this much mends it in Sum∣mer
especially, and some when they per∣ceive the Wine turning, put in a stone of unslacked Lime, and it much mends it. To keep Wine from souring. BOil a gallon of Wine with some beaten Oyster-shells and Crabs-claws Calcined, strain out the Liquid part, and when it is cool, put it into the Wine of the same sort, and it will give it a pleasant lively Tast. To sweeten Wine. FIll it upon the Lees, put a handful of the flowers of Clary, and infuse in it, and add a pound of Mustard-seed dry-ground, which in a bag must be sunk to the bottom of the Cask. Arteficial Malmsey. TAke English, Galingale Cloves, each a Dram, beat them to pouder, and in∣fuse them a day and a night in a pint of Aqua-vitae in a wooden Vessel kept close co∣vered, then put it into good Claret, and it will make 12 or 14 gallons of good Malm∣sey in five or six days; the Drugs may be hung in a bag in the Cask.
To make Wine settle well. TAke a pint of Wheat, and boil it till it burst in a quart of Water, and become very soft, then squeeze it through a new innen Cloath, and put a pint of the liquid art into a Hogshead of unsettled White-wine, and it will fine it. To make Wormwood-Wine. TAke a good brisk Rhenish Wine, or White-wine, and hang a pound of Roman-wormwood in a bag into it, clean tripped from the grosser Stalks, and well ryed; and in 10 or 12 days Infusion it will give it a Tast and a curious Colour beyond what it had before: This may be done as it s drawn, by droping 3 or 4 drops of Chimi∣chal Spirit, or Oyl of Wormwood into a quart of Wine. To make Rough Claret. PUt a quart of Claret to two quarts of Slows, bake them in a gentle Oven till hey have stewed out a great part of their oisture, then pour off what is Liquid, and queeze out the rest, and half a pint of this will rough 10 Gallons.
To Recover the lost Colour of White-wine, or Rhenish-wine. TO do this Effectually Rack the Win from the Lees, and if the Colour o the Wine be faint and tawney put in Conack-Lees, and pour the Wine upon them rowling and jumbling them together a con∣siderable time in the Cask, and in 10 o 12 days rack off the Wine, and it will b of a proper Colour, and drink brisk an fine. Wine that is lowering, to prevent its decay. TAke Roach-Allom poudered an Ounce draw out four gallons of the Wine and strow the pouder in it, beat it well fo the space of half an hour, then fill up th Cask and set it on broach, being carefu to let it take vent, so that by this means i three or four days you will find it a curiou brisk Wine. Of Racking Wine. THis is done with such Instruments as are usefull and appropiated to the manner of doing it, and cannot be so well de∣scribed by words, as by seeing it done however this observe in doing it: Let it b
en the wind sits full North, and the Wea∣r is Temperate and Clear, that the Air y the better agree with the constitution  the Wine, and make it take more kindly; s moreover most proper to be done in the crease of the Moon, when she is under the rth, and not in full height, &c. To make Wines scent well, and give them a curious flavour. TAke pouder of Sulphur two Ounces, half an Ounce of Calamus, incorporate em well together, and put them into a nt and a half of Borrage-water, let them eep in it a considerable time, and then awing off the water melt the Sulphur and alamus in an Iron pan, and dip in it as any Rags as will soak it up, which put in∣ the Cask; then rack your Wine, and put  a pint of Rose-water, and stoping the logshead, rowl it up and down half an hour, fter which let it continue still two days, and y so ordering any Gascoin, or red Wine, t will have a pleasant scent and gust. To mend Wines that Rope. WHen you have set your Cask a-broach, place a course linen Cloath before he Bore, then put in the linen, and rock it
in a dry Cask, add then 5 or 6 Ounces the Pouder of Allom, then rowl and juble them sufficiently together, and then  on settling it will be fined down, and pr a very fluid pleasant wine, both in Tast  Scent. To mend White, or Rhenish Wines. IF these VVines have an unpleasant T your best way is speedily to draw eit of them half off, and to either of the hal put two gallons of new Milk, a handful Bay Salt, and as much Rice, mix, and b them well together for half an hour w a Staff, or Paddeler, then fill up the Ca and when you have well rowled it, turn over in the Lees, and 2 or 3 days after y may broach it, and it will drink very fine a brisk. Another way to mend the Colour of Whit Wines, &c. TAke a Gallon, or more, of morni Milk, put it into the Cask, and  it well with Rowling, then when you pceive it is well settled put in 3 or 4. Ouces of Ising-glass, and about a quarter o pound of Loaf-sugar fine scraped, and th fill up the Hogshead, or other Cask, a rowl it 4 or 5 times over, and this w bring it to a colour and fineness.
To meliorate, or better Viscious Wine. Et your Wine in this case be what it will,  your business is to take a pint of Clari∣ honey, a pint of Water, wherein Rasins of  Sun have been well steeped, 3 quarters of int of good white Wine, or Claret, accord∣ as the Colour of your wine is, let them per, and boil a little over a gentle fire, to  consumption of a third part, taking off  Scum as fast as it rises, put it very hot o the viciated Wine, and let it stand the ing-hole being open, then in a linen Bag  a little bruized Mace, Nutmeg and oves, and hang the Bag in the wine by tring for 3 or 4 days, and so either new  old Wine will not only be fined, but uch bettered; for by this means they e restored from their foulness and decay, d yeild a good Scent and Tast; you may  perfect this work the more when you e out the Spice, hang in a small Bag of ite Mustard-seed a little bruised, and the ork is done. o make Ice in Summer, and cooling Wine, &c. TO make Ice take a stone Bottle that will hold about three quarts of water, t into it two Ounces of resined Salt-petre, If an Ounce of Florence Orrise, and fill with water boiling hot, stop it close, and
immediately let it down into a Well, le  remain there 3 or 4 hours, and when  break the bottle you will find it full of  Ice; or for want of this opportunity, d∣solve a pound of Nitre in a bucket of wa∣ter, and it will cool your Bottles exceedily. Some farther Considerations on these Matt in Particular and General, &c. TAke Salt of Tartar, and pour disti Vinegar thereon until it be assatia every time drawing off the Phlegm,  then distill it in a coated Retort by fir degrees; and lastly, rectify the Oil thro the Spirit of Vitriol, and it will become ∣cid, fragrant, and very pleasant, and a  of this put into VVine, the pouder h in a fine linen Rag to the middle of  Cask so greatly refreshes it, that it is hel Meliorate, if not recover foul, pricked o∣ded VVine in a short space. VVines may be wonderfully exaulted  Essential Salts, viz. First chimically seperate the Oil of  Concreet, and the remainder Calcin ashes, the pure Salt extract, and Christa from thence, and reunite spagerically  fixed Salt, and the Essential Oil, and b them to Christalline Salt, or with the
of the Concreet distill and cohobate so ng till it is all brought over in a Balsam∣k Spirit, and this Spirit being imbodied y the Essential Salt, plainly manifests its ying, enriching Sulphur, which will ve Life and sulphurous Fatness, with a urable, lasting and substantial Virtue unto Vines, exaulting both the Tast and the well. This Salt or Essence of VVormwood will ake rich VVormwood-wine, and so will at of Mint, Balm, Angelico, and other fra∣rant and aromatick Herbs. It also gives fermentation thereunto, and enders it excellent VVine, as VVine refined rom its Lees, and gives such Qualities as eserve the highest Commendation: The Element of Fire, a Matter so called, made f the common yellow Sulphur, if a little f it be put into any defective VVine, pro∣uces very rare Effects, giving a grateful ast and Colour, and will so comfort it, hat it will not easily admit of change, or erishing, as otherwise is wont to happen, e∣pecially to common Rhenish-wine. VVines are also enriched by Essential and ragrant Oils so made, as to incorporate with water, or spirits of VVine, or other VVine, for being dilated by a proper fer∣ment
they are easily united, and so t body of the VVine is much enriched ther by. I might go on in this Theme to swell  large Volume, but having said enough fo Practice and Experiment, and there remaiing yet several other Subjects to handle bfore I can finish this work, I am constrained to mind my promise, in giving ever one the satisfaction of variety, &c. CHAP. III. Treating of the Art and Mistery of a Distiller in Drawing off Brandy, Low-Wines, Proof Spirits, with the true way of making Ordi∣nary and rich Cordial-waters. To Distill Aqua Vitae, and Low-wines, &c. OF late years particularly, the greatest produce of Common Distillation of Spirits have been from Malt, and since the War has prohibited French Brandies, a Spirit very near it in Tast, Colour and Strength has been Extracted from Grain, with Little other help; but before I come directly upon it, I shall introduce it, or
sher it in with the Art of Distilling the common Spirit, or vulgar Aqua-vitae. Aqua-vitae, the ground of so many curi∣ous Spirits, and Cordial-waters, is drawn off from well brewed Beer that is strongly hop∣ed, and well fermented; but it is not re∣quisit it should be fully rich of the Malt, and t must be distilled as soon as it is well wrought, for fear it should be flat or sower, and then great part of the Spirit will evapo∣ate, but if it be very strong of the Malt, nd in good tight Casks, it may be kept our own time. The way to distil it is to take a large Still, with a Serpentine-worm fixed in a large Hogshead, with cold water to condense the Spirit, or for want of that an Alimbeck, yet e not too hasty at first with the fire, rather raise it by degrees to a general Heat till tho Spirit comes; if the Still be very large, the est approved way is to let the Spirit run hrough a Funnel into a Hogshead, placed n the ground to receive it; make this Di∣tillation as long as any good Spirit will issue forth, and when that is done you may know by the Tast, for it will be like unsa∣ory Water, and when all the Spirit is off, his Spirit is called Low-Wine, which ermit to stand 6 or 7 days, and then di∣still
it a second time, which Artists term a Rectification, by which means it may be brought to Proof Spirits, or arteficial Brandy; now, in this case you may know when the Spirit is of the second time, in trying it by fire; for if it will not burn, then the Operation is at an end. These Low-wines and Spirits, are the prin∣ciple bodies of Strong-waters that are made of them; of which I shall treat in their proper place. Now if you Rectefy a third time in Bal∣neo, it will take off much of the Phlegm from the Spirit, and so a true Aqua-vitae will be well prepared. The Dutch way of distilling Spirits, &c. TAke well made Malt, and about 3 hours before you intend to use it, grind it, put about 6 Bushel into a very large Cask, standing on one end, with a cover to keep in the Steem, and a hole in the middle to put in an Oar to row, or stir it; when the water is poured to it, put a little cold wa∣ter to moisten it first, and then fill the Cask with that which is scalding hot, to plump and swell the Grain, and so stir it thorow∣ly; when it is near cold add half a Pound of Hops, and so let it stand till it is fit for
yest, and then let it work 4 or 5 days, and when it is in height of its fermentation put the Liquor and Malt into a Still, raise the fire under it by degrees, and put not the head into the worm at first, for fear it should boil over, and so foul it; but if you perceive the Vapours kindly to ascend then put it in, and Lute all fast, distill and recti∣fy as before, and this is indeed a quick and profitable way of Distilling. To make a sort of Brandy. TAke so much Malt as you design to di∣still, unground, boil it in a Kettle or Copper with fair water, till it break with exuberance or swelling, then pour it out into an open Cask, and being cold add fresh Dregs of strong Beer or Ale; let it stand 2 or 3 days to ferment, and then distill it as you did the Spirits, and by adding a little Molossus it will pass among those that are not very curious for good Brandy, and in this case by its protuberating, the burst Corn cannot be burnt in the Still to give it an unsavory Tast and Smell, and by the Decoction, or Boiling, the ill Tast is taken from the Corn which would otherways tang the Spirit or Brandy, and being thus boiled and broken it produceth more Spirit, and
stronger, spending all its power and strength upon it. Brandy, little inferiour to French Brandy, and exceeding some sorts of it, to make, &c. THough we cannot afford to make any quantity of Brandy of foul Wines, or Lees of Wine, as in France, unless at an ex∣traordinary rate, they being refined and put to other uses more advantageous, yet we have wherewithal in this Kingdom, if men would be industrious to do it with, as well as other Nations, viz. Take ordinary Cy∣der that is not decayed, and may be had in the Countries for little, if it be foul it mat∣ters not, 20 Gallons, decayed Grocers fruit, as rotten Raisins, Currans, Figs, Dates, Pru∣ens the stalks off, which Mallaga-raisins are pricked, and the sifting of Currans, all which may be had for little; boil as many of these as will suite to 20 Gallons of Cyder, in four Gallons of moderately malted Beer, till they swell, and may be well mashed, then put them all into the Cyder Liquor, and let them ferment with stirring four days, then distill them as you are directed for Aqua-vitae, and the first running will be an incomparable Brandy, and to the last it will be pretty well, and from this (at the Rate this Liquor now goes at) great profit will arise; if it be in
Vintage time; the Husks or Pressings of Grapes, Cherries, Peaches, Apricots, Plumbs, and the like, will be excellent; if it prove too sweet a Spirit, that is easily allayed, when distilled with a few drops of Spirit of Salt, and it will not be discernable. Another cheaper way to make Brandy. TAke the grounds of Cyder and Perry, and if they be thick press them thro' a hair Bag, lest they burn the bottom of the Still, put ten Gallons of these to 20 of Beer, not too strong of the Malt, and four Gallons of Molossus, let them ferment together 3 or 4 days with stirring, put about a Gallon of White-wine, or Claret Lees, to them, and so distill other Spirits, and your Expectation will be very well Answered. Of Malt Spirit, and what may be drawn off. FRom 50 gallons of brewed Beer, or good strong Wash, in the first Extra∣ction you may properly draw off 33, 34▪ 36 gallons of Low-wines; and if they lie to better themselves in the second Extraction, they will produce 11 or 12 gallons of Proof Spirits, nay, some Malt 13 gallons, especi∣ally if you put a Can or two of water into the Still, and by this way observe to en∣crease or lessen your fire under the Still, as you see it runs more or less, and look well to it.
Of Honey, Molossus and Sugar, &c. WHen you come to these Distillations, take an hundred weight of Sugar, Molossus, or Honey, and 12 or 14. Gallons of water to boil, as it may be fitting for the brewing of Malt; pour them into a large open Cask, or Fat, and stir them well toge∣ther to dissolve and incorporate, and when they are so, and cold enough, head it suffi∣ciently with Barm, or Yest, or instead of water you may use Small-beer, or Wash, and then the smaller quantity of Yest will serve, and when it has well fermented, you may add for the better flavour, what fra∣grant Flowers, Herbs, or Spices, you please, and if it be slow in fermenting, to encrease that cast in some pouder of Rhenish Tar∣tar, the quantity in a measure proportion∣able to that of the Liquor, viz. 2 Ounces to a Gallon, and so let it stand till it is tho∣roughly fermented, and well headed, and you must watch to take it in the height of its ferment, for if the head once begins to fall, which it will do as soon as the fermentation is declining, the Spirit will evaporate a-pace, and much of it will be lost; and if you work well in this distillation, you cannot miss of 9 or 10 Gallons of Low-wines from every hundred of coarse or refuse Honey, Molas∣sus,
or Sugar, which you may rectify into a very noble Spirit. As for Sugars by which Herbs, Flowers and Berries are so fermented, as to yeild Noble Spirits, and good Wines, being di∣stilled, take what Flower or Herb you please that is proper for this use, as suppose it should be Elder-flowers, of these take a peck clean picked, bruise them in a wooden Mor∣tar, to each peck of them add a gallon of Water, and to that 3 or 4 Pounds of ordi∣nary Sugar, then cover them close in a Cask to stand and ferment, which is known by their working, frothing and flowering kind∣ly, and after that cast a very fragrant scent, and if the Fermentation be slack, you may promote it with Rhenish Tartar, as before, and so in the height of the ferment, Distill it, and it will yeild a very pleasant Spirit. Of Raisins, and other things, used in Distillation, to make good Brandy or proof Spirits, &c. RAisins, and other Fruit, as I have alrea∣dy hinted, are very Excellent in Distil∣lation, did not the dearness of those that are good, over ballance the advantage accruing this way, as to ordinary Spirits; yet such as are damnified, and fit for little or no other use, may be improved to advantage here; when you have them, bruise them in a Mortar,
and put them in fair water 6 Pound to  Gallons, and when they are in the Cask t make them ferment, throw in a large hand∣ful of Christials of Tartar, or Rhenish Tar∣tar, but some there are who use Calx-vive ferment them to the purpose, by adding Ale yest, Stum, or fixed Nitre and Flower work it up in a warm place, draw off the Liquor, press the drugs out dry, and Disti these, and the produce will be excellent Low wines, which being well rectified make a pretty good Brandy. Of Low, Dead Wines, and their Dregs. OBserve in the distillation of these Dregs of Wine, you may ferment them with their decayed ones, or with the after-running of Low-wines, warmed, and cover∣ed up in a convenient Cask; and put a Pint of Stum to every Gallon, to ferment it; or in defect of this, take Barm, or yest; and it being sufficiently so ordered, draw off the Liquor, and press out the Moisture from the Drugs through a Canvas Bag, and so distil the Liquid part, that it may yeild as much as may be, and then rectify it it into proof Spirit, and in all your Fermentations you may use Stum, which is the Flower of the Wine; and observe, that from Low-wines, small wines and Lees, Brandies are
made in Germany and France; and may by ndustry, be as well improved in England. Some Distillers, to make their Spirits hot n the Mouth, to impose on the Ignorant, se Spanish Grains which will do it, but it dds not to the body of the Spirit, which s weak in it self; wherefore, to prove it, ut some in a Glass Viol, about half full, nd Corking it close, strike it against your and; and if the froth arising by the force ontinue, and go off leisurely, then it is of  good Body; but if it sputter, and run off presently, then is it a weak Spirit, and of  cold Body, how hot soever it may taste n the Mouth. Having sufficiently, as I hope, spoken of Spirits and Brandies to inform my Reader to put my notions in practice, and by that proceed to greater Matters and Experiments han words can direct him to, I now pro∣ceed to direct him how to prepare the ordi∣nary Strong-water, Rich Cordials, and waters for other uses, as beautifying, &c. Anniseed-water, to make it, &c. Take a Pound of good Anniseeds, steep them by Infusion in 3 Gallons of Spi∣its of Low-Wines, or Proof-Spirits; but f your Spirits are high Proof, you may dd a little Water in the Distillation, and
then draw off the quantity the Spirits wer And this Rule may properly be used f distilling all common Waters with Seed were it not that the quantity is diversifie according as they are in Strength; for,  Cardamums you must put two Pounds  the like quantity of Spirits: And as to th Herbs Angelica, Mint, Wormwood, an Balm, they are properly to be gather'd i their Prime, and dried in the Shade, tha the Sun, with their Moisture, draw not o their Virtue too powerfully; and the pro∣portion is varied, according as you woul have the Water more or less in strengt of the Herb; and in this Case you mu consider the strength of each Herb, an accordingly proportion them; for  handful of Wormwood or Cardus wi go farther than three or four of Bal Mint, &c. Hearts-Ease, &c. to make, and order, &c. TAke what quantity you please of Aqu Vitae, or Artificial Brandy, and to eve∣ry Gallon put a Pound of Seeds of Heart's Ease, and the like quantity of the Blossom well dried in the Sun; tye them up in  Bag, put them into the Still, and draw  long as you find any pleasant Taste in th Spirit; then sweeten it with the Syrup mad
Heart's-Ease, and White Sugar; put it  in a Cask, adding to it 2 or 3 spoonfulls f new Yest, and the White of an Egg or wo, beaten up with Flower, whereby it ill have its Fermentation, and be refined fit r Sale; being a very pleasant Water. Now, observe, In the Distillation of this, ere will be apt to come over it an Oil, or hite thick Spirit; thus to be fined; As it omes, take a fine Holland Cloth, and rub  very well on one side with Black Lead, nd bind the side so rub'd inward, towards e End of the Worm, and so the Thickness ill be kept back. And thus other Waters, f the like nature, may be ordered, and pre∣ared for Sale, or private Use, &c. A rich Cinnamon-Water, to make it. THE Brandy-Spirit is always preferable if you are to make any Rich and Cor∣ial Waters, especially that made of Malt, r any Brewers Materials, impregnated with n Azure Salt, of a Vinous Nature; and en the Spirit will give a Fragrancy in its aste. For instance; Take of unwasted Cinna∣on 5 Pounds, Brandy-Spirit 5 Gallons, Su∣ar or Honey a Pound and an half; let them fuse 20 days, and then distil off the Spirit, hich dulcifie or sweeten with its own Sy∣rup,
and so it proves the best and truest Spi∣rit of Cinnamon that can be made, and pro∣per for Physical Use. The best and proper Way for Colouring, Sweet∣ning and Perfuming ordinary Waters, usuall exposed to Sale in Distillers Shops, &c. TO do this properly, take two Quart of the cold distill'd Water of the Herb and of the dried Herb two Pounds, Brazi half a Pound, more or less, as the quantity to be colour'd requires; to which add, o Sugar 6 Pounds; stir them very well, tha they may be well mix'd; then gently decoc them in an Earthen Pot, with a close Cove 2 or 3 hours, sometimes stirring them, and immediately shut the Cover; and when they are thus prepared, clarifie them with White of Eggs, well beaten; and when it is suffi∣ciently cool'd, strain it through a Fustian Bag, called a Canopy; and to every Barre of Water, add 5 or 6 parts of this Syrup with a Spoonful of Yest, to make it work and clear it self; and in about 20 days i may be well expos'd to Sale, in good Con∣dition, and Order. A Syrup to make a Red Water, excelling that of London. TAke of the best Rose-Water 3 Quarts Red Saunders well pounded a Pound
Rose-Leaves, Treacle, Honey, or rather Su∣gar, 10 Pounds; decoct these, as before di∣ected; then, being cool, clarifie them with he Whites of Eggs, and add the whole quantity to a Barrel of Aqua-vitae; so in a small Bag put the Whites of 3 Eggs, and a pretty good Spoonful of Barm, beat them well together, and infuse of Musk a Scruple, Amber-grease 10 Grains; and suffer the Bag, with these Ingredients in it, to hang in the Liquor, fasten'd to the Bung with a String, 14 days; and then draw it off for Sale, and it will prove an excellent Water. Simples, proper for Colouring Waters. THE Use of these are not barely to co∣lour it, but to add to the Virtue of he Water; viz. Cochineel, Poppy-Leaves, Turnsole, the Roots of Alkanet, Rose-Leaves, Saunders, Brasil, Logwood, Mulberries, Ras∣berries, Blackberries, the Juice of Sloes when they are baked, the Juice of Black-Cherries, Dew-berries, and Saffron; being, most of them very wholsom, and cordial: So that they being, in their proper Seasons, to be ad at easie Rates, you must take the Advan∣tage of making the Waters at the Times pro∣per, unless you husband them so as to keep he Juice and Syrup of the Fruits, to serve on ll Occasions.
To make Right Usquebaugh, according to th Receipt of that which was made for th King's Use when he was in Ireland. TAke 10 Gallons of a good Brandy-Spi∣rit, made from Strong Beer and som new Malt, Anniseeds one Pound, Cloves  Ounces, Nutmegs, Ginger and Carraway seeds, each 4 Ounces; distil them into Proof-Spirit, according to Art, as already directe for Proof-Spirits. This done, add to the li∣quid part Spanish Liquorish, Raisins of th Sun stoned, of each 2 Pounds well bruised Dates stoned, and the white Skin taken off 4 Ounces; Cinnamon, the like quantity keep them 4 days in a close Vessel, we stop'd; and at the end of 3 days, add  Grains of Musk and Amber-grease dissolv'd and dulcified with 5 Pounds of Nevis-Su∣gar; stir them well at times ten days, an strain the liquid part through a Flannel fixe on a Sieve, or any other convenient place fine it down with Whites of Eggs an Flower. Some there are that only draw  off the Lees, into other Casks, that keep  when fine. And thus, as you would have  richer, or weaker, you may take better o worse Spirits, or more or less of the Ingre∣dients, though the way of making and or∣dering is the same.
Aqua Corroborans, or the Heart-strengthen∣ing Cordial-Water, to make it. TAke Betony, Bugloss, Cowslips, Balm, Sage, in the prime of their Sap, of ach  handful, Low Wines two Gallons; istil it into Proof-Spirits, and then put to  Nutmegs, Gallenga, Cubebs, Cloves, Mace, Cardamums, and Flowers of Melilot, of each  Ounces; the Juice of Celendine 3 Pints, nd the weight of all these in Proof-Spirits, Currant-Wine a Gallon, or, for want of it, White-wine; let them ferment and digest 4 hours with moderate stirring, then distil hem in Balneo till the Herbs grow dry. Its Virtues. This approved Cordial fortifies the Heart gainst Infections, strengthens the Stomach, nd creates a good Digestion; as also, the rincipal Faculties being good in all cold Diseases. Stomach-Water, to make it. TAke of Gascoigne-Wine, or, for want of it, of Midling Spirits of Wine, a Gal∣on, Gallinga, Nutmegs, Ginger, Cloves, panish Grains, Anniseeds, Carraway and ennel-Seeds, each an Ounce; Red-Rose-eaves, Mint, Sage, Pellitory, Cammomile, Thyme, Lavender and Avens, each a hand∣ull; bruise the Spices in a Mortar, sepa∣rate
and grosly shred the Herbs, put them well mixed, into Spirit of Wine, and let them stand 3 days in the Cold, keeping the Vessel close stop'd, or cover'd; then distil dulcifie and colour it with Syrup of ber∣ries, or, for want of it, that of Mulberries and it will prove a Sovereign Pectoral Cor∣dial. Plague-Water, to make it. TAke the Roots of Rue and Sage, the Leaves of Angelica, of each 3 handfuls; White Ginger, Long Pepper and Nutmeg, each an Ounce and a half; Spirit of Elder a Gallon, the Husks of green Walnuts, or Walnut-Leaves, 2 Pounds, Malaga-Wine 2 Quarts, Venice-Treacle and Mithridate, each 4 Oun∣ces; digest them, grosly bruised, 10 days, and then distil them so long as any pleasant Water will come; and to that which comes over, add a Pint of Hungarian Water, and as much Syrup of Vinegar, with about 4 Ounces of Loaf-Sugar, and let it ferment with the help of the White of an Egg and a little Flower tied up in a Bag, 5 or 6 days, and so it will grow clear, and fit for Use. Its Virtues. It preserves against Infections and Pestilen∣tial Airs, Measles, Small-Pox, and all Pestife∣rous or Contagious Diseases: About an Ounce
at a time is a sufficient Dose to take, Morning, Noon and Night. It helps Digestion, and wonderfully fortifies a cold Stomach. Aqua Multifaria, to make it. THis is a Water stiled to be of many Virtues. To make it, Take Bettony, Balm, Sage, Bugloss, Cowslips, gather'd in their prime, of each a handful; Bay-Leaves and Mother∣wort, of each a handful and a half; Flowers of Lavender, Rosemary, Lilies of the Valley, and Rosa solis, each a handful; Saffron two Ounces, the Juice of Celendine two Pounds, Wood of Alloes an Ounce and a half, Tur∣merick 4 Ounces, Spirit of Wine 6 Quarts: Let these digest well 6 days, and distil them in Balneo Sal artificially. Its Virtues. It is an Excellent Water for the Head, in all the Pains and Afflictions incident to it. It eases the Pains in the Breast, Heart, Liver, and other Vital Parts; strengthning Nature, and fortifying the Faculties; and contributes greatly to Health and Long Life. But you must take it moderately, in small Doses; as, an Ounce at a time. And if any of these Cor∣dials prove too hot for your Palate, or Con∣stitution, you may allay them with cooling Simple Waters; as Balm, Bugloss, Sabeons, Comfrey, and the like.
Aqua Triplex, or a Threefold Water, to make it. TO make this, take four Pounds of Venice Turpentine; Mastick and Frankinsense, of each two Ounces; Aloes Epatica, Date∣stones, Laudanum Castor, the Roots of Bet∣tony and Elicampaign, or each two Ounces; Cloves, Cardamums, Ginger, Nutmegs, Gal∣lingale, Zedoare, Pepper, Laurel-berries, Spicknard, Smallage-seeds; Mugwort-seeds, Anniseeds, flowers of Brasil, Elder-flowers, Red and White Roses, Lignum Aloes, Cu∣bebs, Calamus-Aromaticus, Jumper-berries, Germander, Mace, Formentil, Agrimoney, Fumitorie, Centaury, Pimpernel, Dent de Leon, Eudine-seeds, Sorrel, yellow Saunders, Fetherfew, Aloes Kepatick, of each two Ounces, Rubarb, 3 Ounces; Raisins, Dried Figgs, Dates Stoned, and sweet Almonds, of each 4 Ounces; Honey, 6 Pound; Sugar 10 Pound; Spirit of Elder, well rectified, as much as is sufficient to cover all these in∣gredients about 4 Fingers; then add Musk and Ambergrease, of each two Drams; Saf∣fron, two Ounces and a half; put all these into a Retort, cover the mouth with a Cork very sure, and then Lute it over; after that, tye it fast with a bladder, and let them Mace∣rate 40 days in Horse dung; then remove
it, and distil it in a strong Balneo, and at the first will come a white Spirit, then a saffron coloured, and the last will be red, with some Oil floating on it; Let each be recei∣ved a-part: And when this Operation is o∣ver in Balneo, you may distil it on a vio∣lent fire, in Sand, to see what more may be gotten; for it is so precious, that none of it ought to be lost. Its Virtues. The first Drawing off is admirable to bathe Pains, Aches, or Numbed Joynts; proper for new Wounds, sore weak Eys; Plague Sores; for the Pearl and Web in the Eye, the Stone and Strangury. The second Drawing, or Water, is a Re∣medy for the Corruption of the Blood, Leprosie, for the Weakness of Members, for the Ague. The third Water Strengthens the Brain, and takes away cold Diseases that afflict it; as Rheums, Cattarrs, and Expells offensive Vapours, and is proper for the Palsie and Gout; with other Consonant Diseases. The powerful United Spirit of Scurvy-grass, to make it. DIstil from what quantity you please of Scurvy-grass-Wine a high Spirit, which
pour on fresh Scurvy-grass, and distil it again, repeating the Operation till it becomes very strong, of a Grass Green, and a fragrant scent, so that when it is fired it will burn clean away without leaving any moisture behind it, then by distillation make the Oyl of Scurvy-grass, and by Calcination its fixed Salt, and so according to the Sagirical Art reunite these, and then you have the powers, and whole Virtue of the Herb, look∣ing of a curious green. Its Virtues. This is an excellent Remedy for the Scurvy, it gives Circulation to the Blood; by disol∣ving and dissipating congealed Humours; it destroys not only the Salin, but also the Acid and Crude Humours from whence the Scurvy hath its Original, whether contracted by eating gross, raw, or crude Fruit, raw Herbs, salt Fish or Flesh. For the Scurvy, Jaundis, Ptisick, or short∣ness of Breath; these powers may be used at any time, the oftner the better; the Dose is from 10 to 30 in a Glass of Beer, or any other convenient Liquor, and after the spending 3 or 4 Bottles, you may take the golden Spirit, usually Sold, about half a Bot∣tle of it once a week, keeping your self warm, and taking comfortable Diet after it,
and so the relicks of the Disease will be car∣ried off, the Blood purified, and such Crudi∣ties as bred Worms destroyed. The powerful United Spirit of Elder, to make it. TAke Elder-Wine, made as I have directed in the 3d Chapter, as much as you think convenient, adding thereto Elder∣flowers; let them ferment in it, and take it at the height of Fermentation, when it has the greatest Fragrancy, lest it lose much of its Vivor, Strength and Spirit; put it into a Still, and distil it as long as any goodness will come; but observe, those Wines made for distillation ought to be that of the Juyce pressed out only, and no Wa∣ter added, adding its proper ferment, and some Sugar and Honey to help it on; add fresh Flowers in their prime, and reiterate the Fermentation and Distillation, and so the Spirit will be very fragrant, purely im∣pregnated with the Virtues of the Concret, and to every Pound, or Pint of this Spirit, add an Ounce of its Salt, and two of the Oyl, and so unite them together. Its Virtues. The Virtues of the Powers are many, and rare: It cleanses the Blood, and expels Hy∣dropical Humours, and is good in Obstru∣ctions:
It takes away Putrifaction and In∣flammations in any part of the Body; It clears and cools the Skin. The Oil of it is excellent against Scorbutick Humours; as, the Itch, Piles, Braises, Strains, or any Cold settling in the Joints; and allays the Pains of the Gout. In Convulsions, Palsies, Vir∣rigoes, Calentures, or sudden Swoonings, 'tis very prevalent. Twill last many Years, carried by Sea or Land. And upon the Ap∣proach of a Proxism, if you drop 20 or 30 Drops into a Glass of Water, and drink it, 'twill wonderfully abate the Violence there∣of, and strengthen Nature: Dip also for this the Corner of your Handkerchief in it, snuff up the Scent, and smeer the Temples with it. For Children, 9 or 10 Drops are suffi∣cient, in a Spoonful of Water, sweeten'd with Sugar, or the like: But the Mother may take a full Dose, as 20 or 30 Drops, whilst the Child is sucking, and then the Prevalency of it will appear. It also abates the Oppression of Wind, which Children are much subject to. It helps Diseases in the Breast; as, Asthma's, Dropsies, Spitting of Blood, Consumptions, and such like. It creates a good Appetite; and 'tis good for many other Things.
The Powerful United Spirit of Rosemary, to make it. TAke a sufficient quantity of the Flow∣ers of Rosemary, in their prime, in∣fuse them in Rectified Spirits of Wine, then distil them, and unite the Spirit with the proper Oil and Salt; which far out-does the Hungarian Water. And by these Exam∣ples, you may be enabled to prepare what Powers you will from Herbs, Flowers, Gums, &c. Its Virtues. This not only beautifies the Face, Hands, &c. to admiration; but also, 20 or 30 Drops being taken in a Glass of Wine, or any other convenient Liquor, fortifies the Heart, cleanses the Blood, recovers the fa∣ding Spirits, causes a fresh and ruddy Com∣plexion, is good against Fits, and helps in any cold Disease; prevents Faintings and Swoonings, drives out bad Airs or Vapours contracted in Infectious Places. Elixir Salutis, the best Receipt. TAke of Guaiacum, the dried Roots of Elicampaign, Carraways, Coriander, and Anniseeds, each 2 Ounces; the Leaves of Senna 4 Ounces, Raisins of the Sun ston'd half a Pound, Liquorice 2 Ounces; infuse these in 3 Quarts of good Brandy 4 days,
then draw it off, and infuse in it half an Ounce of good Ruburb, thinly slic'd; when the Ruburb is well infused, put it into small Bottles, and keep it well stop'd. Its Virtues. This Elixir, so much fam'd, and long kept as a Secret, purifies the Blood, carries away slimy Matter from the Bowels, eases Pains in the Belly, removes Gravel and Sand, bringing it away with Ease, by taking 2 or 3 Spoon∣fuls of it Morning and Night. Elixir Proprietatis, to make it. TAke Aloes, Myrrh and Saffron, of each half an Ounce, infuse them in 3 Quarts of Spirit of Wine, drop in a few Drops of Spirit of Sulphur, then let them digest in a Glass well stop'd 30 days; at the end of that time, having often shaken it, you will per∣ceive a black Tincture on the top, pour that off, and let it stand 24 hours, then decoct it till no Foeces remains at the bottom. Take a moderate Spoonful of this in a Glass of Wine, in a Morning, fasting. Its Virtues. 'Tis exceeding helpful in Agues, or Rhu∣matisms; and, indeed, in any cold Diseases. It fortifies Nature, and gives a lively, fresh Complexion. But observe that you conti∣nue temperate in Meats and Drinks the day
you take it, that it may work the better up∣n the Crudities, and disburthen Nature of what is oppressing, and most noxious to her. Marigold-Flower-Water, to make it. TAke a quarter of a Peck of well-blown Marigold-Flowers, dry them a little in he Sun, put to them a Quart of Spirit of Wine, and distil them in a cold Still till hey become dry. Its Virtues. This is admirable for Pains and Noises in he Head: It cures Inflammations in the Eyes, and Heart-sickness. The curious Cordial, called Dr. Stephens's Wa∣ter; or, The Golden Cordial; how to make it the right way. TAke a Gallon of Claret, or brisk Canary, not over-sweet; of Ginger, Cinnamon, Grains of Paradise, Nutmegs, Gallingale, Fennil and Coriander-seeds, each 3 Drams; Mint, Sage, Rose-Pellitory, Rosemary, Wild Marjorum, Wild Thyme, Cammomile and Lavender, of each a handful; beat the Spices very small, cut and bruise the Herbs, put them to infuse in the Wine 24 hours, and distil them in an Alimbeck. This is called the Golden Cordial, and is a great Fortifier of the Heart and Stomach: 'Tis good in Pestilential Diseases; and is a
long Continuer of Health, even to extrea Old Age. Orange-Water, to make it. TO make this, pare Sevill-Oranges, an put the Piels into Low-Wines, or Spi¦rits, and distil them, and it will produce  curious Water, both for Scent and Taste 'Tis sometimes, in Proof-Spirits, done only by Infusion. This, with a little Saffron infused in it, is an excellent Cordial to ease Pains in the Head, Heart or Spleen, and very much warms and enlivens the whole Body. Surfeit-Water, to make it. TAke good Brandy, as much as you think convenient; steep a good quantity of Red Single-Poppy-Flowers in it, the black Bottoms being taken away; and when, by Infusion and squeezing, the Brandy is well tinctur'd with them, put in fresh ones, till it becomes deeper dyed; then take of Ginger, Cinnamon and Nutmeg, 2 Drams each, to a Quart of the Liquor; bruise them grosly, and infuse them; then to every Quart, add a quarter of a Pound of Loaf-Sugar; let this in∣fuse 20 days, then strain off the Liquid Part, and keep it for Use, as an excellent Cordial in case of any Surfeit, or Over-charging: It eases Pains in the Head, and strengthens the Heart.
And so, from these, I shall regularly pro∣ed to other curious, useful Things, plea∣t and profitable; and, in all Particulars, ke good what I have promised; with ny Additions. CHAP. IV.  make Perfum'd Waters, and such as are proper for Scenting and Beautifying. Rosa Solis, to make it. PUT 2 Pounds of Sugar to a Quart of Water, in a Copper Vessel, over an Ember Fire; let them seeth to the onsumption of a fourth part; then put in  spoonfuls of Orange-Flower-Water, and row in an Egg, White, Shell and all, well eaten, stir it well with a Whisk in the Li∣uor; and when it boils take it off, strain it ell 2 or 3 times; and when it becomes ear, pour into it a Quart or 3 Pints of right randy, and add Essence of Hypocrass, or mber, and it will be a curious Persum'd olis. Essence of Hypocrass, to make it. TAke a Glass Bottle that is very strong, pour in half a Pint of Spirit of Wine, dd half an Ounce of grosly bruis'd Cinna∣mon,
half an Ounce of Cloves, a Gross  Ginger, and a few Coriander-seeds well bru¦sed, 4 Grains of Black Amber, or Amber grease, done the like in a Mortar; the corking down the Bottle very fast, expose  in Sand a Month to the Sun, and it wi prove a curious Perfum'd Cordial. By th Rule you may make greater Quantities. Bu never let the Bottle be full, lest it break with the strength of the Spirit. Orange-Flower-Water, to make it. TAke 2 Pounds of Orange-Flowers, infus them in 3 Pints of White-wine, and the distil them, and they will yield a curious Spirit. But if you design this only for a Per∣fume, or Wash, they may be infused in fai Water, and drawn off in a cold Still. Milleflure, or a Thousand-Flower-Water, to make it. TO make this, Take a strong Glass Bottle, and put into it a Pint of Angel-water; beat 12 Grains of Musk in, a Stone-Mortar, and put it into the Bottle; then put in what wholsom Flowers you please that are of a curious Scent, more of the weaker than the stronger, which may temperate and allay them with the Water; and when they have been infused 24 hours add a Pint of Spirit of Wine, and pour off the Water; and it will
be both an excellent Cordial, and a curious cented, beautifying Wash. Angel-Water, to make it. PUT a Quart of Orange-Flower-Water in a well glaz'd Earthen Pot, add 2 Oun∣ces of Storax, a quarter of a Pound of Benja∣mine, half an Ounce of Cinnamon, a quar∣er of an Ounce of Cloves, and 3 bits of Ca∣amus; set the Earthen Vessel over a gentle Fire, or Embers, till it simmer to the Con∣umption of a fourth part, then add a Blad∣der of Musk, and so let it cool; pour it by nclination from the Settlings, and keep it n a Glass-Bottle, close stop'd. Essence of Amber, to make it. GET a strong Glass-Bottle, and into that put a Pint of Rectified Spirit of Wine; beat in a Stone-Mortar a Gross, or the eighth part of an Ounce of Black Amber, or rather Amber-grease, put this into the Spirit of Wine, with half a Gross of the Bladder of Musk, very small; so stop the Bottle close, set it for 14 days on Sand, exposed to the warm Sun, shaking it twice or thrice a day; but never fill the Bottle full, for fear of breaking; and when you have thus done, et it stand quiet, without shaking, another Fortnight, and it will be a curious perfu∣med Spirit.
Hungarian-Water, to make it. PUT into a large Bottle a Quart, or som¦what more, of Spirit of Wine, a hand¦ful of Rosemary-Flowers, some Tops o Thyme; Marjorum and Sage; keep it clos stop'd, and set it a Month in the Sun; di¦solve the quantity of a Filbert of Orcanet i some Spirit, and put into it, and let it stan another Month, and it will prove a curiou scented Spirit. To reduce Spirits for making of Cordials. THE Reduction of Spirits is no more tha to bring them to a middle Temperatur by uniting the Aqueous Parts with the mo Spiritual, and fermenting to an Union. T do this. Take a Quart of Water and a Pound o Loaf-Sugar, boil them for half an hour ve¦ry well together, or till you find them we incorporated, then let the Liquor cool till  is proper to put Barm to it; and when it  luke-warm, put in Spices as your Fancy lead you, viz. Cinnamon, Jamaica-Pepper, Or¦rice-Roots, Cloves grolly bruis'd and stic'd▪ and being pretty cool, add your Barin, an let it work up sufficiently; then you ma use it for Bottling of Ale, Mead, Cyder an Wines, putting about two spoonfuls to eve¦ry Bottle, a little Orrice-Root, and a fe
Grains of Crystal of Tartar, and a bit of oaf-Sugar; and corking them close, set em in a cool place, and they will drink ex∣eeding brisk, and have a curious Flavour. To make curious Cordial, Take of this iquor and Aqua Corroborans, half a Pint of e one, and a Pint of the other, 4 Ounces  Balm-Syrup, and mix them by well sha∣ing in a Glass-Bottle. An excellent Cordial-Water. TAke Balm and Plantane-water, of each a Pint, Cinnamon half a Pound, digest em 3 days, and distil off the Water, and dd of this to any strong Cordial Spirit equal arts, and half the weight of Syrup of Clove-illeflowers or Violets, then a little Cochi∣eel, and it will be a curious strengthening ordial. The Virtues of these Cordials. The First resists Pestilential Airs, strength∣s the Heart, allays the Heat or Ferment of e Blood, helps in the Green-Sickness, undice, and the like. The Second is good, and taken success∣lly, in all cool Diseases; as Agues, Drop∣cal Humours, Colds, Rhumatisms, cold ches or Pains afflicting the Nerves, cold iminess of the Stomach or Bowels, Numb∣ess, Cramp, and the like.
CHAP. V. A Treatise of High Etherial Spirits, of for to fire Gun-Powder; and of making sever kinds of Varnishes by their Means and Help. To make a high Spirit, proper for China, Ja∣pan and Lac-Varnish. TAke of Bay-Salt 3 or 4 Pounds, de¦cripitate it very well, and give it  great Degree of Fire, but preven its melting by well stirring it with an Iro Rod, till it is reduc'd to a curious fine Pow¦der; and before it is quite cold, put it int a Still, pour gently on it 2 Gallons of Aqu Vitae, Brandy-Spirit, or any other Spirit, an gently distil it in Balneo till all is come over▪ and by this Means the Phlegm will remain i the bottom, and your Spirit will at one Di¦stillation be more sine, than at 2 or 3 wher there is no Salt. To know the Proof and Goodness of i put some Gun-powder in a Spoon, or an thing made of Metal, pour on it some of th Spirit, and fire it, and when the Spirit burn out, if the Powder goes up in a Blast, the is it a sufficient Spirit: And to try the great¦er strength of it, hold the Spoon or Silve Taster in cold Water whilst the Spirit  burning, but let no Water come into it.
The Use of this Spirit to prepare Varnish as Gold-Lac. TAke of Seed-Lac 8 Ounces, of the finest Gum-Sandriack in Powder 4 Ounces, mix these very well, and put them into a large Glass Bottle, and put to them 4 Pounds of the Spirit; observe that one third of the Glass be fill'd, and, with Hay twisted about it, place it in Balneo Marioe, and suffer it to stand till as much of the Gums are dissolv'd as will be, which may be in about 8 or 10 hours, with often shaking, sometimes over the Balneo; then take Guttagamba an Ounce, Sanguis Draconis half an Ounce, dissolve these in it, and strain out the Varnish, keeping it close stop'd for Use: Some, instead of Gut∣tagamba, use Turmerick; others, Saffron, to raise the Golden Colour. Gum-Anima makes a White Varnish; and Gum-Spelt, a Black one. To make China Varnish. TAke Rectified Spirits of Wine a Pint, put it into a clean Bottle, and add to it of Gum-Lac 5 Ounces, shake them well, and let them stand 24 hours in a moderate Heat, such as the Sun may give in the Summer Season, then strain it through a Canvas Bag, and being well settl'd by the Fire, keep it in Bottles close stop'd for Use.
To make the Black Ground for Japan-Work. THE Ground is of the above-named Var∣nish; mix it in a Gally-pot with some of the following Blacks, covering the Work 3 or 4 times, and wash it over with clear Var∣nish ten times, let it be done in a Stove, and polish it at the end of 8 days with Trippilo. To make the best Black, Take an Earthen Lamp, and put into it a large Cotton, then fill it with Linseed-Oil, and receive the Smoak in a new Earthen Dish, and with a Feather, from time to time, as it comes on, brush it off, and keep it for Use. To make a Red Varnish. MIX Vermilion with the Grounds of the Varnish, with which cover the Work well 3 times; then strain in Carnation-Red, through a fine Linen Cloth, into the clear part of the Varnish, with which var∣nish the Vermilion till the Colour is pleasing to your Eyes; then with the clear Varnish alone go over with it 10 times, then let it dry 7 or 8 days, and polish it with Trippi∣lo, as the other. To make the Ingredients for Raising the Work, mix a sixth part of Wenting, and one part of Bole-Armoniack in fine Pow∣der; make them the thickness of Cream in Gum-water, and lay them on: To make
the Gum-water, is no more than to dissolve an Ounce of Gum-Arabick in a Pint of fair Water. To make a Varnish for Silver. TO do this, take a Pint of the Spirit of Wine, put to it 4 Ounces of Gum-Sandriack, and one Ounce of Mastick, shake them well, and let them stand 24 Hours in a moderate Heat. To make another China-Varnish. TAke of Seed-Lac 10 Ounces, Gum-Sandriack an Ounce and a half, put these into a Can of Rectified Spirits of Wine, shake them considerably together, and let them remain 48 hours in a moderate Heat, then strain it through a Canvas Bag, and let it settle in a moderate Heat 4 or 5 hours, then drain off what is clear, and keep it a∣part. To make White Varnish. TO do this, Take 3 Ounces of pick'd Sandriack, and 2 Ounces of Mastick, and put them to a Pint of Spirit of Wine, and let them dissolve well in a moderate Heat, and pour off the thinner part. To make a Raw Varnish for Musical Instru∣ments. TAke 3 or 4 Ounces of the deepest co∣lour'd Amber, and put it into a well
Leaded Pot, and melt it on a Charcoal-fire, stirring it with an Iron Spatula; and when it is melted it will be of a dark Colour, like Clarified Rosin; then pour it on a Mar∣ble Stone. To purifie the Oil, Take of the best Lin∣seed Oil, so much as will suffice, put it in∣to a new well leaded Pot, let it boil well, and scum it often; and when it is enough, which you may know by putting in a Goose-Quill, and it will not burn, strain it, and keep it for Use. Then take of this Oil one Pound, of Am∣ber above-mention'd 6 Ounces beaten very small, let them heat on a gentle Fire, keep∣ing them continually stirring till it be dis∣solv'd; if it be too thick, add more Oil; and if too thin, more Amber; and when it is of a proper Thickness, strain it through a Cloth, and close stop it up for your Use. To Black Wood. TAke a Quart of Brandy, the like quan∣tity of Spring-water, and two Oun∣ces of Nut-Galls, the like of Salt M. boil them half an hour in an Earthen Pot, close cover'd; then take a Spunge, dip it in, and with this Water cover the Work, once in 4 or 5 hours, at least 30 times;
every time, before it is quite dry, lay on the following Dye: Take of strong Vinegar 2 Pounds, the Filings of Iron one Pound and an half, of Rusty Iron a little more than a Pound, Salt of Verdigrease an Ounce and an half, Nut-Galls a Pound and an half, a Penyworth of Ox sublim'd, a piece of the Busk of Bois-Dean, and a Limon cut into 4 quarters; let these steep 15 days in an Earthen or Iron Pot, close stop'd; and when it is dry, po∣lish it with Trippilo. To Guild this. TO do this, the Proportions are, Of Bole one Pound, of Sanguis or Red Stone one Pound, of Black-Lead an Ounce, of Tallow an Ounce and an half; steep the Bole in Water, and then pound the Red Chalk and Black Lead, and afterwards grind them fine with the Tallow, grind the Bole by little and little, then mingle them together, and cover them with Water. To a spoonful of this, put 2 or 3 spoon∣fuls of Water, and the quantity of a Wal∣not of strong Sope Leay on 7 or 8 Couches.
CHAP. VI. To make divers sorts of wholsom and pleasant English Liquors, not yet treated of; some for usual Drinks, others Purging, &c. with the Virtues of the latter. Dr. Buttler's Ale, the best Receipt: To truly prepare it. TAke of Sarsaparilla 2 Ounces; Senna, and Polipody of the Oak, of each 4 Ounces; Anniseeds and Caraway∣seeds, of each half an Ounce; Liquorice, 2 Ounces; Agrimony and Maiden-hair, of each a small handful; Scurvy-grass, 10 hand∣fuls; Grosly beat and bruise these in a Mor∣tar of Stone, or Wood; put them into a new Canvas Bag, and hang them in 9 or 10 Gallons of Ale when it has well worked, and is 3 days old, and the 4th or 5th day it will clear up so that it may be drank with pleasure, a Pint at a time. Its Virtues. It chiefly Purges by gentle Breathing-sweats and Urine, being Excellent to Expel scorbutick Humours and Dropsy: It removes Gravel, smimey Matter, or other Obstructi∣ons in the Writers, or neck of the Bladder; thins and sweetens the Blood; is good a∣gainst all pricking pains, or Head-aches.
To make Hypocrass a new way. TAke 5 Ounces of Aqua-vitae, 2 Ounces of Pepper, 2 of Ginger, and 2 of Cloves, Grains of Paradise 2 Ounces, Ambergrease 3 Grains, Musk 2 Grains; let all be Infused 24 hours in a glass bottle, on warm embers; and when you would use it to make Hypo∣crass, mix a Pound of fine Sugar, and a Quart of Wine, or Cyder; and when the Sugar is well dissolved, add to it 3 or 4 drops of this Liquor, and your Expectation will be fully answered. This is an Excellent cooling, refreshing Liquor, and Exceeding wholsome, as well as pleasant, at all Seasons. To make Limonade. SCrape what quantity you think fit of Li∣mon-peel into Water and Sugar, to which add some Drops of Essence of Sulphure, with some slices of Limon and Sugar; viz. half a pound of Sugar to every Pint of Water; and let them well Infuse. This is an Excellent cooling Liquor in the Summer-season, admirable in Fevers, and in all hot Diseases, as well as pleasant on any occasion. The way to make a good sort of Mum TAke a Hogshead of Water, boil it to the Consumption of a third part, and put
in 3 Bushels of ground Horse-beans, and a Bushel of Wheat, brew it according to Art, draw off, and press out the Liquor, and put in so much more as may make, in its con∣sumption, or boiling, to a third part, the Hogshead full; but when it is turned fill it not too full at first, that it may the better work; which, when it begins to do, put to it some of the inward Rhind of a Fir-Tree, 3 Pounds of Birth, the Leaves and tops of a F r-tree; each one Pound; Cardus Benidict∣us dryed, 3 good handfuls; Burnet, Bettony, Rosmary, Marjorum, Avens, Peneroyal, Elder∣flowers, wild Thime, of each one handful and a half; Cardamum-seeds bruised three Ounces, Bay-berries an Ounce; put the seeds into the Vessel when it hath wrought a while with the Herbs; and when they are added, suffer the Liquor to work over the Hogshead as little as may be; fill it at last; and before it is stoped, put into it 10 new-layed Eggs, with their shells whole, stop it close, and let it stand 3 Quarters of a Year, or more, to Ripen: A little Horse-Radish, Watercresses, and wild pursley are added by some; and, indeed, the Horse-Radish makes it drink very brisk, but gives it a Tang.
To make Punch Royal. TAke one Pound and a half of Loaf Sugar, and dissolve it in 2 quarts of Water; and  there be any dross in the Sugar, strain the iquor through a Cloath; then add a Pint of Rhenish Wine, 6 Ounces of Limon Juice, or the Juice of 4 large Limons, 7 or 8 drops of the true Spirit of Salt, and a Dram of Al∣ermes, or 2 Grains of Musk, 3 of Amber∣grease, a Quart of strong Brandy, and a whole Nutmeg grated, with half an Ounce of Cinnamon, and a quarter of an Ounce of Ginger finely sraped, or beaten: Stir these ill they are very well mixed, and then head t with a good Toast, or Sea Bisket; you may ikewise, when it is thus prepared, in what uantity you please, proportionable to these irections, bottle it up, and it will keep long, nd drink exceeding brisk. The best way to make Cyder, and order it. TAke Redstreaks, Peppins, Pearmains, Ree∣netings, Golden Peppins, or such Apples s pleasant Fruit as your Orchard or the Country will afford when they are indiffer∣nt ripe, so that upon the Tree shaking, they will fall with tolerable ease; bruise or rind your Apples very small, and when hey are come to a mash, put them into a Hair bag, and squeeze them by degrees, not
over hastily, by turning an Iron Crow the Screw; put up the Liquor, well straine through a fine Hair Sieve, into a Cask w seasoned, and aired with a Lighted R∣dipped in Brimstone; then mash the pressin with a little warm Water, and add a fou part of it, when pressed out, to the Cyde and to make it work kindly, heat a lit Honey, 3 whites of Eggs, and a little flow together; put them into a fine Rag, a hang them by a string to the middle of t Cyder Cask, then put in pretty warm, abo a Pint of new Ale yest; let it work, and w purge it self from dross, 5 or 6 days, th draw it off from the Lees, into smaller Cas or into Bottles, as your occasion serves; a if the latter, leave an Inch vacant fr the Cork, lest the Bottles fly, or break; a if any such danger appears, which y may perceive by the singing of the  through the porous parts of the Cork, th it will be requisite to open them, to let  the fermented Air that threatens to b them. In Winter cover the Casks, or B∣tles warm, for fear of Freezing or Chillin but in Summer place them as cool as y can, lest the heat make it ferment, so t it taint, become mousty, grow thick,  ropey; and that it may the better feed, a
ep its body, put little lumps of Loaf-su∣r into it. ummer Cyder, for present spending, to make it. TAke Codlins, or other juicy Summer Apples, not too sweet; or if they be, ay them with those that are sowrer, not thering them too ripe, but when they be∣n to turn, and lay them to sweat in Hay  Straw for 2 or 3 days, then quarter them, d take out the Coars and Kernels, then uise and press them as the former; boil me sliced Codlins and sliced Quinces in ir Water, with a few tops of Rosemary, and ades of Mace, and mash this Water with e pressings of the Apples; press it out as be∣re, and mix a fourth part with the Cyder; t it up, and add 2 Quarts of white or Re∣ish Wine to every 12 Gallons; purge it as e forme, draw it off when settled, and eep it cool for present spending, for it will or keep longer than September. To procure very Rich Cyder, without distilling. TAke a Hogshead or lesser Cask of Cyder, when the frost is very violent in the Vinter, expose it abroad so that it may freeze  the outward parts, and then the main rength and heart of it will retire to the iddle, which will, in an Hogshead, be a∣out 12 or 14 Gallons, when the weaker
part is over-powered by the cold; and th drawn off, and Bottled, will prove as Co∣dial as Sack. This way is frequently used in New-En∣land, and other places, where Cyder is ple∣ty, and at a cheap rate: and that which  frozen, may be, by heat of Fire, or the S in Summer Season, reduced to a tolerab good Vinegar, proper particularly for Pic∣ling of Fruits, Flowers, Herbs, Roots, &c. Perry, to make it. TAke Red Catherins, Orange-Pears, an some Winter Pears, mixed togethe none over-ripe; cut them in Quarters, a take out the Coars; then put them to soa in warm Water, sweetened with a little fi Sugar, 12 hours; then take them out, a press them, when bruized, as the Apple boil the water they were soaked in, to th Consumption of a third part, and put it  the pressings, add of this squeezed out, to th proper Juice of the Pears, work it as th Cyder, and put in a few lumps of Loaf S∣gar for it to feed on; and being well fine and drawn off, it will drink brisk, and e∣ceeding pleasant: If it grows thick, or  over-sweet, put to it a Quart of Rhenis wine, whereing two Ounces of Cristal  Tartar has been dissolved, and the Perry w
gain ferment, and fine it self, coming to be f a curious brisk Taste, and sparkling. To make Matheglin, the best way. TAke clear Spring-water, seeth it over a gentle Fire, scuming it till no more cum arises; then add the Tops of Rosemary, wet Marjoram, Balm, Sage, and Sursafrax, of each an handful to 4 Gallons of Water, nd so proportionable to a greater or lesser quantity; let them boil 3 or 4 hours, and when it has so done, set it to cool a night, hen pour it off gently from the Setlings, and strain it; then add of the best Honey, as much as will very well sweeten it; take the whites of 20 or 30 Eggs, beat them very well, and when it is over the the Fire, and boils, pour them in at twice, stir it well, and then let it boil apace before you scum it; and when it is boiled sufficiently, pour it into a cool Glazed earthen Vessel; when it s cool again, pour 5 or 6 Spoonfuls of new Ale yest upon it, stir it every day, and scum t with a bundle of Hysop, or some sweet Herbs, till it has done working, and then but it up into a Cask that has had Sack or Malaga in it, if you can get one; other∣wise, season your Cask with Water where∣n sweet Herbs have been boiled; let it have vent for 3 days after it is put up, then stop
it close; yet when you hear it make a noi you must give it vent with a Pierces, el if it force not out the Cork, it may happ to make the Vessel fly in pieces. To make this the richer, slice Ginge Cloves, Cinnamon and Nutmegs, and pu∣ing them into a thin Bag, hang them by string in it; and if it wants a good Bod add a Quart or two of Canary, and in tw or 3 Months it will be fit for use. Its Virtues. It is an Excellent Pectoral Drink, go against Consumptions, Physicks, and t Asthma; it is cleansing, and diuretic good against the Stone and Gravel, it is r∣storative, and strengthening, a great Co∣forter of the Vital Pas, and affords go Nourishment; it is cooling and pleasant  healty persons; and agrees better than Wi with all Constitutions. White Mead, the best way to make it. TO do this, Take the Tops of Rosemar Thyme and Sweet-Bryar, the Wood  Agrimony, Eye-bright and Roman Wor∣wood, of each a like quantity, viz. as mu of each as you can hold between your Fi∣ger and Thumb, which, in Physical Accou is called a Pugil; cover these with Sprin-water, let them continue to infuse a Nig
d a Day; so take them out, and boil them  another clear Water, till the Colour comes gh; so shift them into another Water, and il them up till the Colour looks green, and ffer them so to do as long as any green∣ss continues; then, with the Herbs in the quor, let it stand 24 hours, then strain out e liquid part, and to every Gallon of the quor put 2 Pounds of Virgin-Honey, and hen it will bear an Egg about the breadth f a 2 Pence above the Water, then work it ell together, so that all the Honey may be ssolv'd; then let it stand 12 hours, and then oil it again a quarter of an hour, with 26 Whites and Shells of Eggs: This done, let  cool, and put it up into a new, well sea∣on'd Cask, or Bottles, with Spices, such as est affect your Palate, which, if in a Cask, ou may hang in a Bag, as has been direct∣d in other Liquors; but if bottled, then reak into it little bits of Nutmeg, Mace, innamon, &c. If you are desirous to drink this pleasant ooling Liquor speedily, then, to fine it, beat wo Whites of Eggs, with a spoonful of Yest, nd 2 of Wheat-Flower, and put it into the Cask; suffer it to work well, and then stop  up, and in 9 or 10 days you may use it, tho  will keep brisk a very considerable time.
A Brown Sort of Mead, looking som what like Canary: And all the difference  the last is not boil'd to the heighth of th first; and instead of Wood of Agrimon some use Wood of Sarsafrax, which gives  a pleasant Taste and Colour: In all oth Matters you may do it as the first; only a a little handful of Borrage and Balm. Both these are very cooling and wholso Liquors, wonderfully refreshing in hot D∣eases, and in the sweltry Seasons of the Yea▪ This, with Surups mix'd with it whe you come to drink it, may not only  chang'd into the Colour of sundry sorts  Wines, but be varied in Taste to make  more grateful to the Palate. To make excellent Coffee. BOil curious Spring-water 6 hours,  more; put into it, tied up in a fi Rag, a little handful of sweet Malt and Ba-berries, two parts of the first, and one of th latter; then draw it off into lesser Pots, a to a Pint and an half of this Water put t Ounces of good Coffee-powder, stir it w in, and set it before the Fire, to bubble u and it becomes rich in taste of the Coffe then let it settle well, and pour it not o too hastily, but rather by Inclination.
Its Virtues. This, moderately drunk, removes Va∣ours from the Brain, occasion'd by Fumes of Wine, or other strong Liquors; eases pains in the Head, prevents sowr Belchings, nd provokes Appetite. To make the best Tea. SET on your Boiler with fair Water, put into it a few Tops of Hysop, let it boil s the former; then add a few Leaves of age, and a Lump of White Sugar or Sugar-Candy; and drawing it off into less Pots, ut to every Pint of the Liquor a Dram and n half of the Herb Tea, and put it before e Fire to settle, and heat, and infuse well, or if it boil any thing after the Tea is in, uch of the strength will evaporate, and ave it weaker than otherwise it would be; eeten it with fine Sugar when you pour  out, more or less, according to your Pa∣te. To make the best Chocolate. TAke of Milk and Water an equal propor∣tion, let them boil, and well incorpo∣te, but not too long, keeping it stirring, st it burn too, and spoil; then add of your hocolate-Cakes, grated fine, an Ounce and  half, or two Ounces if you would have it her, to every Quart of the Liquor; then
take it from the Fire, and add to it the Yolks of 2 New-laid Eggs, beating them well, with as much fine Sugar as will sweeten it; then mill it with a Mill for that purpose till it be∣comes thick, and proper for drinking: This Mill is a Stick, with an Head at the End full of Notches, which you must, at the little end, hold in your hand, and hastily twirl i about. Some, to high-colour it, and give it a better Flavour, put Saffron in a little Rag, or fine Sarsnet, and put it into the Li∣quor when it is boiling. To make Chocolate-Cakes, the best way. TAke Cocoa-Nuts, moderately dried in an Iron Pan, scrape or peel off the Husk and then beat the Nut to fine Powder, an sift it, and to every Pound add 6 Ounces o White Sugar, one fine grated Nutmeg, ha an Ounce of Cinnamon, one Bonil, of th best Musk and Amber-grease, each 4 Grains▪ To prepare this, have a Stone-Mill, or els an Iron Plate, very bright, and an Iron Ro∣ler, 2 hands longer than the Plate, and abou 10 Pounds weight; place the Plate on Wooden frame, so, that a little Charcoa Fire may be made under it, to give a gent Heat; and first melt the powder'd Cocoa-Nuts and Sugar together, by rolling the Iro Roller over them, and work till the who
Mass becomes like Dough; then add the Nutmeg, Cinnamon and Bonile; and the longer you work it, the finer it will be: Observe carefully its Oiliness, and be heed∣ful that it burn not; therefore, observe, ne∣ver to suffer the Plate to be too hot, moving the Mass from the Iron Plate often with a thin Iron Slice; and last of all put in your Musk and Amber-grease; and when it is well wrought, make it up into Cakes, or Rolls, and keep it in dry places for Use. A curious Drink, made of Services. TAke Services when they turn brown, but before they grow soft; lay them in Bunches, on new Hay, 3 or 4 days, to sweat and mellow, then take them from the Stalks; after that, let them lie 24 hours in fair Wa∣ter, then take them out, and bruise them with your hands; put them then into Small Beer, 2 Quarts of them to a Gallon, and let them infuse there 24 hours; add a Pint of Sherry to each Gallon, and give them a gen∣tle Breathing over a moderate Fire, then pout out and press forth the Liquor, let it work and purge as Cyder; and in all other things use it in the same manner. Cock-Ale, to make it the best way. TAke a Cock of half a Year old, kill him, and truss him well; and put into a Cask
about 12 Gallons of Ale; add 4 Pounds of Raisins of the Sun, well pick'd, ston'd, wash∣ed and dried; Dates sliced, half a Pound; Nutmegs and Mace, 2 Ounces; infuse the Dates and Spices in a Quart of Canary 24 hours; then boil the Cock in a manner to a Jelly, till a Gallon of Water is reduced to 2 Quarts, then press the Body of him extream∣ly well, and put the Liquor into the Cask where the Ale is, with the Spices and Fruit, adding a few Blades of Mace; then put to it half a Pint of new Ale-yest, and let it worl well for a day, and in 2 days you may broach it for Use; or, in hot Weather, the second day: And if it prove too strong, you may add more plain Ale to palliate it. This is excellent for Consumptive Persons who are wasting in any part of the Body and contributes much to the invigorating of Nature. Covent-Garden-Purl, or Purl Purging. TAke of slic'd Beet-root an Ounce, Co∣riander-seeds and Sena, each 2 Ounces Horse-Raddish, 2 or 3 little Slices; the Flow∣ers of Rosemary and Sage, each an handful Roman-Wormwood, a Pound and an half bruise these grosly together, and put then into a Canvas Bag, which put to a Kilder kin of Ale, hanging it almost to the bot∣tom,
and in 2 or 3 days it will be fit to drink. This moderately purges by a gentle breathing Sweat and Urine, and is very cleansing for the Body, carrying off gross Humours. It was first made (as we hear of) in Covent-Garden, from wence it took its Name. East-India Rack, as it is made here. TAke a Gallon of Brandy, a Quart of tart Cyder, not sowr, Lime-Juice half a Pint, a Quart of Water, Beaten Cinnamon, Nut∣meg and Ginger, of each a quarter of an Ounce; White Sugar-Candy, finely beaten, 2 Pounds; mix these well together, and put a Toast dip'd in Honey into it. Rum, to make it. THis is made in the Sugar-Islands, &c. in this manner; They steep the Grindings and Refuse of the Sugar-Canes in fair Wa∣ter 2 or 3 days; then drawing off the Wa∣ter, they boil it, and keep scuming of it till no more will arise; then they put it up in a Cask to ferment and work 9 or 10 days, in which time it gains a strong Body; then they draw it off from the Settlings, into o∣ther Casks, and put to it Jamaica-Pepper, and a few Sweet Herbs, hung in a Bag in the Cask, which gives it a curious Flavour.
In England it may be made after the same manner, with the Washings of Sugar-Hogs∣heads or Chests, and Sugar-Bakers or Sugar-Refiners Refuse, or such Foot or Dross-Su∣gar as is fit for no other Use but that, and Distilling; adding Sweet Herbs and Spices, as Ginger, Cloves, Cinnamon, Mace and Nutmegs; and you may have a pleasant Li∣quor, at a cheap rate: You may put into it Balm, Mint and Hysop, according to the quantity you make; and being bottl'd, it will prove a curious refreshing Drink, both in Summer and Winter: You may add a lit∣tle Molassus, to make it a stronger Body. To make Variety of dfferent Ales, and other Liquors. IF you are desirous to have Variety of dif∣ferent Ales, &c. on a sudden, it may be easily done in the following manner: Make a Syrup of the Root, Spice or Herb you intend, or of many, to keep by you on Occasion; and having a good, clear, strong body'd Ale, bottle it up within 3 Inches of the Cork, put in 2 spoonfuls of the Syrup, and 2 or 3 Drops of the Essence or Chymical Spirit of the Herb, Root, Flower, Spice, &c. either Scurvy-grass, Mint, Balm, Cyprus, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Orange, Limon, Ci∣tron, Clove, or the like; shake it a little, and
let them incorporate; and when you pour it out, the Ale will have the true Relish and Scent of what you put in, whether of what I have named, or of Goosberries, Rasberries, Currants, Cherries, Strawberries, Mulber∣ries, or the like, though with some Varia∣tion of its proper natural Colour. And so, at all Times, with one good Tub of Ale in your House, and the other Materials, you may make 40 several Changes, to pleasure your self, and make your Friends won∣der how you came by such Variety of Li∣quors. A curious moderate Purging Ale, to make it. TO make this so much esteem'd Ale, of new Invention, Take a Peck of the Leaves and Flowers of Scurvy-grass, Water-Cresses half a Peck, Brook-Lime a quarter of a Peck, English Rubarb 6 Ounces, Horse-Raddish 4 Ounces, Carraway and Anniseeds, of each an Ounce; Sena and Fennel, each an Ounce; Polipody of the Oak, 4 Oun∣ces; Figs, and Raisins stoned, of each 8 Ounces; put these into 12 Gallons of new Ale, having first grosly bruised them, and put them into a fine Canvas Bag; let them stand 3 days, then draw it off, and bottle it up for Use; or keep it in an Earthen Stean or Jar, close cover'd.
It Virtues. This wonderfully helps in the Scurvy, re∣stores a lost Appetite, provokes Urine, car∣ries away the slimy Matter out of the Bowels purifies the Blood, cleanses the Reins of Gra∣vel and Sand, and is good in Fits of the Stone A Pint-Glass is a sufficient Dose, to be drunk fasting: For, note, if you make these Phy∣sical Ales, or Wines, your common Drink, they will do you by far more prejudice than good; but if taken in due proportion, in sutable Seasons, they will be a far better Friend to you, than the Doctors, with all their Pills, Bolasses, Powders, and other Po∣tions, and not put you to the 20th part of the Charge; and they may serve to quench Thirst, and administer cool Moisture to the Body, as well as any formal Morning's Draught, which Custom has made necessary to most Men; so that there again the Ex∣pence will be but the same. To make Ale, or any other Liquor, that is too new or sweet, stale or eager. TO do this to the Advantage of Health, put to every Quart of Ale, or other Li∣quor, 10 or 12 Drops of the true Spirit of Salt, and let them well mix together, which they will soon do by the subtile Spirits pe∣netrating into all Parts.
To recover sowr Ale. SCrape fine Chalk a Pound, or as the quan∣tity of Liquor requires, more; put it nto a thin Bag, and so into the Ale. To make Sage-Tea, the best Way. BOil your Water, ordering it in all re∣spects as for other Tea; and to a Quart, put in an Ounce of dry'd Sage; boil it up, and sweeten it to your Palate; and it will rove a very wholsom Liquor to cleanse the Blood, and cool the Heat of the Body. And hus you may do by Mint, Balm, &c. Of Ales in general, brought from divers Parts of England, and sold in London. THere are sundry sorts of Ales, that prove very pleasant and wholsome Liquors, brew'd after the common Methods of Brew∣ing, but differ from ours at London; and many attribute the Cause to the Water; some, to the Malt; others, to their Skill in Brewing and Fining them; as Nottingham, Derby, Burton, Hull, and some others; which might, I conceive, be as effectually brew'd here, with the same Care, viz. Boil then your Liquor sufficiently, prepare good Malt accordingly, give it good Mash∣ings; let it purge well, and be gentle and easie in the Settling; draw it off from the first and second Settlings, and fine it with Izon-glass
and the distill'd Simple Water of Clary, and bottle it up with a very little Loaf-Sugar, and it will keep well, and answer your Ex∣pectation. But, after all, I must acknowledge, there is a great Difference in Water, which may much alter the Liquor; and of some, good Drink cannot be brew'd, as common Expe∣rience teaches us: But the best Water for these Ales is that which is clear, moving, of a good Substance, and sweetish in Taste; and, if fermented between your hands, is smooth, and a little clammy: But on the contrary, that which is brackish, or Alomy tasted, is to be rejected. Rules for well Bottling of Liquors. IF any Liquor be prick'd, or fading, put to it a little Syrup of Clary, and let it ferment with a little Barm, and it will re∣cover it; and when it is well settled, bottle it up, putting in a Clove or two, with a little Lump of Loaf-Sugar; you must have firm Corks, boil'd in Wort, or Grounds of Beer; sill within an Inch of the Cork's Reach, and beat it in with a Mallet; then with small Brass Wire bind the Neck of the Bottle, bring up the 2 Ends, and twist them over with a pair of Pinchers.
CHAP. VII. The Mistery of the Fruiterers; or, the most Approved Way to gather, keep, and order di∣vers sorts of Fruits and Berries, to keep sound, and with their natural scent and Taste in all Seasons of the year. Of gathering Fruit in Season, &c. IN gathering Fruit in Season, if you de∣sign them to be long lasting, and un∣perished, there ought to be great care taken; and to do it in general for all Fruits growing on standard-Trees, have such a Lad∣der as may bear Lightly on the Boughs, so as not to Endanger their breaking, and bruising the Fruit. Gather your Fruit by the stalks to prevent bruising of them, do it when they are well ripning, but not over-ripe; and to put them in, have a Basket with a hook to hang on the round of the Ladder, or some conve∣nient Boughs, laying Fern, or Nettles, in the bottom to keep them from pressing by their weight too hard, lay them gently in, and as gently out into the Receiver; and never proceed to gather them in a wet day, nor so early in the morning that the Sun has not time to draw up the moisture from them, lest the dampness soon perish them;
and where Fruit, especially Stone-fruit, is not all ripe at once, gather them as they ripen, and so those that remain having the greater advantage of Sap may ripen the kindlier, and grow larger; gather those that have no stalks to hold by with a tender hand, lay them not on heaps, but single, on Nettles, or some such Weeds not offensive in smell, and they will not only perfect their ripeness, but sweat out their superfluity and be sweeter in taste; keep them in dry pla∣ces, and if the Weather be hot, let the cool North, East or West winds, breath on them by the opening of Windows, or other con∣veniencies, in clear, dry days. To know whether Pears or Apples be ripe, gather one from the middle of the Tree, cut it in the middle, and if there be a great hollowness, and the kernels seem loose, they are of a sufficient ripeness. Apricots, Nectrines, and such like, are known in ripeness, by the stones easily par∣ting from the Fruit, and growing of a dus∣key colour; as for other things your Judg∣ment will direct you, by seeing, handling, smelling and tasting. When you gather Quinces, rub off gent∣ly the wooliness, pack them in straw, and in a dry Cask, with a layer of Straw between
each laying of Fruit, for they are very sub∣ject to mouldiness and rotting upon the least contracted moisture, and must be pla∣ced at a distance from other Fruit, because their scent is offensive to them. If you gather Medlars, or Services, you must do it before they are ripe, just when they are turned brown, and by laying the first in straw thinly, and hanging the o∣ther upon Lines in bunches, they will kind∣ly ripen of themselves. As for your winter Apples, it is proper to gather them without the stalks, because they will soonest perish and wither. How to stow and order your Fruit, the better to keep them sound and long in your Fruit-loft, or Ware-house. (1.) YOur Winter-fruit in this case must not be too hot nor too cold, too close nor too open, but removed from all offensive Smells; for if any be near them, they will be apt to attract it, and spoil their Taste; also it will corrupt them. (2.) The proper place to stow them in is a Low-room, or Cellar, clean and sweet, either paved or boarded, but not too stifling or close, and into these it will be proper to lay or shift your Winter-fruit at Christmass;
and with shifting and airing at convenien times, you may let them continue there ti the middle of March, stoping, in extrea frosty weather, all the crevises with a littl Straw, to keep out the frost and bleak winds (3.) When the warm Air returns, brought by the Influence of the Sun, if you find any considerable defect among your Fruit, re∣move them from these close places to airy lightsom, ceiled Rooms, giving them fresh straw, and leaving a Window open in all clear dry days, letting in the Sun beams as much as may be; observe, that where you have placed your Fruit in Cellers there be no Damp, sweaty Walls, for they will cast a mouldiness, and that will bring a Speck∣ing, and total rot, in time, among them; beside it much abates the natural Taste and scent of those that remain sound: And thus you may order them till Michalmas, some sorts of Fruit there are that rarely last beyond Alhallontide, but by this mannagement they have been keept much longer well condi∣tioned. To rub them over with the juice of Spear∣mint, but not to let the moisture long con∣tinue on them, is a great preserver of Win∣ter Fruit (take this as a secret.)
(4.) Those that are earliest subject to De∣cay, it is proper they should be laid by themselves: Those that usually continue till Christmus, by their selves: Those that usual∣ly continue till Shrovetide, by their selves: And Pearmains, John-Apples, Pippins, and and Winter-Russetings, which last all the Year, are proper to be laid by themselves. (5.) As for Pears, they keep very long, many of them all the Year; as, the Winter-Boon-Chrestien, the Great Kareville, the Black Pear of Worcester Surrein, the Blossom-Pear. (6.) There are other Apples than what I have nam'd, that may be managed to keep till new ones come again; viz. the Golden Doucet, the Boon Pearmain, the Reniting, and many more I might name, but they be∣ing well known to those who deal in Fruit, for Brevity sake I omit. (7.) As for those that are speck'd, take them away, and dispose of them, whilst a good part remains sound, lest they infect the rest. Put no Fallings among lasting Fruit; but rather make Cyder, Perry, Pyes, Tarts, &c. of them, which will turn to a greater Advantage. You need not turn the most lasting Fruit, unless you see great Occasion, till Christmas, and then shift their Straw if it
be any wise damp; however, turn it well, and lay it hollow; then you may let them remain till Whitsontide; and ever observe, in your Turning, to lay your Heap lower and lower: But observe never to handle any in a great Frost, but those you take for present Use, unless they lie in a very warm Cellar, nor for a Time afterward, because at any considerable Thaw their Giving and Damp∣ness makes them soft▪ and the least Bruise will subject them to rot. Also in great Rains, or exceeding damp Airs, forbear to meddle with them; yet set open the Windows, if the Weather be warm, to air them. (8.) Whether you are to carry them by Water, or by Land, observe you do it not in Frosty Weather; nor in March, when the Winds are sharp and high; not in the ex∣tream Heat of Summer; but in moderate Weather, and they will be the longer last∣ing. To keep Grapes, Goosberries, Apricots, Peaches, Nectarins, Cherries, Currans, and Plumbs, the whole Year. TAke fine dry Sand, that has little or no Saltness in it, make it as dry as possi∣ble with often turning in the Sun; gather your Fruits when they are just ripening, or coming something near Ripeness, dip the
Ends of their Stalks in melted Pitch or Bees-Wax; and having a large Box, to shut down with a close Lid, dry your Fruit in the Sun a little; to take away the superfluous Moi∣sture, and lightly spread a Laying of Sand in the bottom of the Box, and a Laying of Fruit on it; but not too near each other; then scatter Sand, with much evenness, a∣bout an Inch thick over them, and so an∣other Laying, till the Box be full; then shut the Lid down close, that the Air may not penetrate; and always as you take out any, lay them even again; and so you will have them fit for Tarts, or other Uses, till new ones come again; and if they are a little wrinkled, wash them in warm Water, and it will plump them up again: You may use Millet instead of Sand, if you think it con∣venient. To keep Figs and Stone-Fruit sound, and fit for Use, all the Year. TAke a large Earthen Pot, put the Fruit into it in Layings, their own Leaves being between them; then boil up Water and Honey, scumming it till no more will ise, but make it not too thick of the Ho∣ney, and pour it in warm to them, stop up he Vessel close; and when you take them ut for Use, put them two hours in warm
Water, and they will have, in a great mea∣sure, their natural Taste. To keep Strawberries, Rasberries, Currans, Goosberries and Mulberries. TAke new Stone-Bottles, air them well in the Sun, or by a Fire; dry your Fruit from superfluous Moisture, to prevent its sweating, take off the Stalks, and put them into the empty Bottles, by a Fire, that may draw out as much of the Air as may be; then suddenly cork them up, and tye down the Corks with Wires; let the Corks be sound, and not any ways visibly porous; for if they be, the Air will come in abundantly, and corrupt the Fruit; then in a moderate cool place cover the Bottles with Sand, laying them side-ways, and the Closeness will pre∣serve them. CHAP. VIII. The Curious Art of Pickling Fruits, Flowers, Buds, Roots, Herbs, and all other things pro∣perly used in Sawces; the most exact way, how to make Hams like Westphalia. To Pickle Cucumbers to keep Green and Crisp. TAke a sharp Rape-Vinegar, and add to each Gallon a Quart of fair Wa∣ter, and a handful of Bay-Salt well
beaten; so that it may dissolve in the Vine∣gar; boil them well, and take off the Scum till no more will arise; and having layed your Cucumbers of a moderate size, 12 hours to steep in cold Water and Salt, as well to harden them, and confirm their Colour, as to take of the Dust they have contracted, cut your dill about 2 handfuls in length, throwing by the very large stalks, or boiling them in the Liquor, and make a Laying at the bottom of the Cask with it, and a few Bay-Leaves, and so lay your Cu∣cumbers Regular on it, continuing the Layings between every Span thick of them, till the Cask is filled up; then put in the Head, and hoop it up close; take the Liquor from the fire and when it is Blood∣warm, pour it, with a Funnel, in at the Bung∣hole, till the Cask be near full; and then take some Mace sliced, Nutmeg and Pepper, boil them well in as much Liquor as will fill the Cask up, put it in, and Cork or plug the Bung-hole close, and let them stand 2 Months at least before you open them, and they will not only be Crisp, but of a curious Grass green, greener than when they were growing, and keep, with a little renewing their pickle, till new ones come in.
To Pickle French Beans. TAke sharp White-wine-Vinegar, and a little Spanish-Salt, boil and Scum them as the former; and when it is boiling hot, having stringed your Beans, put them in; and after a boiling or two, to make them a little tender, take them off, and let them cool in the Liquor, and then put them into the Liquor you intend they shall remain in, with a Sprinkling of whole Pepper, and a few Cloves; cover them over with Bay-Leaves, and lay a board, with a weight upon it, to keep them down. To Pickle Barberries. MAke a Pickle with Salt and Water, and boil it up to a strength till it will bear an Egg, Scum it well, and put a good handful or two of Barberries into it, and let them boil till they burst, or may be reduced to pulp; then strain the Liquor, and put it to your cold Barberries, pretty warm, and cover them with Hysop. This way Pickle green Grapes, Plumbs, Goosberries, Apples, Quinces, Cornels, and unripe Currants. To Pickle Mushroms. CLean them in warm Water from the Dust they have contracted, then boil them a little, a walm or two, that they become
tender; put them into strong White-wine-Vinegar, with some bits of Cinnamon, Mace, Nutmeg, whole Pepper, and Bay-Berries; keep them as close as may be from the Air. To Pickle Artichoaks. PArboil Artichoaks that have full bottoms, and take off the Leaves and cheak with the strings, drain them and dry them with a Cloath, make a Pickle with fair Water and Salt, well boiled and scumed so that it will bear an Egg; then place the Artichoak bottoms in an Earthen Vessel, between Lay∣ing of Laurel or Bay-Leaves, with a few of their own Leaves about them; pour in the Pickle hot, and pour melted butter on the top, which spreding, will, when cool, keep out the Air and prevent their musting; tie over the Vessel with a Leather or Paper, and set them in a cool place, and when you would use them, soak them in fresh warm Water, which taking out the Saltness, will render them at any time fit to be used in Pies, or to boil and serve up at the Table, as a rare dish when others are not to be had. To Pickle Broom Buds. TAke strong Vinegar and Water, an equal quantity; put a Seasoning of
Salt into it, then boil and Scum it well, so put in the Buds clean picked from the Stalks, let them boil a little tender, and so put them to cool, add a little Jamaica Pepper, and cover them them close for your use: Thus you may pickle Turnips, by cutting them in Square bits about the length of your little Finger; but then you must boil them somewhat longer than the Buds, but not soft. To pickle Purslain and Asparagus. TAke the tender parts of these, sprinkle them with Salt and Cloves grosly beaten together, and lay them regular in a glazed Earthen Vessel, boil Vinegar and Salt, and put it to them very hot, and then stop them up close; thus you may pickle the hard inward Hart of Cabages, or Ca∣bage-Lettice, to serve for Salating among other Herbs, at any Season of the Year; as also the white Stalks of Endine and Succory. To pickle green Pease, or Beans. TAke Water and Vinegar boil them well, viz. the Liquor, and just scald the Pease, or Beans, and put them up in a close Earthen Vessel, and when you have a mind to boil them, steep them a night i fresh Water, and when they are boiled, they
will eat almost as if they were new ga∣thered, which has been proved to the ad∣miration of many, who have wondered where such delicates could be had in the dead of Winter. To Pickle Samphire. MAke a strong Pickle of Water and Salt well boiled, and well scald the Samphire, but not to any considerable soft∣ness; pack it close in a Cask, and head it up. Thus you may pickle Ashkeys, or Bram∣ble-buds, Plantain-Roots, and the like. To Pickle Clove-Gille-flowers, Cowslips, Violets, Prim-Roses, and such other pleasant Flowers. IN fuse them in fair Water, over a gentle fire, and then press out the Liquid part into the Water, which, with some Sugar, you may boil up to a Syrup, as shall be here∣after shown. Put the pressed Leaves of the Flowers in strong White-wine Vinegar, and to each Gallon add a Pound of fine Sugar, keep them as close as may be, by tying Leather over the Gallipots, to keep out the Air, and they will be Excellent Sawces on all occa∣sions. To Pickle Oysters. TAke what quantity you will of pretty large Oysters, Liquor and all, wash
them clean from the Grit, and put to every 3 Pints of fair Water half a Pint of White-wine-Vinegar, half an Ounce of grosly brui∣sed Pepper, an handful of Salt, and a quarter of an Ounce of Mace; boil these over a gen∣tle Fire till a fourth part be consum'd, ta∣king off the Scum; just scald the Oisters, and put their own Liquor into the Pickle, and then put them up into little Barrels, or Pots, and stop them very close, and they will keep in cool places the Year round. To pickle Salmon. WHen you have cut your Fish into fit pieces, cleanse it from the Blood, by wiping and pressing it in a dry Cloth; then lay it in a Kettle of Water that is boiling, on a Tin Fish-Plate, so that it may be taken up without breaking; and being boil'd pretty well, make a Pickle thus: Take 3 Quarts of Rape-Vinegar, and 2 Quarts of Water, boil it up with a little Fen∣nel and Salt till it will taste strong, scum it, and cool it; then lay the Fish in a conve∣nient Vessel, and pour the Pickle to it pret∣ty warm. Thus you may do Sturgeon, bating the Fennel, and putting in a little more Salt: Also any other boil'd Fish, proper to pickle, souce, &c. for keeping.
To salt Neats-Tongues. CLeanse the Roots well from the Moi∣sture, and wash them well in warm Water, to open the porous Parts, that the Salt may the better penetrate; dry them well again, and make a Pickle of Spanish Salt and Water, or Bay-Salt, well boil'd in it; let them lie cover'd in this a Week, then take them out, and rub them over with Salt-Pe∣ter Salt very well, which will penetrate, and colour them re, pressing them down hard with a Board and a Weight, that being put into the Kiln to dry, they may keep their due proportion: They are usually dried with Saw-dust burnt, which, together with the Salt, gives them their dusky red Colour, which appears on the out-side of them be∣fore they are boil'd. To make English Hams like those of Westpha∣lia, in Shape and Taste. TAke the Legs of young, well-grown Porkers, and cut with them part of the Flesh of the Hind-Line on either side, more than is commonly usual; then lay them in Cloths to press out the remaining Blood and Moisture as much as may be, laying Planks on them, and on them great Weights, which will bring them into Form: Some have Boxes purposely shap'd for them,
with Screws or Weights to press down the Lid. When they are thus order'd, salt them well with Bay-Salt, finely beaten, and lay them in Troughs, or a Wicker Pannier, one uon another, close pressed down, and co∣ver'd with Sweet Herbs, as Hysopo Winter-Savoury, Thyme, Peny-royal, &c. which will infuse into them a pleasant Flavour; let them continue thus a Fortnight, then rub off the common Salt, and, rub them well over with Petre-Salt, and let them lie 3 or 4 days till it soaks in, it being of a wonderful penetrating Nature, then take them out and hang them in a very close Smoak-Loft, and make a moderate Fire under them, if possible of Juniper-wood, but so that it may last long, and let them hang to sweat and dry well; then hang them up in a dry, airy place, to the Wind, 3 or 4 days, which will purge them of the ill Scent the Smoak has put into them; and then hang them up in any dry place, against you have Occasion to use them; which when you do, wrap them up in sweet Hay, and put them into a Ket∣tle of Water when it begins to boill, and keep them well cover'd till they are boil'd and they will cut of a curious Red Colour, and eat short and savoury, so that few can
distinguish them from the Right Westphalia Hams. To make Sausages equal to those brought from Bolonia. TAke the Fillets of young, tender Porkers, 3 parts Lean, and one Fat, to the weight of 25 Pounds, season it well in the small shreading, and beat it in a Mortar with Pep∣per and Salt, a little grated Nutmeg, and a Pint of White-wine mix'd with a Pint of Hog's Blood, then stir and beat it all toge∣ther till it is very small; add a few sweet Herbs small chop'd and bruis'd, as Peny∣royal, Sweet-Marjoram and Winter-Savou∣ry; then with a Whale-bone Bow open the Mouths of the Guts you are to fill with this Meat, and thrust it leisurely down with a clean Napkin, lest, forcing it with your hands, you break the Gut; make Divisions of what length you think convenient, tying them with fine Thread; dry them in the Air 2 or 3 days if it be clear, and the Wind brisk; then hang them in Rows, at a little distance one from the other, in your Smoak-Loft; and when they are well dried, rub off the Dust they have contracted with a clean  them over with sweet il-Olive, and cover them with a dry Larthen Vessel; and, either roasted or boil'd, they
will equal those so much boasted of from Italy. To recover the Flavour of Oil, when by Acc∣dent it is lost. BUrn Roach-Allom, and beat it into fin Powder, which put into boiling Wa¦ter; and when it is well dissolv'd, take th Water off, and pour the Oil into it, and work it well with it; then let it stand and settle 44 hours, when the Oil, being again imbodied, which scum'd off from the Sur∣face of the Water beneath, it will leave its bad Taste or Scent in the Water, and reco∣ver, in a great degree, its first Flavour. To recover Anchovies that have, by the Loss of their Pickle, become Rusty, or decay'd. TO a Gallon of fair Water put 2 Pounds of Petre-Salt, boil it till a fourth part is consum'd, scuming it continually as the Scum rises; then put to it a quarter of an Ounce of Crystal of Tartar; mix these, well stirring them; then unpack the damag'd Fish, and re-packing them lightly, pour in the new Pickle, mix'd with a Pint of good old Pickle, and stop them up close 24 days; and when you open them again, cover them with sine beaten Bay-Salt, and let them stand three or four days; then, as you take them out for Use, be careful to cover
them down with a Slate, and they will rove well. To recover Sturgeon, or Salmon, that is de∣cayed. TAke a Gallon of White-wine-Vinegar, boil it by it self, with 3 or 4 Slices of Ginger in it; boil separately 2 Quarts of Water, and a Pint of White-wine, with an andful of Salt; mix these together; then eep the Fish 4 or 5 hours in warm Water, ake it out, and dry it; mix the Pickles to∣gether, and put them to it luke-warm; co∣er or head up close the Vessel or Cask you ut them in, and let them stand 10 or 12 ays before you open them. To make good Vinegar for Pickling, &c. TAke the Middling Sort of Beer, indiffe∣rently well Hopp'd, let it work as long s possible, then fine it down with Izonglass, o draw it off from the Settlings, and to very 10 Gallons put 10 Pounds weight of he Pressings or Husks of Grapes, mash hem together, and let them stand in the un, if in a hot Season, otherwise in a close oom, heated by Fire; and in thirty or orty days it will prove, being drawn off by Inclination, an excellent Vinegar: For want of Grape-Husks, you may use the ressings of Crabs, or sowr Apples, but
they will not bring it to so good a Bod or Taste. Foul White or Rhenish-Wines, set in  warm place, will grow tart, and fine the∣selves to a very good Vinegar: Clarets  Red Port will do the same, but not alt their Colour. Cyder will make a tolerab good Vinegar; and so will unripe Grape or Plumbs, &c. To make Elder-Vinegar. TAke White-wine, or good Rape-Vinega and fill a Cask 3 quarters full with i then gather Elder-flowers moderately blow in a dry day, pick off the little Sprigs an Flowers from the greater Stalks, air the well in the Sun that they may grow dr but not so as to crumble; then put a Poun of them to every 4. Gallons of Vinegar, so∣ing them up in a fine Rag; and stopping th Cask close, let it stand in a warm place 4  5 days; and at 10 or 12 days end the Vin∣gar will have the perfect Taste of the Elde-flowers, and prove not only grateful in Tast but very wholsom. To make Rose-Vinegar, and that of other Flowers. TO do this well, take Roses half blown, i a dry day, viz. the Red or Damask one pluck the Leaves, and cut away the Whit
he bottom with a pair of Cyzers, air them ittle by spreading them on a Carpet, in  Shade; for if you suffer the Sun to come  them, it will dry away much of their ent; then put them into a well-glazed rthen Vessel, and to every Pound of Roses t a Gallon of the best White-wine-Vine∣r, cover them close, and suffer them to in∣e 8 or 9 days; then take out the Roses, d press or wring them hard into the Vine∣r, and so strain it, and put it up for Use; d it will have the perfect Scent of the Ro∣: And as you would have it stronger or eaker scented, so you must order it accor∣ngly, in putting in more or less Roses; or, hen the first that are put in are well infus'd, ke them out, and put in fresh ones. In this manner you may make Vinegar of owslips, Clove-Gilliflowers, Violets, Prim∣ses, Peach-Blossoms, or the Blossoms of any grant and wholsom Flowers: And even  Herbs; as Mint, Balm, Sweet-Marjorum, d the like: All which are very wholsom, uch contributing to Health. And thus having given you the best Di∣ctions in these Matters, I proceed to others, weighty, and necessary to be known, for e Reader's great Advantage; taken from e most exact Experiments.
CHAP. IX. The Curious Art and Mystery of Confectioner in ordering Sugars, making Sweet-Meat Preserving, Conserving, Candying, makin Syrups, &c. Of Sugar. IN this Undertaking, Sugar is the general Thin you must work withall: Consider it then in i Goodness; and whether you have it ready re∣ned, or are to do it your self, chuse that which  the best, and most weighty, quantity for quantity with others; and try it in Liquors, or any oth thing, weight for weight, which sweetens mos and so you will not be deceived in the Quantities  shall have Occasion to set down in this Treatise, fo the several Uses I shall attribute it to. To make Macaroons. TO do this well, take of Sweet Almonds on Pound, blanch them in warm Water, an shake them in a Sieve, that the Husks may loose and come off; then beat them sine in a Stone-Mo∣tar, give them a sprinkling of Rose-water, and ad to them a Pound of sine Sugar, well fierced; m these well with beating, and sprinkle a very litt fine Flower; to make them incorporate the bette add the Whites of two or three Eggs; and wh they are so thin that they will drop out of a Spoo like Fritters, place Wafers on an Iron-Wire Gra made for that purpose, and drop them regularly  then put them into an Oven moderately heated, an they will spread, and rise; when you see them ju begin to change Colour, take them out; and p them up in Papered Boxes, very dry, for Use.
To make Genoua-Bisket. TAke four Ounces of Sugar, and put to it a Pound of Flower, sprinkle among them a convenient sprinkling of Coriander and Anniseeds, beat in the Yolks of four or five Eggs, add as much warm Water as will make it into a Paste, make it up Bisket-fashion, and bake it in a moderately heated Oven, but not brown; then cut it into five or six pieces, or slices, which bake again till they be some∣what brown, and they will keep good a long time. To make Naples-Bisket. TO do this, well mix an equal quantity of fine Flower and Sugar, and all things else as in the former; put the Batter in Tin Coffins, and glaze the Tops with a Feather dip'd in Rose-water and Sugar. To make the Queen's Bisket. TAke a Pound of fine Sugar, put to it three quar∣ters of a Pound of fine Flower, the Whites of twelve Eggs, and the Yolks of nine; bruise and sift Coriander and Carraway-seeds, an Ounce, beat and and mix them very well together till they come to a soft Paste, then add a little Leaven; and being well mixed, put it into Tin Coffins about two Inches over, and 4 in length, and bake them moderately. To make Pastes of Fruit. TAke what quantity of any pleasant Fruit you will, take out the Stones or Kernels, pare them, and boil them in fair Water to a Pulp, strain the Pulp through a coarse Linen Cloth, and to ten Pounds of t put six Pounds of Sugar, then boil them up toge∣ther; and when they are well incorporated drop them on Tin Plates, and spread them a little, sprinkling them under and over with a little dry Sugar, then turn them, and let them dry; after that, eep them in very warm places, as over an Oven, or
in a Stove, often turning, and sprinkling them with Sugar, till they are very dry; then put them into dry Boxes, well paper'd, and keep them for Use. You may thus make Preserves of Bugloss, Borrage, Roses, and other Flowers and Herbs, into Paste. To make Jelly of Quinces. BOil up Quinces in thin slices, till a third part of the Liquor they are boiled in be consumed; then strain out the liquid part, with some of the Pulp, and to each four Pounds add a Pound of Su∣gar; and being cool, it will become a curious Jelly. To make Geneva-Paste. PAre ripe Quinces, and scrape them small; do the like by Sweet-Apples, an equal quantity; put Rose-water to them, and strain them well through a Sieve; then dry it in proper Cakes, on a wooden Slice, over the Fire; then add as much Su∣gar as there is Paste, and boil it to a convenient thickness. To make Marchpanes look like Rashers of Bacon. TAke Marchpane-paste, work it with Red Saun∣ders till it is coloured it, then roll a broad Leaf of red, and a broad Leaf of white Paste, till there be three of the White, and four of the Red, one on another, in a mingled sort, every Red between; when this is done, cut it over-thwart, and it will look like Rashers of Bacon, and not discernable other∣wise without handling, or tasting. To make Marmalade of Grapes. TAke your Grapes, Red or White, when they ar pretty ripe, gather them in a dry day, and dry them afterwards in the Sun; and being clean picke from the Stalks, boil them in fair Water, take th Scum clean off as it rises till the Water is consume to a third part, then let it simmer over a gentle Fire and when you find it is thicken'd, strain it throug
a Sieve; and boiling it once more, add a small mat∣ter of Sugar, and put it up in Boxes for Use, strew∣ing it over with Sugar, and keeping it very dry. To make Marmalade of Red Currans. TAke Red Currans when ripe, pick them clean, and squeeze the Juice well out, add a small matter of the Juice of Rasberries, and boil them up over a gentle Fire, putting in three or four handfuls of whole Currans; and when they begin to break, put in a third proportion of Sugar, and boil it to a Candy heighth, then sprinkle it with Rose-water; and when you perceive it the thickness of Marma∣lade, being well scum'd, strain it through a coarse Cloth, into a glazed Earthen Pot, and keep it dry. This is excellent cooling in Fevers, and other hot Diseases. To make Marmalade of Damosins. TAke about two Quarts of ripe Damosins, the largest you can get, put them in the Sun to dry, or evaporate a little of their superfluous Moisture; peel off the Skins of three Pints of them, put them into an Earthen Vessel, and those not skin'd under∣most; then stop the Vessel very close, and put it into a Kettle of boiling Water, but so that no Wa∣ter can come at the Fruit; and when by this Means they are grown, through the Steam and Heat, ve∣ry tender, take them out, and skin and stone those that were not so ordered before; then make them into Pulp, and boil them, with their weight in Su∣gar, over a gentle Fire, with a little Rose-water, till they become a Marmalade. And thus you may make Marmalade of Goose∣berries, Cherries, Plumbs, Apricots, Nectarines, or any other delicious Fruit.
To make White Marmalade of Quinces. TAke Quinces, sliced thin, to the weight of six Pounds when pared and coared, and boil them to a Pulp in fair Water; to the Pulp put 2 Pounds of Clarified Sugar, moisten'd with Rose-water; boil them gently together till the Liquor be swelled out of the Quinces, and the Sugar well dissolved, which you may try by laying a little on a Plate to cool; then put it up for your Use. Thus you may make Red Marmalade, Marmalade of Pippins, Pomwaters, or other Apples; and of O∣range-peels scraped, and boiled in 2 or 3 Waters, to take out the strongness of their Taste before they come to be boiled up to a Pulp, and mixed with the Sugar, Rose-water, or Orange-flower-water. Also Marmalade of the Peels of Limons and Citrons. To preserve Medlars, or Services. TAke of the fairest of them when they begin to be ripe, scald them in hot Water so that the Skin may come off; and for Medlars, you may skin them at the head; the others may be let alone; add to each Pound, a Pound of Sugar, make it into a Sy∣rup with some of that Liquor, and so put them, with it, into a close Pot, for Use. To preserve Apricots. GAther this Fruit well button'd, the Stone being so tender that you may run a Pin through it with ease, and let them dry a little from their Moi∣sture; then put them into warm Water, to break them, and let them stand close covered till the ten∣der Skin will easily come off with scraping; then put them into another Preserving-pan of hot Water, and let them stand till they become very green; then clarifie an equal weight of Sugar, with the White of an Egg and some Water boil it up to a Syrup, and put the Apricots into it.
If you would do this when they are ripe, you must stone them, and then you need not boil them, but boil up the Syrup with the Juice of some of them and Sugar, and put them into it boiling hot. Thus you may preserve Peaches, Plumbs, Grapes, Barberries, &c. To make Cakes of Apricots. TAke large Apricots, moderately ripe, scald them well in Spring-water, skin and stone them, and take out the Pulp, and add half its weight in Sugar, boil it up over a gentle Fire; and being just warm, spread it in Cakes. Thus you may do by Rasberries, Strawberries, Currans, or such suitable Fruit, as is best pleasing to your Palate. To dry Apricots or Peaches. WHen you have stoned them, take their weight in double-refined Sugar, and make a Syrup with so much Water as will make them wet; boil this to the heighth that a Drop will slip off from a clean Plate when drop'd on it, and then it is enough; pare your Fruit, and put them into the Syrup when heated, then tie them up one by one, in Tiffanies, and put them in again, setting the Syrup over a quick Fire; let it boil as fast as may be, keeping it well scum'd; and when they look clear, they are enough prepared; then take them out, and lay them on a Wyre-Grate or Sieve, to drain and dry; then take them out of the Tiffanies, and dry them in the Sun, or in a Stove, and keep them for Use. Thus you may dry Nectarines, Malacottoons, Pip∣pins, large Plumbs, or the like. To Conserve Citron-Flowers. TAke more than the weight of these Flowers in Sugar, dissolve the Sugar in Rose-water, over a gentle Fire, boil it almost to the Consistence of a
Syrup; then put in the Flowers, boil it up to an heighth, and bruise them into a Conserve. Thus Orange-flowers may be conserved. To Preserve Damosins. TAke the largest Damosins when the Sun has eva∣porated their Moisture from them, and they be pretty ripe, put a Pound of fine Sugar and an Ounce of Rose-water to every Poun of them; then put them into a large Preserving-pan, not heaped upon one another, but one by one, and set it over a mo∣derate Charcoal-Fire, turn them not till the Syrup is so melted that it will cover them, or bear them up, then cast in more Sugar, not suffering the Liquor to seeth when you turn them, lest they burst on both sides; and being enough, take the Skins off gently, cool them, and put them in a Glass, with the Syrup, and add 3 or 4 Cloves, and a few Breaks of Cinnamon. Thus may you preserve any Plumbs that are pro∣per: But such as are white, and will be in a manner transparent, must have no Spice put to them. To Candy Clove-Gilly flowers, and other Flowers. PIck your Flowers from the Husks, and snip off the white Bottoms, weigh their weight in refi∣ned Sugar, put Rose-water to it, and set it over a Charcoal-fire, let it heat by degrees, and stir it till it be heighten'd to a Candy-syrup; keep them in a dry place, and use them as you find Occasion. And thus you map candy other Flowers, as Cows∣lips, Primroses, Violets, and the like. To make Mulberry-Honey. GAther Mulberries before they come to be very ripe, do it in a dry day, when the Sun or clear Air has taken off the Moisture, strain out the Juice, and put to a Quart of it a Pound of Virgin-Honey, well incorporate them over a gentle Fire, to the thickness of Honey, and keep it in glazed Gally-pots,
as a curious cooling Cordial, a little of it mix∣ed with a Glass of Wine. To make Musk-Sugar, or perfume Sweet-meats. TAke 5 or 6 Grains of the best scented Musk, and put it into a fine Lawn Rag, lay it at the bottom of a Sugar-pot, and sift fine Sugar lightly in upon it, stop it close from the Air, and set it in a warm place, and the Sugar will quickly suck up the Scent of the Musk. And thus you may do by Sugar-Plumbs, Sugar-Almonds, Macaroons, Fruit-Cakes, or the like. But be very careful to keep it close 5 or 6 days; for if the Air come freely in before the Musk has spent it self on the Confectionary Ware, the Spirit will eva∣porate, and it will little avail you. To Candy Nutmegs. TO do this, Take a Pound of Clarified Sugar, moi∣sten it with a quarter of a Pint of Rose-water in which a little Gum-Arabick has been dissolv'd, boil them up almost to a Candy-heighth; soak your Nut∣megs well in warm Water, put them into an Earthen Vessel, and pour the boiling Sugar on them; stop them up close from the Air, and set them in a warm place for 20 days, and at the end thereof they will be a curious Rock-Candy. Thus you may do by Ginger, Mace, and other Spices, and dry Things. To Candy Orange-Chips and Peels. THose properly called Chips, are the Parings of the Orange, fine and thin; the Peel is, the whole half, when the Pulp or Meat is taken out. These must be boiled in several Waters, till they much abate of the strength of their Taste, and become ten∣der; and having dried them, put as much fine Sugar to them as will cover them, boil them up to a Can∣dy-heighth, and when that is done, take them out,
and put them in an Earthen Vessel 4 or 5 days, and let them stand warm; then put them over the Fire again, and there let them continue till they be well hot, then lay them on a Wyre Frame to drain, then put them into your Stove, or on the top of an Oven, to harden; and at 10 days end they will be fit for Use. Limon and Citron-peel are thus Candied; as also, Eringo-roots, Fennel-stalks, and any hard Stalk, fit for Candying. To make Orange-Marmalade. TAke the fairest coloured Oranges, with the smoothest Rhines, scrape off just the out side, and clear them within as much as you can of the Pulp and spungy inside, boil them in water, often shifting them, till they have lost their strong Taste; then boil them to a Pulp, and bruise them to mash in a Mortar, and add 3 or 4 yellow Pippins, boiled soft, to every dozen of Oranges; and to this Pulp add its weight in refined Sugar, put it into your Pan, with as much Rose-water as will dissolve it, boil i by degrees to a candy heighth; and when the Pulp is put in, stir it till it rises from the bottom of the Pan; so put it up in Boxes or Pots, and keep in dry places, for use. Thus you may make Marmalade of Limons, Citron, and the like. To make Transparent Quince-Cakes. TAke a quarter of a Pint of the Syrup of Barbarie▪ and a Pint of Quince-Syrup, clarefie them ove a gentle fire with well Scuming; put to them 2 Ounces of very fine white Sugar; and when yo perceive it of a convenient Thickness, take it ou with your Ladle, and pour it out on cool Tin o Peuter Plates, and then with a Knife or Spatula when it grows cool, form it into Cakes according t
your desire; and they will be Lucid, or Tansparent, and have the Taste of the Quince it self. To make Syrup of Quinces. TAke of the Juice of Quinces 3 Quarts, set it over a fire, and let it Simper well, and take the Scum clean off; and when it is clarified from the Dregs, boil it to the Consumption of half; then add of deep Red Wine 2 Quarts, 4 Pounds of fine Sugar, a Dram and an half of Cinnamon finely beaten, Cloves and Ginger as much; in the like manner boil these to a Syrup, and suffer it to cool by degrees; then bottle t up, corking it very close; and use it as a great cooling Cordial. Thus you may make Syrup of Barberries, Elder∣berries, Sloes, or Apples. To make Syrup of Rasberries. PUT six Quarts of Rasberries, pick'd clean, and well dried in the Sun, into 5 Pints of Canary, n a well-glazed Earthen Vessel, and cover them ve∣y close; keep it cool 10 days, then distil them in a Rose or Glass-Still, adding 3 Pints of fresh Berries, nd a Pint and an half more of Wine; and when the erries have lost their Colour, strain our the remain∣ng liquid part, and with as much fine Sugar as is con∣enient, boil it up into a Syrup, clearing it of Scum. To make Syrup of Clove-Gillyflowers. TAke 2 Quarts of Water, and a Pint of White-wine, boil in it 2 Pounds of the Flowers with the Whites cut off; when they have sufficiently boil'd, ring them out into the Liquor, and add an handful r two of fresh ones; do the like by them till you e the Liquor of an high Colour, and it has taken he full Scent of the Flowers; then put in 4 Pounds f fine Sugar, and 3 or 4 Cloves, with a bit or two f Cinnamon, and boil it up to a Syrup; put it into ottles, or close stop'd Glasses, for your Use.
Thus you may make Syrup of Roses, Violets,  any Herb that is cordially pleasant, and well scent And thus much for these Things: Now I am l to those of a different Nature, that nothing may  omitted that is useful. CHAP. X. The Market-man's or Woman's best Instructe in knowing all sorts of Poulterers Ware whether they be New or Stale, Young or Ol by infallible Signs and Tokens, to preven being Imposed upon, or Cheated. AS Covetousness is sordid and base, so Frug lity is commendable: A little, well laid o in what is good, may yield a Sufficienc more comfortable than lavish Expensiveness; fo usually, those who are extravagant, are ignorant i Marketing, and most commonly cheated in the Pri and Goodness of what they purchase. And havin well consider'd this, I have laid down Rules to istruct the Buyers, in many necessary Things, th they may know what they buy, and not be impsed on. Instructions, giving an Insight into Poulterer Wares, to know their Goodness, &c. A Capon, to know whether a true one, Youn or old, &c. IF a Capon be young you may perceive it by h short, blunt Spurs, and his Legs will be smooth▪ But some knavish Poulterers will scrape the Spur
artificially smooth the Legs; therefore be care-of that; and if you mistrust a Trick in it, pinch Fowl on the Breast with your Finger and Thumb,  if they go in easily, it is young; if not it is old.  be a true Capon, it will have a fat Vein on the  of the Breast, and a thick Belly and Rump. If  pale about the Head, and the Comb short, it e sign of a right one; but if red, then other∣e. If it be stale 'twill have an open, loose vent;  if new, a close, hard one. A Cock or Hen-Turkey, Turkey-Pouts, &c. a Cock-Turkey be young, you may know it by  the blackishness and smoothness of his Legs, and ort Spur. If it has been long killed, the Eyes  be sunk in the Head, and the Foot feel very ; but if not, the Eyes will be lively. The same is to be observed by the Turkey-Hen▪  if you expect one full of Eggs, observe further, t she will have a fast, open Vent; but if not, it l be close and hard. The Turkey-Pouts are known, as to their New∣s, or Staleness, by the same Rule. Their Age not deceive your Eye. A Pullet, her Marks. Any, in their Marketing; have been deceived in this particular; and, instead of a Pullet, have en imposed upon, by taking an old Hen. To pre∣t this Evil for the future, observe, That a true llet has her Legs and Breast smooth, and pinches y tender on the Breast. If she be with Egg, the ly will feel soft; but if not, more strait: If with g, the Vent will be opend; and if not, hard and se. As for Staleness or Newness, they have the e signs as the Capon.
A Cock, young or old, new or stale. TO know his youngness, observe his Spurs; b mark they are not pared or scraped, to decei you: If they be short and dubbed, he is young; b if sharp, and standing out, old. An open Vent sinifies, he is stale; an hard and close one shews, he  newly killed. Chickens. THose that are dry-pulled, are stiff when new; b if stale, their Vents are green, and they limb If they be wet pulled, or scalded, then rub yo thumb or finger on the Breast; and if it be slipper they are stale; but if rough and stiff, then are th new. If they are fat by Cramming, 'tis know  the fat Rump and Vent. The Swan. THis, if old, is full of Hairs when pulled or scaled. As to the Newness or Staleness of it, in t first, the Foot is limber; in the latter, dry. The Wild Goose, and Brand-Goose. IF she be red-footed, and full of Hairs when puled, she is old; but if white-footed, and wit out Hairs, then is she young. The Brand-Goose, if smooth when she is pulle is young; but if full of Hairs, then is she old: If s be new, the Foot is limber; if stale, dry. The Wild Duck. THis Fowl, when fat, is hard and thick on t Belly; but if not, then is she thin and lean:  limber-footed, new; if dry-footed, stale: And if be a true Wild Duck, it has a reddish, small Foot. The Tame Goose. IF this Fowl has but a few Hairs, and the Fo and Bill be yellowish, she is young; but if s be full of Hairs, and the Foot and Bill be red, it
hen old. Its Newness or Staleness is known as the ormer. The Bustard. THis much-prized Fowl is known as the Turkey, for Age, Newness, or Staleness: And to that bservation, for Brevity sake, I refer you. The Shuffler, and other Fowl. THis Fowl is like a Duck, but less, and a broader Bill. If it be new, it will be limber-footed; if ale dry-footed. If it be fat, it will have a fat ump; if lean, close and hard. And by the same Marks you may know Godwits, arrel-Knots, and Ruffs. If they are old, their egs will be rough; if young, smooth. The Gulls and Dottrels are known after the same anner: And Wheat-Ears are a very excellent Food r them. The Pheasant-Cock and Hen. HE Pheasant-Cock, when young, has dubbed Spurs; but when old, small and sharp: If he  new, he has a firm Vent; if stale, an open and abby one. The Pheasant-Hen, being young, has smooth Legs, d a cuious fine Grain on her Flesh; but if old, airy when pulled. If she be with Egg, she will ave a fast and open Vent; if not, her Vent will  close. As for her Newness and Staleness, observe e same as in the Cock. Heath and Pheasant-Pouts. HE first of these, if new, will be stiff and white in the Vent, and the Feet limber; and hard in e Vent if fat: But if stale, dry-footed, green in e Vent, and if you touch it hard it will peel. And so of the latter.
The Heath-Cock and Hen. THese are known, as to Newness and Staleness,  the same Marks as the fore-going: But if th be young, they have smooth Legs and Bills; if o rough. The Wood-Cock and Snipe. THis Fowl, if fat, is thick and hard; if new, li¦ber-footed; but if stale, dry-footed. Obser likewise, the Nose be snotty, and the Throat mo¦rish and muddy, then is it bad. The Snipe, if fat, has a fat Vein on one side, u¦der the Wing, and feels thick in the Vent. T other Marks are as the Wood-Cock. The Partridge. IF this, either Hen or Cock, be old, the Bill w be white, and the Legs of a bluish Colour; b if young, the Bill is black, and the Legs yellow If it be new, it has a fast Vent; if stale, a green a and open one, which, with a touch, will peel:  if she have fed on green Wheat, and her Crop ¦full, she may be tainted there, though other Ma discover it not; and to know this, smell at  Mouth. Of Doves or Pidgeons, Plover, &c. THese are of various Kinds; and to disting them in their Feather, observe the following ¦rections. The Turtle-Dove has a bluish Ring about its N and is otherwise, for the most part, white. The Stock-Dove is bigger than the Wood-¦geon; and is a good nourishing Food. The Ring-Dove is less than the Stock-Dove,  not so delicate a Food. The Dove-house-Pigeon; when old, they are  Leg'd. If they are new and fat, they feel full  fat in the Vent, and are limber-footed; but if s¦flabby vented.
Thus you may know Bustard, Grey Plover, and Green Plover, Feldfairs, Thrush, Mavis, Larks, Black-Birds, Wood-Larks, and all other small Birds. Teal and Widgeon, Land and Water. THese, if fat, will feel hard and thick on the Belly; but if thin and soft, they are lean: If they be imber-footed, they are new; if dry-footed, then re they stale. And by the same Rule you may know Moor-hens, tent, Poutel, Whevers, Didappers, and other Wa∣er-Fowl. Of Four-footed Creatures, sold in Poulterers Shops. The Hare. A Hare, if new, and clean-killed, will be white and stiff; but if stale, the Flesh will be blackish  many places, and limber. If the Cleft in her Lip read exceedingly, and her Claws are blunt and rag∣ed, she is old; if the contrary, then young. The Leveret. His, for Newness and Staleness, as the Hare. But to know if it be a true Leveret, feel on the Fore-eg of it, near the Foot; and if it have there a small one, or Knob, it is right; but if not, it is no Le∣ret, but an Hare. The Rabet, or Coney. F stale, she will be limber, and the Flesh look bluish, and have a kind of a Slime upon it; but  new-killed, stiff, and the Flesh white and dry. nd if it be a right Coney, or Rabet, it will have a all gristly Knot on the out-side of the Fore-foot,  little above the Joint. If she be old, her Claws are ery long and rough, and long grey Hairs stand out mong the Wooll. And thus I have, as I hope, given a satisfactory Ac∣unt of these Things to the Buyer, &c.
CHAP. XI. To know several sorts of Fish, whether New or Stale; and to distinguish some Kind much in Likeness one from the other; an the Goodness of Salmon, Sturgeon, &c. Lobsters. THE Cock is usually smaller than the Hen and of a deeper Red when boiled; neithe has it any Spawn or Seed under its Tail. To know whether these be new or stale, unbin the Tail, and if it be stiff in opening, and snap to again, then is it new; but if limber and flagging  it is stale: If new, it has a pleasant Scent at tha part of the Tail which joins to the Body; if stal a rawmish, faint Scent. If it is spent, a white Scu will issue out among the Roots of the small Leg and at the Mouth. To see whether it is full, ope it with the Point of a Knife, on the Bend of th Tail, as it is tied down; and if it fill the Shell ther and be red, hard, and pleasant scented, it is good  out if sinking and soft, it is spent and wasted: Fo the Fishmonger, to deceive the ignorant Buyer, wi only open them at the extream part of the Tail; an though they be wasted, they will appear well enoug there. If you suspect the Claws filled with Wate to make them weighty, as sometimes they do, pu out a Plug you will find there, and the Water wi gush out. Sturgeon. MAny times this is recover'd by the Means I ha before directed, when it has been rusty throug Loss of Pickle, or dry; but if it be not well cure it will never have its true Goodness. To know thi
cut it with a sharp Knife; and if it crumble and shi∣ver, and feel rough and brittle between your Finger and Thumb, it is not for your turn; but if it be good, it will be a little tough, and squeeze Oily, cut in a manner like Wax, look white, and in some places have blue Streaks or Veins, the Skin limber, feeling fat underneath, and cast a pleasant Scent. Prawns, and Shrimps. IF new, they will be hard and stiff, cast a pleasant Scent, and their Tails turn strongly inward; but if stale, then limber, and will fade in their Colour, scent faintly, and will feel clammy, unless, in that to deceive you, they have new washed them; how∣ever, by their Limberness and Colour you may know it. Crab-Fish, Great and Small. IF stale, the Joints of their Claws will be limber, the Colour of their Shells of a dusky Red, and an ill Scent just under the Throat of them; their Eyes will be very loose, turn any way with the tip of your Finger, and sink inward. To know the Goodness of Boil'd Salmon. IF the Scales are bright and shining of a light A∣zure Colour, the Skin, when pressed down, rising again quickly, the Flesh of a blushing Colour; the Flakes parting kindly, and large, without breaking: feel oily and moist between your Fingers, and of a pleasant Scent, then, it is good, and has not been made up again when damaged: But if the Scales be cloudy, dark, easily slip off the Skin, rough and stub∣orn, the Flakes short, dry and brittle, then is the Goodness gone from it; either it is decay'd Fish, or as been recovered by Pickle, after Damage. Anchovies; Good, and Bad, to know them. OPen the Cork in the middle of the Head of the Barrel, put in your Little Finger, and taste the
Pickle; if it tastes mellow, has a good Relish, and looks of a dusky Red, then is it the natural Pickle, and they may prove well: But if it be whitish, wa∣tery, rough, and very brackish, it signifies new Pic∣kle has been put to them. But to try the Fish, open the Backs of 2 or 3 of them, and if the Flesh be of a pleasant Red, soft and mellow, the Bone moist and oily, the Flesh easily parting to good Lengths, with∣out breaking, then are they good; but if it be stiff, brittle, of a dusky Colour, the Bone dry, and of a whitish Yellow, or blackish, then they are decayed, or have been rusty, and artificially recovered, and consequently naught. Pickl'd Herrings; Good, or Bad. OPen the Back, if the Flesh be soft and mellow, kindly parting from the Bone, come out in long flakes, the Bone white, and somewhat inclining to a light Red, then are they new, and good; but if the Flesh stick to the Bone, be brittle and rough, the Bone of a yellowish, blackish, or Murrey Colour, they are rusty, and of little worth. The same of Pilchards. Red Herrings; Good, or Bad. IF they carry a good Gloss, and the Flesh part kind¦ly from the Bone, and they be of a light, brigh Colour, they are good; but the contrary shews the decayed, or rusty. Of Salt-Cod, and Old-Ling. THese are known to be good when the flakes ri well and oily; the Bone parts clean from t Flesh, and they are of a bright natural Colour a Scent; but they are bad when they break short, a hard and dry, change Colour, the Bone dry and d coloured, the Skin rough, and sticking close,  well to be stirred, or removed.
To know Plaice or Flounders; New, or Stale. IF they be alive, this Scrutiny needs not: But on the contrary, see if their Eyes are any ways sunk, or look very dull; if they be limber, and have an unusual, cold, clammy Slime upon them, then are they stale: But if they be stiff, their Eyes clear, and moderate dry; their ins stiff, and not crimpling or shriveling together, it is a sign of Newness, or that they have not been long dead. To distinguish these, the one from the other, they being much alike in shape, observe these Directions. The Plaice has Red or Orange-colour'd Spots on her Back, her Fins more spreading, of a tawnyish or brown Colour on the Back, and a more Earthy White Belly, her Mouth standing, as it were, more awry. The Flounder is dusky, or cloudy, on the Back, without Spots; thicker, and more compacted; and a kind of an azurish white Belly. Fresh Herrings and Maycril. THeir Newness or Staleness is known by their keep∣ing or losing their lively shining Redness on their Gills; for, a deadish, fading Colour, the Frog with∣in their Gills turning dusky, or blackish, with an ill Scent, their Fins crimpling and limber, and their Eyes looking dry and dull, shews that they are stale; whereas, the contrary denoes them new. Maids, a Fish so called; and Thornback. THE Staleness appears in these, by their Eyes be∣ginning to sink, and look dull; their Flesh feel∣ing flabby, and a slimy Matter coming from their Vent; their Lips beginning to hang, and the Cor∣ners of their Mouths to be distorted: But when no such bad signs appear, they may well enough pass for new. These Fish are held to be one and the same in Kind; but the Maid growing old, has Thorns of
Prickles growing out upon her Back, and is from thence called a Thorn-back. Carp, Pike, Bream, Roach, Trout, Graling, Ruff, Chub, Tench, Eel, Barbill, Fresh Sal∣mon, Whiting, Smelts, &c. THese, and all such like Fish, when dead, if new, will be stiff, and their Eyes well standing, of a lively Colour for a Time; but when they begin to taint, their own cold, slimy Substance makes them limber, and the Moisture falling from the Brain, renders the Eyes more dull to Appearance, and, as it were shrinking, or sinking; their Fins, though often wetted by the Fishmongers to prevent it, will however crimple, shewing Signs of approaching Pu∣trefaction, if not already tainted. Those that are by Nature red about the Gills have a peculiar Mark besides all these; for the lively Co∣lour, as they grow stale, will fade, and become pa∣ler and paler, to a deadish Colour. And by these Rules you may look over the whole Stores of Fish, and make your Judgment accord∣ingly. To preserve Fish a while when near Tainting. THis is meant of Fresh Fish: The best way to do it, if they are not too far gone, is, Take out their Guts, but do not wet them with Water, then sprinkle them within and without with Salt, and lay them in Rows, on Flags or Rushes, in a cool, dry Cellar, but suffer them not to touch one another, then cover them with Hysop or Winter-Savoury; and so they will keep twenty four hours pretty well, the Herbs drawing the Scent from them, and the Rushes the Moisture and Slime; but they will afterwards be better boil'd or baked, than fryed, stewed or roasted, unless they are stewed with Spice and Wine.
And thus, Reader, have I given you a true In∣sight into what was never before in Print, and has, by much Industry, been hitherto kept from Peoples Knowledge, for private Gain, and over-reaching such as venture to Market to buy Fish, unprepared with a Caution how they are imposed upon by fair Words. CHAP. XII. Some Rules and Directions in Marketing, to buy Butchers Meat, and prevent being de∣ceived. Lamb; Good, or Bad. IF you are to purchase a Fore-Quarter of Lamb cast your Eye on the Vein in the Neck; if it be turning yellowish, though the Meat may scent well at that time, yet is it about tainting; and if the Weather be warm, it will not keep sweet till the next day: If it be greenish, it is already tainted: But if it look ruddy, or of an Azure Colour, then it has not been long killed. As for the Hind-Quarter, scent under the Kidney of the Loin, and feel whe∣ther the Joint of the Huckle be limber or stiff; and if you meet with a faint or ill Scent in one place, and (unless it be killed when hot) a more than usual Limberness in the other, decline it as not for your turn, unless for present spending, and your Price be accordingly. Veal; Good, or Bad. IF the Vein in a Shoulder of Veal appear as in the former, you have the same Rule to chuse or leave it: The further Mark is, its Clamminess, and grow∣ing more than usually limber and soft; or if you see
any Spots of Greenness about it, it is tainting, or tainted, and will not keep. If it be brought up in wet Clothes, it is apt to be musty; and here your Nose must instruct you. The Loin first taints under the Kidney; the Neck and Breast, at the upper ends; first shewing a faint Yellow, and then a dusky Green, which is the worst Symptom of tainting. The Leg is known to be good or bad by the liveli∣ness or changing of such Veins, or by small Streaks that appear in it, according to the former Rules, Clmminess, &c. The Flesh of a Bull-Calf is redder, and more firm grained than that of a Cow-Calf, the Fat more curd∣ling, &c. Mutton; Young or Old, New or Stale. IF it be young, the Flesh will pinch up tender, and soon fall again; but if old, it will wrinkle, and remain: If young, the Fat will easily part from the Lean; but if old, it will stick faster, be∣ing very skinny and fibrous: But to try it effe∣ctually, put it rough on a Plate, over a Candle, or a gentle Fire; and if it spread and run presently, it is young; but if it hiss, and spread slowly, or little, it is old, or else Ram-Mutton, which may otherwise be known by the closeness of the Grain, and the deep redness and toughness of the Flesh; as Ewe-Mutton is discover'd by being more loose and pale, than that of Weathers: Though, indeed, the several sorts of Feeding do many times alter the Flesh some small degree in Colour and Firmness, viz. Up-Lands, Moors, Heaths, or Marishes. But if there be a Rot in the Case, the Flesh will be palish, the Fat a faint White, inclining to yellow; and the Meat will, in a manner, slip from the Bones when raw, if any force be used, because the Skin or Film that should
take hold of the porous parts of the Bones, and should unite it more firmly, is it self loosen'd by the force of the Disease. As for Newness, or Staleness, take the same Di∣rections as in Lamb and Veal. Beef; its Age or Youth, Newness or Staleness: And to distinguish Bull, Cow, or Ox-Beef, one from the other, &c. BEef, for Flesh, is the greatest Feeder of the Na∣tion, it being of long endurance when salted, and is never out of Season, as most other Meats at some time or other are: Therefore, though in buy∣ing it is commonly known to most, yet I may hap∣pen to put something of Caution and Instruction in∣to their Minds that they know not; and which, for ought I know, may be greatly to their Advantage; for there are vast Sums of Money laid out weekly in this Commodity all over England, but more particu∣larly in and about London; and therefore, according to the old Saying, Seeing that which is good, is best, I shall endeavour to distinguish good Beef from that which is otherwise. Now for chusing Pieces, I shall leave that to eve∣ry one's Discretion, as they like; though for Roast∣ing, the Sir-Loin is better than any other, except the Ribs; for Boiling, the Flank, Buttock and Ach∣bone. If it be right Ox-Beef, it will have an open Grain; the Fat, if young, of a crumbling or Oiy Softness, not tough and spungy, unless it be old, except the Brisket and Neck-pieces, and such parts as are very fibrous: The Colour of the Lean is of a pleasant Carnation-red; and the Fat rather inclining to whi∣tish, than to much yellow. Cow-Beef is of a closer Grain, less boned, and of somewhat less Colour, the Fat whiter; and if young,
tender, easily indented with your Finger, but will in a little time rise again. Bull-Beef is of a more dusky Red, closer and firm∣er than either Ox or Cow-Beef, harder to be imprint∣ed with your Finger, and suddenly rising on a light Touch if you do it; the Flesh brawny, and the Fat gross, and very fibrous, difficult to melt, and of a strong Scent. And thus, little or more, it will be, If it be the Flesh of a Beast that has not been geld∣ed till grown up to full Bigness; and if old, very tough upon pinching, so that your Nails will with great difficulty enter it. As for Newness or Staleness, this sort of Flesh has few Signs to the Eye, more than the Appearance of a lively fresh Colour for the first, and a darkish dull Colour for the latter; but cut in pieces, where the Veins can be discern'd, observe as in Lamb and Veal. If the Beef has been too suddenly kill'd upon over∣heating in driving, it will soon taint, and never take Salt kindly. This you may know by squeezing it in any fleshy part where there are Veins; and with hard squeezing, a red Juice will issue out, and tin∣cture your Fingers. As for farther Confirmation, if you mistrust your Sight, use your Scent: Bull-Beef will smell strong and Rawmish, so will that which has been over-heated in driving; and if it be your bad Luck unadvisedly to buy either of these to salt, make a strong Brine-Pickle, boil'd, and well scum'd, and put them into it 24 hours when cold; then take it out, and salt it with dry Salt, and it will take much better, because the Brine has first penetrated it to make way. If this Meat be bruised, that place will look of a dusky Colour to the rest, as having settl'd Blood in it, that in the killing would not evacuate with the other Blood. And for the rest, use your Scent where
you see Cause to suspect; and believe your self, ra∣ther than the Butcher's Protestations or Oaths. If this sort of Flesh be old, several pieces will, in your Hand, shrink a little from the Bone; but if young, it will stand firm and well where it is not divided from them by cutting. And these Directions, together with your own Experience, cannot but be profitable to you. Of Pork and Brawn. IF you find little Kernels in the Fat of Pork, like small Peas, or Hail-shot, in any Number, it is Measly, and not wholsom for Food. If in pinching the Lean, it break, and squeeze soft and Oily between your Fingers, it is young: Also, if you can nip the Skin of it with your Nails, that is another Token of Youngness; so is it when the Fat is soft and pulpy, in a manner like Lard. But if the Lean of it be tough, the Fat very rough, spungy, or not expanding well between your Fin∣gers and Thumb, and the Skin or Rhind stubborn, then is it old, and may be a Pigging Sow; especial∣ly, if the Flesh be extraordinary flabby, and the Skin crinkled. If the Flesh be of a Boar, or an Hog gelded at full Growth, then it will smell Rawmish, look redder than ordinary, or, at least, of a dusky Red; and both the Lean and Fat will feel harder and tougher than usual; the Skin will be thicker, and not easily pinched up; but when it is, 'twill immediately fall again. As for Newness and Staleness, try the Legs and Hands, or Springs, at the Bone that comes out in the middle of the fleshy part, by putting in your Finger, and scenting it; for there it first taints: the Skin will also be sweaty and clammy when stale, but smooth and cool when new. And of the rest,
you may make your Conjecture according to these Observations. This is best first laid in Pickle 24 hours, and then put into dry Salt; which will give it a good Colour, and a more than ordinary savoury Taste. Brawn is known to be old or young by the extra∣ordinary or moderate Thickness of the Rhind, and the hardness or softness of it; though that I account best, not made of a proper Boar, but of a Barrow, gelded at 9 or 10 Months old, and kill'd the second Year. The greatest danger in this is, Mustiness, of which your Scent must inform you; and your Feel∣ing, whether it be clammy, or not. If you design to keep it when bought, boil two Quarts of Beer-Vinegar, with a Quart of Water, and two handful of Salt, half a dozen Bay-Leaves, and a Race of Gin∣ger sliced; scum the Pickle well, and when it is col put it into an upright Earthen Pot, so that it may co∣ver the Brawn standing upright, and keep it close. To discover Defects in Dried Hams, and other Bacon. TO discover Defects in Wstphalia, Bremen, or Eng∣lish made Hams, Take a sharp-pointed Knife, and run it under the Bone in the in-side of the Ham, a∣bout the middle; and quickly drawing it out, scent It with your Nose; and if it has a curious relishing Savour, and comes out with little dawbing, ther are the Hams good and sweet: But if it smell rank the Knife be much clouded, and the Vent it made cast a Hogo, then, for want of well salting and or∣dering, they are tainted. Also try the Fat on the Edges, by cutting up a Sliver at one end, which yo may put down again; if it be firm, white, and wel scented, it promises a good Ham; but if loose an yellowish, or of a rusty Colour, then is it not as i ought to be; it is either rusty, tainted, or inclinin to it.
Bacon in the Gammons may be well tried in all espects as the former: And in the Ribs, see that the Flesh stick close to the Bones, and the Fat to the Lean; for if not, it has been a diseased Hog, or it is lready, or inclining to be, naught. Rustiness is nown by a Murrey Colour in the extream Parts of he Fat, next the Rhind; by the hardness and pale∣ess of the Lean; and sometimes, in this Case, it is f a dark, dirty Colour. If Bacon gives much in moist Weather, and be∣comes flabby and soft, it has not been well salted nd dried, and therefore must be quickly spent, or t will grow naught. Of Venison. THE Haunches and Shoulders try under the Bones, with your Knife, as directed for the Hams; if it have a good Scent there, fear not but it may spend well: As for other Parts, observe the Colouring of he Flesh; if it be stale, it will look black, with some yellowish or greenish Specks: If it be old, the Flesh will be tough and hard, and the Fat more con∣racted, and of a skinny or restringent Substance; if you can see the Claws, you will find them large, and broad-spreading in the Clefts, with a deep Cleft, and the Heel horny, and much worn; the Gristles dry; and in breaking the Bone, you will find the Mar∣row much spent; the Horns also, if they are to be seen, will give you this Satisfaction by their more or less Snags. To recover Tainted Flesh. PUT it in an Earthen Vessel, full of small Holes, with a Cover to it; lay Sweet-Herbs above and beneath, with some Toasts of Bread; then dig an Hole in the Ground, and set the Vessel into it, and cover it with Earth, and let it stand 24 hours in a light, fresh Mould; and the Earth, together with
what is in the Pot, will take the Scent away: But it must be presently spent, or it will draw in fresh Air, and putrefie again. Where you have not this Conveniency, wash Venison in warm Water when tainted, let it soak 4 hours, then put it into Vine∣gar, Salt and Pepper as long, and presently use it: Let not the Vinegar be too sharp; an ordinary sort of Rape-Eager will do best. Of Butter and Eggs. IF you are to buy Butter, especially of Haglers, or Carriers, or of such as you suspect they have sold it to, take not the Taste they give you, but taste it your self at a venture, lest a well-tasted and scent∣ed Piece may be purposely placed in the Pound, to deceive you; for when Salt-Butter is rank, and de∣cay'd, they work it up with Water, and make Fresh Butter of it, such as is sometimes cried about for 4 Pence half Peny a Pound; for the Water, by much working, takes out the Saltness, and much of the rank Scent; but then the Strength and nourishing part is lost, and in melting it turns to a faint Oil, or Wheyish Substance, not fit for Use. Salt Butter is better scented than tasted, by clapping a Knife in∣to it, and presently putting it to your Nose: If it be a Cask, trust not the top only, for that may be pur∣posely pack'd; but unhoop it to the middle, and thrust your Knife there through the Crevice of the Staves, and so you may be too hard for the De∣ceiver. Eggs are sometimes brought by Sea, and sometimes far by Land, and consequently long in coming, and so grow nought. To know this, if you have not the Opportunity of a Candle, hold them up against the Sun; and if the White appears of a muddy or clou∣dy Colour, and the Yolk lies not round, or is broken in any, then are they nought; but if they be clear,
and fair, then they are good. If you have none of these Advantages, you may inform your self by sha∣king them; and if they swag much, they are wasted, and perhaps their Yolks are broke, and they Addled; though some New Eggs, will shake a little, but not squash so as you can hear the shaking to any purpose. The best way to keep them long, is, in Bran, or Meal; though some do it in Sand. Of Cheese and Bread. I Shall say little of these, because every one loves to please his Palate herein; though, if the larger sorts of Cheese be very rough Coated, dry, and rough or rugged, as if Worm-tracks appear'd, beware of Weavels, little Worms, or Mites in it: If it be over∣moist and spungy, 'tis subject to Maggots: Two De∣fects proceeding from ill making. If you see any soft or perish'd places on the out-sides, try them with a Cheese-Iron, or Scoop, to know how far they go, that you may know what you buy. If among your Bread you find little Knots, or Knobs, Old Bread has been mash'd with it. If your Bread tastes sweet, it has been made of Grown Corn, and will soon be musty. If it be gritty, or rough, then is it made of Smutty or washed Corn, that has lost much of its Virtue, and nourishing Quality, by washing, drying on Kilns, and the like. If Rye be mix'd among Wheat, the Bread will be more moist, and of a sad Colour; and any reasonable Palate may taste and discern it. Some Observations in Buying Fruits, English, and Outlandish. AS for Cherries, Strawberries, Rasberries, Apri∣cots, Plumbs; Currants, Gooseberries, Mulber∣ries, Malacatcons, or the several sorts of Peaches, or any such like Fruits, your Taste, Feeling and Eye will inform you whether they are under-ripe, ripe,
or over-ripe; some delighting in them in one Con∣dition, and some in another: But my Purpose reache farther, which is, to prevent your buying perish'd prick'd, or musty Fuit, which may yet bear a fai Out-side, and deceive you. If you doubt Peas, whether sound, or not, thoug they may feel well, pull at the Stalk, and if it come out easily, with the Spires belonging to it, and the look of a rusty, darkish Colour, then is the Pear pe∣rishing at the Core. Apples, though outwardly appearing firm, if ther be a Speck where the Stalk grew, the Core is perish∣ing, and they will not long keep, if they be not a∣ready decay'd. And the like observe by Quince at either end, either the Stalk-place, or the Blossom-end; for either of these two places being speck'd o∣tainted, they are more dangerous than any Spec though much larger, in another place, because th putrefie to the Heart and Centre, Mustiness in the Fruits is discerned by their Roughness, and deadi or palish Colour, to what in their lively Colo they seem. Oranges and Limons, whether dry, or full  Juice, are known by their Weight; their Goodnes by their Perfection of Colour. If they be prick' they will be soft, and some Spots appear, or bruize places; then they are, for the most part, black  Heart, and perishing. Pomegranates are known to be full or empty, b their ratling, or not ratling; their Goodness, by t redness of their Berries, or Seeds. As for Roots, Herbs, Flowers, &c. it is unnec∣sary to give an Account of them, they being so w and commonly known to the Buyer.
CHAP. XIII. Rules and Instructions for good House-keeping; Containing many curious Receipts in va∣rious Things tending thereto, for the bet∣ter profiting a Family, and saving much Charges, &c. THE good Management of Houshold-Affairs is not only commendable, but turns to much Profit and Advantage; and will furnish eve∣ry thing sufficient, neat and cleanly, with far less Ex∣pence than where Care is not taken, nor exact Rules observ'd: So that some live more plentifully on a small Estate, or Income, by good Houswifery and Management, than others do on a much larger Com∣petency. Wherefore, that all may be directed to this Advantage, or left without Excuse if they prove la∣vish by Negligence, I shall give such good Instru∣ctions as are proper in sundry Matters on this Occa∣sion; comprehending, as near as may be, all that is ne∣cessary to a compleat House-keeping, whereby Plenty may be had, and yet much saved at the Years end. How to make Bread more substantial than ordinary. TAke the Bran that has been boulted off, put it in∣to a Kettle of Water, and boil it, then strain out the Water, and it will be white, and of a thick, strengthening Substance; with this wet the Meal wherewith you make your Bread, then add Yest, and a little Salt, and so make it into Loaves; and it will be more heartening, pleasanter in Taste, and increased in Substance, than otherwise it would have been.
To make Bread that will keep moist and good very long. SLice a Pumpkin, and boil it in fair Water till the Water grows clammy, or somewhat thick, then strain it through a fine Coth or Sieve, and with this make your Bread, well kneeding the Dough; and it will not only increase the quantity of it, but make it keep moist and sweet a Month longer than Bread wetted with fair Water only. Water-Gruel. THis is a wholsom, cooling, nourishing, and cheap Food. 'Tis made Plain, or otherwise: The Plain is, by boiling a good handful of Oat-meal, finely ground, in a Quart of fair Water, till a fourth part be consum'd; than strain it through a fine Sieve, and sweeten it a little with fine Sugar. The other way is, to boil a quarter of a Pound of Currants in a Quart of Water; put in a little Oat-Meal-Flower or Dust to thicken it, and a few Blades of Mace, and a Slice or two of Nutmeg; and it wil be wonderful strengthening. To make Milk-Pottage. TO a Gallon of New-Milk put 2 Quarts of Water, and two handfuls of fine Flower, let them seeth gently, keeping it stirring to prevent burning to and this, sweeten'd, is very cooling, and wholsom. To make Flummery. THis is a wholsom Diet, highly esteem'd by many and much used in the Western Parts of England. To make it, Take half a Peck of Wheat-Bran tha has not been over-much boulted or sifted, let it soa 3 or 4 days in two Gallons of Water, then strain ou the liquid part, pressing it hard; boil it to the Con∣sumption of a third part, so that when it cools it wi be like a Jelly, and keep long: When you heat an of it, season it with Sugar, and a little Rose or O∣range-flower-water, and add a little Cream or Milk and it will be very pleasant, and nourishing.
To make salt Pottage fresh. SET them over the Fire, and beat up a little Wheat-Flower with the White of an Egg, and put a lit∣tle of the Broth among it to make it thin, then put it into the Pot or Skillet; and in a little boiling up, with stirring, it will exceedingly abate the saltness. To make Meat salt in Boiling or Roasting that was before fresh. WHen Haste requires dressing of Meat that you cannot have time to salt it, If Boil'd Meat, make the Water boil up before you put it in; and having well rub'd it with Salt, put it in, and throw in Salt by degrees, a little at a time, till the Broth tastes very strong of it, and so cover it close; and be it Pork or Beef, the Water penetrating with its Heat, it will car∣ry the Salt quite through, and season it sufficiently. If Roast Meat requires Saltness or Seasoning, make a Brine of Salt and Water boil'd together, and wher it begins to be well heated at the Fire, bast it with it hot, and in a few turnings the force of the Fire will cause it to penetrate; and when you perceive it has well done so by a dry salt Scurf that will arise, then you may baste it with your ordinary Basting, and roast it to a Readiness. To Powder a Goose in Roasting. THis may be done the former way; but, how∣ever, there is a better, viz. Take an handful of Sage or Parsley, bruise it very small, then mould it with Butter and a good quantity of Salt, with a lit∣tle grated Bread to bind it; roll it up, put it into the Belly of the Goose, and tye the Neck and Vent close to the Spit, and as the Fire heats through it by de∣grees, the Butter and Gravy will carry the Salt into all parts of the Flesh, so that it will be as well sea∣son'd as if it had been powder'd a Week, or more. To make any Fowl very tender. ABout an hour before you design to kill them, pour down the Throat of each a spoonful of
Vinegar, and let them run about the Room, or Yard; and when they are kill'd, hang them up in their Fea∣thers, by the Heels, in a smoaky Chimney; then pull and dress them, and they will be very tender. If present Occasion require them, when you have pull'd and drawn them, heat a good Pebble-stone, wrap it up in a fine Rag, and so put it into the Belly of the Fowl, closing the Vent to keep in the Steem; and in half an hour they will be much tenderer than otherwise they would be. Of Jellies, and how to make them. JEllies are very strengthening and nourishing, as car∣rying the whole strength of the thing they are made of in them; and many of them may be made with lit∣tle Cost. Their proper Meats to be made on are these, viz. 1. Three pair of Calves Feet; 2. A well-flesh'd Capon, not very fat, and a Knuckle of Veal; 3. A pair of Calves Feet, half a Pound of Izon-glass, and a well-flesh'd Capon; 4. A Knuckle of Veal, and an old Cock; 5. A Pullet, and a quarter of a Pound of Hart's-horn; 6. A Capon only; 7. A Cock, or Ca∣pon, with Izon-glass; 8. Jelly of Hogs Feet; 9. Sheeps Feet, Lambs Feet, or Calves Feet. Now, to make these into proper Jellies, I shall give you one Exam∣ple for all, as to what relates to Flesh-Jellies, viz. Take Calves Feet well scalded; pare the bottoms and take out the long Shank-bones, lay them to so in Water 4 or 5 hours; boil about a dozen of them i 2 Gallons of Spring-water, perpetually, as they bo up, taking off the Scum, till about the fourth part  the Water be consum'd; then strain it through a J∣ly-bag, or a thick Linen Cloth, and let it cool; th take the clearer part from the Setlings, pare off t top, and melt it; then put it into an Earthen Vess adding White-wine, Ginger, Mace, Cinnamon, a the Whites of Eggs, little or more, proportional to the Jelly you make; then add some Juice of ∣mons
and Sugar, to season it; boil it leisurely, and strain it again; then eat it alone, or serve it up with Meats, or any other things that require Jellies of this kind. And so, by boiling the other Meats to mash, according to these Rules, you may make curious strengthening Jellies of them. To make Jellies of several sorts of Fruits. THE Fruits proper for these are, 1. Currants, 2. Quinces, 3. Apples, 4. Pears, 5. Plumbs, 6. Rasberries, Strawberries, and the like. And, to make these, I shall, for Brevity sake, give you one general Example, viz. Jelly of Apples. To do this, pare the softer sort of pleasant tasted Apples, and slice them very thin, taking out the Coars and Seeds; boil a Pound of them in a Quart of Wa∣ter till a fourth part be consum'd, then strain it well, and to every Pint and half put 3 quarters of a Pound of Sugar, with a little Mace or Cinnamon, and boil it up to a thickness, adding a quarter of a Pound of I∣zon-glass; strain it again, and put it up for Use. This, and all other Jellies of Fruits, are cooling, and wholsom; taken successfully in hot Diseases, and very refreshing at all times. And by this Rule you may make Jelly of any Fruit. You may mix, if you please, Wine, Cream or Milk with them, if your Pa∣late is desirous of it; and scent them with Rose, O∣range, Citron, or any pleasant scented Waters. To make Jelly-Broth. TAke any of the Meats mention'd for Meat-Jellies, put a Quart of White-wine to two Quarts of Wa∣ter, and a Pound and an half of Sugar, 6 Eggs, two Nutmegs thinly sliced, two Races of Ginger, a quar∣ter of an Ounce of Mace, and a little Cinnamon gros∣ly bruised; boil it up as the Calves-feet Jelly, strain it, and scent it with a little Amber-grease, or Musk, season it with Limon or Orange-Juice, and it will be excellent.
To make Oyster-Jelly. THis may be properly called a Jelly of divers sorts of Fish, and may serve in general for Fish-Jelly. To make it, Take 10 pretty large Flounders, two small Pikes, or Plaice, and 4 Ounces of Izon-glass ve∣ry well cleansed, boil them in a large Earthen Pipkin, with 2 Quarts of Spring-water, and as much White-wine, adding Slices of Ginger, and Blades of Mace, and so boil them up to a Jelly; strain it through a Jelly-bag, into a pretty deep Dish, and when cold, pare off the Top and Bottom, and put it into a Pip∣kin, with 3 or 4 spoonfuls of the Juice of Limons; season it with fine Sugar beaten with the Whites of Eggs; then stew a Quart of large Oisters in a Pint of White-wine and their own Liquor; add some Spices, as Mace, Ginger and Cinnamon, with Pome-granate-kernels; put these, when well jelly'd, to the former, heat them, and run them through a Bag, and keep it as an excellent Jelly, 3 or 4 spoonfuls being sufficient Nourishment for a day on urgent Occasion. And all the Jellies are excellent Nourishments for sick Persons, or weak Stomachs, that cannot well digest Meats. Sundry kinds of Sawces, and Garnish. FOR Chickens roasted, take the Gravy, and the Juice of Oranges, and a little Cinnamon or Pep∣per very finely beaten or sifted; lay some Slices of Manchet, curiously carv'd, round the Dish; lay the Chickens in the Sauce, and garnish with Limons thinly sliced, Parsley and Barberries. For a Duck or Mallard, Take the Gravy of the Fowl and Oister-liquor, boil in it a whole Onion, a few Slices of Nutmeg, and an Anchovy; and if they be lean, farce and lard them. Garnish with Green and Red Cabbage, or Beets. For Green-Geese, Stamp Sorrel, White-bread, and some Slices of Pippins, or such hard Apples, put a little Vinegar and Sugar to them, then press out the
liquid part, and serve it up in Sawcers. Garnish with Parsley, Marigold-flowers, and some Slices of Oranges or Limons. Or, for Sawce, take the Juice of Sorrel, scalded Goosberries and Sugar, serv'd on Sippets, with Sugar and Butter. For an Hare roasted, After you have par-boil'd, truss'd and larded her, beat Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Pep∣per and Ginger, put to them boil'd Prunes, and a lit∣tle White-wine, boil them, and strain out the liquid part, and serve it up in Sawcers. Or, Take Currants and Muskified Bisket-bread beaten to Powder, boil them, with Sugar and Cloves, in Water, to the thickness of a Gruel. For Hens or Pullets roasted, Take the Eggs you find in them, if any; if not, the Yolks of six Eggs boil'd hard, and smally minced, put them in White-wine or Wine-Vinegar, with beaten Butter and the Gravy, add the Juice of an Orange. Garnish with Slices of Limon, Greens, or Flowers. For any Land-Fowl, Strain a little of the Pulp of boil'd Prunes into the Blood of the Fowl, put to it a little Cinnamon and Ginger finely beaten, boil it with the Gravy, and a little Sugar, to an indifferent thickness, and serve it up with the Fowl. For a Pag, Take the Sage that has been roasted in his Belly, with the Crust or Manchet, bat or shred them small together, boil them in Water, with Cur∣rans, and a little beaten Cinnamon, then ad to a Quart of it a Jill of Sack. A proper Sawce for a Loin of Veal, which may indifferently serve for any other part; Take Thyme, Peny-royal, Mint, Sage and Marjoram, boil them, and shread them, with the Yolks of two hard Eggs, a little Salt, some grated Nutmeg, and the Juice of two Oranges; boil them with a little Spice, and some Currans, then dish it up. Garnish with Slices of Orange, or Capers, Samphire: Cucumbers, &c.
For Mutton roasted, Slice Onions, and boil them in Claret, with grated Nutmeg, and the Gravy. For Red-Deer, Boil sweet Herbs, well minc'd, with the Gravy, White-bread, and Juice of Oranges and Limons; beat these up with curious sweet Butter. For Stubble-Geese, Take Pippins, or other hard Apples, boil them to Pulp, strain it, and put Sugar, a little beaten Cinnamon, and a little Sack to it. For Pork roasted, Boil Sage, and mince it small, mix it well with fine Pepper, Mustard and Sugar, made thin with some Vinegar. Garnish with Slices of Oranges, Limons, Greens and Flowers. To make Cray-fish Red. TO do this, rub them with Aqua-vitae, and the Bu∣siness will be done to Admiration. To preserve Fowl a long time from Tainting. TAke a large Cask that has very lately had Wine in it, knock out a Board or two at the Head, and in the others drive Hooks to hang your Fowls on so as they may not touch each other, and cover the open places with the Boards, leaving only the Bung-hole for an Air-vent; set them in a dry, cool place, and they will keep as long again as in any other place. And thus you may keep Flesh or Fish. To preserve fresh Lard. MElt it, putting to it a little good Verjuice, and boil it up till the Verjuice disappears; then put it into Bladders, or what Vessels you will, and it will keep curious white, and free from Must or Taint. To fatten any sort of Fowl in fifteen Days. TAke Nettle-leaves and Seeds, gather'd and dried in in their proper Season, beat them into Powder, and make it into Paste with Wheat Bran or Flower, add∣ing a little very sweet Olive-Oil; make this up into little Crams, coop them up, and duly feed them with it, giving them Water wherein Barley has been boil∣ed, and they will be fat at or before the Time pro∣posed.
To raise a Sallet in a few Hours. TO do this from the Seeds, in any Season, take Ashes of the Moss of Trees, and rotten Dung, mix them well together, and sprinkle them with the Moisture that comes from the Dung-hill; do this several times, and dry it as often in the Sun, till it becomes, as it were, a fatt, cloggy Earth; keep it in a glazed Earth∣en Pot, to use either Summer or Winter. If in Winter, spread this Earth in a Dripping-pan, or Iron Vessel, sprinkle it with the Moisture of wet Dung in which you have steep'd your Seeds of Let∣tice or Purslain a night, give it a moderate Heat with Fire under it; sow your Seeds, and sprinkle them with warm Rain-water; and if the Heat be the same as in July, they will instantly sprout; and if sowed at 9 in the morning, they will produce Leaves at any Season, sufficient for a Sallet by Dinner-time. To make abundance of Cream. TAke a Scuming-dish full of the top of the Milk, add to it 4 spoonfuls of scraped Sugar, and a drop of good Rennet, then stir them together that they may thicken a little, then set it in a warm place, and a great deal of Cream will arise in an hours time. To make an excellent Syllabub. MIlk the Milk of a young Cow into your Vessel, to 2 Quarts of it put a Pint of White-wine, 2 or 3 spoonfuls of Verjuice, or the Juice of green Grapes, and a spoonful of the Juice of Balm or Mint, scrape into it some Loaf-Sugar, and add a little gra∣ted Nutmeg; you may also scent it with a little Rose or Orange-water. To make Cream of sundry kinds of Fruits. TO do this, take either Currans, Mulberries, Ras∣berries, or Strawberries, sprinkle them with a lit∣tle Rose-water, press out the Juice, and daw the Milk hard out of the Cow's Udder into it; sweeten it with a little Sugar, and beat it well with Birchen
Twigs till it froth up, then strew over it a little fine beaten Cinnamon; and it will be a curious Mess. You may do this with the Juice of Plumbs, Goose∣berries, Apricots, Figs, or any juicy Fruit. To make a Cream-Pudding. TAke Flower, and mix it with a like quantity of gra∣ted Bread, some Dates minc'd, Cinnamon and Nut∣meg finely beaten, Beef-Suet, Sugar, Eggs, and warm Milk; then take half the Pudding for one side, and half for the other, make it up round, and put some Butter and Cream into the middle of it, and close it up; put it into the Pot, in a Cloth, when the Li∣quor boils, and, when boil'd, serve it up in 2 halves, with Butter, Rose-water, Sugar and Verjuice, beat∣en well together, and warm. To keep all sorts of Flowers fresh, out of their proper Seasons. FIll an Earthen Vessel with half Water and half Verjuice, put to it as much Salt as will make the Liquor taste well of it; gather the Flowers in their prime, before they are too much blown, and put them in the Liquor, pressing or rumpling them as little as may be; cover the Vessel close, and set it in a warm place; when you have Occasion for them, take them out by the Stalk, and hold it to the warmth of the Fire, and it will recover much of its Colour, spread in its proper Form, and want nothing of the perfect Flower but the true Scent. And thus may they be kept all Winter. To make an excellent White-Pot. BLanch half a Pound of Sweet-Almonds, make them into a Paste well beaten, put to it 2 Quarts of Milk, and boil them together, then add a spoon∣ful and an half of Rice-flower; and when these are boil'd well, strain out the liquid part into 2 Quarts of New Milk, stirring it; and add Sugar to sweeten it as you please, and a little Saffron strain'd into a
quarter of a Pint of White-wine, viz. the Wine wherein it has been soak'd; and with this beat up a dozen Yolks of Eggs, and bake it. To make excellent Black-Puddings. TAke Oat-meal a little ground, grate to every Quart of it an half-peny stale White Loaf, soak these in Milk a night, then in the Hog's Blood warm 12 hours, then mince your Fat or Lard small, mingle and stir them to a proper thickness; then mince Peny-royal, Winter-Savoury, and such other proper sweet Herbs, as the Season will afford, and stir them together, sea∣son them with a sprinkling of Salt, and fill the Guts with them, tying them at what convenient Lengths you please; and when you have boild them, hang them up in a dry Loft, near the Chimney, to keep them from Moistness or Mouldying. White-Puddings, the best way to make them. GRate fine Manchet, sprinkle a little Flower on it, and beat a small quantity of Mace and Nut∣meg, steep these in as much Milk as they will thicken like Pap; then to every Quart of this put a quarter of a Pound of Currans, and two Ounces of Sugar; mix them well together, and put them into sine thin Guts, well clean'd, and rinsed in warm Water; tye them up as the former, and keep them in dry Boxes when boil'd. To make English Sausages. TAke the Lean of a Fillet of young Pork, chop and bruise it small, then to every Pound put a quar∣ter of a Pound of Fat, well skin'd; season it with Pepper, Salt, and a little Nutmeg; add some small matter of Peny-royal, well shreaded, and beaten; mix them all well together, put the Mass into Guts season'd with Water and Salt; and when fill'd and tied, hang them up in a Chimney, or Smoak-Loft, to dry.
CHAP. XIV. Rare Experiments in making Pomatums, Essences, Perfumes, Sweet-Bags, Powders, Whitening Teeth, making Hair grow, beautifying Brass or Silver, Taking out Spots and Stains, Renewing faded Paintings or Hangings, Killing Vermin. A good Pomatum for Beautifying. TAke the Fat of a Bacon-Hog unsalted, stick it full of Oats, roast it by a slow Fire, that it may drip away; put to the Dripping some Oil of Sweet-Almonds, and 2 or 3 drops of the Chy∣mical Oil of Cinnamon; mix them well together, and put them up for Use. To make Essence of Cinnamon. TAke Oil of Nutmegs, and set it in the Summer-Sun till it has lost much of its Scent, then put in half an Ounce of the Oil of Cinnamon; and when they are well incorporated, the whole Scent of the Cin∣namon will remain in the Mass To make a Perfume to burn. THis is proper for taking bad Scents out of Rooms, and purge gross Air. To make them, Take of Benjamin 4 Ounces, Storax 2, Cloves 12, Laudanum and Calamus Aromaticus, each a Dram, and a little dri∣ed Citron peel; bruise them together, mixed with Rose-water, incorporate them into a Mass, and make them into Cassolets, or little Pastils, which being lighted at a Fire, or Candle, they will diffuse a cu∣rious Scent into all parts of the Rooms, which will destroy Spiders, and other venomous Things. To make Pastils to perfume Cakes. Take of ignum-Aloes a Dram, Storax half an Ounce, Benjamin 2 Ounces, Coals of Sallow or Willow-wood as you please, reduce them to a sine Powder; add to them 20 Grains of Civet, and as much fine Su∣gar as is convenient; then put them into an Earthen
Vessel, with as much Rose-water as will cover them; boil them a little, till the Pastils be digested; ever stirring them with a Stick in boiling, to prevent their being burnt to; and when they are enough, make them into the form of Pastils, and use them as you see Occasion. To make Grounds for Hair-Powder. THose Grounds are proper enough to be either Rice-Grounds, or Starch-Grounds, finely pulverized, and sifted through Sieves of different bignesses, and growing lesser, to a vast fineness, dried in a warm place, and fitted to receive the several Scents. To scent Powders. IF you would do it with Flowers, place a Laying of Powder, and a Laying of Flowers, whether Roses, Jessamin, Violet, Orange, or the like, till a close Box is full; then shut it, and let them infuse; and the Powder will attract the whole Scent of the Flower to it: And if it be not strong enough, you must shift the Flowers till it is. As for Civet or Musk-powder, infuse Cotton-wool in those Scents till it has exceeding well taken it; then lay a Laying of Wool, and a Laying of Pow∣der, and shut it close in a Box, and it will scent the Powder. And by these Directions, any other Scents may be infused. To make, and perfume Wash-Balls. TAke a Pound of Cake-Soap, moisten it with Rose or Orange-water, beat it till it is in the nature of Pap, put half an Ounce of Orris to it, and as much Calamus in Powder; so make it up into Balls, and dry them in the Air, or Sun. To perfume them, Take what quantity of Musk you please, and dissolve it in any sweet-scented Wa∣ter, bruise your Wash-balls with it in a Mortar, and make them up a-new, and they will scent throughou of it. And so you may do of other Scents; as Am∣ber-grease, Orange, Jessamin, &c.
To make Sweet-Bags for Clothes. TAke a Pound and an half of Florence-Orris, Rose-wood 6 Ounces, Calamus Aromaticus half a Pound, Benjamin 5 Ounces, Yellow Saunders 4 Oun∣ces, Cloves half an Ounce, Cinnamon an Ounce; bruise these grosly together, put them into a fine thin Bag, and lay them among your Clothes, for a curious Scent: It will also keep away Moths, Worms, &c. Violet-Powder for Cassinets, and Sweets to put among Linen. TAke of Florence-Orris a Pound, Rose-wood a Pound and an half, Yellow Saunders and Storax, each an Ounce, Benjamin 2 Ounces, Cyprus, Galingale and Galamus Aromaticus, each an Ounce and an half, Corian∣der-feeds, Nutmegs, Cinnamon and Cloves, each a quarter of an Ounce, Citron-peel and Orange-flowers dried, each 2 Drams; bruise these in a Mortar, and sift them through a fine Sieve; then put them in Bags, or sprinkle them among the Clothes, and they will keep all offensive Infects from them, and give them a curious Scent. To whiten Teeth. Wash your Mouth well with Plantain-water, then rub your Teeth very well with fine Powder of Pumice-stone, and if sound, they will be very white. To make Hair grow. TAke the tender tops of Hemp just appearing above Ground, steep them 24 hours in Water, and mix the Water with Fern-ashes, then wash the place with the Water warm'd, and it will produce Hair very speedily if the place be natural to it, and it be not lost by extream Old Age. To take Spots of Oil or Grease out of Sattin, Silks, Stuffs, or Woollen. BUrn the Bones of Sheeps Trotters, reduce them to a fine Powder, lay it on fine Paper, on both sides of the Spots, and place upon the upper part a Spoon in which is a lighted Coal that may heat pret∣ty well through, and the Heat will cause the Powder
to suck out the Grease; then rub it over with a piece of fine White Bread, to cleanse it. If it does it not sufficiently at once, repeat it twice or thrice, and it will not fail your Expectation. To take out Pitch, Rosin, Bees-Wax or Tar. PUT a little Oil of Turpentine on the place, and dab it on often with a Feather as it dries away, and it will so consume the unctious part of them, that by gently rubbing, it will crumble away like Dirt. To take Iron-Moulds from Linen. HAving well wash'd your Linen, put boiling Water into a Peuter-Pot, and put the Linen to it, then take it out, and anoint the place with Juice of Sorrel, and let it dry; then wash it out in a good Lather, with Castle or Cake-Soap. To take out Spots of Ink, or Stains of Fruit. PUT the Juice of Limon and Onion on the Spot or Stain, and let it dry, then wash it out with a good Lather of Cake-Soap: Or you may first steep the Linen in Chamber-Ley; or wash the Stain with Soap dissolv'd in Vinegar. To take Spots of Oil or Grease out of White or Red Silk▪ without altering the Colour. WET the Spot with Spirit of Wine, then dawb it over with the White of a New-laid Egg, and dry it in the Sun; then wash it with clean Wa∣ter, and press it well. To make Brass Utensils look of a Golden Colour. TAke a Pint of strong Ley, mix with it an Ounce of burnt Roche-Allom, boil them well together, then rub the Utensil with it, and when it is dry, rub it over with Tripoli; and it will not only take away all Spots and Stains, but make it look like Gold. To cleanse Silver, and give it a curious Lustre. BOil it well in Ley, then take it out, and smeer it over with Whiting, and let it dry; then with a warm, dry Woollen Cloth, rub it over with Powder of burnt Allom.
To set a Gloss on faded Paintings. TAke of Tartar and Gloss-wort, each an Ounce; boil them in a Pint of Water till half be consum'd; then strain it; and having, with a Spunge and warm Water, cleansed the Painting from Dust, do it over with the strain'd Liquor, and it will set a curious fresh Gloss upon it, and make it look as if new. To refresh faded Hangings. SCower them well with a strain'd Water wherein Cake-Soap and Fulling-Earth have been soak'd, rinse them afterwards in fair Water wherein Allom has been dissolv'd, then, if it be Tapestry, run them over with the Juice of Quinces and Limons: And where the Colours of Tapestry are faded by Age, you may revive them by artificially painting them. To whiten Linen Cloth. WET it well, and lay it on the Grass in a Sun∣shiny day, cast Water on it wherein Allom has been dissolv'd, and a little Chalk; use it thus 5 or 6 days, then wash and Buck it well, and it will be∣come far whiter, and thicker, than it was before. To destroy Mice, Rats Weasles, &c. TAke Arsnick and rude Mercury, mix them with Cheese, Bread, or fat Bacon, and as many as taste of it will die. Or, Boil Wild Cucumbers with the like quantity of Coliquintida till the Water is almost consum'd, then make a Paste with it and Oat-flower, and lay in Bits about their Haunts, and it will de∣stroy such as eat of it. To prevent Weasles sucking Eggs. PLace Rue about the Nests of your Hens, Ducks, or Geese, and they will not come near the Eggs. To destroy Bugs. MIX Oil of Turpentine with Soap-Lees, anoint the Bed-posts and Crevises of the Walls with at, shut the Room up close, and burn Brimstone and Storax, and they will die away.
To destroy Fleas and Lice. FOR the former, sprinkle the Room with Water wherein the Roots of Wild Cucumbers and Wormwood have been boil'd; and lay between the Mat and the Bed the Herb Arse-smart, or Hound's-tongue, which grows in most Ditches in Summer. For the latter, Take Hog's Lard, Quick-silver and the Juice of Sage, beat them into an Ointment, and anoint your Head and Body with it, and the Scent will kill them either in your Hair, Linen, Bed, or Woollen Clothes. To destroy Flies. BRuise the Herb Helebore, and steep it in New Milk mix'd with Orpiment, and sprinkle the Rooms or places where Flies swarm, and they will either presently avoid it, or die. To destroy Moths. THese usually infest Clothes and Hangings, and therefore prove very mischievous. If among Clothes, To destroy them, make a Pow∣of Sarsafrax-wood, the Flowers of Lavender, and the dried Leaves of Rue; lay these in small Sprinklings amongst your Woollen, Silks, or Linen, and scent your Drawers or Trunks well with them, and no Moths will live in the Scent of them. But if they eat your Hangings, or other things, which you cannot order with this Powder, then burn Storax and Sulphure in the Room, the Doors and Windows being close shut, and the Scent will utterly destroy them; and the Scent remaining in the Hangings will keep others from coming to them for 6 Months, or as long as the Scent remains in them; and then, to prevent future Danger, you may renew it. To destroy Ticks. THis sort of Vermin is very offensive, especially in old Houses, where the Timber is decay'd, or rot∣ten;
and they are great Destroyers of Timber-Build∣ings, by rotting and wasting the Timber in eating it To destroy these, observe their Haunts, and wash or sprinkle the places with Urine wherein Tobacco and Rue have been boil'd, and it will kill those that are already, and prevent the breeding of others. To destroy Spiders. AFter you have destroy'd their Webs, sprinkle the Rooms with Water wherein Plantain has been boil'd, and smoak them with Benjamin and Frankinsence, and none of them will ever after ap∣pear there; especially, till the Scent of these things are utterly extinguish'd. To destroy Worms. THose in Walks or Gardens may be destroy'd by strewing of Lime, foul Salt, or Pot-Ashes, and lay  Laying of Gravel on it. But such as are in Bedsteads, or Timber in Houses, are destroy'd by washing the places with strong Vinegar, and scenting them with Storax and Brimstone: The latter will do in a Li∣brary, to prevent their eating and spoiling Books. To drive away Snakes, Adders, Efts, Emmets, &c. BUrn Wall-wort, Rue and Bay-leaves, scatter the Ashes and some fresh Leaves in their Haunts, and they will either immediately depart, or die in their Holes, or places of resort. Thus, Reader, have I given you many rare Expe∣riments, and in every thing fulfilled my Promise a so that it cannot but be worthy of Acceptance, and will, no doubt, redound to your Profit and Plea∣sure: Wherefore, recommending it to you, I leave you to put it in practise. FINIS.
