F896 E470_13 50805848 162386
A FIGHT AT SEA TWO Ships taken by Prince CHARLES his Officers. And Prince Charles very ill, and in danger of Death. THE Lord Willoughby and Sir John Batten, both put out, and Prince Rupert made Admirall, and Captain Robert Welch Vice-Admirall. The Estates Message to Vantrumpe, And the agreement at the Treaty. ALSO Other Extraordinary News from the Earle of Warwicks Ships. Brought on Munday November 6, 1648. no: 7 LONDON, Printed for H. Becke, and are to be sold in the Old Bayley. 1648.
A Fight at SEA, two Ships taken by Prince Charles his Officers. And Prince Charles very ill, and in danger of Death. SIR, I Know many eyes are upon us, yet I doubt not, but that we shall give such an account of this businesse of our undertakings here, as shall give good satisfaction to the Parliament. It is true, wee were mistaken in our first thoughts, for it was supposed that the Sea∣men would have all come in to the Lord Ad∣mirall upon the first Summons, Indempnity being offered them. But it seems they had not so much discre∣tion, as to make use of that offer when it was
tendred, For by means of some monies, and an high hand together, over the Sea men, they were stopt from comming into us. Yet now they are in as great  as ever, nay worse, for the Seamen flye out high against the Lord Willoughby and Sir Iohn  for s, and  they have contracted to themselves, by deserting the Parliament, and that they did alwayes expect the per∣formance of payment of moneys from them for they promised it, and of them it is they expect to see it per∣formed. And their wants are very great, having spent since they arrived in Holland, not only the pillage of their Piracies, but what they brought away from England. Hereupon severall Councells of Warre were called to consider what to doe, and upon advice there a∣mongst them, Prince Charles and the Agents have been solicited by the Lord Willoughby, Sir John B∣ten; and other Officers; And they have had good words, but no monies. At last the Lord Willoughby went to the  told him that there must some course be taken for mo∣nies, or else the Sea-men would all dissert them, and that he could not keepe them in order without some thing for them to subsist by. Then his Lordship was desired to try what interest he could make for the borrowing of monies for the Prince, to give the Sea-men some pay, and that hee should do what he could to keep them in Order. The Prince also declared unto him, that he would desire them that they would be contented (only) untill
the Treaty between the King his Father, and the Par∣liament of England was ended, that they might see what the end thereof would be, and then they should see, that care should bee taken for them, either (in a short time) to have their Arrears, and all ingagements made good to them, or else that they should have both monies and provisions for further imployment, if the King and Parliament should not agree. In the mean time, the Lord Admirall sent to the Estates of Holland, to desire that Van∣trumpe might bee recalled from guarding of the revolted Shippes that deserted the Parlia∣ment of England, and others from the Par∣liament were there soliciting, that so the Lord Admirall might have an opportunity to re∣duce them. And it was so farre prevailed with the E∣states of Holland, that an Order was passed that Vantrumpe should withdraw, and take of his guards, and those ships of theirs be im∣ployed upon other service for their owne country. But I know not how it came to passe but so it was, that either it was not sent, or not obey∣ed, but I suppose there was some private countermand from the Prince of Orange, or else that Vuntrumpe durst hardly have denyed to obey those Instructions. And the Estates have since made another Order to send to Vantrumpe, to know the reason why those Orders were not obeyed?
Whether he was to withdraw presently, or convey them out of Gowry (which is not pro∣bable) and then withdraw, I cannot tell cer∣tainly: but probably the latter. The Hollanders are much discontented to be at the charges, to maintaine them at their charge, for no benefit to themselves, especi∣ally having so much use as they have for them at Sea. But for (the future) perhaps they may not have altogether so much use for them as for∣merly, for the generall peace is now conclud∣ed and signed. Now all this while Prince Charles his sea∣men goe on high in discontents, and breake out into factions; their generall cry being monies, mony, and indeed I do wonder how they can make shift as they doe. And the Sea-men sent to desire Prince Charles to come to them, and give them some other satisfaction (for they were much dis∣contented at the Prince for leaving them and going to the Hague). Yet it hath so fallen out, that they cannot be satisfied in this; for Prince Charles is sicke
of the Small Pox at the Hague and is very ill of them, in great danger to fall into a Fea∣ver. The Duke of Yorke also and his sister are neither of them well. The Duke it is beleev∣ed will also have the Small Pox. So that neither the Prince nor the Duke of Yorke can goe to them, whereby they are like to rise into an high disorder. The Prince there by the advice of his coun∣sell about him, took into consideration what was best to be done herein, for their Order and Discipline. And it was concluded, that a message should be sent to the Lord Willoughby, and Captaine Batten, to know their mindes, and try whe∣ther they could use a s to settle and order the Sea-men untill the Treaty was ded. They returned Answer, that they could not possible doe it without money, and that they could not tell how to undertake any thing in discharge of their places except some provisi∣ons was made for the Seamen. Hereupon the Prince by advice of his councell, concluded that the Lord Willoughby
and Sir John Batten should be dismissed. And that Prince Rupert should be made Admiral and that one Welsh should be Vice-Admirally (this Welsh is Robert Welsh that came out of Ireland, a poore sneaking fellow) are not those like to prove good guides to an English Navy. But this will not be sufficient to compose the Seamen, and notwithstanding their intenti∣ons for so it is designed to send Landmen over them, to over-awe them, and put a force upon them. The time of the Treaty they suppose but short, and so expect their work to be, and so not much difficult. There are some of Prince Charles his Officers have taken two Ships be∣longing to some Merchants of London, which they have seized on, and plundered to a very great value. Many ships were cast away the last great windes. Gowry, From aboard the Vere-Admiral, Dated the 3 of Novemb, 1648. FINIS.
