G1781 E663_5 99865930 118186
A GREAT VICTORY OBTAINED BY THE King of France AGAINST THE PRINCE of CONDE; WITH The particulars of the Fight; and the manner how Collonell JAMES STUART (second Son to the late King of Eng∣land) with a Brigade of Horse, charged the Prince of Conde's own Rgiment, with a Resolution to fight either to Death or Victory; and after a bloudy Conflict totally routed them; and with the assistance of Gen. Turein, put 6000 to the flight, killed above 800, took prisoners about 1200, and 100 Colours; with all their Ordnance, Arms, Am∣munition, Bag and Baggage. Also, a List of the Names, of the chief Officers, slain, taken, and wounded on both sides; Likewise, the Prince of Conde's Letter to the Parl. of Eng∣land; And the Declaration, and Message, of the King of Scots; with his granting forth new Commissions, to make War with the English; the setting forth of a new Fleet under the com∣mand of Sir George Carteret; the number of the Ships; and their taking of a rich Prize bound from England, laden with Gold and Silver. Imprinted at London, for George Horton, 1652.
A DECLARATION OF THE King of Scots Concerning the Parliament, Crown, and Commonwealth of England; And the Prince of Cond's Letter to the Councel, touching the same, &c. Inclosed in a Letter from the Court at Paris, the first of May, 1652. SIR, THe King of Scots hath resumed the way of me∣diation for peace and union between his Roy∣all Majesty, and the Prince of Conde; propo∣sing (as an Expedient) that Cardinal Maza∣rin might be sent away as a Commissioner to treat about the general peace of Europe; but the Duke of Orleans seemed to wave it at present, until such time, that
by the advice and counsel of the Prince of Conti, he was moved to accord thereunto; in pursuance whereof his roy∣all Highness gave his assent, That young Charles should be permitted to persue his mediation. Whereupon He imme∣diatly sent the Lord Montague with a Message to K. Lewis, wherein he declared himself as followeth: May it please your Majesty, WHereas by sad experience (in these our late distem∣pered and unhappy Times) We are sensible of the great Miseries and Calamities that are incident both to Prince and People, upon the distempers arising between the Head and Members, occurring chiefly from the flames of those, who are frighted with mortal apprehensions, and re∣tain unto themselves diversity of fears and jealousies, at the remembrance of those dangers, which wise Counsels, and great Favourites, may suddenly involve them in: There∣fore, having seriously weighed the sad effects thereof, and the great devastation that doth befall both Crown & King∣doms thereby, which with grief of heart I speak it, I hum∣bly offer to your Majesty this Expedient, for preventing of these inevitable Ruines, That your Majesty will be pleased to consider upon some convenient way for the expelling of the Cardinal (though it were but a limitation of time pre∣fixed within your Royal Breast) and to satisfie the desires of the people; without which, little safety can be expected, and all hopes of Reconcilement utterly frustrated and taken away. The King having received this Message, or Declaration, returned thanks to his Cousin Charles; but withall desired him not to intermeddle any further therein giving assurance that he was resolved to keep and protect the Cardinal. Whereupon the Citizens of Paris were exceedingly ex∣asperated
in spirit, offering to raise 20000 men for the Pr. of Conde against the King: but its probable, that upon re∣ceit of the unwelcome tydings of the great blow given to the Princes forces by Gen. Turein, and valiant James Stuart, they may change their resolutions: for, indeed, the Defeat was great, being managed by a surprisal; the exact Rela∣tion whereof, take as followeth: The King drawing near Paris, Marshal Turein, Generall Hocquincourt, and Col. Stuart being to attend the march of the Court with their Armies, came along the Rivers of Yonne and Seine: And Turein perceiving that if he got be∣twixt the Princes Army and Paris, he might be able to in∣terrupt their communication with the Parisians, marched with such care and expedition, that he arrived at Chartres, while the same time the Princes army removed from Mon∣targis to Estampes: And being resolved to set upon the ene∣my, he marched all night, and found them daawing up their army near Estampes; who spying the Kings army, immedi∣atly retired into the Town, placing their Foot within the Works and Fortifications; but caused their Horse to pass the River. Hereupon the two Generals drew up near the Walls of the Town; and perceiving a good space of ground not wel guarded betwixt the outmost Suburbs and the Town, where they might cut off that part of the Suburbs, they attempted that place, and began the assault with much resolution, and the Town was well maintained by the Defendants; but the Kings Ordnance having the advantage of a commanding Hillock, did so annoy the Princes party in the Town, and made a breach in the Wall, so that the Kings forces entred; and after a sharp dispute, became Masters of the Town, sei∣zing upon the Magazine, and putting divers to the sword: during this dispute, the titular Duke of York, brake in with the horse, doing great execution.
The Princes party were almost all killed, or taken, and his own Regiment totally cut off; for they denyed quarter. The Horse stood all upon a Hill, on the other side of the River, as Spectators of this bloudy Tragedy, and never attempted to relieve the Foot. The occasion of the Princes Army draw∣ing out thus, was to welcome Madamoiselle from Orleans, whence she came to see them. This action was the more observable, in that the Kings party consisted onely of 2000 Foot, and 500 Horse, against 6000 of the Princes; notwith∣standing they had the advantages of a deep Trench, a strong Wall, and the Town it self. The Duke of York (for so he is called here) commanded the Kings horse, who charged so puissantly, that his very first Onset sufficiently testified he fought either to Death or Victory; for after the first Vol∣ley, he brake in upon Wirtemberg, and the Princes own Re∣giment, doing great execution, and making the field resound with shrill ecchoes: In this fight was slain Mounsieur de Bloin, a Gentleman of irresistable courage: Yet notwith∣standing, the loss whereof, could not damp the general re∣joycing for so important a Victory: Which was pursued with such eagerness of spirit by the aforesaid Duke, that the Kings party were in half an hours time exceedingly tran∣sported with excess of gladness. The King hearing of this Victory, sent an Express to young James, to hasten to the Court, where he was triumphantly entertained, and is now in great esteem amongst the French; Immediatly after his reception, he presented the King with a Narrative of the whole business, and a particular List of the Officers and Souldiers killed and taken on both sides: a Copy whereof I have hereunto annexed.
A List of the Officers and Souldiers on both sides, at the bloudy Fight neer Estampes, about 18 miles from Paris. Slain of the Prince of Condes party. Monsieur Brook Major Gen. Col. Rinskey. Col. Montul. Col. Briole. Lieut. Col. Ferstemburg. Major Pareu. Captain Langorn. 800 private souldiers. Taken prisoners by the Kings party. Maj. Gen. Debarto. Monsieur De Breal, Marshal of the Camp. Col. Montaque. Col. Plessis. Col. Macrue. Col. Gihe. Col. Ranuel. Major Donorre. Major Sparing. Major Burluo. Captain La Pallu: captain Rinstey. captain Stumburg. captain Rosen. captain Gennet. 60 Lieutenants, and other Officers. 1200 private souldiers. 100 Colours. 13 pieces of Ordnance. 3000 Arms. And all their Bag and Bag∣gage. Slain on the Kings party. Col. Bloin. captain Vanco. captain Meldrum. Lieutenant Westoon. And about 200 other officers and souldiers. Wounded on the Kings side. colonel Kinsey. col. De Broglion. Lieu. col. Morelock. captain de Materillos. captain de Fiscas. captain Mollin. captain Shaviniac. captain Caroon. Lieut. Godwell. Cornet Haveroon.
Since this great Defeat, we hear, that the Prince of Conde hath taken the field with his new Auxiliaries; and that He hath sent a Letter to the Parliament, inviting over the Eng∣lish to his assistance: Indeed, they are as much desired by the one party, as dejected by the other: but that which cau∣seth the most admiration, is, their drawing towards the Sea∣coast, whose design is said to be for the Port of Bordeaux. Several Commissions are given forth by the Scots King to raise forces against England; but amongst the rest Sir Geo. Carteret, late Governor of the Isle of Jersey hath broken his Articles with the Parl. by his actuall engagement against them, for the King; having already got 7 Frigats at Sea, & a Commission to fight and plunder the English: He hath lately been abroad with the Francis, Patrick, and Michael, which carry 44 pieces of Ordnance, and hath taken a gal∣lant ship bound for Newfound Land, wherein was great store of Gold and Silver. He hath taken several other pri∣zes, and hath brought them to St. Mallows: from whence he hath sent a Present of Gold to his Master. Paris, May the 1. 1652. FINIS.
