H862 E1043_3 99866957 119246
THE SPEECH OF Major John Harris AT The place of Execution, near St. Mary Axe, on Monday the Third of September, 1660. With his Prayer immediatly before his Death; And his Confession touching his appear∣ing on the Scaffold before White-Hall, at the most horrid Murder of our late Gra∣cious Soveraign Lord King Charles. London, Printed for Nathaniel Bryan, 1660.
THE SPEECH OF Maj. John Harris, AT The place of Execution, on Monday the Third of September, near St Mary Axe: With his Con∣fession, touching his appearing on the Scaffold at the horrid and most de∣testable Murder of our late Gracious Soveraign, &c. SInce the Exploit put upon the Ginny Mer-chant by Major John Harris; who counter∣feiting
the Hand and Seal of Cromwel the Ty∣rant, presumed to demand some hundreds of pounds from them, y a specous preence of Authority & Commission from the said Tyrant, which he ob∣tained; And having something in Arrear, as he said, and falling into Poverty, Necessity invited him to use his Wits once more, (which prov'd his last;) For, upon his going to one Mr. De Noy a Merchant, with a Guard of Souldiers, pretending the Lord Chan∣cellors Warrant, he caused the doors to be broke open, entred the house, and carryed away about 12. pounds in money. From thence he went to Capt. Halls at Redriff, about 2 or 3 of the clock in the morning and in like manner entred his house, carry∣ing away a very considerable sum: Which being done, he gave the souldiers 30 shillings to drink, and dismissed them, immediatly betaking himself to his house at Lambeth Marsh: But he was in few hours pursu'd, and by a Warrant apprehended, and com∣mitted to Newgate, where he remained till the last Sessions: At which being tryed, he was found guil∣ty of Burglary, and received Sentence of Death to be executed near St. Mary Ax, not far from the place where the Merchant lived: Which accordingly on Monday the 3d instant, was put in execution, being carryed from Newgate, with his Coffin, in a Cart; But before we proceed to his Speech, we shall only
give a touch of his Confession; Which was, That he protested against the having any hand in the late Kings Death, and that he was onely upon the Scas∣fold with a half pike, being commanded thither by some Commission-Officers, &c. But the time of exe∣cution drawing nigh, he was required to hasten; & being come to the place where he was to breath his last he addressed himself to the People (wringing his hands) as followeth: CHristian Friends, As my time in this world is very short, so is the breath of my Nostrils rea∣dy to depart; I am exceeding faint and weak the Lord (in mercy) inable me to undergo this bitter Cup; the Dregs, I confess, I deserve; but I hope God will forgive me my sins, since I conceive it is very much his pleasure to bring me to this place for the sins that I have committed. It is the Lords af∣fliction, blessed be his Name. And though I desire, as I am carnal, that this Cup may depart from me, yet not my wil, but the Lords be done. Death brings unto the Godly an end of sinning, and of all miseries due unto sinne, so that after death there shall be no more sorrow, nor cry, or pain, for God shall wipe a∣way all tears from our eyes; by death our soules shalbe delivered from thraldom, and this corruptible body shall put on incorruption, and this mortal im∣mortality. I beseech you pray for me, and joyn with me in this my last prayer.
His Prayer a little before his Death. WElcome blessed hour, welcome Death, the period of my Pilgrimge, the term of my Bondage, the end of my Cares, the close of my sins, the bound of my Travels, the Gaol of my Race, and the Haven of my hopes; I have fought a long fight in much weaknesse, I have finished my course though in great faintnesse, and the Crown of my joy is, through the strength of Divine Grace, I have kept the true Faith: And now what is my hope? my hope Lord Jesus is even in thee, for I know that thou my Redeemer livest, and that thou wilt im∣mediatly receive my Soul, and raise up my body al∣so at the last Day. And now, O Lord, let thy Spi∣rit of Comfort help mine infirmities, and make supplication for me with sighs and groanes that cannot be expressed; I submit my self wholly to thy Will, I commit my Soul to thee as my faithfull Redeemer, who hast bought it with thy most pre∣cious blood. I confess, I know no name under hea∣ven by which I may be saved▪ but thine my Jesu, my Saviour; I reounce all confidence in any merits save thine. I thankfully acknowledge all thy bles∣sings I unfainedly bewail all my sinnes, I stodfastly believe all thy promises, I heartily forgive all my
Enemies, I willingly leave all my Friends, and I en∣tirely long for thy coming. Come Lord Jesus come quickly; Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. Then pulling his Cap over his Eyes, he prayed again very fervently, putting up divers short Eacu∣lations; As, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit, for thou hast redeemed it; O God, thou God of Truth; Lord Jesus, receive my Soul; Sweet Sa∣viour into thy hands I commit my Spirit; and so he yielded to Death. FINIS
