J1019A 669.f.11[114] 99869022 162765
THE ANARCHIE, Or the blest Reformation since 1640. Being a new Song, wherein the people expresse their thankes and pray for the Reformers. To be said or sung of all the well affected of the Kingdome of England, and Dominion of Wales, before they eate any Plumbroth at Christmasse. To a Rare New Tune. NOW that thankes to the Powers below, We have e'ne done out our doe, The Miter is downe, And so is the Crowne And with them the Coronet too; Come Clownes and come boyes, Come hober de hoyes, Come Females of each degree, Stretch your throats, bring in your Votes, And make good the Anarchy. And thus it shall goe sayes Alice, Nay thus it shall goe sayes Amy; Nay thus it shall goe sayes Taffie I trow, Nay thus it shall goe sayes Jamy. Ah but the Truth good people all, The Truth is such a thing, For it wou'd undoe, both Church and State too, And cut the throat of our King, Yet not the Spirit, nor the new light, Can make this point so cleare, But thou must bring out, thou Deified rout What thing this truth is and where. Speak Abraham, speak Kester, speak Iudith, speak Hester; Speak tag and rag, short coat and long, Truth's the spell made us rebell, And murder and plunder ding dong. Sure I have the truth sayes Numph, Nay I ha' the truth sayes Clemme; Nay I ha' the truth sayes reverend Ruth, Nay I ha' the truth sayes Nem. Well let the Truth be where it will, We're sure all else is ours, Yet these divisions in our Religions, May chance abate our powers; Then let's agree on some one way, It skills not much how true, Take Pryn and his Clubs, or Say and his Tubs, Or any Sect old or new; The Devils ith' Pack, if choyce you can lack, We're fourescore Religions strong, Take your choyce, the major voyce Shall carry it right or wrong: Then weele be of this sayes Megg, Nay weele be of that sayes Tibb, Nay weele be of all sayes pityfull Paul, Nay weele be of none sayes Gibb. Neighbours and Friends pray one word more, There's something yet behind, And wise though you be, you doe not well see In which doore sits the winde; As for Religion to speake right And in the Houses sense, The matter's all one to have any or none, If 'twere not for the pretence; But herein doth lurke the key of the worke, Even to dispose of the Crowne, Dexterously and as may be For your behoofe in our owne. Then lets ha' King CHARLES sayes George, Nay lets have his son sayes Hugh, Nay then lets ha' none sayes jabbering Ione, Nay lets be all Kings sayes Prue. Oh we shall have (if we go on In Plunder, Excise, and blood) But few folke and poore to domineere ore, And that will not be so good: Then lets resolve on some new way, Some new and happy course, The Countrys growne sad, the City horne mad, And both Houses are worse. The Synod hath writ, the Generall hath— And both to like purpose too, Religion, Lawes, the Truth, the Cause Are talk't of, but nothing we doe. Come come shal's ha peace sayes Nell, No no but we won't sayes Madge, But I say we will sayes firy fac'd Phill, We will and we won't sayes Hodge. Thus from the rout who can expect Ought but division; Since Unity doth with Monarcie, Begin and end in One; If then when all is thought their owne, And lyes at their behest, These popular pates reap nought but debates From that many Round-headed beast. Come Royalists then, doe you play the men, And Cavaliers give the word, Now lets see at what you would be, And whether you can accord; A health to King CHARLES sayes Tom, Up with it sayes Raphe like a Man, God blesse him sayes Doll, and raise him sayes Moll, And send him his owne sayes Nan. Now for those prudent Things that fit Without end, and to none, And their Committees that Townes and Cities Fill with confusion; For the bold Troopes of Sectaries, The Scots and their partakers; Our new Brittish States, Col Burges and his Mates, The Covenant and its Makers, For all these weele pray, and in such a way, As if it might granted be, Iack and Gill, Mat and Will, And all the World would agree. A pox take them all sayes Besse, And a plague too sayes Margery, The Devill sayes Dick, and his Dam too sayes Nick, Amen and Amen say I. It is desired that the Knights and Burgesses would take especi∣all care to send downe full numbers hereof, to their respective Counties and Burroughs, for which they have served Apprentiship, that all the people may rejoyce as one man for their freedome. Jan: 11th 1647 FINIS.
