J624 J625 669.f.14[52] 99869940 163040
TEN ARTICLES Already proved upon OATH against An Evil MEMBER now in the PARLIAMENT CONTAINED In three Letters lately directed unto Col. George Cook and the rest of the Committee of the Army for discovery of Cri∣minal Offendors, in relation to the late Wars (viz.) 1 THat the said Evil Member did release three of the Queens Priests, and Jesuits out of New∣gate by his Warrant. 2. That the said Evil Member did maintain and protect severall Spies and Agents for the late King within the line of Communication during the late War. 3. That the said Evill Member did convey divers remarkable Prisoners at War, out of the line of Communication, unto the late King. 4. That the said Evil Member did assist, and protect severall Plotters (on behalf of the late King) to destroy the Citie of London. 5. That the said Evil Member did wittingly and wilfully suffer above 30000 l. to be conveyed out of the Line of Communication unto the late King. 6. That the said Evil Member did send Horses for War, with Men and Arms, unto the late King. 7. That the said Evil Member did hold an Entercourse of Letters with the late King. 8. That the said Evil Member did maintain and keep an Agent in the Garison of Oxford to expe∣dite the fore-going Treacheries. 9. That the said Evil Member did corrupt many Members of the Parliament (some lately excluded, some now in the House) to conceal and smother the foregoing Treacheries. 10. That the said Evil Member did endeavor to take away the lives of several of the prosecutors and witnesses unto the foregoing Treacheries. Motives unto the prosecution of the foregoing Articles, con∣tained in the aforesaid three Letters. 1 THe foregoing Articles are proved upon Oath before Colonel Cook and the said Committee of the Army, and the Depositions are in writing in the hands of Colonel Cook. 2. The said Depositions do declare that whatsoever the said Evil Member hath acted with the Par∣liament, or Army, hath been meerly out of design. 3. All godly and honest Members of the Parliament and Army would become odious, if by any po∣licie or power the said Evil Member should be protected from a legal Tryal. 4. The Spirit of God hath declared, that because Justice is not speedily executed upon evil doers, therefore their hearts are fully set in them to work mischief, Eccles. 8. 11. and accordingly the said Evil Member (as it is probable) doth employ his Agents to make factions and parties to retard the relief of Ireland, and to exasperate the spirits of brethren against each other, that during such divisions his foregoing Treacheries may never be called in question. 5. The speedy Execution of Justice upon the said Evil Member, and such like, would turn away the fierce wrath of the Lord from this Land, as it did from Israel, Prov. 14. 34. Isai. 32. 17. Josh. 7. 24, 26. Numb. 25. 7, 8, 9. 11. Therefore, the foregoing Articles being proved upon Oath, it is not only the duty of Colonel George Cook, the rest of the said Committee, the Officers and Souldiers of the Army, but also of all the Free Common-wealths-men of England upon sight hereof, to joyn together as one man to move his Excellency forthwith to call a general Councel, wherein the said Depositions may be openly read, debated, and transmitted to the Councel of State, for them, thereupon to prepare the form of an Act to be speedily presented and passed, for appointment of Commissioners to bring the said Evil Member, and such others, to exemplary Justice, before the Adjournment, and before any Act for a General Pardon be concluded. PROV. 25. 11. Words spoken in season are like apples of gold in pictures of silver. EPHES. 5. 11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness; but reproove them rather. London, July, 3. 1649. Edward Jenkes.
