L1006 E10_26 99859681 111776
A SPEECH, Of Colonell Edward Leigh, as it was delivered by himselfe to the Ho∣nourable House of Commons, upon occasion of presenting a STAFFORD-SHIRE PETITION: As also the Petition it selfe, presented by the same Colonell, and divers other Gentlemen OF STAFFORD-SHIRE, On Munday the thirtieth of Septem. 1644. LONDON, Printed by F. L. for Matthew Wal∣bancke, at Grays-Inne-Gate. 1644.
A True Copie of a Speech of Co∣lonell Edward Leigh, sodainely com∣posed, and spoken by himselfe to the Honoura∣ble House of Commons, upon occasion of presenting a Staffordshire Petition, published by himselfe, to prevent the printing, and scat∣tering of any false Copies. Mr. Speaker; WE are sent hither by our Chiefe Commander (though wee could bee ill spared at this time) to represent unto this Honourable House the sad condition of our Country. VVhat a miserie it is for a Politick body to be deprived of its head, you all know sufficiently, and will there∣fore
bee the more sensible (we hope) of our troubles in Staffordshire. England hath heretofore beene divided from the whole world, (toto divisos orbe Britannos) but was never in any age so much and so long divided in it selfe wee labour now, not onely under the grand division of King and Parliament, Head and Mem∣bers, but under many subdivisions of Generalls, & Committees, and comman∣ders. These unhappie divisions in the State, and diverse other sad differences in the Church, do threaten suddaine ruine to both, unlesse You honourable VVor∣thies (who are the grand Physitians or our Church and State) doe wisely and sea∣sonably compose them. Inveterate disea∣ses are hardly cured, evill spirits are more easily rais'd then laid Principis obsta, is good counsell in this case. The eyes of the three Kingdomes, shall I say? Nay of all the Christian world are upon you,
Worthie Patriots, expecting a happie Reformation, and timely redresse of errours in Religion, and grie∣vances in the Common-wealth: And as you have gi∣ven ample Testimony already both of Your zeale to Gods glory (and your love to your deare Coun∣trie) so wee doubt not but you will still persist in so good a Cause, that both our selves and our posterity may blesse you, as Repairers of our breaches, and the maine Pillors (under God) of upholding our tot∣tering State. The Earle of Denbigh first received his power from you, and my Lord Generall, and there∣fore it must be dissolved by you, before it bee voyde. The chiefe commanders, the Deputie Leiutenants, the Gentlemen of quality, and greater part of the Committee, with thousands of the Communaltie in Staffordshire, do humbly desire, that he may be accom∣modated as a Noble Generall, and then speeded into the Country, action being now more seasonable then dispute. Many of the subscribers to this Petition have attended on my Lords person in this service, and ven∣tered their lives with him. They see no reason to question his fidelitie, who hath for this cause lost great friends, displeased neere friends, spent his estate, and hazarded his life. His wisedome and affability, are generally known, his courage and resolution hath appeared to those, which have beene eye-witnesses, of his actions, and one vertuou qualifications in a Com∣mander, I cannot omit in this Honourable Lord, though hee have beene much opposed by some ever
since hee first embarqued himselfe in this imploy∣ment, et he hath ever had a great command over himselfe and his owne passions, therefore I shall thus conclude, humbly submitting to your wise Iudg∣ments; He is fit to command others who can so well com∣mand himselfe. To the Right honourable the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament; The humble Petition of the Committee, Commanders, Gentlemen, and others well affected in the County of Stafford. Humbly sheweth. THat whereas the continuall and grievous pressures of Plunder, insupportable taxations, imprisonments, ter∣rours and murders by the Enemy, now much encreasing by the addition of many falling into these counties of Stafford and Salop, being the weakest part of the Kingdome, as we conceive, through our distractions, and the unhappy absence of our Lord Generall the Earle of Denbigh, and are now (as we are credibly informed) preparing to plant themselves in Garisons for this winter. We are forced humbly to pray, as formerly, that no ob∣stacles (not worthy to be compared with the sufferings of these Countries, and the cause in generall may any longer re∣tard the accommodation and timely dispatch of our L. Ge∣nerall, by whose wisdome and power (under God) we are
confident there will be raised, united, and disposed such a seasonable and considerable Force in these, and parts neare us, that are disingaged, which now for want of a head, are disioynt and unserviceable) as will not only cleare these, But assist other parts. And that the differences betwixt his Lord∣ship and others, may either be speedily reconciled and orde∣red, or deferred untill the leasure of the honourable Houses and the exigents of our condition will admit. And your Petitioners shall ever pray, &c. With 4000. hands of Gentlemen and others of good ability. FINIS
