L1520 E699_14 R207047 99866123 166562
A LETTER From the Fleet, with a DIVRNAL Account of the Military affairs between the English and the Dutch, From Friday the 3d. of June, till Thurs∣day the 9th. of June. RELATING The taking and firing many of the Dutch since the late fight, the blocking up Flushing and other harbours, the landing of men at the Txel and in Zealand, and the op∣position made by the Hollanders. London, Printed by J. C.
From our Fleet riding upon the coast of Holland came as followeth. SIR, THe signall victory which the Lord hath been pleased to give over our Enemies, I hope will raise up the hearts of all Gods people in England to praise him, not onely in words, but in deed & truth; and I wish that it may be recorded amongst the chief of those mer∣cies that God hath bestowed upon his Saints, that all posterities to come may give him honour, and that the present age may not be so stupid as they have been, let them take notice of, and keep in perpetual memory those which the Lord hath wrought even in our dayes; and likewise be assured that he will goe forward with his worke untill he hath perfected the same, notwith∣standing
all the Treasons, Plots, or Conspirtions of men; God hath taught us notable Lessons of this al∣ready, of which I shall onely minde you of one or two and proceed to Intelligence. The very day that the Treaty began at Vxbridg, that same day we lost a strong garison, but the very day that we brake off Treating with the Kings party, a strong Castle was delivered up unto us. And that very day that a Letter came to the late Parliament from the Dutch with some overtures of peace, one of the princi∣pall ships belonging to this Commonwealth was con∣sumed by fire. A Diurnall Account of some proceedings between the English, and the Dutch, from Fryday the third of June, till Thursday the seventh of June, 1653. THe third of June in the evening. The Enemy making all the saile he could to get homewards, the ablest of our ships which suffered least damage in the two dayes sight; made after the Dutch fleet, and did good execution upon them for many Leagues pursute and some ships of ours that had received pre∣judice in their Masts and Tackling, together with our wounded men (which were about 236) and about 1130 prisoners which we had taken of he Dutch) were sent away for the English shore. Gen. Blake,
and Gen. Monke Anchered this night between Ostnd and the Wellnigs. The names of the ships which came in with Gen. Blake were these. The Essex Frigot, Hampshire Frigot, The William, The Eagle, The Culpeper, The theth whelpe, The Phenex, The Storke, The Hopefull Luke, The Imployment, The Prosperous, The John and Abigale, The Swan. June the forth. In the morning Inteligence was brought that Tromp was neere Flankenburgh, & it was thought he would make way towards Flushing which is one of the best Ports they have. This day we had brought into us severall Dutch vessels, and Scouts were sent forth severall wayes for making a further discovery of such of the Dutch as had escaped away in the fight into any of their Ports, as likewise to catch up any of their Merchantmen that should be sliping into any of their Harbours, and it was resolved by a Councell of War that our maine Fleet should follow the pursuit of Tromp and such as had escaped with him, and so towards Flushing. June the fift. We were againe within sight of some of the Enemy, but he crept away by the Sholes and Sands where we could not come at them; something
like the Highlanders in Scotland who save themselves by their inaccessable holds. This day a view was taken of many hundred sick & wounded souldiers souldiers of the Dutch who were taken by our fleet, and care taken for setting them on shore in their own Country, and they being in pain and misery are likely to give their other Country men the truest information after their vapouring against Dover, which (though it savoured rather of impudent insolency then of valour, yet) was printed a huge and mighty victory at the Hague. June 6. Our Fleet came near the Texel, and the sick and wounded souldiers of the Dutch before men∣tioned, were put into long boats and other vessels (upon their parole) and lanced out to go on shore, and ma∣king forth towards the land, they (being descried from the Castle) the Dutch let fly many great guns at their own men, and upon this they received a great allarum into the Country, about which time the main body of our fleet appeared within sight, at which the people cri∣ed out they were betrayed and undone, and in such an amazement they continued. The next day we did not onely take many of their ships near their own harbours, but fired others, and sent many hundred great shot on shore amongst them, and now judge you whether we are not even with them for their attempt upon Dover; and we are upon another de∣sign to find them work at home, not doubting but by the next you will hear that some of their strong holds are in our possession.
This day some of our Scouts brought in two Dutch vessels, and divers water ships and others came from the English coasts with supplies of such necessaries, as we stood in need of they also bring us news that many supplies are coming after which will be very service∣able for carrying on of the work in hand. The greatest part of the Dutch fleet which esaped is is gotten into the harbour at Flushing, where we hope to keep them from doing further mischief upon the seas against England. A Letter from Dover, dated, the 9th. of June. SIR, THese three or four days together many ships which came out of the River of Thames, passed this way to∣wards our fleet which is on the Coast of Holland, wherein went a considerable number of souldiers, and a great quan∣tity of powder, shot, and Ammunition, as likewise a great number of Shovels, Spades, Pick-axes, and other necessaries for land service, we hear also that the like supplies are go∣ing to them from several other parts belonging to this Com∣monwealth. Some wounded souldiers are gone up to London and others remain here under cure, the State having ta∣ken special care for sending down able Chyrurgians into these parts to cure such as stand in need of their help. This day arrived a vessel here which landed several persons, which say that they have been with our fleet, & one of
them reports that Gen. Blake and Gen. Monk, are before Flushing, and be heard at his coming away that some of our men were landed in a kind of a smal Island near Flushing in Zealand, where no horse could get to them, and if we could keep it, it would conduce very much to the effectual blocking up of that City, and securing their shipping in the harbour. Some of our fleet is sent out several ways to dis∣cover the preparations and motion of the enemy, and we hear they are in a great distraction among themselves, and Trump whom not long since carried a Broom in his Top-Mast to sweep the Seas, dares not so much as sweep his door, scarce daring to shew his head. The Officers in general ac∣cuse one another, and the common people blame not onely them but their high and mighty Hogen Mogens. I trust the Lord will put a sudden period to these wars, to the praise of his great Name, and the good of his servants that desire to walk uprightly before him, which is the prayer of Your assured friend, T. Leigh. 9 June, 1653. FINIS.
