M2877 R230734 99896454 154293
Knight on a horse
The most Excellent and Famous HISTORY Of the Most Renowned KNIGHT, Amadis of Greece, Surnam'd, The Knight of the Burning Sword, Son to Lisvart of Greece, and the Fair Onoloria of Trebisond. Representing his Education in the Court of King Magadan, his Conquering of the Defended Mountain, his Combat with his Grandfather the Emperor Esplandian, his killing Frandalon the Ciclops, and falling in Love with Lucella, Daughter to Alpatracy King of Sicily, his Arrival in the Isle of Argenes, where he put an End to the Enchantments of Queen Zirfea, his Assisting his Great-Grandfather King Amadis in the Island of the great Siclades, and in respect to him taking on himself the Name of Amadis of Greece: Together with the high and noble Enterprizes of his Cozen Lucencio, Gradamart Son to the King of the Giants Island, Birmartes Son to the King of Spain, and many other Noble Knights and Gallant La∣dies: All no less Useful, than Pleasant. Humbly Addrest to the Beauties of Great Brittain. By a Person of Quallity. Licensed according to Order. Printed for I. Deacon at the Angel in Guilt-Spur-Street without Newgate, and I. Blare at the Looking-Glass on London Bridge. 1693.
To the BEAUTIES of Great BRITAIN. TO you, fair Ladies, does our Younger Amadis, after his Traversing many vast and Forreign Regions, address him∣self, laden with Triumphant Spoils, and Crown'd with Ʋictorious Lawrels; all which he humbly lays at your Feet, whom he acknowledges to be not only the Fairest, but also, the Kindest and best Natur'd of your Sex, the whole World affords. In your soft Arms and silken Laps he hopes to find that Repose, he has so long in vain been seeking thro' so many hard and perillous Adventures: And these Hopes of his are much Encourag'd by his considering the favourable Reception, you some time since gave his Father Lisvart, his Grand∣father Esplandian, and his Great Grandfather Amadis of Gaul, King of Great Brittain, the greatest Exemplar of Constant and Loyal Love, that is in any History of this sort to be found. If therefore you will graciously condescend to his Request, and receive him into your favourable Embraces, he here makes a Solemn Protestation, that all his future endeavours shall wholly be directed to procure your Satisfaction and Delight, and his chief Ambition shall be to let the World see how highly he Ʋalues the Honour of being Your, Amadis of Greece.
Books Printed for, and Sold by J. Deacon, at the Angel in Guilt∣spur-street, without Newgate, where all English and Irish Chap∣men may be furnish'd with all sorts of Books, at Reasonable Rates. 1 THE Dutch Fortuneteller, in Folio. 2 The triumphant Weaver: Or, the Art of Weaving, in Verse, in Quarto. 3 The Pleasant History of Ornatus and Artesia, in Quarto. 4 The Fomous History of Sir Bevis of Southampton, at large in Quarto. 5 The Art of Legerdemaine: Or, Hocus Pocus, being the whole Art of Jugling. 6 The 3d. Part of the seven Champions, in Quarto. 7 Sports and Pastimes for the City and Country, for the Delight and Recreation of Youth, Quarto. 8 The English Fortuneteller, by J. P. 9 The Golden Garland of Princely Delight, wherein is contained the History of ma∣ny of the Kings and Queens, Princes, Lords, Ladies, Knights, Gentlewomen of this Kingdom. 10 The most Excellent, Profitable, and Pleasant book of the Famous Doctor, and Expert Astrologian Arcandan, or Alcandrin, to find the Fatal Destiny ef every Man and Woman and Child by their birth, done into English, by William Ward. 11 Markham's faithful Farrier, wherein the depth of his depth of his skill is laid open in all these principal and approved secrets of Horsmanship. 12 The 3d. Part of the Pilgrams Progress, with the life of John Bunyon, Author of the 1st. and 2d. Part. At the above mentioned place is to be Sold (by Wholesale or Retail) all sorts of History books that is used in Ireland: And also all sorts of Divinity books, Physick and Astrology, Romances and Plays, and Paper books, and Bonds, and Releases, &c.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Jos. Blare, Bookseller, at the Look∣ing-Glass on London-Bridge. THE Accomplished Ladies Rich Closet of Rarities: Or, The Ingenious Gentlewoman, and Servant Maids Delightful Companion. Arithmetick, A Treatise fitted for the Ʋse and Benefit of such Trades-Men as are ignorant in that Art, teaching the nature and use of Fractions, both vulgar and decimal, by a new and easie Method, made familiar to an or∣dinary Capasity: Also, the Mensuration of Solids and Superficies. By John Ayres, likewise his Copy Books of several sorts. The Key of Commerce, shewing the true method of keeping Merchants Books, after the Italian manner of Debter and Creditor, in one hundred and twenty Propositions, containing most Cases relating to Merchandise, with a Practical Wast-Book Journal and Ledger, and transfer the ballance thereof, as an inventory to a new Ledger. Designed for the Help and Assistance of Young Merchants, at their first Entrance on their Apprenticeship to their Masters. By J. H. of London Merchant. The Accomplished Seamans Delight. Pearls of Eloquence: Or, the School of Complements. The History of Argalus and Parthenia. The English Fortuneteller, by J. P. Russels Sermons, viz. the Accepted time and day of Salvation, the End of Time and beginning of Eternity. Heavens Glory and Hells Terrour. The 3d. Part of the Pilgrims Progress, with the life of John Bunyon, Author of the 1st. and 2d. Part. The Secretary Guide, directing to Write letters. The Famous History of Hero and Leander. Russels little book for little Children. A Discription of Kent and Sussex: Or, a View of all the Cities, Towns and Villages in each County. At the above mentioned place, is Sold Books of Divinity, History, and Navigation, Wholesale or Retail at Reasonable Rates.
The most Excellent and Famous HISTORY of the Most Renowned KNIGHT, Amadis of Greece, Surnam'd, The Knight of the Burning Sword, Son to Lifvart of Greece, and the Fair Onoloria of Trebisond. CHAP. I. How certain Pirates of the Moors presented to Magadan, King of Saba, the Gen∣tleman of the Burning Sword. IN the Kingdom of Saba, there sometime Reign'd a Moor, call'd Magadan, who; contrary to the usual Nature of Blacks, was affable, courteou, and debonair, loving, above all people, such as were White, whom he much more willingly employ'd, than any others. This Magadan took to Wife a noble Lady, nam'd Buruca, black like himself: And of these two, was born the valiant Fulurtin, of whom our History will sometimes make men∣tion. This Fulurtin, who, for good conditions, resembled his Father, was in his younger years instructed in all forreign Languages, by Mandaiar, a white Slave, a Man of wonderful Learning. Now it was well known, thro' all the Realm of Saba, how great Pleasure the King took in getting Prisoners from forreign Parts, especially from the North, because of their whiteness: Inso∣much, that he often pardoned even Crimes of High-Treason, provided the Cri∣minals presented him with such Personages. Hence it happened, that one day, as he rose from Table, there entred into the Hall four Moors, leading by the Hand, a LITTLE GENTLEMAN, about
THREE Years old, of a singular Perfection in Beauty. Having accoding to their manner done their Reverence to Magadan, one of them spake thus: Sir, the two Brethren, that slew Your Cosen, prostrate themselves in all humility at Your Majesty's Feet, beseeching You to accept of this Child, who, besids he excellency of his Person, has brought from his Mothers Womb a marvellous  This said, slipping off a little yellow Taffery Coat, he had on, they shew'd before ll that were present, a Sword, as red as Fire, the Pommel proceeding from his left Knée, and the Point terminating near his Nipple; It had on it certain white Characters, which were then unknown to any, even to Mandaiar himself, tho' there were in that Age few who equall'd him in Learning. The King, extreamly pleas'd with so Fair a Present, and much more wondering at the Natural Sword the Child had on his Body, would have him call'd the Gentleman of the Burning Sword, gi∣ving him at that very moment to his Son Fulurtin, who thenceforward so greatly affected him, that he made him his second self, so that one of them could not live without the other, ordinarily exercising themselves in all Virtuous Pastimes. Now before I pass any farther, 'tis fit you understand, that this Gentleman was that very Child, whom (as you find it Recorded in the sixth Book of Amadis of Gaul Garinda, one of Onoloria's Women left on the bank of the River, as she was carrying him to the Port of Filina to Nurse, whence being taken away by these Corsairs into their Vessel, he was brought up by them, till they presented him to King Magadan, who on this occasion not only forgave them his Cosens death, for which they were fled, but also bestow'd on them many great Benefits; so agreeable to him was the Gentleman of the Burning Sword, who, growing up, became so fair and goodly of Stature, that at Eight Years of Age he was taken to be above Twelve, so conforming himself withal to the Humour of Prince Fulurtin, that he could not be without him. They were both Instructed in all good Literature, as also in Wrestling, Managing the great Horse, Casting the Bar, Fencing, and  o∣ther Exercises fitting for Gentlemen of their high Qualities. And tho' the Gen∣tleman of the Burning Sword became so expert in all these things, that he had not his Equal; yet so great was the Honour and Reverence, he bare his Prince Fulur∣tin, that he would never contend with him; by which he so highly gaind Magadans Affection, that he ordinarily took him to all places of Pleasure, whether it were to Hunt the Stag, or other Diversion whatever. CHAP. II. How King Magadan, being a Hunting, was Assaulted by a great Bear, and deli∣ver'd from Death by the Gentleman of the Burning Sword. SOme Years after, the King of Saba having caus'd the Toils to be spread in the next Forrest, as he stood watching for a stout Bore in the midst of a great Path, having a sharp Bore-Spear in his hand, there rusht out of a Thicket a Bear, who,
frighted with the barking of the Hounds, and sound of the Trumpets, sought which way to save himself) Now Magadan was at that time accompany'd only by the Gentleman of the Burning Sword, who held in a slip a Greyhound, wich, spy∣ing the Bear, got his head out of the Collar, and ran to assault him; but the Bear struck him so furiously with one of his Fore-feet, that he brake his Iaws, and imme∣diately turn'd against the King, who defended himself with his Bore-Spear. But the Bear so fiercely charg'd the King, that having got the Spear out of his hands, he clos'd with him, and threw him on the ground. The Gentleman seeing this ran speedily to help the King and drawing out a Wood-Knife, wich hung at his Gir∣dle, gave the Beast so great a blow, that he almost cut off is Leg. The Bear find∣ing himself wounded, let go his hold, and with open mouth ran upon the Gentle∣man, who, undauntedly lifting up his Arm, struck him with so great foce between the Ears, that he split his Head asunder. This done, as he return'd to help up the King, he perceiv'd coming towards him a great Lion, crown'd, and bearing between his Teeth a Child about two Years old, who cry'd with a loud voice: Alas, Gentleman of the Burning Sword, pray help me; which your Father would not refuse to do, were he here in your place. The Gentleman was no less astonisht to hear these Words, than to see him that spake them, towards whom he diligently hastned to free him from the Danger he was in. The Lion no sooner saw him approach, but letting go the Child, he went to de∣our the Gentleman, who, stepping aside, gave the Lion so great a stroke with his Knife, that he separated his leg from his Body: Yet the chafed Beast, lifting up his other Paw, with his sharp claws tare part of the Gentlemans Garment, pulling him also to him with so much violence, that he threw him on the grounds. The Gen∣tleman notwithstanding got quickly up again, and recharging the Lion, wounded him with a back-blow so deep into the Reins, that one might have seen his Entrals, the Beast immediately falling dead on the Grass. The Gentleman then lookt about to see what was become of the Child he had succour'd, and spying him run away a∣long a Path, made after him, that he might get him to declare what knowledge he had of him. Having then overtaken the Child, he very affectionately askt him, how he fell into that danger, and whether he had heretofore seen him: For you ere while affirm'd, said the Gentleman, that had my Father been present, he would no more have fail'd to assist you, than I have done. The young Child, hearing him speak thus, smilingly return'd him this Answer: Indeed, Gentleman, you are Son to such a Father, that it will cost you no small pa ns to resemble him, tho you are Born to receive greater Honour for your Hgh row∣ess and Chivalry, than any one, who has Preceded you; for the rest trouble not your self to make any father Enquiry, since you will but lose your labour. This said, he immediately vanisht out of sight, leavng the Gentleman no less amaz'd than if he had newly risen out of a dream; yet withal not a little rejocing at what h had heard. Being now moe desirous, than before, to know of whom he was Descended, he
turn'd back to the King, whom finding sorely bruis'd, and wounded in his Thigh, and other Parts of his Body, by the Outrage of the Bear, he (with Tears in his Eyes) askt him, how he did? Magadan, who had curiously observ'd what befel the Gentleman, as well in his Combat with the Bear, as with the Lion, graciously an∣swer'd him: Indeed, my Friend, I am much better than I lately expected, Thanks to our Gods and You: So that never was Education better bestow'd, than that I have given you, seeing the Hazard you have put your self in to preserve me; which makes me throughly sensible, that Virtue, once firmly planted, is never lost. Sir, said the Gentleman, there is no doubt, but that Virtue is understood only by Virtue; and yet I well know, that I can never all my life satisfy the Benefits, I have already receiv'd of your Majesty. Nevertheless, I humbly pray our great God Iu∣piter, to grant me the Favour, that my Power may one day correspond with my Will, and then shall be clearly manifested the Desire I have to obey and serve your Majesty. But Sir, I think it convenient, to look for some of your Huntsmen, or some others, that may carry you into the Town; for as far as I can perceive, the Bear has dealt very roughly with you. I desire you so to do, reply'd the King. Then the Gentleman crost thro' the Fo∣rest, till he met Fulurtin, and many other Gentlemen, who, being Advertis'd of th Misfortune befaln their Prince, were very much discontented, and setting Spurs to their Horses, Posted immediately to him, whom they found in a very weak conditi∣on, by reason of the Blood, he had lost. However, he exactly related to them, what had happened, telling 'em, that had it not been for the assistance, given him by the Gen∣tleman of the Burning Sword, he was in greater danger of losing his life, than ever he had been from the first hour of his Birth. Then making him a Litter, they con∣vey'd him to the City of Saba, where he was with all imaginable care lookt after by the Queen, who from that very Moment no less esteem'd the Gentleman, than if he had been her own Son. CHAP. III. How Fulurtin and the Gentleman of the Burning Sword were made Knights by King Magadan, and how Maudan, stimulated by Envy, falsly accus'd the Queen Buruca. MAgadan having béen in this manner preserv'd by the Gentleman of the Burn∣ing Sword, had from that time as great an Affection for him, as if he had been his near Relation, especially after he had recounted to him the discourse, he had with the Child of the Lion; whence the King Imprinted in his Fancy, that he must be Descended from Persons of the highest Quality: He therefore made him ordinarily fit at his own Table, next to his Son Fulurtin, giving him also a young White Gen∣tleman, nam'd Yneril, to wait upon him, and be always near his Person. Thus pas∣sed away fome Years, till the Gentleman, belov'd both by Great and Little, was
come to the Age of Fourteen, being so well shap'd and manly, that he seem'd to be above Sixteen. Now it happened, that Fulurtin, who was a little Elder than he, being an Accom∣plisht and Good-natur'd Prince, requested the King to give him the Order of Knight∣hood, to which he easily condescended. The Gentleman of the Burning Sword, be∣ing Advertis'd of it, and desiring this Honour above any thing in the World, addrest himself also to Magadan for this purpose, who knowing the Greatness of his courage, with the love he bare him, did not so much consider the greenness of his years, as the Vertue of his Person, and was therefore content, that Fulurtin and he should be∣come Companions in Arms, so that he gave them both the Order, with white Harness. Now according to the Custom of keeping the Ceremonies, the Feast continu'd the space of Fifteen days, during which, Maudan, Son to one of the gratest Lods of Saba, came to Court, to be bred up with Fulurtin. He had not been long there, ere he became so jealous, and envious of the Honour, the King did the Knight of the Burning Sword, that falling into a deep Melancholly, he was generally thought to be sick. And the more this Poison gnaw'd his heart, the more did he seek to bring the Knight of the Burning Sword into the Kings Disfavour, which when he could not find occasion to do, he was seen hourly to wast away like Snow before the heat of the Sun. Now some time after, Magadan, leaving the Queen at Saba, went to visit a Town of his, call'd Terryna, during whose Absence, the good Lady diverting her self one day at Chess with the Knight of the Burning Sword, Fulurtin and Maudan, who were looking on, weary'd with the length of the Game, went foth, and left them a∣lone. In fine, after some Mates, in which the Queen had the Victory, she, who (as you have heard) lov'd him, against whom she play'd, as her own Son, as well for his Vertues, as for the Succour he had given the King, when he deliver'd him from the Peril that befel him as he was hunting, made him sit down by her on the Beds-Feet, where discoursing together without the least thought of prejudicing her Honour, she tenderly kist and embrac'd him. But Maudan, whose Envy made him pry after Opportunities to ruine the Knight of the Burning Sword; having quit∣ted Fulurtin to watch them, and seeing their Caresses, perswaded himself more than was true, resolving in his wcked mind, to acquaint the King with their love at his Return: which was not long after, He having advice, that the Kings of Araba and Tharsus were coming dwon into his Country to make War upon him. This made him return the sooner to Saba, that sending out on every side to raise Men, he might go foth to meet his Enemies. But scarce was he risen from Supper, when Maudan, finding him alone, leaning on a Window in the Presence; after a short Preamble to Palliate his Treason, began to discourse him in this manner: Sir I most humbly beg your Majesty's Pardon, if with the greatest Regret imaginable I discover to you a thing, which, I wish, my Death could have prevented, as well for the Discontent, it will give your Majesty, as for the Amity I bear the Knight of the Burning Sword, whom I take all our Gods to witness, I have ever lov'd; honour'd,
and esteem'd above any other of my Acquaintance. But the matter so neerly con∣cerning You, should I, who am your Vassal, conceal it, I shuld be guilty of the High∣est Treason, and the Education You have bestow'd on me, would be very ill employ∣ed, so that Reason constrains me to lay aside all respect of Persons, tho' it were of my own Father, for to preserve the Fidelity I owe You, my Natural Prince, and So∣veraign Lord. Then he declar'd, how he had seen the Queen playing at Chess with the Knight of the Burning Sword, telling the King the Familiarities, that had pass'd between them, which he so amplifi'd and enlarg'd, as to aver, that the Queen, abandoning all Modesty, had violated her Marriage Bed. The King was (not with∣out cause) so astonisht at hearing this, that being ready to drop down to the ground, that he was a long time unable to utter the least word, by reason of the contest, there was in his Inteior between the Love he bare the Accus'd, and the dishonour had been done him, so that he could not forbear weeping. Having therefore his Face co∣ver'd with tears, he ask'd Maudan, whether it were possible that the Knight of the Burning Swod had so dishonour'd him as he had related. Yes Sir, answer'd he, and I will swear it by the living Gods; for I saw it with my own eyes. Ah, Ah! said the King, fetching a deep sigh: Since the Traytor has so far forgot∣ten himself, as I heretofore prefer'd him before all that were in this Kingdom, so will I now cause him, and the Strumpet his Companion, to be put to the cruelst Death, that ever wretched Creatures suffer'd. Then the King, commanding Maudan to keep secret what he had told him, retir'd to his Chamber as full of discontent, as the Villian was of joy, for having so well accomplisht his design. As the Love of a Father to his Son is incomparably greater than common Amities, so the hate of the one to the other, when it grows vigorous is undoubtedly more extream than can be exprest. In like manner the King, who was so affectionated to the Knight of the burning sword, that he had almost equall'd him with Fulurtin, having heard the discourse of this Whisperer, grew so disturb'd, that he had much ado so to govern his Passion, as to forbear sending him at that ve∣ry moment to receive his last Punishment, which yet, tho' not without putting a geat constraint upon himself, he for a while suspended, hoping to surprize him in the Fact. Now such is commonly the Nature of Sin, that 'tis no sooner brought into the Wold, but 'tis attended by Repentance, which was the cause, that Maudan, mix∣ing water with his wine, began immediately to know his offence, insomuch that, considering the many Pleasures and Courtesies he had receiv'd from the Knight, he had accus'd, he wisht he had never spoken ill of him; but when the Steed is stoln, 'tis too late to shut the Stable door. Yet did remorse of Conscience, conducted by Reason, gain so much upon him, that he purpos'd at least to save his life, by giving him notice tat the King sake of doing him a displeasure, and advising him there∣fore to absent himself from his Fury. This thought he put in Execution; A thing probably proceeding from GOD, not for the sake of so wretehed a Per∣son, as Maudan, but for the preservation of the Innocent, for which cause we
sometimes see the Wicked, contrary to his Nature, to leave Evil, and give way to Good. The Sun was already retir'd behind the Mountains, and the Night approacht, when the Traytor found out the Knight of the Burnng Sword, to whom, conceal∣ing from him the Poison which lay hid in his heart, he thus spake: My dear Friend so much do I desire your Good, that there cannot any inconvenience befall you, at which I should not be as much troubled as if it hapned to my self. 'Tis therefore necessary, you retire with all possible speed; for I certainly know, that the King is resolv'd to put you to death, for which purpose you will be Arrested at your En∣trance into the Palace. The particular cause indeed I cannot learn, but some story has been told him, for which he hates you to extremity. The Knight of the burning sword, as you will easily believe, was not a little a∣stonisht at this Advertisement, the truth of which, as not having any way offended, he would soon have question'd, had not Maudan always pretended a particular kind∣ness for him. He gave therefore so much credit to this Traytor's words, that he immediately commanded Yneril his Esquire to bring his Arms, and taking Horse, went secretly forth of the Town, without any other Attendance, Riding all Night in marvellous discontent. Thus Maudan wove the Web, which afterward cost him his life, as shall be decla∣red to you. In the mean time the better still to cover his design, he went very late in the Evening to the King, to whom he said: Sir, I doubt Yneril may have over heard some part of the discourse, I had with Your Majesty, about his Master; for I am certainly inform'd he was listning under the window: Which may be the more easily credited, for that I have not since seen the Knight of the burning sword, whom I believe you will find to be fled. That would be ill, reply'd the King, therefore, pray, know the certainty of it, and that without delay. At these words Maudan went strait out of the Palace, to the Knight's Lodgings, returning soon after, as in amaze, to tell the King, he was gone. Magadan, hear∣ing this sent hastily to apprehend the Queen Buruca, swearing, he would have her burnt alive; at which the poor Lady, who knew not for what occasion, was very much troubled, and casting her self at the Kings feet, besought him with hands held up to tell her the cause of his displeasure. Wicked woman, answer'd he, you shall know too soon to your cost. Then commanding her to be lock'd up, he set Guards upon her, charging them on peril of their lives to keep her safe. After this he sent forth men on all sides to look for the Knight of the burning sword, and bring him either alive or dead, For, said the King, he has acted against me the greatest Treason in the world. Fulurtin, wondering at this so suddain change, found means to know the cause f it, which the King would not conceal from him, that he might irritate him the more against the Knight, who had done him so many Services, not letting him how∣ever know from whom he had receiv'd his Information. But the Young Prince, be∣ing
well advis'd, endeavour'd, what he could to pacify all, and disswade Magadan from believing any such thing, which 'twas impossible for him to do. Not long after those, who had been in quest of the Knight of the Burning Sword, return'd without hearing any news of him; at which the King was so enrag'd, that he wanted lttle of putting the Queen to death. But by the Advice of his most inti∣mate Counsellors he delay'd it till such time as he recover'd the Knight. At that very instant there Arriv'd a Courier, bringing him News of the Spoil, the Enemies made in his Realm, into which they were entred. This made Maga∣dan, whose Army was now ready, march forth to meet them, and give them Battle, the Man being led by Fulurtin, and the rest of his Forces by the King himself, whose Army was divided only into two Squadrons. The Kings of Tharsus and Arabia, advertis'd of Magadans approach, drew up their men in a Psture to receive him. After a long and fierce Fight, Magadan and his Son were in fine taken Prisoners, and their whole Army discomfited, the greatest part e caping to the Neighbouring Towns, and the rest being put to the Sword. These Kings, having thus gotten the victory, consulted betwixt themselves to send Maga∣dan and Fulurtin where they might be safely kept. Of this the King of Tharsus would take the Charge, attended only by ten chosen Knights, not being willing to trust such a Prey with any other Person but himself, and in the mean time the King of Arabia advanc'd to Besiege Saba. CHAP. IV. How the Knight of the Burning Sword found a Moorish Hermit, and of the discourse they had together. SO long travell'd the Knight of the Burning Sword, with his Esquire Yneril, that having Travers'd many Leagues without knowing whether, or which way they went, they came at last into a great Forrest, in which they Rode two whole days be∣fore they could find any way out. Now towards the end of the second day, as the Sun had finisht his Diurnal course, they approacht the little Hermitage of a Pagan Moor, who, for the Austerity of his life, was by those of his Law reputed an Holy Man. He was then sitting before his door; wherefore the Knight of the Burning Sword, who had formerly heard of him, assoon as he saw him, immediately sat Foot to ground, and with great humility saluted him, offering to kiss his Feet. The Good Man, wondering at his Behaviour, and seeing him to be so fair, young, and lusty a Knight, graciously lifted him up, and havng desir'd him to sit down, and re∣pose himself a little, askt him whence he was, and what Adventure had brought him to that unhabitable Desert: For, Son, said he, I believe, 'tis now above ten Years, since any reasonable Creature, besides you and I, has passed by the Place, where I now see you.
Father, answer'd the Knight, my Unhappiness being greater, than ever befel any other, that was born of woman, 'tis no wonder, if you see in me, what you would think strange in many: since Fortune within these few days has made me certain∣ly know the entire effects of her Inconstancy. But were she other, the Name, she bears, would be no way suitable to her, seeing she sometimes Elevates one to the top of her Wheel, without his having in the least merited it, and presently tum∣bles another under her Feet against all Right and Reason. Whch is clearly manife∣sted in me, whom she had for several years plac'd in the Throne of all Prosperity, and in the twinkling of an Eye, not three days since has so ruin'd, and debas'd me, that, when I consider the State, in which I am, seeing my self in so great Infelcity, methinks I am in a dream, not being able to comprehend, how, why, or in what manner this has befaln me, having never done any thing, to deserve the Evil, I endure. The Moor, seeing his Youth, and hearing him speak so appositly, and with so much reason, was wholly amaz'd, and exceedingly pity'd his condition: for as he utter'd these Words, the Tears in very great abundance trickled down his Cheeks. Wherefore he said to him: Son, the Gods, to try those, whom they love, and who are dearest to them, often permit many Adversities to come upon them, for satis∣faction of the Sins, they commit, as men, giving them afterward (instead of this tran∣sitory life) Permanent and ever Blessed Glory. It is therefore necessary, you con∣form your will to their good pleasure, rendring them glory and thanks for all they send you, were it only for the Beauty and good Wit, with which they have endu'd you: which makes me think, that many great things must pass in you, as they have done in several, who shall serve you for an Example, as that King of great Brit∣tain, nam'd Amadis of Gaul, and his Son Esplandian, Emperor of Constantinople, on whom the Divine Bounty heretofore bestow'd such Perfections as yours, altho' they ever were, and still are Infidels, maintaining the Law of their CHRIST. But as the Sun affords his Light as well to the Wicked, as the Good: so our Gods indifferently extend their Graces and Mercies upon all Persons, hoping by that means to bring them to the true knowledge of their Salvation. And tho' it be true, that Amadis and Esplandian, seeking strange Adventures, as all Knights errant are wont to do, very often fell into such Dangers, that they many times despair'd of their own lives and safety, and other whiles of ever having Joy, or Pleasure, as you do now; yet after an infinity of Miseries and Perils, which they escap'd, Fortune, or to say bet∣ter, the divine Pleasure has rais'd them to that height, that the one is become a great King, and the other a Potent Emperor, neither the one, nor the other having by their Birth any Right, or Pretence to the Countreys, they enjoy, but having ob∣tain'd them by the Magnanimity of their Courages, accompany'd with Prudence, Fortitude, and Virtue. Wherefore, my Son, endeavour to imitate them: for you have Ability and Discretion enough to resemble them: and our Gods are as power∣ful as ever, to convert this your great Sorrow into Joy, surpassing your extream Dis∣pleasure, and the Evil, that afflicts you, into far greater Contentment, and Good.
So many other Remonstrances made the Pagan Hermit to the Knight of the Bur∣ning Sword, that he was very much comforted, desiring the Good Man to remember him in his deout Prayers, promising him, that he would thenceforward do all possi∣ble dammage to the Christians Religion, since by them the Coelistial Court was of∣fended. Then, without omitting any thing, he acquainted the Hermit with the oc∣casion of his Flight and Discontent; but the poor Sancto assur'd him, that the Event would be very good. Then taking the Knight by the hand, he led him to his Cell, where he and Yneril abode eight whole days, during which, the Hermit fed them with such mean Provisions as he had, giving them also for their Horses some Straw, he kept for a Bull, on which he sometimes rode, when he went far from his Hermitage. And it was commonly reported through all the Country, that this Good Man by his exceeding great Sanctity often tam'd, and rendred tractable the cruellest and fiercest Beasts. CHAP. V. How Magadan, King of Saba, and his Son Fulurtin, were Rescu'd out of the hands of the King of Tharsus by the Knight of the Burning Sword. a battle on horseback (same figure used in Chapter 27) THe Knight of the Burning Sword, after a Weeks Abode in that place, taking leave of the Hermit, entred with Yneril his Esquire into a Path, which led
strait to a Sea-Port Town, belonging to the King of Tharsus, where they determin'd to embark. They Travell'd all that day, without finding any Adventure till the morrow morning, when they met an Horseman, Arm'd Cap-a-pie, whom the Knight of the Burning Sword saluted, asking him, what News, and whether he was going. The King of Tharsus my Prince, answer'd the other, is entred into the Countrey of Saba with his Army, and they say, King Magadan is marching with his Forces to give him Battle, at which I will not fail to be. This said, he pass'd on, and, without making any farther stay, left the Knight of the Burning Sword so melancholly, that he began to say to Yneril: I would have you, good Sir, go to the Sea-Port, not far from hence, which, I hear, is a Trading Town, carry thither my Arms, and change them for others, that are black: for I will not henceforward be known, and in the mean time I will stay on the edge of the Wood, expecting your return: but pray, Yneril, make hast. I shall willingly do it, answer'd Yneril; but your Harness being very good, I know not, what should make you desire to change it for a worse. Go, said the Knight, thou shalt know when thou com'st back. Then they withdrew into the privat'st part of the Forrest, where the Knight, disarming himself, gave his Armor to Yneril, who rode strait with it to the Town, where having found at an Armorers, what he desir'd, he return'd to his Master, who having Arm'd himself, and mounted his Steed, said to Yneril: Pray stay for me at the Town, and come every Evening to this place, to see whether I am retur∣ned or not: For I must help the King and Fulurtin; else the Nourishment, they have given me, would be very ill bestow'd, if in a time of such necessity I should not hazard my Person to preserve them. How Sir, answer'd the Esquire, will you put your self in such danger, to preserve his life, who seeks to deprive you of yours? He shall not know me, reply'd the Knight, and besides I have always heard it A∣verr'd, to do Good for Evil is double Merit. And therefore since the Gods give me this good will, I will employ it, and my Person also, in doing Service to the King, to whom I am oblig'd. Yneril, seeing him so resolv'd, durst not contradict him, wherefore recommending him to the Protection of his Gods, he took one way and the Knight another, follow∣ing the course he had seen kept by the Horseman, he met the day before: Now he had not rid far, ere he met a Courier coming full speed, whom he askt what News he brought. Sir Knight, answer'd he, rejoice, our Prince, the King of Tharsus, has defeated the Army of King Magadan, and taken him and his Son Prisoners, bringing them a∣long himself, with a Guard only of ten Knights, which are not far behind me, and for this cause, I am going to Advertise those of the Town, that they may come forth to receive them. Then he pass'd on, and the Knight of the Burning Sword, still keeping his way,
said within himself, God never prosper me, if I don't deliver them, or dye in the attempt. And that he might not tire his Horse, he rode leisurely on till he came to the top of an Hill, whence he might easily see those, that conducted the King and his Son, who were set upon two little Nags, having each of them an Esquire behind him, which for greater security held them about the middle. The Knight was so mov'd at this spectacle, that without any farther delay he let down the Visor of his Helmet, and seeing his opportunity, rusht in amongst them, crying with a loud voice, Stay, Traytors, stay, the Injury, you do such Noble Princes, shall cost you dear. The King of Tharsus and his Brother, who rode foremost, seeing themselves as∣sail'd thus on the sudden, put themselves in a posture of Defence, breaking their staves on him, that ran against them; but with so much force did the Knight hit the King, that piercing with his Launce both his Shield and Breast-plate, he threw him out of the Saddle, his Arm in the fall breaking short in two. Then passing farther, he en∣tred pell mell amongst the seven others, who environ'd him on every side: For of the ten two were retir'd aside with Magadan and Fulurtin. Now the Knight of the Burn∣ing Sword was not at all dismay'd, but striking on the right hand, and the left, gave not any home blow, but what Death follow'd. Which when the King of Saba, and his Son saw, they greatly wondred, not being able to imagine who it should be, that perform'd so high an Enterprze, but saying within themselves, that they had never seen so much Prowess, acted by one sole man. And with good reason might they say it: for this Dispute continued above the space of four hours, during which the seven assaulted Knights were so ill treated, that the King of Tharsus's Brother lost his life there, and three others with him. The rest, turning their backs, fled through the Wood, whether the Knight of the Burning Sword car'd not much to follow them, but turn'd his Bridle, doubting, lest those, who guarded Magadan and Fulurtin, might kill them, but they had seen their Fellows so well rubb'd, that, to avoid falling into the same danger, they made use of their Horses heels. Thus were the Prisoners left without any Guard, to whom the Knight of the Burning Sword turning him∣self, cut the Cords, with which they were bound, saying to the King: Sir, may it please you now to give me leave: for as far as I can see, you have no longer need of my assistance. Ah! good Knight, answer'd the King, I beseech you, tell us, who you are: to the end we may bear you good Will all our lives for the favour, and succour, we have receiv'd of you. Sir, reply'd the Knight, I am one, that ow you far greater service than this, and I hope, the time will come, when you will by experience know the great Respect, I have for you and yours. In the mean time be pleas'd not to trouble your self any farther with enquiring what I am; but cause the King of Tharsus, who lies wound∣ed, to be set on Horseback, and sent into one of your nearest Towns: for, as for me, I must get my wouds lookt after. The King, perceiving he would not reveal himself, importun'd him no farther; but very affectionately thanking him, committed him to the Protection of his Gods,
as the Knight also did him, hasting without any stay through the Woods. Then the King and Fulurtin made a sift to catch two of the Stees, which were loose, and having arm'd themselves wth the best Arms, the could find, tey went to the King of Tharsus, and seeing, that he was not dead, bound up his wou ds, and ha ing set him upon one of their little Nags, conducted him thence to the Town of Terina, where being arriv'd, and understanding, that the King of Arabia had planted h s Camp near Saba, Magadan sent him word by a Trumpet, that if he did not retreat he would strike off the Head of his Prisoner, the King of Tharss. The King of Arabia hearing this, and being inform'd how all had pass d, rais'd his Siege, and without any longer stay return'd into Arabia, as Magadan did to Saba, attended by a great Troop of Knights, and taking along with him the King, his Prisoner, of whom he had afterwards not only Peace, but also a great Tribute and Ransome. CHAP. VI. How after the Knight of the Burning Sword had Resu'd the King of Saba, and his Son, he entered into the thickest of the Forrest, where he met with an Old Man, and of the Discourse they had together. THe Knight of the Burning Sword, having, as you were told, deliver'd Maga∣dan and Fulurtin, turn'd back the way, he came: and tho' he was cruelly woun∣ded, yet did not this so much trouble him, as that he did not know the place, where he was, and less, how to find any help: for the Neighbouring Country appertain'd to the King of Tharsus, whom he had defeated, which made him greatly fear being known by them, that fled: wherefore he kept himself as close within the Forrest, as he possibly could, not ceasing to Travel till night, when the Dew, falling into his wounds, much encreas'd their smart. Being in this pain and trouble, he saw by Moon-shine a Man coming towards him, who at first seem'd to have his Face cover'd with a Linnen Cloth; which never∣theless was not so, that Apprehension being caus'd by the Whiteness of is Hair, and his great Beard. Then the Knight of the Burning Sword suspected him to be some Slave, that was stoln away from his Master, and therefore saluted him accor∣ding to the Custom of the Country, but the Old Man return'd his Salutation in Greek, which the Knight understood, as also all other Languages, having learned them of his Master Mandaiar. Wherefore he began to say to him in the same Lan∣guage: Honourable Father, can you inform me of any Place near, where I may find a Remedy for some Wounds, I have on my Body? If you were a Christian, as I am, answer'd the Old Man, I should certainly satis∣fy you. In good saith, said the Knight, this ought not to hinder you: for Vertue is ne∣ver lost, in what place soever it is exercis d, since it still continues Vertue. If then
it be in you, I beseech you to tell me, what I ask, and since you are more oblig'd to your self, than to any other, delay not so good a work, if you can do it for the Gods are reverenc'd only for the Good, we hope to receive from them, and which is in them. And therefore, tho' you are not of their Law, cease not to imitate them, in what is good, since I my self, who am not a Christian, but a Pagan, would follow your GOD, in what should seem to me just, and equitable: seg the Ver∣tue, of which I speak, in what place soever it be lodg'd, is always vertuous, mak∣ing those, in whom it is, resemble the Divinity. You speak so well, reply'd the Old Man, that you shall find in me, what you de∣sire: alight then, and I will succour you: for it would go ill with you, should you be known in this Countrey, whence you would not afterward get easily out. The Knight incontinently obey'd this Counsel, wondering nevertheless to hear the Good Man's discourse, of whom he demanded, how he could tell it, would be dan∣gerous for him to be known. Do not, said he, Enquire so far; but let it suffice you, that I know more of your Affairs, than you do your self: but at present I will say no more. Then having apply'd such Remedies to the Places, where he was wounded, that the Knight found himself without pain, the Old Man gave him some Victuals, he had in a Pannier, of which the Knight having eaten, fell into so sound a Sleep, that it was brode day, when he awoke, finding himself Arm'd, not with the black Arms, which Yneril had brought him in exchange for his own, but with other white ones, much richer and stronger, with a Shield, suitable to them, in the midst of which was painted a Sword, resembling that, he Naturally had on his Body. The Knight, then exceedingly wondering, how this had befaln him was so perplext that he much doubted, whether he were not in a Dream, especially when he no longer saw the Old Man, that had cur'd him. Being thus in a muse, he spy'd coming a∣long the Way a Damsel, mounted on a Palfrey, accompany'd by an Esquire, whom he knew: for it was Yneril. This Woman, as she came near him, appear'd so Old and Feeble, that she could scarce keep her self on her Horse: He nevertheless g aci∣ously saluted her, who askt him, If he could tell her any News of a very Ancient Man, that went before her. Indeed, answer'd he, I should be glad to hear some of him, for the great desire, I have to find him. And greater you would have, said the Old Woman, did you know him as well, as I do. This said, she smote her Palfrey, and pass'd on, leaving him, to whom she spake, very Anxious, yet well pleas'd at Yneril's Arrival, whom he askt, who brought him thither. On my Faith Sir, said he, I shall willingly tell you. As I was going out of the Forrest, where I left you, the Old Woman, which spake to you, addrest her self to me, bidding me in your name follow her, and she would bring me whre we should find
you at this very hour. Thus we came together, she telling me by the way, that her Old Husband was with you, discoursing you about things, which were of great importance to you, and, as far as I can understand, she is nm'd Ʋrganda, and he Alquif. Now the Knight of the Burning Sword had often heard them and their knowledge highly esteem'd in the house of King Magadan, wherefore, as if some new Accident had happen'd to him, he cry'd out; O Jupiter! Is it possible, that the Sage Ʋrganda, and the Prudent Alquif should come to visit me? As I live, I know not any Inconve∣nience, that can hinder me from following them, wherever hey are: and they shall tell me, before I part with them, whose Son I am. Then taking Horse, he gallopt after Urganda and Alquif, whom he perceiv'd on the top of an hgh Hill, where he lost sight of them, discovering them again after∣wards on the Sea-shore, as they were entring into a little Bark, whch four Men began to Row. He call'd after them as loud, as he could, thinking to make them stay; but 'twas in vain: for the Vessel in less than a moment put off from Land, steering towards an Isle, a pretty distance off, which fo displeas'd our Knight as nothing more: yet he went on as far as the Shore, where he found a little Boat, with two Oars, and some Victuals in it, which certain Fisher-men had left there. Then he askt Yneril, whether he could guide him into the Isle, he shew'd him. Yes very well, answer'd he: but I doubt, the Air of the Sea may prejudice your Wounds. And this he said, because the Knight had told him, what had befaln him upon the deliverance of Magadan. Trouble not thy self, said the Knight: I have no hurt, that should hinder my Enterprize. Since it is so, answer'd Yneril, let us alight, and leave our Horses to feed till our return. They did so, and entred into the Skiff, which Yneril began to Sail, so tat they Arri'd at the Isle about Sun-set. They Landed, looking high and low for Urgan∣da and Alquif; but found not there any living Creature: wherefore they return'd in∣to their Vessel, hoping by the light of the Moon to get back, where they had left their Horses; but scarce had they weigh'd Anchor, when the Weather began to be Tempe∣stuous, and the Sea to swell so desperately, that they abandon'd their Boat to the mer∣cy of the Wind and Waves, and not knowing, which way they went, they lost all sight of Land, expecting every moment an unhappy End. CHAP. VII. How te Knight of the Burning Sword came to the Defended Mountain, where he fought with Frandalo, Frandalon, and Belleris, whom he vanquisht. TEn Days and Ten Nights were the Knight of the Burning Sword and Yneril, in the Condition, you have heard putting all their hope of Life in the Good Plea∣sure
of their God Neptune, and others, whom they incessantly invok'd, till that one morning the Sun began to get the Mastery, and the Sea to become calm. Then they discover'd an high Coast, to the Foot of which it pleas'd Fortune to drive them. The Country seem'd to them so Pleasant▪ and well adorn'd with tall Trees. that to Refresh themselves, they determin'd there to enter into harbour, and know, whether the place were Inhabited. For this reason they went ashore, where they sound a little path, that led them to a Monastery, before which there was erected an high Wooden Cross. Now the Knight of the Burning Sword had never seen such a Sign, wherefoe he askt Yeil, if he knew what it meant. Assure your self, Sir, answer'd he, that we are on Christian Ground: for to such a Tree was their GOD heretofore fastned. This News greatly pleas'd the Knight of the Burning Sword, who hop'd to find some Adventure, and prove himself in such sort, as to do some glorious Act of Chi∣valry to the Augmentation of his Religion. Wherefore passing farther, they found the door of a Church open, in the front of which were three fair Altars, adorn'd with Sacerdotal Ornaments, together with some Representations of Saints, accor∣dig to the Custom of the Faithful, and presently they heard several Voices of Men, singing, tho' they saw not any one, at which being wholly amaz'd, they came as far as the Quire of the Church, where they saw a Sepulchre of Alabaster, cover'd with a very clear Crystial, under which was the Effigies of a Knight, compleatly Arm'd, and round about were engraven these following Words. Here lies the Valiant and Magnanimous Matroco, who before his death had (thro' the Grace of GOD) knowledge of the Eternal Life, and as a Champion of JESƲS CHRIST, made himself with his own Blood the sign of the Cross, which he ador'd, dying very happily in the Faith of the Elect. The Knight of the Burning Sword knew well by the Contents of this Epitaph, that Yneril had told him the Truth, and that this was indeed a Christian Countrey, when at the very instant came forth a Religious Man, prepar'd to say Mass, who, seeing this Stranger so fair, young, and well proportion'd, knew not well, what to think of him; however, without long amusing himself, he began the Divine Service, in which the Knight took so much Pleasure, that he had the Patience to stay, till the Ceremonies were ended, the good Father easily perceiving by his Behaviour, and the little Reverence, he shew'd, that he was indeed no Christian. Having therefore put off hs Alb, and finisht his Orisons, he Addrest himself to the Knight, saying: Sir Knight, I desire you not to conceal from me, of what Country you are, who, without any regard to so holy a Place, have made no accout of Di∣vine Service, whilst I was celebrating Mass. In truth, if you are a Pagan, I won∣der, how you durst enter into this Countrey, so contrary to your Law. Father, answer'd the Knight, I am a Pagan both by Religion and Nation, o less admiring at my Arrival here, than you do to see me. Nevertheless, I earnestly desire you to tell me, what Countrey this is, and under what Prince or Lord you live.
Son, reply'd the Good Man, the Pity, I have of your ignorant Youth, makes me willing to satisfie you. This Land is p rt of the Realm of Natola, call'd the D∣fended Mountain, but now held by the Emperor of Constantinopl, who conquer'd it by force of Arms. Then he particularly related to him, in what manner Esplandian got possession of it, as it is recorded in the fifth Book of Amadis of Gaul. The Knight gladly hear∣kened to him: for he had often heard of this Emperor and his great Feats of Arms. Nevertheless he thought soon to essay by all means the Reduction of the place to its former Obedience, and of the People thereabout to the Religion, under which they had heretofore liv'd: for the attaining of which design, he askt the Religious man by whom the Place was Guarded. By a Knight, answer'd he, nam'd Frandalo, who, having been a Pagan, as you are, submitted himself to the Knowledge of GOD, having since shewn him∣self so Valorous, especially in the keeping of this Isle, that the Emperor has made him a Count, as also Admiral, and Governour of the Fortress, into which as be∣ing impregnable, the King of Ierusalem was not long since brought Prisoner, the Garrison being reinforc'd by one only Knight, nam'd Frandalon, whom Fran∣dalo, whose Kinsman he is, lately sent for, as we are assur'd by one of our Convent, who was there within this few days, and these two together, would (as 'tis said) well undertake to keep the Place, not only against the Neighbouring Kings, but al∣so against all those of Asia, should they attempt to force it. And are they alone? said the Knight. No, answer'd the Religious, Belleris keeps them company, and they have with them their Servants, and Esquires, with some Serjeants and Laborours. But should they have need, King Norandel, who is at Tesifanto, would be here in a days time with his Army, which is very great, as also the Emperor of Constantinople, should it be necessary: for it is not far by Sea from hence thither: therefore I ad∣vise you to retire; else you will fall into danger of Death, or Captivity. I will first, reply'd the Knight, view a little nigher the strong Place, of which you tell me so many things. And what will you get by it, said the Good Father, except it be the Prison, of which I have given you warning? That's more than I know, answer'd the Knight, I will try at least, whether the Gods are as much displeas'd with me, as they were with those, who heretofore lost it. Which, as you may judge, could never have been effected by the effort of one single man, had not the Divine Goodness consented to this Infelicity for the offences of the Wicked, who at that time possest it. And now, perhaps, our Gods are appeas'd, and will, as I hope, permit, that their holy Law, which has since bin profan'd by you Christians, shall there be renew'd, and restor'd to its former state. Ah Sir Knight, said the Good man, have a care, lest the Devil deceive you under colour of the Sanctity, of which you speak, so as to make you attempt that, which
you neither can, nor ought to do for your Honour, and less for the Salvation of your Soul. 'Tis a mistake, answer'd the Knight, may not Fortune be as favourable to me, as she was to him, that conquer'd it, according as you have related it to me? There∣fore pray, good Sir, shew me the way thither, without Preaching to me any lon∣ger. That indeed I will not do, said the good Father, for tho' you are a Pagan, and wholly contrary to the Faith of IESVS CHRIST, yet is it not lawful for Re∣ligious Persons, such as I am, to contribu in any manner whatsoever to the death of any one. Since it is so, answer'd the Knight, do as you please: I will then find it by some other means. This said, he and Yneril went out of the Church, taking ther way along a lit∣tle Path, and seeming very joyful, that they had found an occasion of acquiring Ho∣nour by doing Service to their false Gods. They had not Travell'd long, before they met a Man, diving two Mules, laden with barrels of Water, of whom they askt the way to the Castle, which the honest Country Man willingly shew'd them. Then they began to ascend the Mountain, not without great Pain. And because Yneril appear d more pensive than ordinary, the Knight of the Burning Sword askt him, on what he mus'd on so much. Certainly, answer'd he, were I not afraid of displeasing you, I should willingly tell you, for the Love I bear you, accompany'd with the desire, I have to serve you Friend, reply'd the Knight, thou canst not say any thing, that will be disagrea∣ble to me, since in all things the Intention is more to be regarded than the Effect, which proceeds of it. And moreover, since the Counsel of an Enemy is sometimes good, that of a Friend (as you are to me) ought well to be esteem'd wholsome and salutary: Speak therefore boldly, and, if thy Advice be reasonable, assure thy self that I will follow it: for I will not imitate many obstinate Persons, who, know∣ing themselves to be in Fault, do yet disdain the counsel of others, committing therein two Offences: the one thro' their little sense; the other thro' their want of knowledge. Truly Sir, said Yneril, your Arguments are so prevalent, that I will freely lay open my Thoughts, not concealing from you any thing, I have in my mind. You are not ignorant, that you were found by the Sea-side, neither your self  I be∣lieve) nor they who bred you up, knowing, whether the Country, whence  ere taken, be Christian, or Pagan, wherefore methinks you are much to blae in what you undertake, since peradventure you are son to some Christian ho' at present you profess another Religion. And then if it be so, are not you oligd to follow the way of your Parents? Yes indeed are you, and you ought to hearen to the counsel of this poor Sancto, till you know better what you are, than as yet you do: for the hands often act wrong; tho' the intention be right. Now Yneril said this, because himself was descended of Christian Parentg,
tho' he were then a Pagan; but his heart perpetually earn'd to return to the Faith of his Ancestors, and he would willingly have diverted his Master from passing any farther, as well for the fear, he had of his Person, as for the Evil, which might follow, if this Country, where GOD was so devoutly serv'd, should b conquer'd by him, and reduc'd to its first Error. The Knight of the Burning Sword, hearing Yneril speak with such Affection could not forbear smiling, but said to him, Indeed, Yneril: I may (as you say) be descended of some Christian, but I doubt it, whereas I am certain, that the King Educated me in the Pagan Law, and in doubtful things we must follow the most ap∣parent. Now I have always liv'd amongst those of Saba, and receiv'd Knight∣hood according to their Faith, in which I will persevere to my death, except my Judgment alter: otherwise I should properly resemble him, who, having his s ght perfect, knowingly makes himself blind, or (to say better) leaving the High-way, known to all, I should take the Path that will lead me to Perdition. Believe me, that Wise men advance only with the Time, and follow their good Fortune, when it presents it self, and to these two, Time and Fortune are all Persons naturally subject. Put case therefore, that my Parents were Christians, or still are so, it is nevertheless for me to choose that Religion, which shall seem best to me, and not to imitate them, knowing that they Err. For this cause have the Gods made men differ from Beasts, giving them Reason to choose the Good and Avoid the Evil. Where∣fore I am resolv'd (till such time I am otherwise inspir'd) to endeavour by all means the Augmentation of the Pagan Religion, and the Destruction of its contrary, were I therefore to dye a Thousand Deaths for such Death ought properly to be nam'd the beginning of Life. And moreover it is probable, that our Gods have cast us upon these Coasts, and deliver'd us out of danger, expresly to force us to do them some agreeable service here, in destroying this Rabble, which has so long resided in this place. And as to what you have laid before me, saying, that I am bound to follow my Parents; to this I answer, that I am yet more oblig'd to them, to whom I ow my Education, as I will presently prove by an Example, which was on a time amongst other things told me by Mandaiar, who was my Instructer, whilst I liv'd with Magadan. There was, and still is at Sobradise a King, nam'd Don Galaor, who, being a Knight errant, was entertain'd in the House of a Prince, which then Reign'd in great Britain, call'd Lisvart. Now it happen'd that a certain Difference arose between this Lisvart, and Amadis, Brother of Galaor, touching the Isle of Mongaza, for defence of which Amadis, with his Father the King of Gaul, another Brother of his, nam'd Don Florestan, and many of their Kindred, Friends, and Allies, went into it: and to such an height grew this Quar∣rel, that there follow'd many fierce and cruel Battels, in which Galaor was always found on the side of the King, by whom he had been entertain'd, giving by his Pro∣wess a certain Testimony of his acknowledgment for the great Benefits and Favors, he had receiv'd of him, preferring the Amity and service, he bare him, before all Right of Affinity, and Parentage, tho' it were against his own Father. And by this
thou may'st judge, that every Personage of noble Spirit is more indebted to his Ho∣nour and Reason (by which he ought to govern himself) than to Father, Friends, Kinsfolks, or even his own self. Discoursing in this manner, they came to the Bridge, adjoyning to the Fortress, which they were a pretty while in Viewing, and there the Knight took his Helmet, and Shield, commanding Yneril to stay there for him, and not to pass any farther, which was very grievous to him. Then he marcht bravely on, till he came near the first Tower, at the Window of which he perceiv'd two Knights, playing at Chess, the one bigger than the other, each of them about Fifty Years of Age, and both clad in Black. The lesser had his Hair exceeding long, and his Beard below his Girdle, twisted with Threads of Gold, which made the Knight certainly believe him to be, as indeed he was, the King of Jerusalem. But when the greater de∣scryd the Knight of the Burning Sword compleatly Arm'd, ready for Fight, and climbing up the Steps, cut in the Rock, he put his Head out of the Window, and speaking to him in Greek, said loud enough: Knight, pass no farther, before we know what you are, otherwise the Custom of this place requires, that you be made go down, whether you will or no. He, to whom he sake, was not at all frighted at these menaces; but without ta∣king any farther notice of them, came as far as the Gate, and then gave him this Answer: Sir Knight, cause the Castle-Gate to be open'd, and let me in, and I will satisfie you, and the Custom. By my Head, said the other, it shall be open'd time enough to your cost: for it is probable, that you come not into these Coasts for any good will, you bear us: wherefore you shall not escape my staying of you for a Spy. As he finisht his Speech, there presented himself another Knight, younger, but so big, that he of the Burning Sword was somewhat amaz'd at him; yet made he no semblance of any such thing: but said to the other, You may peradventure be deceiv'd: for, if I can, I will renew the Good, of which you have depriv'd this Country, to sow therein so much Evil. In what manner? said he of the Fortress. The Gods, answer'd the Knight of the Burning Sword, displeas'd with your wicked Life, contrary to their Glory, will permit me to chastise you and drive you hence. How? said the young Grant, Art thou then one of those Fools, that believe in more Gods, than there are sands in the Sea? Stay a little, and thou shalt see the E∣vent of it. Scarce had he utter'd the Word, but they retir'd from the Window; and a little after there was a Postern open'd, at the entrance of which, an Arm'd Knight presen∣ted himself, who, hoding his Shield ready for Combat, said to him of the Burn∣ing Sword, Come in poor Man, and perhaps I will have Mercy on thee. I know not what Mercy you may shew me, answer'd the other, but I have not yet any part about me, that inclines me to ask it: the Execution also
Arms les not in the Tongue, but in the Hands. Then he of the Burning Sword entred, and soon after began such a Combat be∣tween them, that to hear the Blows, they gave each other, you would have taen to be two Smiths beating on an Anvil. The Knight of the Castle gave the other such a Blow with his Sword, that he made his eyes sparkle; but the other in Re∣venge, struck at him with so great foce, that he cleft his Shield asunder, and te Point of the Sword, falling upon the crest of his Helmet, wounded him so severely, that he fell backward, as if he were dead. Which being seen by those, that beheld them, they were very much troubled, believing him to be slain, nor did the Knight of the Burning Sword think any less. Wherefore he left him, and pass'd on, till he came in to the Court, where he found ten Servants, Arm'd with Brgandins, who ran upon him, crying out: Wicked Infidel, Enemy to GOD and his Faith, thou shalt now pay for thy Rashness, which has brought thee hither: and immediately they environ'd him on all sides. But he, as being the best Knight in the World, fac'd them with so much Courage, that they soon felt the weight of his Blows, whoever he struck, being assur'd either of Death, or a Wound, wherefore they began to retreat by little and little, and not without cause: for Three of them were in a little time lay'd dead on the place, which so mov'd the others to revenge, that they resolv'd either to kill him, or to lose every man of them their Lives: pressing therefore more close upon him, than they had i∣therto done, he nevertheless knew so well how to defend himself, that before the par∣ting of the Game, two more of them were overthrown, shaking their Heels. But the Five, which were left, gave him afterwards so much work, that it is incredible, how he could preserve himself: for one of them, closing with him, thought to get him down, but the Knight of the Burning Sword with a Blow of his Fist brake his teeth, and jaws, the extremity of the pain making him let go his hold, and fall flat with his face on the ground, which the rest perceiving, fled to the Tower of the Ca∣stle, crying out, Come forth my Lord, come forth, we are all dead men, un∣les you assist us. So close at the Heels were they follow'd by the Knight of the Burning Sword, that they had not time to shut the door, but he entred after them into the midst of the place, where he heard the voice of one, that said to him, Devil, Enemy of GOD, thou shalt dy by my hands the most cruel Death, that ever brought Wretch to the End of his days. Then he perceiv'd the Gyant, he had seen at the Window, who, being compleatly Arm'd, and holding his Sword drawn in his hand, came to assault him. And th the strange Knight had more need of Repose than Fighting, and mor occasion of Fear than Assurance, seeing this great Loggerhead so inclin'd to mischief him, he was nevertheless so magnanimous, that bowing down his head, he march'd against him, and being come within a yard or two of him, spake to him in this manner, Gy∣ant, the Vastness of thy Body did at first put me in some fear, who am as it were but half a man in respect of thee; but when I heard thy Threats, I felt my heart so
swell and ris, that it wholly confirm'd me, sorting before mie eyes, that it is far more seemly for all Knights, how Good and Valiant soever, to do than talk. At the finishing this Discourse, without expecting any answer, they joyn'd battle with such cruelty, that never two mortal enemies shew'd greater Desire of Killing each other, so that in this conflict the Plates and Pieces of their Harness were scat∣ter'd about the ground, their Helmets batter'd, and not only their Shields, but their Flesh also so cut, that the Spectators wondred at their long resistanee, epecially the King o Jerusalem, wo seeing the Blood trickle along the Gyants Armor, sometime thought him vanquisht, and suddenly again chang'd his Opinion, so well did the Gyant know how to handle his Adversary. Nevertheless after this Skirmish had conti∣nu'd the space of two long hours, the worst was seen to fall on the Gyants side, al∣tho' he dd his utmost to resist it. Just at this point came in another Knight com∣pleatly Arm'd, and wearing about his Neck a Shield, on which in a Field or was a Cross Gules, and this Knight was bigger and stronger than any, that had hither∣to combated. Now as he was coming into play, he of the Burning-Sword knew him to be Frandalo by the Description, the Monk had made of him: wherefore step∣ping back a little he said to him: Conform, I pray thee, Frandalo, thy Actions to thy Renown, and think, that thou wouldst wrong thy self by medling any farther in this Combat, which was undertaken by one against one. Let us then finish it, and if Fortune permits me to out-live it thou mayest then do with more Reason, what Knighthood permits thee for Satisfaction of thy mind: otherwise the vengeance, thou shouldst attempt to execute upon me, might turn to the disadventage of thy Honour, so that thinking to kill me, thou mightst perhaps put an end at the same time to thy virtue, and thy own Life, since the Hazard may assoon fall upon thee, as on me. Frandalo, who, at the first hearing himself nam'd, stood still, perceiving the Pa∣gan discourse with so much Reason, made him this answer: Indeed Knight, I must confess, that I had very much forgotten my self; but the grief, which surpriz'd me, seeing the death of my Nephew, whom thou defeatedst at thy entrance into this place, as thou didst afterward my People, even to this Knight my Cosen made me think to revenge my self on thee without any farther delay, preferring my Cho∣ler before the Reason, which every man of Honour ought to have before his eyes, as thou hast made me Remember; yet can I not imagine what knowledge, thou hast of me. Nevertheless who ever thou art, it will be a Pleasure to me to know thy Name, and much more, if thou wilt leave thy foolish Belief, and follow the Faith of IESVS CHRIST. This doing, I will not only quit thee the Combat betwixt us but will also find means, that the Emperor my Master shall receive thee in his house according to thy Merits. Frandalo, said the Knight of the Burning Sword, I was upon the point of per∣swading thee to the same thing; It is then time lost to think of giving Counsel to him, who comes nt to receive it, but to give it to another. Therefore retire, and
let the Knight and me finish our Enterprize: for we lose a fair Opportunity to no purpose. My Lord, said he, who had the worst, to Frandalo, he has Reason. I beseech you, let him and me try our Fortune, and if I am vanquisht, then govern your self as you please. Thus Frandalo stood aside, and the two others began again their Combat more se∣verely than it had been all the day, so that in less than a quarter of an hour, the Knight so endammag'd the Gyant's Shield, that he had no more of it left in his hand but the Handle, by which he held it. And so closely did the Gyant find imself prest, that the goodness of his Armour could not secure him from the edge of his Adversa∣rys Sword, which drew Blood from him in such abundance, that the pace, before brown and dry, became red and moist: nevertheless he did not cease doing his duty, for he had an heart so couragious and resolute, that the Knight, sometimes thinking their Battle at an end, found himself still at the beginning. But as much as the one grew heavier, the other shew'd himself light and lusty. At which Frandalo wondering, said within himself, that he had never seen any man equal in Prowess this Stranger, altho' he thought he had known the best Knights in the World. In the mean time the Gyant, whose strength decreas'd by little and little, desiring to bing the matter to a short Issue, threw the little, he had left of his Shield, upon the ground, and taking his Sword in both hands, advanc'd to give such a Blow on his Enemies Helmet, as he thought, might cleave his head in two. Nevertheless it hapned not so, the Knight bearing it off with his Shield, into which the Sword entred above an hands breadth, and the yet point fell so heavily upon his Helmet, that it was batter'd to his very head. And as the Gyant thought to draw out his Sword, he found himself so weak, that he had much ado to keep himself from falling with his nose to the ground, the other stepping aside with so much dexterity, that, as he drew back his Shield, he carried away his Adversarys Sword, that stuck in it: and he was now lifting up his, to give the Gyant his deaths wound, when Frandalo, putting himself between them, said thus: Ah! Knight, if there be in you as much Courtesy, as good Language, spare the Life of this poor vanquisht person. And as he finisht this word, the Gyant, wholly enfeebled, fell flat upon the ground, so that they thought him to be dead, at which the Knight being somewhat sorry, said to Frandalo: In faith I wish you had not been so slow in asking me this Pleasure, which I would willingly have accorded you, and, if it be not too late, do yet grant you. For tho' I repute you as my Enemy, yet may I use to you all the Courtesy and good Language, I possibly can. Truly, answer'd Frandalo, you speak so well, and I have such an esteem for you, that if it were possible to hinder the Combat, between us, I would willingly do bit, u I look upon you as one, that would not for any thing delay it. Nor indeed would it be for the Honour of either of us, to put it off. There is nothing then, but the death of one of us, or perhaps of both together, that can terminate this Diffe∣rence. One only thing I would have you grant me for your own great Profit, and
which I desire more for the duy I owe to Chivalry, than to your Person, being an Enemy to our Faith. It is, that you repose till to morrow morning: for I see you so tr'd and harrass'd, that the victory, I hope to get of you, will go for nthing. This offer made the Knight of the Burning Sword have a very great Esteem for Frandalo, whom having thank'd for his Civility, he return'd him this Answer: Frandalo, believe me, that I am not yet so debilitated, as to stand in need of Repose, so that I do not see now any cause o retard our Combat: wherefore look to your Defence. Since it is so, reply'd he, come on. Then they set themselves to Outrage each other, making the place sound with the clashing of their Swods, and the sparks of Fire fly out of their Harness, so that for the space of half an hour they were not seen to take breath, their Fight being so in∣cessantly furious, that they had neither Shield, nor any part of their Armour left entire, the ground being sown with the pieces of it, and water'd with their Blood. At which the King of Jerusalem being amaz'd, continually pray'd for the Knight of the Burning Sword, hoping by his Victory to regain his Liberty. Nevertheless, considering the shocks, he had already sustain'd, and what he must suffer more, he very much doubted of that, which he would most secure himself of, seeing him, in his Opinion, as brisk, as if he had not handled his Sword that day. By means of which Frandalo began to distrust himself, and being seiz'd with a chill and unusual fear, perceiv'd his strength to diminish, and that of his Adversary to encrease and redouble. Thus they continu'd above four hours, till Frandalo was so wounded, tat instead of offending his Enemy, he had enough to do to defend himself. And tho' the Knight of the Burning Sword might easily without much more Labour have put an end to his defence; yet he drew a step or two back, and leaning on the Pom∣mel of his Sword, as if he would take breath, began to say: Frandalo, thou canst not but certainly know, that thy death is near, if thou contendest any longer against me: yield then, I pray thee good Sir, and I will save thy Life, so good an Opinion have I of thy Person. I had rather, answer'd he, dy a thousand Deaths together, than do any thing, that should in the least blemish my honour. You may perhaps kill my Body; but as to my Intention, none but our Lord, in whom I put my Trust, can change it. Compleat then thy Victory, without expecting any thing else from me: since I am resolv'd to end my Days, that I may perpetuate my Renown, keeping the Faith. I ow to GOD, and my Prince, as well knowing, how great an Ho∣nour it will be to me hereafter, that I have with so much glory paid the Debt, to which I was oblig'd from the first moment of my Birth, and which we all ow to our Soveraign, that has created us, and plac'd us on the Earth. So well was the Knight of the Burning Sword satisfy'd with this Remonstrance, that he said withn himself, I should indeed be very much to blame, should I endea∣vour any farther to force him, who, being depriv'd of all Strength, has already van∣quisht
himself, so as rather to choose Death, than never so little to prejudice his Loy∣alty and Virtue. And certainly it would be no other than Treason to perseute any more so Noble, Faithful, and Magnanimous an Heart, as his; and therefoe I will leave off. Scarce had he finisht this discourse in his mind, when Frandalo, fainting, fell down to the Ground, without stirring either foot or hand. At which the Knight of the Burning Sword being much griev'd, ran hastily to untie his Helmet, to give him breath. Nevertheless the King of Jerusalem thought, he would cut off his head, wherefore he cry'd out with a mournful Voice: Ah! Knight, I request you by the Virtue, that is in you, to spare him. At this cry the other left Frandalo, and taking off his Helmet, addrest himself to the King, kneeling down before him to kiss his hands, but the King embrac'd him, saying: Indeed I do not know, that ever I have seen you before: Therefore pray do me the favour to tell me, what knowledge you have of me, and who you are. Sir, answer'd he, be pleas'd to command some one from within to bind up the Wounds of these Knights, before they dye: for it would discontent me, seeing their Prowess, that any of them should perish for want of help. This done, I will answer you, the best I can, to what you please to know of me. Indeed, said the King, there is not any one here, that understands, how to dress the Wounded; but below at the Monastery there is. Then he call d a Servant, whom he sent to fetch one of the Religious, that was skill'd in Chirurgery. In the mean time he gave Order for disarming Frandalo, and the Gyant Frandalon, who were carry'd, and laid in the best Chamber of the Castle. And the Knight of the Burning Sword, desiring to know, who the first was that assaulted him at the Entrance of the Castle, they told him, he was nam'd Bel∣leris, a courteous Personage, and Nephew to the Admiral Frandalo. As God shall help me, said he, it will be then a great Loss, if he be dead. Go see for him, and if he be living, let him be put with his Uncle. Then some ran thither, and finding him come to himself out of his Swound, took him up gently, and laid him in another Bed near Frandalo. Then the Knight of the Burning Sword retir'd into another Chamber, and put himself between the Sheets, that the Monk might apply some Remedies to the Wounds, he had Receiv'd. Presently after entred Yneril, who, having heard how all had pass'd, was unspeakably glad, especially after he had spoken with the Religious man, who as∣sur'd him, that all the danger was over. And indeed he so dextrously dress'd the wounded, Applying to them proper Remedies, that their Pains being mitigated, they all slept quietly till the morrow morning, which was an Apparent sign of spee∣dy Cure.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Discourse the King of Ierusalem had with the Knight of the Burning-Sword concerning his Liberty, and afterward with Frandalo and Belleris. THe next day, after these things had thus faln out, the King of Jerusalem went to visit the Knight of the Burning Sword, whom he found walking about his Chamber, for none of his Wounds were such, as to oblige him to keep his Bed. And therefore seeing the King enter, he went to receive him, and with great Reverence besought him to sit down in a Velvet Chair, and placing himself near him, began his discourse in this manner: Alas! Sir, how shall I ever be able to acknowledge the Honour, your Majesty is pleas'd to do me, who am but a simple Knight, and as yet unknown? And nevertheless, you take the pains to come and visit me, who have never done you any service. My Friend, answer'd the King, he, that can deliver Kings out of Prison, deserves well to be honour'd by the greatest Lords in the World, and for ever to be than∣ked by them. Is it not then reasonable, that I, whose Liberty you have so valiant∣ly obtain'd, should offer my self to you, and continue all my life your Oblig'd. Pardon me Sir, reply'd the Knight, 'tis a small matter to pay an Obligation, due by necessity. Now there is nothing more certain, than that such, as Your Majesty, are born into this World, to be Reverenc'd, and serv'd by all, all being naturally o∣blig'd so to do, but that Obligation brings along with it this Benefit, that, whoe∣ver satisfies it, is thereby honour'd, for as much as the Honour, he pays his Superior, or any other, is of such a Nature, that it returns to the place, whence it proceeded, as the Rivers and Streams do into the Sea, out of which they came. So that, Sir, you do me wrong to thank me so much, since it is abundantly sufficient to commend him, who does well, without giving him thanks. For, if he did otherwise than well, he would not (in reason) deserve to be call'd a Man, but a brute and senseless Beast. The King, hearing this goung Victorious Knight speak so wisely, and with so good a Grace, made him only this Answer: My great Friend, I see in you so much good Wit, that 'twould be a Folly for me, to think of vanquishing you either in word or effect: setting aside therefore this Contest, I desire you only to give me your Ad∣vice, how we shall henceforward govern our selves here, where there is not one in whom you trust, but your Esquire and my self. And I much fear, that some or o∣ther is fled to King Norandel with News of the Conquest, you have gain'd over Frandalo. Now he is so near us, that he will in less than a moment have Besieg'd us, and Fortune may shew us her Countenance quite contrary to what it has been in this beginning. Since you will know what I think, reply'd the Knight of the Burning Sword, I will presently tell you, I have left at the foot of this Castle a Bark, in which we
will send Yneril, accompany'd by one from hence, to the next Pagan City, to de∣mand Assistance. And in the mean time, considering the strength of the Place, we shall easily keep it against all Assailants. This Advice was well approv'd of, so that the Esquire and another embarkt imme∣diately after Dinner, when the King and the Knight of the Burning Sword went to visit Frandalo, whom the King of Jerusalem askt, how he did. Your Majesty, Sir, answer'd he, may see, and much better consider, seeing the inconstancy of Fortune, who towards the end of my declining years has shewn her self so adverse to me, that she has brought me into Captivity, and under the Power of him, that could vanquish me, and by that means conquer this Place, with the keeping of which the Emperor my Master had intrusted me: which misfortune is much more afflicting to me, than death it self. Nor can my life be henceforth other than a trouble to me, since I desir'd its continuance only to serve him, who had put me in the Honour and State, in which I yesterday day was. Ah Frandalo! said the King, You have ever been esteem'd one of the wisest Knights in the World, and now methinks, you would seem guilty of that, which ne∣ver had any place in you, viz. Pusillanimity. Pray good Sir, make use of the Counsel, you have so often given me, thinking to comfort me, whilst I was a Priso∣ner, and to shew the Magnanimity of your heart, taking example by many others, who have pass'd thro' such streights, as you are at present in, and out of which you may get with Honour, knowing the Virtue, that is in this Knight, whom I will en∣treat for you: for he alone can do it, and no other. The Knight of the Burning Sword, hearing the King speak so much to his Ad∣vantage, could not forbear blushing, wherefore taking up the discourse, he said to him: Sir, your Majesty may command me in all things. And as for you Frandalo, your Goodness and Loyalty sufficiently satisfie, what you ere while Remonstrated to the King, and the Efforts, you made me feel yesterday in defence, of what the Empe∣ror had committed to your keeping, will always testifie the Endeavour, you us'd to serve him faithfully. You have not then any Reason to complain of Fortune; but ought rather to esteem her favourable to you, than adverse or cruel: since she has not any way abas'd your Honour, but exalted your Renown by your Loss, which ought Rather to be esteem'd a Gain, than otherwise: seeing I bear you more Envy for the Honour, you have gain'd with me, than I should Glory, had I reduc'd this Island under the Law of our Gods, as it heretofore was. Sir Knight, answer'd Frandalo, the little knowledge, I yet have of you, will hin∣der me perhaps from thanking you for the Praises, you give me, so highly, as you deserve, so easily may it be seen, that you desire in all things to render your Con∣ditions, and Prowess, equal to your Discretion, and Vertue, not to lose by Reasons, and discourse the Conquest, the Goodness of your Chivalry has made in me. I will not heretofore any longer contend with you in words, fearing least by them you may gain over me, what with the hazard of your Life you could never have obtain'd, which is to make me voluntarily yours.
This said, he held his Peace, his weakness not suffering him to speak any more. Which the King and the Knight of the Burning Sword knowing, left him to re∣pose, and went to visit Belleris and Frandalon, with whom after they had along while discours'd, they wisht them a good night, and retir'd to their Chambers. Here we will for a time leave them, turning our stile to another Matter, very necessary to the compleating of our History. CHAP. IX. How Garinda, sent by Onoloria, to fetch from Filina the little Amadis of Greece, that was lost, fled thro' despair into a Wood, not daring to return to her Mi∣stress: and of that, which happen'd. YOu will find it Recorded in the most Excellent History of Amadis of Gaul, about the latter end of the Sixth Book, how Onoloria and Gricileria were each of them deliver'd of a fair Son, whom they sent to the Port of Filina, to be there Nurst; but Fortune would, that the little Amadis of Greece was met by the Moors, who carry'd him into their Gallies, where he was bred up by them, and was afterwards nam'd the Gentleman of the Burning Sword, as you have been told. Now you are to understand, that these two Princesses, thinking Garinda had entirely satisfy'd their command, and that the two Children were plac'd with careful Nurses, often sent their faithful Messenger, to enquire how they did, who always told them the quite contrary to what was befaln the little Amadis. As for the other, she deliver'd him to a Cosen of hers, nam'd Florisma, who soon after became a Widow, having but one only Son, call'd Florindo, whom she Educated with the little Lucencio. A∣bout a Year after which the Empress of Trebisond came to the Monastery of Sancta Sophia, so discontented, because she could have no News of the Emperor, that she resolv'd to continue with her Daughters, and no longer concern her self with the Government of the Empire. She was receiv'd by them in a manner, suitable to her state, and they endeavour'd by all means possible to mitigate her sorrow. Now one day amongst the rest it happen'd, that Onoloria, desirous to see her Son, commanded Garinda to go and fetch him from Filina, and, that she might pre∣vent all Suspicion, charg'd her expresly to say, that he was her Nephew, or Si∣sters Son. Garinda, seeing what she had so long conceal'd, now upon the point to be discover'd, went her way so exceeding melancholly, that she wisht her self dead. In this despair she betook her self to the Thickest part of the Forrest, fully purposing never any more to be seen by either Man or Woman, but to finish her days with as much misery as she found her self unhappy. In this Determination she spy'd a Cave, which she chose for her abode, eating from that time, no other Food, but wild and ill tasted Herbs; hoping by this Austerity to shorten her Years, and soon bring her life to an end. Now Onoloria expected her from hour to hour, but not seeing her return, was
very much amaz'd, sending a Country man to Filina, to know, what was become of her, and whence her stay proceeded. The Fellow with great diligence enquir'd, as he had been commanded, all about, but could not hear any Tale or Tydings of her: wherefore he return'd to the Monastery, where being arriv'd, and having made his Report, I leave you to think, in what trouble the sorrowful Mother was, who will recover the Ioy, she has lost, when it shall please GOD. In the mean time the little Lucencio grew up from day to day, thinking himself to be Son to the good Widow Florisma, and Brother to Florindo, whom he lov'd as his second self. They were both now come to such an Age, that they were strong enough to go an Hunting. Now as they sat sometimes, during the Het of the day, under the shadow of the Trees, expecting the Cool of the Evening, when they might better find their Prey, Lucencio would in this manner discourse his Compa∣nion: Brother, there is nothing in this world, I should more desire, than if it were possible, to be of the Order of Knighthood. But what? I see not any likehood of ever being so: for our Father was not a Gentleman, but a Labourer, tho' a rich and honest man, nor are we noble, but Rusticks, and People of this Conditi∣on are reputed unworthy to follow Arms: at which I am ready to dye for spight. So frequent was this discourse with Lucenio, that the good Widow being Ad∣vertis'd thereof by Florindo, which made her from that time doubt, lest coming to understand the truth of his condition, he should leave her: therefore to obviate this, she us'd her utmost endeavours to conceal it from him. But it happen'd one time, as he and his Companion were an Hunting, having each of them a Bow in his hand, they met an Hind, at which they shot, and wounded her, yet not so, but that she fled through the Thickets, whether the Dogs follow'd her, she doubling so with them, that they came to a Fault, and a little after began again their cry, so that Lucencio and Florindo, thinking they had run her down, made hast in to 'em. They perceiv'd them environing a naked Woman, who was so disfigur'd, that she seem'd rather a Phantasm, than an humane Creature, at the sight of which Florindo was so frighted, that he turn'd his Face, flying, and trembling like the Leaf. But Lucenio, whose blood could not deny the place, from whence he was descend∣ed, advanc'd, and taking his Staff, drave away the Dogs from about this woman, to whom he said: By my Fathers soul, I will now see whether you are an Hobgoblin, or some Devil disguis'd. The poor Creature, wholly astonisht, as thinking he would beat her, cast her self on her knees, and joyning her hands, answer'd him: Ah Gentleman, I beseech you by the Faith you owe to GOD, to leave me in peace, without adding farther Afflicti∣on to the Misery, in which I have now liv'd these thirteen or fourteen years, and shall live, as long as it shall please him, who has given me Being. Lucencio, not without cause wondering to hear her speak so discreetly, whom he just now took for a Phantasm, took a more distinct view of her, than he had hitherto done, and judg'd by the Lineaments of her Face, that she must have been heretofore
handsome: wherefore he askt her, how she came to make her Repair to this Place, inhabited only by wild and savage Beasts. Alas! answer'd she, I pray you desire not to know it: for my Misfortune is grea∣ter, than you can comprehend: Wherefore I desire you to take away your Dogs, and not importune me any farther. Lucencio had such pity of her, that he graciously made her this Reply: Dame I will readily obey you, altho' you would have more reason, and greater joy, if leaving this Austere Life, you would come with me to my Mother, whither I will willingly conduct you for the Desire, I have to serve you, and all others, that would employ me. My Child, said she, I thank you; and you will do me a Pleasure to tell me your Name, and who you are, to the end I may pray to our Lord, so to keep you, that the Renown of your good Works may be conformable to your Beauty. I am, answer'd he, call'd Lucencio: my Father was Sinofry, who dy'd long since, and my Mother, who yet lives, is nam'd Florisma. Scarce had he utter'd this Word, but she began tenderly to weep and sigh. And Lucencio, thinking, that these her Tears proceeded from her hearing of Sinofry's Death, askt her, if she ever knew him. Indeed, my Child, answer'd she, I have many times seen your Father, and know perhaps more of your Affairs, than you do your self: since I can assure you, that Si∣nofry nothing concern'd you. When Lucencio heard this, he was more mov'd than before, thinking her to be some Fairy or Magican, wherefore he said to her: Dame, I request you with all the earnestness I can, to declare more fully what you have began to tell me: for according to your discourse, my Mother must have play'd him false, whose Son I esteem my self. Your Mother, answer'd she, never did your Father any Injury; but if you will promise me one Gift, I will tell you a thing, shall make you glad. Indeed Dame, reply'd he, I promise it you whatever you please to ask me. My Child, said she, assure your self, that your Father and Mother are of such noble Blood, that you are descended of an Emperor, and a King. The Gift, you have granted me, is, that you forbear to question me any farther, concealing from all Persons your having found me, and the discourse, I have had with you, and to the end it may not be discover'd, make your Companion also promise you the same, to whom nevertheless you may relate what I have told you. And you will find means between you, to know whither two Knights, the one call'd Lisvart of Greece, and the other Perion of Gul, lost about fourteen Years since, together with the Emperor, be return'd into this Country, and bring them both hither to me, or at least one of them: for this greatly imports you, and me also. Then having embrac't and kist him, she ran so swiftly thro' the Thickets, that Lu∣cencio, who ws in a muse, presently lost fight of her, joyful nevertheless, that he
knew himself to be the Issue of such Noble Parents, in favour of whom he might one day hope to be a Knight. Then returning the way he came, he heard a little af∣ter Florindo calling him with a loud and mournful Voice: for he thought him to be dead, and for this reason bitterly wept, and discomforted himself; but Lucencio took his Horn, which he winded so loud, that his Companion heard him, and being wholly reassur'd, came to meet him, saying to him at his Arrival with Tears still in his eyes: Alas Brother, I was greatly afraid of the Wild Beast, believing, she had outrag'd you. On my faith I lookt upon you as gone, nor can I tell what made you so hasty to cast your self into her Paws. Lucencio smillingly answer'd him: Have I not often enough told you, that the Sons of such, as you and I are, cannot be Knights? for they have naturally fear for a Companion instead of Assurance, as you have experimented in your self. Yet if you will promise me, never to report, what I shall tell you, you shall presently hear a thing, at which you will sufficiently wonder. Then Florindo having made such an Oath, as he desir'd, First, said Lucencio, you must never speak to any person of the Beast, we found: neither is she indeed a Beast, but a wise and discreet Woman. Then discoursing to him from point to point all, that you have heard, they came out of the Wood. Ah! Ah! said Florindo, I beseech you, at least let me always continue in your Company, and make use of me, as your Esquire: for I shall think my self happy, if I can come to such honour. This Lucencio easily granted him, and coupling their Dogs, they return'd into the Town CHAP. X. How Lucencio and Florindo fled secretly from Filina to Constantinople, where Lu∣cencio receiv'd Knighthood at the hands of his Uncle, the Emperor Esplandian. THe discourse, which the Damsel of the Forrest had with Lucencio, so rais'd his Heart, that he rested not an hour after without thinking, how he might attain to be a Knight. Sometimes he determin'd to speak of it to his Nursing Mother Florisma; then all on a suddain he chang'd his Opinion, so that having debated all things in his Interiour, he resolv'd as the best, to go to Constantinople, and there humbly to supplicate the Emperor Esplandian, of whom he had many times heard speak, that he would give him the Order, with Horse and Arms, hoping, seeing the Reputation, he had, to be the most affable, and courteous Prince in the world, that he would not refuse him. This his Resolution he imparted to Florindo, who from the time, he had told him, what was said by the Woman of the Forrest, was become much more serviceable to
him, thn before. They began then to dispose the Means of their Departure; for doing f which they consulted together to pick open a Coffer, in which Florisma had som Money, and take thence as much as would be necessary for their Voyage: which they did, so that the next day, feigning to go an Hunting according to a ship leaving port, with three pennants bearing the words Fidelity, Piety, and Loyalty their Custom, they secretly went aboard a Ship, which they found in the Port ready to set sail for Thrace, and having a good wind, set forth into the Main-Sea, so that in a short time they arriv'd at Constantinople, where the Emperor Esplandian kept his Court, towards which Lucencio and Florindo took their Course. The Emperor was (at the time of their Arrival) in the great Hall of his Palace, attended by many Valiant Knights, all clad in mourning for the Death of the Old Emperor, and his Wife, deceas'd not long before. Close by him was the Empress Leonorina, and her Daughter Luciana, being then about twelve Years of Age, and so fair withal, and well behav'd, that she was a Pearl amongst the Grecian Ladies. And tho' Lucencio had been all his life time bred up amongst Shepherds, and other Mechanical People, yet was he not amaz'd at the sight of so great an Assembly, but getting near the Emperor, and making him a very low Reverence, with an assured Countenance he set knee to ground, and spake to him in this manner: Most Potent Prince, the Fame of your Goodness, which fills the whole World, has emboldned me to come to your Court, that I might beseech you to give me the Order of
Knighthood, with Horses, and Furniture necessary; for tho' my whole Estate at present is no more than what you may see about me, yet dare I assure your Maje∣sty, that I am descended leneally of great Lords, nay even of Kings, as I have been told. But Fortune, who will not make all equal, has plac'd me in so poor a Con∣dition, that I have not so much, as to procure me an Horse, unless your Majesty please to bestow one on me. The Emperor, seeing him so fair, young, and wel-demean'd, lookt on him with such an Eye, that he was mov'd to pity, and answer'd him: Truly, my Friend, I will do, what you desire me: for I believe, as far as I can guess by your Person, that Knighthood will not be ill imploy'd in you. And turning to the Marquess Saluder, he said to him: My Lord Marquess, I give you this Gentleman for a Guest, take him with you, and furnish him with all, that shall be necessary for himself, and an Esquire. Lucencio rose up, and having made his Reverence, to thank the Emperor, went along with the Marquess, who the same day provided him a Suit of rich white Ar∣mor, such, as was usually worn by new Knights. And altho' he had never before been so accoutred, yt was it so fit for him, and did so wll become him, that he seem'd to have been altogether born for it That night he watcht in the Chappel with Florindo, and on the morrow the Emperor, accompany'd by the Ladies, after Divine Service was over, gave him the Order, the Infanta Luciana, to do him the more ho∣nour, girding on his Sword. Then taking him by the hand, she led him into the Hall, where the Tables were cover'd for Dinner. But scarce were they entred when there presented her self a beautiful Lady, clad in Cloth of Gold, having er Hair, which was fairer than the Sun, spread upon her Shoulders, and on her Head a Galand, set with an infinite Number of pecious Stones. She cary'd in a Scarf a Sword and Shield, so richly adorn'd with Gold and Pearls, that it was wonderful to behold; and was led under the Arms by two Knights, so old and feeble, that each of them seem'd above an Hundred Years of Age. By her went a Gentleman, between sixteen and seventeen years old, very fair, and so excellently shap'd, that he seem'd a Master-piece of Nature. A little behind came two other Knights, compleatly arm'd, except the Hands, and the Head, with four Damsels in very good Equiage. Then she, who appear'd to be the Lady of this Company, humbly saluted the Em∣peror, and making him a Reverence, endeavour'd to kiss his hands, as the Gentle∣man also did: but he graciously lifted them up, asking them, if they had any Busi∣ness with him. Sir, answer'd she, Your Majesty will be pleas'd to understand, that I am Dut∣chess of Savoy, nam'd Grimarta, and as to this Gentleman, neither You, nor any other, can know his Name, before that be accomplish'd, for which we are come forth of our Country, and with which I am now going to acquaint you. Your Majesty then may understand, that, the Duke, my Father, dying without any Heirs, but my self, I was incontinently crown'd in the City of Chambery,
where this Gentleman was then newly arriv'd, who, vanquisht with Love of me, had lest his own Countrey, hoping, after he should have seen me, so to employ himself in serving me, that his Travel and Good Will should be in such manner ac∣knowledg'd by me, as he might attain to the end of his Desires. And indeed, if my Fame had caus'd in him any Affection for me, 'twas little in respect of the Ar∣dor, he found in himself, as soon as his Eye had given him the enjoyment of my Presence: Which Zeal was yet much more augmented, after he had begun famili∣arly to discourse with me. It hapned then, that one day amongst the rest, the Fire of this Love encreasing by little and little, as we were a hunting with a good Company of Gentlemen, La∣dies, and Damsels, dispers'd about the Woods, some this way, others that way, I was at a certain Stand, accompany'd only by four of my Women, and two Knights, with this Gentleman. Now so it was, that a chafed Bear came running so furiously towards us with open Mouth, that the two Knights, in whom lay the Safety of our Persons, were so srighted, that they fled with all their might thro' the Forest. Your Majesty will easily believe the Fright. I was then in: But this Gentleman, alighting from his horse, shew'd himself so valiant, that at the ap∣proach of the Bear, who thought to lay hold of him, he gave him such a blow with his Staff between his two ears, that he fell dead to the ground. This gave me such Content, that I determin'd in my self from that very hour to love him, as he de∣serv'd, and not without cause, considering his Civility, the Pains, he had taken, in coming from a far Countrey, to see, and serve me, and the Danger, to which he expos'd himself, for to save My Life, shewing himself, tho' naked, and unarm'd, more couragious than those two, who turn'd their backs with their Lances, and Shields. Wherefore I began from that time forward to treat him with more intimacy, than I had done, offering him my Estate, and what ever a Woman of my quality can honestly offer: Which gave him so much content, that, after a thousand thanks, he said to me: Madam, tho' it will be impossible for me, as long as I live, to acknowledge the Favour, and Honour, you have been pleas'd, and are pleas'd to do me, I being such, as I am, and you so great a Lady, and Princess; yet will I, with Protestation not to of∣fend you, take the boldness to make you a farther Request, which I most humbly desire you to grant me, hoping, that the Effect will redound to your Glory, and my Honour. 'Tis that you will be pleas'd to give me leave to go into Great Britain to King Amadis, that I may of him at your request receive the Order of Knighthood. This done, forasmuch as that Countrey is said to be frequented with adventurous Knights, than any other, I will for Love of you, and under the Favor of your Presence, keep, and defend a Passage, du∣ring the Space of six Months, against all those, that shall attempt to pass it, on conditi∣on, that, if I be vanquisht within the said time, the Conqueror shall receive of you a Jew∣el of such value, as you shall think fit to give him; but if Fortune give me the Honour to get the better, he, or they, that shall yield, shall be constrain'd to leave their Shields in your Pavilion, with their Names in writing, for an assurance, that they will come, and
serve you, when you shall require them. And if it happen, that in this Enterprise I do any thing, worthy your Love, it will please you then to grant it me, and not sooner: for GOD for bid, that a Princess of your high quality should have any Friend, but such, as she merits; nor would it be Reason, that I, or any other, having done so little for you, should attain so great Happiness, as by your Authority to call himself Yours. This Request, Sir, I so willingly granted him, that a few days after we set forth on our journey, and for the Jewel, he speak to me of, I caus'd to be brought with me this Sword, and Shield, which you see, with an Helmet, which for its Good∣ness, Beauty, and Richness, is not to be valu'd. But by misfortune (said she, shewing one of her Women) this Gentlewoman, in whose custody it was, staying behind us this morning; was met by a Knight, who askt her, for whom she kept it. She answer'd him, for the best Knight in the world. Then he more discour∣teous, than Gentility desires, took it from her by force, saying, that, since it was dedicated to the best Knight in the world, it belong'd to none but him. And hav∣ing gotten it from her against her will, he fled thro' the wood, so that she lost sight of him: at which being greatly discontented, she came to us, weeping for the Out∣rage, which she related to us. These Knights, who accompany me, hearing it, ran to overtake him; but seeing they lost their Labor in searching for him, being advertiz'd, that you made your Abode in this your City, we resolv'd to come, and pay you our Respects, and know, whether you would please to command us any thing to King Amadis: with whom we had long since been, had not Fortune dri∣ven us into these Coasts. This said, she held her peace. Madam, answer'd the Emperor, You have done me both an Honour, and a Plea∣sure by this friendly Visit, for which I heartily thank you, and this Gentleman al∣so, to whom Our Lord, if he please, grant the Grace to accomplish so noble an Enterprise: And as to the Villian, who has done you the Injury about your Helmet, believe me, I am very much displeas'd at it, as well that so base an Act should be done in my Countreys, as that it should be committed against a Lady of your Rank. During this Discourse, Lucencio thought in himself, that he would go to Re∣venge the Damsel, and recover, what she had lost: Wherefore without any farther delay he kneel'd down, and besought the Emperor, that he would give him leave so to do: which he readily granted him. Then addressing himself to the Dutchess, he said to her: Madam, I have all my life heard, that Knighthood was principally ordain'd, to preserve Ladies and Gentlewomen from Injury: I entreat you there∣fore command her, whom the Knight has thus wrong'd, to conduct me, till such time, as we have found him, and I promise you by the Faith, I ow the Emperor, to revenge her, and you also; or to dy in the attempt. Truly Knight, answer'd the Dutchess, I very heartily thank you: and immedi∣ately commanded the Damsel to accompany him, saying to her: And as soon as you shall have recover'd the Helmet, fail not to come into Great Britain. Then Lucencio, having eaten something, took horse, and accompany'd only by Florindo, who serv'd him for an Esquire, and the Damsel, departed out of the City,
in which the Dutchess made afterward but a very short stay: for having thankt the Emperor for her good Reception; and taken her leave of Him, the Lords and Ladies, she embarkt, steering towards Hercules's Pillars, for to enter into the Ocean Sea. Now there were many upon the Shore, looking after her at her departure when a Knight, compleatly arm'd, except his Head and his Hands, entred the Palace, and saluting the Emperor, was known to be Sergil. Esplandian heartily welcom'd him, asking him, how King Norandel did. Sir, answer'd he, He humbly recommends himself to your good Grace, and has sent me expresly to acquaint you, that one sole Knight has valiantly conquer'd the Defended Mountain, fought with, and vanquisht Belleris, Frandalon, and Fran∣dalo, so that he, and the King of Ierusalem, are become Masters of the Fortress, as we are certainly inform'd by two Souldiers of the Garrison, who have made their Escape to Tesifanto. May it please you therefore, Sir, to advise, how you will have King Norandel govern himself in this Affair, and to consider the importance of the Place, easy to be regain'd before the Turks send Succour thither, if you pre∣vent them. How? reply'd the Emperor: Is it possible, that one only Knight has done so many Feats of Arms, as you say? And are my People all dead? No, Sir, said he: But never Knights better did their Devoir, tho' they were in fine vanquisht, and left without means to defend themseves. GOD be prais'd for all, answer'd the Emperor: We must endeavour to provide for it. Then he call'd the Prince of Brandalia, and the Marquess Saluder; to whom he gave Order for the Equipping, and Arming all the Vessels, they could assemble, with Souldiers, and other Persons necessary for the Voyage. He also present∣ly sent back Sergil with speed to Norandel, to the end he might march by Land the Army, he had with him, to hinder his Enemies from giving Assi∣stance to the King of Jerusalem. But let us leave them, providing for their Equipage, and return to Lucencio, who goes inquest of the Knight, that took the Helmet from the Damsel, whom he afterwards found, as you shall understand.
CHAP XI. How Lucencio fought with the Knight, that took by force the Helmet from the Dutchess of Savoy's Gentlewoman, and vanquisht him. a joust (same figure used in Chapter 46) LUcencio with his Company, going forth of the Town, took their way towards the Forrest after the Knight, t at had robb'd the Damsel of the Helmet: and as they rode, he enquir'd of the Damsel, who He was, that the Dutchess her Mistress so much commended, and why she thus conceal'd his Name. Sir, answer'd she, my Lady has told you as much bfore the Emperor, as I know: for, on my Faith, he hath ever since his Arrival in Savoy so well conceal'd him∣self, that, if he has not discover'd himself to my Mistress, I dare aver, there's none of us, who knows him.
As GOD shall help me, said Lucencio, he is one of the handsom'st young men, I ever saw, and of whom I hope much. His Behaviour, answer'd the Damsel, would yet more please you, had you con∣vers'd with him, as I have done: for his Disposition is no less noble and courteous, than his Stature comely, and graceful. Thus discoursing, they entred the Forrest, on the edge of which, they met a poor man, loaden with wood, of whom the Damel enquir'd, whether he saw a Knight pass by, riding on a Roan Horse, and having his Shield Or in a Field Azure. He is before, answer d the Clown, and cann't be above two leagues off: turn on your Right hand at the next cross way, and you may easily overtake him before night, if you make hast. Lucencio, very glad of this Account, spur'd after him; yet did he Travel two days, and two nights, before he had any farther News of him. The third day fol∣lowing, as he came forth of the Wood in a long and spacious Plain, he saw two Knights, fighting furiously one against the other. Ha! said Lucencio then to the Damsel, Never trust me, if there ben't your man; I pray you fair Lady, go no farther lest he know you, for if it be he, 'tis to be fear'd, he will flye to save his Theft: keep your self therefore conceal'd with my Esquire, till I have spoken with him. Having said this, he rode on a great Gallop, and being come near to those that were sighting, they stood still, to know, what he lookt for. But Lucencio, easily knowing the Knight, he sought for, by the Marks, that had been given him, cry'd out to him: Ill-bred Knight, who robbest travelling Damsels, restore the Helmet, or thou shalt dy an evil Death. The Helmet? answer'd the other, It belongs so justly to me, that you shall ne∣ver have it, seeing it is mine. In faith, said he, with whom he fought, neither he, nor you, deserve it; but I a∣lone, who have set my self to gain it by force of Arms, besides, she who carry'd it, said, it was for the best Knight in the world. Now neither of you are any way equal to me: wherefore I advise you to follow your way, and, without contending any farther, to do me Justice of your selves; else my Sword shall do it me to your Disgrace and Damage. On my word, answer'd Lucencio, you both sufficiently shew your Follies: But tell me in good earnest, for what Reason the Damsel should lose it, from whom it was taken by violence. Come, come, leave this Quarrel, and restore it wil∣lingly to her; otherwise I will endeavour to make you do it by force. Truly Knight, reply'd he, that took it, I no longer wonder at your being so lean, since you trouble your self about so many things. In troth, if he will be rul'd by me, we will cudgel you so well, that you shall be more sensible of your Folly on your Shoulders, than you are of it in your Head. If you promise me, said the other, that I shall share with you, you shall see how I'l order him presently.
I promise you, answer'd the first. By this word Lucencio well knew, that 'twas at him, their Discourse was le∣vell'd: wherefore he retir'd a little back, the better to give his horse a Career, and couching his Lance, ran so directly upon them, that he met him of the Helmet wth such force, that, his Staff breaking in pieces, he tumbled him on the ground; yet he held fast the Reins of his Steed, and soon after got up again. In the mean time Lucencio turn'd his Bridle, and setting his hand to his Sword there began so sharp and dangerous a fight of two against one, that Lucencio presently knew the Peril, he should be in, if he did not look the better about him. Then altho' he had never been at such sport before, mov'd nevertheless with a natural Instinct to imitate those of whom he was descended, he had so good and vertuous an Heart, that his Adver∣saries soon perceiv'd it, the Field being in many places dy'd with their Blood. But our Gamester was pretty well matcht: for the two Assailants treated him so ill, that he felt himself so wounded, as to doubt of his Death: at which he became so furious that he entred pell mell betwixt them, iust as a chafed Bull does amongst those, who provoke him in the Place, where he is to be baited. And thus striking on the right hand, and on the left, he met, not with the Knight, that had robb'd the Damsel, but the other, whom he gave such a Blow on the ear with the Pommel of his Sword, that it made him bow his Head as low as his Saddle-bow, and, before he could recover himself, Lucencio, redoubling his Stroke, with the edge of his Sword smote his Head from his Shoulders. his Body falling reaking to the ground. Of which Lu∣cencio glad, cry'd out loud enough: In good faith, Master, you will now have no more need of a Night-cap, much less of the Helmet, you so greatly desir'd. When the other saw his Companion in so ill a Condition, he no longer desir'd to try the Force of him, he had injur'd: the better therefore to secure himself, feign∣ing to revenge his Fellow, he drew near, and lifting up his Arm, gave Lucencio's Horse such a Blow with his Sword between the two Ears, that he kill'd him: then giving his own Horse the Reins, he turn'd his Back, flying, as if a thousand De∣vils were at his heels. You may easily believe, that Lucencio was not a little dis∣pleas'd: for he saw himself without an Horse, and out of hopes as it were to recover what he sought, which was the Helmet, that the other carry'd away. But when he was got up, spying the dead Knights Steed pass by, he found means to seise of him, and getting on his back, posted after him, that was fled. Then Florindo and the Damsel, who had kept themselves conceal'd within the Forrest, seeing him thus speed away, came out of their ambush to follow him: but they lost sight of him, and it was almost Night, when they saw him again on the top of an Hill, whence he discover'd his Man, making such hast down, that his Horse be∣ing tir'd, and out of breath, he took so great a Leap along the Valley, that he roll'd above a Stones cast, before he stopt, in such manner that Lucencio could not forbear laughing: for he thought, the Horse had broken his own Neck, and his Masters too. Nevertheless they both got up again, and in the mean time Lucencio approacht, cry∣ing out a loud: By my Faith, Sir Knight, you shall now leave the Helmet, which is none of yours, and your Head likewise.
The other, seeing him so close at his heels, thought no way better to secure his life, than to throw down, what he had, hoping that Lucencio, instead of pursuing him, would amuse himself in taking it up. But he, not regarding it, pass'd on wth such speed, that he overtook him near a great Wood, and gave him such a blow on the bare head, as cleft it down to his teeth. Then he turn'd back to the Place, where he saw the Knight throw down the Helmet, but he found it not there: Where∣fore he thought that Florindo and the Damsel had taken it up: And for this cause he lookt round about to see, whether he could espy them; but it was in vain. At which being much troubled, he return'd to the top of the Hill, and entring thence into the Forrest, resolv'd to stay there till morning: for the Darkness was by this time so great, that he could not see which way to go. By and by, he heard an horse neigh, and thinking it might be those he lookt for, he rode thither, where by the light of a great Fire he perceiv'd a very fair and young Lady, washing her hands in a Fountain, which sprang forth of an hollow Rock close by. Se was attended by six others, having each of them on their Heads Garlands and Chaplets of very odoriferous Flowers, two of which joyning their Voices to the Sound of the Lutes, which they sweetly toucht, made the Air sound with such a Harmony, that Lucencio became wholly astonisht, surpris d nevertheless with some Ardor of Love, which so enflam'd his heart, that he approacht them, and saluting the Company, addrest himself to the fairest of them, to whom he said: Madam, I beseech you to excuse my Presumption towads you, assuring you, that my Com∣ing to this Place is not to disturb you; but rather to serve you, if you please to command me any thing. At this Discourse she, who thought only of refreshing her self, lifted up her head, and seeing him all Arm'd, except his Helmet, which he carry'd at his Saddle-Bow, was at first amaz'd; but his Demeanor, appear'd so gentle, that she reassur'd her self, ing him what he sought. Madam, answer'd he, I was looking for an Esquire of mine, and a Damsel, whom he accompanys: but Love, I think, has directed me to the Light of this Fire, to make me experiment the heat of a severer, with which I already feel my self in∣flam'd; yet your great Beauty and Excellence, which have kindled it in my heart, have also the means to moderate it, if you please to take pity of me, who never of∣fended you, as I know of. The Lady, hearing him speak with such affection, could not forbear smiling, and feigning not to understand this Language of Love, turn'd the Cart against the horse, saying to him: And how did your People lose you thus? Madam, answer'd Lucencio, as I was going after a Knight, who had forcibly ta∣ken an Helmet from the Damsel, I speak of my Esquire and she, who follow'd me at a Distance, were surpriz'd by the night, and I expected to meet with them in this wood, but I find my self much mistaken: for thinking to recover another I have lost my self by the Extremity of that Divine Beauty, with which you are endued. Then he related to her from point to point all, that you have heard of the Helmet, an what had befaln since.
Knight, said she, I have seen part of what you tell me, concerning him that fled: your Esquire, and the Damsel, I know nothing of; but of the Helmet I will give you a good account, if you will promise me a Gift, such, as I shall ask of you. Madam, said Lucencio, the Charms of your Beauty have made me so much yours that you may command me in what-ever you please, and I shall be yet more in∣clin'd to serve you, if by your means I may recover the Helmet, which I am obli∣ged to restore to her that follows me. Then she lifted up the border of a Sattin Mantle on which she sat, and shew'd it him, saying: Is not this what you look for? One of my VVomen took it up, a lit∣tle after the Knight, you pursu'd had thrown it down. Come then alight, and rest your self a little with us: for I believe, you have need enough of Repose. He, who desir'd no better Occasion of discoursing with her, readily obey'd her: and, when he was sat, she sent one her Women out of the Forrest, to see, whether she could understand any thing of the Squire, and Damsel, that were gone astray: (for already the Moon began to shine) and in the mean time she entred into discourse with Lucencio, to whom she said: Knight, you have promis'd me a Gift, such as I shall ask you. In order to the accomplishment of this promise, I desire you, that as soon, as you shall have recover'd your Esquire, and the Damsel you have lost, you will accompany me to a Ship of mine, which my People have at Anchor hard by, and out of which I landed this morning, as well to see this Country, which seem'd to me pleasant, and well-shaded, as to refresh me after my Travel on the Sea, where I have long voyag'd. Madam, answer'd Lucencio, you may dispose of me, as of one of your Slaves; for I will not disobey you, but you shall always find me willing, and ready to folow your Pleasure. Indeed, reply'd she, I very heartily thank you. Whilst they were thus discoursing, Florindo and his Companion arriv'd with her who went to look them, and alighting from their Horses, pass'd there the rest of the Night till Sun rise, when Lucencio, calling the Dutchesses Damsel, said to her; My good Friend, there is the Helmet, that was taken from you, you shall carry it to your Mistress, and recommending me to her Favour, assure her on my behalf, that I am her Servant. And forasmuch as I have promis'd my Lady to embark presently with her, I desire you to excuse me, that I bear you Company no longer. Sir Knight, answer'd she, you have done so much for my Mistress, and me, that we are for ever oblig'd to be thankful to you: and since you are pleas'd to licence my Departure, I shall, as I pass by, acquaint the Emperor with your Atchieve∣ments, and from thence will take Ship for Great Britain, as I have been comman∣ded: therefore consider, whether you please to have any thing else with me. He answering No, she recommended him to the Protection of our LORD, and mounting her Palfrey, took her way towards Constantinople, the rest going towards the Sea, where they found their Ship, in which being embarkt, they weigh'd Anchor and departed. Let them Sail then at their leisure, if the Weather will
permit them, and let us return to those, whom we have left in the Defended Moun∣tain. CHAP. XII. How the Emperor Esplandian arriv'd at the Defended Mountain, where he fought with the Knight of the Burning Sword: and what was the Issue of their Combat. THe Knight of the Burning Sword continu'd in the Castle of the Defended Moun∣tain above three weeks after the Victory, he had gotten over those, that guard∣ed it: during which, there pass'd not a Day, but he went to visit Frandalo, and the other wounded Knights, till such time as Yneril return'd from Natolia with a Reinforcement of twenty Turks, who were very well receiv'd, especially by the King of Jerusalem, who had before related to the Knight of the Burning Sword the manner, how he was taken at the Siege of Constantinople, as his Son and Daugh∣ter were a little before by Perion of Gaul, then Surnam'd the Knight of the Sphere. But believe me, said he, never was captive Prince more honour'd, or better treated, or had so many Civilities shewn him, as I receiv'd from King Amadis, and the Emperor Esplandian. Then he related at large the Favours, and Courtesies, that had been done him, which were so many, that the Knight of the Burning Sword said aloud: Truly I must even from your Discourse confess, that Vertue and Prowess are more familiar to Amadis and his Children, than to any other Knights in the World. As they discours'd thus, leaning on a Window, that lookt towards the Sea, they perceiv'd a Bark with two Oars come into the Harbour, out of which landed a Knight, arm'd in black Armor, all but his Head, an Esquire bearing his Helmet, and a Damsel his Shield, on the midst of which in a Field Or was painted a Cross, red as blood. They began to ascend the Steps, cut in the Rock, so that in a little time they were come to the Portal, where the Knight made himself ready to fight. Which being seen by him of the Burning Sword, who beheld him come so boldly up, he knew not at first what to think of him; but it came at last into his mind, that he was indeed some Christian, who, having understood the Loss of the Castle, would en∣deavour to recover it, if he could. And for this Reason he askt him out of the Win∣dow, whither he was going, and what he sought: For, said he, the Blason of that Shield you bear, testifies that you can be no other than an Enemy to the Turks. At this word the black Knight lifted up his Eyes, and seeing him, that question'd him, thought him the fairest Personage, he had ever beheld: wherefore he answer'd him: In good faith Knight, if you are he that have gain'd this Castle by force of Arms, Knighthood indeed (considering your young Age, and what your Counte∣nance shews) is better employ'd in you, than in any other, I know; and if your
Conditions are such as Fame reports them, you ought not to take it ill, that (bea∣ring the Sign, which is in my Shield) I endeavour to do what you have done, de∣siring to prove my self against you, as against the most courteous, and valiant Knight of Asia. I desire you then to cause the Gate to be open'd for me: For, on the Security of your word, I will come in, and we will try (if you will take my ad∣vice) which of us two Fortune will most favour in fight. The Knight of the Burning Sword easily imagin'd by the Discourse of the other, that he must be some valiant Man. And for that reason he said to him: Indeed, Knight, you speak so much to my advantage, that I greatly doubt, whether I ought to assure you that I am he, you imagin, or another. One certainty there is, that Honour always redounds to him, from whom it parts: thus you cannot but gain Honour by the Combat, you demand, whether you have the better, or the worse. For to praise the Strength, and Vertues of ones Enemy is nothing else, but to il∣lustrate ones self, and to desire to conquer his Heart by Virtue, before one attempt his Body by Force. And therefore, since you are come to hazard your life, and to endeavour the gaining of Renown by doing what your Law obliges you to, it would neither be reasonable, nor courteous in me to deny you, what you desire of me. Say then a little, and I will cause you to be let in on the Condition, you re∣quest, and which I willingly grant you. Then he retir'd from the Window, leaving the black Knight extremely satisfy'd with the Civility of his Discourse. But he staid not long before the Gate was o∣pen'd, at the entrance of which a portly Knight presented himself, arm'd with white Armor, and having about his Neck a Shield, on which was painted a Red Sword, with some Characters, that he could not understand: nevertheless he doubt∣ed much, that it was he, who had spoken to him at the Window, and with whom he desir'd to fight: for he bad him enter, and then endeavour to accomplish that for which he was come. At this word the black Knight pass'd on, and, as he entred, said to the other: I pray you good Sir, let our Combat be farther in the inner Court of the Castle. This he said, fearing, lest (if he should vanquish) the Door might be shut against him. The Knight of the Burning Sword, very well knowing what he meant, an∣swer'd him, that he was well pleas'd, it should be so, and offering him the Honour of the way, importun'd him to go in first: but the black Knight re∣fus'd it, telling him, that He, who was Lord of the Place, ought to shew him the way. I will obey you then, answer'd the other: for it may be thinking to shew my self too courteous towards you, I may fail in not doing, what you desire: I have also all my life heard say, that Knights, who are upon the point to combat, ought to have Courtesie in no less esteem, than Honour using towards each other humble and gracious Discourses, remitting all the Ill Will, they may bear one another, to the Strength of their Arms, guided by the Magnanimity of their hearts, in expecta∣tion
of the future Victory: which if they obtain, it is so much the more glorious, as their Discourse was more courteous and affable, than the Place and Occasion requi∣red. Then he pass'd on, and the black Knight after him, who, before they began the Combat, said to him: Knight, if thou wouldst leave thy foolish Belief, and follow me to a Place, where thy Strength and Courage would be better employ'd for his Glory and Honour, of whom thou hast receiv'd them, believe me, I would easily forbear this Contest, not for any doubt, I have of thee; but only to the end we might be Friends, so much do I commend and esteem thee. Ah! answer'd the other, This Request is so much out of Reason, that I ought by no means to dispute it with thee. Therefore amuse thy self no longer to preach, but regard, for what end thou com'st to sek me. Is it so? said he in the black Arms: Come on then. And uttering this word, they charg'd one another with such vigor, that there was never seen a fiercer Fight: for during the space of above two long hours, they ceas'd not to cut and thrust, unjoin∣ting each others Armor, and paring their Shields in such manner, that the Place was up and down cover'd with the Pieces which flew from them, so that it could not be judg'd, to which of them the Victory was promis'd: for the longer they fought, the more eager they seem'd to be: whence it hapned, that they were by the heat of the Sun (it being now Noon) so scalded in their Harness, that they were forc'd to draw back, and lift up the Visors of their Helmets to take breath. But this lasted not long, ere they charg'd again with more Fury, than before; yet could not either of them gain any advantage over the other: at which being extremely vext within themselves, they let go their Swords, leaving them hanging at their wrists in Sil∣ver Chains, and closing, endeavour'd each by his strength and skill in wrestling to throw his Adversary on the ground: which 'twas impossible for them to do, both of them standing so stifly, that the King of Jerusalem, running to Frandalo, whose weakness caus'd him to keep his Chamber, said to him: If you can but come into these Galleries, you will see (perhaps) the cruelst Fight, that can possibly be be∣ween two persons. Frandalo wondring what it might be, made a shift to crawl thiter, and came just as they were falling one upon the other, yet without any way letting go their hold. Then they strove, who should get the advantage; but in vain: for one was no soo∣ner got uppermost, but he presently found himself again underneath. Thus strug∣ling, sometimes above, sometimes under, they grew so out of breath, that they se∣parated, and rising up, took their Swords again, with which they acted so valiantly as if they had not striken a stroke all that day before. Which made Frandalo to who the King of Jerusalem had related all the beginning of this Dispute, conjecture that he in the black Arms was Amadis of Gaul. But he soon chang'd this Opinion: for Amadis was indeed of less Stature, and in too far a Countrey: wherefore he sus∣pected that it was rather Lisvart of Greece, who had made this attempt. And was sying so to the King of Jerusalem, as the Knight in the black Arms, lifting up his
head, spy'd Frandalo, at which he was both Glad and Sorry. Glad to see him alive, and Sorry that his Colour was pale and wan, which was caus'd by the continual Pain, he suffer'd in his wounds. This made the black Knight so much desire to re∣venge him that fetting in himself for having been already so long about it, he could not forbear saying between his Teeth: By my Head, I have been too long fighting for so desir'd a Victory, and I must surely believe, that this is some Devil let loose from the Bottom of Hell: for if he were other, I should long since have brought him  reason. And at that instant his Courage intreast in such manner, that he struck him in the white Arms so outrageously, that he forc'd him to set knee to ground: yet he got suddenly up again, and the better to be quit with his Adversary, took his Sword in both hands, with which he gave him so strong a blow, that had it not me with the Shield, which he oppos'd against it, 'twould have been his last: neveheless the Point fell upon his Helmet, and so stunny'd him, that he was constrain'd to lean a∣gainst the wall, or else he had tumbled on the ground. But this Astonishment lasted but a little, ere they made a fresh charge with more violence, than before; tho' indeed the black Knight began visibly, to grow faint and heavy, however he still vigorously per∣form'd s Devoir: yet was it easily discern'd that he could not long hold out. Wherefore he in the white Armor drew a little back, and said to him: Knight, be not thine own Murtherer; but yield: for it were great Pity thou shouldst dye, be∣ing so valiant a man, as I know thee to be. In good faith, answer'd the other, thy Courtesy summons me as it were to fol∣low thy Counsel; but my Honour contradicts it, so that nothing but Death shall finish this Dispute between us two. And altho' he had not then so much Shield left, as would cover his Arm, and tho his Helmet, and Armor were unriveted and broken, so that his bare Flesh ap∣pear'd in many places, yet as he answer'd his Antagonist, he entred into such a Fury that stepping forward, he gave him such a blow with his Sword upon the Shoulder-piece, that the Blood in that place dy'd his Harness. This exceedingly innst the white Knight, who was about to make him very sensible of his Resentment, when a Servant came running to tell the King of Jerusalem, that there was a Damsel at the Gate, who desir'd to be let in for a matter, which greatly imported the two Com∣batants. The King commanded her to be immediately brought in, and she instantly presented her self before the Knights, to whom she said: My Lords, I beseech you, if you please, to delay your Fight, and hear the Message I have to deliver to you. At this word they drew back, principally he in the Black Arms, who knew her for it was Alquisa, who, since the Loss of Lisvart and Perion, had kept company with Urganda in the Isle of Apes, and was by h r Father sent towards the two Knights, to prevent their death which was very near, if their wrath had continu'd as it was begun. To obviate which, she prostrated her self at the Feet of him in the Black Arms, speaking to him in this manner: Sir, my father, who loves and esteems you, commanded me to do you this Honour, assuring me that  first
word you would know me, tho' I have never seen you, as I know. He intreats you that the Combat between you and this Knight may pass no farther, and this for a Reason, he will one day let you understand, and for which you will thank him. Damsel, answer'd he, if you know me not at present, I know very well, who you are, we having often discours'd together at a more agreeable time. As for the rest, you may easily see, I have no power over this Knight, to pray him, or command him, considering the State we are in: wherefore I am of opinion; that you your self speak to him, and know what he thinks of it. It shall not stick there, said the Damsel. Then turning her Face towards him in the white Arms, she said to him: Knight, the Old Man, who found you in the Forrest, after you had deliver'd King Magadan, desires you for a reason to fight no more against him, to whom I have addrest my self, but to remember the Dis∣course you had with him, when you said, that Vertue was never lost, in what place soever it were exercis'd. Damsel, answer'd he, I am so much bound to the old man, that I will believe his Counsel, and would gladly be in place, where I may do him Service as I desire. Now he had taken notice of the Honour, she did the black Knight, which made him conjecture, that he was some King, or other great Personage, wherefore he said to him: My Lord, pardon me, I beseech you, if in my Behaviour and Words I have not been so courteous to you as I ought, and do me the Favour to tell me, who you are, that I may hereafter better know by name, him, in whom there is so much Goodness and Prowess. Knight, answer'd he, your so glorious Discretion makes me entirely lose the ill will, I have hitherto born you, and summons me to leave you the Place, since our di∣spute can take no other course: Yet I will first satisfy your Request, and tell you, who I am, on condition, that afterwards neither you, nor any other shall hinder my Departure. Of that you may be sure, said the white Knight, and I promise you it upon my Honour. Understand then, said he, that you may now see Esplandian Emperor of Con∣stantinople, who came hither, hoping alone to recover, what your self have gain'd from me, and mine: but finding, what is in you, and knowing the Strength of the Place, I make no farther acccount of getting any thing, what Power soever I can bring. O Iupiter, cry'd out the Knight of the Burning Sword, is it possible, that the Prince whose Renown is the greatest, and most glorious of any in the whole world, has done me this Honour! On my faith, I may at present well stile my self the hap∣piest man on earth, having had the Means to prove my self against the best Knight living. Ah! Ah! most Excellent Emperor! You are such, that the Praises, which are given you, are far short, of what is due to your Merits. And would to our Gods, the Law, you hold, were conformable to their Honour, that you might in
time see, with what affection I would do you Service, instead of the Displeasure, you have receiv'd thro' my ignorance: for which I entreat you, and this Damsel to excuse me. Now he believ'd her to be still behind him; but she was already departed, which he perceiv'd, as he thought to give her thanks: wherefore with much discontent he chang'd his discourse, and askt, what way she had taken. My Lord, said one from within, She is gone forth, and we saw her descend strait to the Sea. Ah! said the Knight, she does me wrong. Now he thought to know of her, where he might find the good old Alquif, by whom he hop'd to come to the Knowledge of his Parents. And for this cause leav∣ing the Emperor, he went hastily out of the Castle, running after her, and the far∣ther he went, the more he said within himself: By my Head, I have no wound, that shall hinder me from following you: and if once I catch you, you shall tell me, where your Father is. But notwithstanding his Diligence, Fortune guided him far another way, as you shall hereafter be inform'd. CHAP. XIII. How the twenty Turks, which Yneril had brought from Natolia for the Relief of the Defended Mountain, set themselves to kill the Emperor Esplandian: and of that, which hapned. FRandalo, who was come down out of the Galleries, to listen to the Damsels dis∣course, having heard from the Emperor Esplandians own mouth, that it was he who had fought with the Knight of the Burning Sword, presently kneel'd down to kiss his Hands, the King of Jerusalem also making him a very great Reverence. The Emperor receiv'd them very kindly, and embracing the King, said to him: In good faith, Brother, your Liberty is, I believe, more happy than you expected, be∣ing deliver'd, and freed out of Prison by the best Knight I ever saw in my life. Ah Sir, said Frandalo, your Presence gives me an incomparable Joy, and a Re∣gret even to Death, My good Friend, said the Emperor, you have always be esteem'd so discreet, that you need not any Comfort, but what you can give your self. But they had not long continu'd this Discourse, when the twenty Turks lately arriv'd for Defence of the Place, calling out to Arms, ran upon the Emperor: who, more astonisht than before, and that not without cause, said to the King of Jerusalem, whom he suspected to be the Head of this Treason: How, Brother, Dare you in∣deed do an Act, so injurious to your Honour, and the Right of Chivalry? On my faith you not only wrong your own Person, but all others, who bear the Title of
Gentlemen for you cannot be ignorant, that I entred into this place with Security from him, who had power to give me it. The King of Jerusalem, very sorry for this assault, took suddenly his Sword in hand, and severely menac'd these Rascals: who, to shew how little they would do for him, began in such manner to let fly their Arrows, that they seem'd like Hail, pouring down from Heaven. This so chaf'd the Emperor, that without any farther delay, he cover'd himself with his Shield, and with Sword in hand entred pell mell amongst them, striking so on the right and left, that he gave the first, he met with, such a blow, that he never spake after, and following the rest, brought three of them with their Noses to the ground. Nevertheless this could not have preserv'd him without Frandalo, who, weak and feeble as he was, got hold of a Battle ax, and follow'd by two of his Squires, so well seconded the Emperor, that whether the o∣thers would or no, they were forc'd to give back, to their great shame and loss. And as we often see a campany of Pies persue an Hawk, that, taking his flight from off his Masters hand, pearches upon some Tree, at his departure from which being pro∣vok'd by their beating and pecking at him, he not only seizes upon one, two, or three of them, but furiously scatters the Remainder: in the like manner these Rascals, having done their endeavour against the Emperor, betook themselves to flight, some falling dead, and others putting all their hopes in the entrance of a stair case, whe∣ther they retir'd for their Defence. But this weak Resistance lasted scarce a moment, the Emperor and Frandalo following them so close, that there did not one of them escape. The King of Jerusalem was then in very great perplexity, fearing, lest the Em∣peror might impute it to him, that he had been the Author of so great a Villany: of which being desirous to excuse himself, before he was spoken to about it, he went to meet the Emperor, and said to him: Sir, I humbly besech you to blieve, that the Treason of these Rogues was not in the least known to me, nor yet to the Knight of the Burning Sword: as Frandalo can also assure you, with what Civility he has been treated since the Conquest of this Place. Truly, answer'd the Emperor, these Wretches have sufficiently shewn, how little they know to maintain the Fidelity, requisite amongst Knights, and they have al∣so been very well recompens'd, and chastis'd for it. And as to you, King of Ieru∣salem, I certainly believe what you affirm, and farther to satisfy you, I do so, I will not hinder your departure, whither, and when you please, out of this Place, which (as you know) I have conquer'd twice with the Price of my Blood. And this makes me the more desirous to keep it better, than ever I have done, nor can so doing any way blemish my Honour, I being no more oblig'd to keep Faith with those here, than they have been ready to do it with me. So that seeing the wicked and base Act of these Rascals, which assaulted me, and the Suspicion also, that may be ha of you, who are of their Religion, if I shew you now any Courtesie and Ci∣vility, you ought to thank the Knght that is gone; and none else. At the finishing their Discourse, they entred into the great Hall, which lookt to∣wards
the Sea, where the King of Jerusalem discover'd a vast Fleet of Ships, and other warlike Equipage, which Esplandian had brought for Recovery of that Place: But would, before he laid Siege to it, endeavour to regain it by the means you have heard: for which purpose he went into a Skiff, taking no other Company with him, but one Esquire, and Carmella, who staid for him at the Gate, into which she en∣tred, when she perceiv'd the Knight of the Burning Sword go out. Yet the Empe∣ror presently sent her back again to fetch Master Elizabel, who came with the Prince of Brandalia, and the King of Hungary, which, doubting the Event of so hazardous an Enterprize, were in strange Pain for the Emperors Person: but when they knew, how it was hapned, they came to wait upon him, praising GOD. Master Elizabel visited his great and dangerous Wounds, for the cure of which he was con∣strain'd to take his Bed, where a few days after he began to amend, during which, King Norandel came with his Army, which he had brought by Land from Thesifanto, according to the Directions had been sent him by Esplandian. Now being come with∣in a days March of the Place, he had News, that the Defended Mountain was re∣cover'd: wherefore leaving his Souldiers encamp'd under the Command of the Prince Elinio, he came to the Fortress, where he found the Emperor: who, after he had bidden him welcome, related to him the Combat between himself and the Knight of the Burning Sword, who is, (said the Emperor,) in my opinion, the best, and most courteous Knight in the world. Ah! Sir, answer d King Norandel, how then have you lost him so soon? cer∣tainly your Court would have been much honour'd, if you had staid him for yours. He follow'd the Damsel, that parted us, reply'd the Emperor, and will (perhaps) return. Then you may besure, he shall not scape me, tho' I should be fain to give him half Thrace, to stay him. Thus did the Emperor discourse of him, whose Grand-father he was, tho' not knowing it: and so long did he continue in the Defendd Mountain, till his wounds were at last quite cur'd. Which the King of Jerusalem seeing, he took a fitting op∣portunity, and said to him: Sir, you know the Liberty you have given me: will you be pleas'd (since the Knight of the Burning Sword so long delays his return) to let me have some Vessel, in which I may return into my Countrey. Brother, answer'd the Emperor, you shall have one. And immediately com∣manded Proision to be made of all that was necessary, so that the King embarkt the morrow morning betimes, having Yneril in his Company, who was extremely discontented for having thus lost his Master, and the rather, because he knew not where, or in what place to have Tale or Tydings of him. Thus was the Fortress of the Defended Mountain regain'd, with which the Em∣peror desirous to acquaint King Amadis, sent a Gentleman into Great Brittain. And in the mean time having given Order, touching what was necessary for the De∣fence of the Island, where he left Frandalo, return'd to his Vessels, and set sail for Constantinople.
CHAP. XIV. How the Knight of the Burning Sword, being in quest of the Damsel Alquifa, met Alpatracy, King of Sicily, with whom he fought: and what afterwards befel them. YOu have heard, in what manner the Knight of the Burning Sword went foth of the Castle, where he left the Emperor Esplandia, to follow the Damsel, from whom he hop'd to learn News of the old man, that succour'd him in the Forrest, as you have been told. And for this cause he travell'd so far, that, Night surprizing him, he lost himself, not knowing, which way to go, so great was the Darkness, and so thick and difficult was the Wood, into which he was got. Then began his wounds to grow cold and stiff, which put him to such pain, that he was often in the mind to return, from whence he came, could he but find the way back. Whilst he was in this Study, he saw at a distance the Light of a Fire, which made him think that she, whom he sought for, mght perhaps be there; but when he was got near, he perceiv'd, they were only Sheperds, that were looking to the Monks Cattle, who fled away for fear, as soon as they esp'd him. But he call'd them back, and gave them such assurance, that they return'd towards him, and he askt them, whe∣ther they had not seen a Damsel pas by, who he describ'd to them in the best manner he could. By St. Mary, answer'd the stoutest of them 'tis not half an hour since she went a∣long this Path, making all the hast she could. This troubles me, said he: for I would willingly have spoken with her. But, since there is at present no Remedy, I pray you, if you have any thing to eat, give me part with you. Then one of them drew out of his Wallet an hard Crust of brown Bread, and a Bottle of water, and presented him with them, which were so welcome to him, that never any Feast in the Court of King Magadan appear'd to him so delicious as this. Having thus refresht himself, he got them to bind up his wounds in the best manner, he could, and laid him down to sleep, till such time as the Moon should rise. But as soon as he could see his way, he got up, and thanking his Hosts, took the Path, they shew'd him, so that by brak of day, he was come to the Sea-shore, not know∣ing, what farther course to take: for the Water hindred his passing on, and if he thought to turn on either side, the high and inaccessible Rock shew'd him the Auste∣rity of the Desart. Beg thus at a loss, what to do, all melancholy, and as it were in despair, he had a desire to drink, and perceiving the Stream of a clear Spring, passing between the Shrubs, he went thither, and climbing up the Hill, found the head of it, which was so pleasant, that having taken in the hallow of his Hand, what was sufficient to quenh his thirst, he put off his Helmet, and lyng down on the green and fresh grass,
with his head leaning on his left hand, fell so sound a sleep, that at his awaking the Sun was now very high. Nor had he awoke then, had he not heard a noise on the other side the Thicket: wherefore starting up, he lac'd on his Helmet, and soon af∣ter saw a Knight come along in exceeding fair and rich Armor, accompany'd only by a Gentlewoman, with whom he discours'd, so that he was already upon the Bink of the Fountain, when he perceiv'd the Knight of the Burning Sword. Now Fame had already spread over all the Countrey the Loss of the Defended Mountain, those, that were fled, telling every one, how a Knight, bearing in a Shield Argent a Sword Gules, had vanquisht Frandalo and the other Guards: so that by these Signs the Knight in the rich Arms immediately knew, that he of the Fountain had perform'd that Enterprize. For this cause he addrest himself to him, and without saluting him, us'd this Language: Sir Knight, are not you he, who, living against the Christian Law, have not long since forc'd the Defended Mountain? Certainly I will endavour, if I can, to keep you from offending any more the GOD of Heaven and Earth, of whom you pretend not to have any knowledge. Having said this, he took his Shield, and ran upon him of the Burning Sword, who, without being any way dismaid, answer'd him bravely: By my Head, I know not who you are: but I have seen many as brave as you, who at the end of the Fight have been cool enough, and yet without choller: therefore take heed, lest the like befal you. That will appear, reply'd the other. Then they so furiously assaulted each other, that never two Stags, heated at the Rut for love of the Hind, shew'd themselves more furious. So that after many blows struck, Fortune would, that he of the Fountain should have the better, giving his Adversary two such strokes, that, whether he would or no, he fell in a swound, be∣ing depriv'd of all knowledge. Which the Knight of the Burning Sword seeing, he went on to take off his Helmet, and afterwards his Head. But Frandamella (so was she nam'd, who had long beheld them) began to cry out, and with the Tears trick∣ling in abundance down her Cheeks, askt pardon for the vanquisht Knight. Damsel my Friend, answer'd he of the burning Sword, I will not refuse you, but you shall be obey'd: for I have never learnt to be discourteous to Ladies, nor will I begin with you; tho' the Knight deserves great Chastisement, having assaulted me who never in my life injur'd him, as I know of. I shall only in recompence desire you to tell me his Name: for by his Rich Armor, joyn'd with the Valour and Good∣ness I have found in him, I guess him to be some great Personage. Ah, Ah, good Knight, reply'd she, this I will willingly do on condition, that you also grant me a Gift, which will not I think be any way displeasing to you: for if you are he, whose Renown flies thro' the whole World, I am in a manner assur'd that you will without constraint accord it me, when you know it. Damsel, said he, you shall have of me, whatever you will nor shall the Difference be∣tween your Religion and mine hinder it, provided your Request be reasonable and discreet? for I and all others, who bear Arms, and the Name of Knight, are speci∣ally
oblig'd to maintain Right, and to do our utmost for Ladies; otherwise the Strength given us by the Gods, would deserve no more praise, than that weakness and impuissance, which is so peculiar in you, that you cannot without us resist the Wicked. Ah vertuous Knight, answer'd she, you have spoken so well, that I shall esteem you for it, as long as I live. And as to what you desire to know concerning the Knight, you shall understand, that he is natural King of Sicily, nam'd Alpatracy, Husband to one of the most noble Princesses of Europe, call'd Miramynia, Daugh∣ter to the King of Metz in France, and they two were some time since enchanted by the Sage Medea: but about twenty years ago, the best Knight and fairest Lady in the world deliver'd them out of that pain, the Knight, of whom I speak, gain∣ing an Helmet, and the Lady a Crown of inestimable value. But as one Unhappi∣ness often accompanies another, King Alpatracy and his Queen living peaceably in their Countrey, blest with one only Daughter, which GOD had given them, more divinely accomplisht in all Perfections, than any other Creature in the world, it happen'd that the King of Metz died, by whose Death Miramynia, his sole Daugh∣ter and Heiress, became Queen and Lady of his Countreys, which are large and rich, as having been given for Apennage to a second Son of France: for from Pha∣ramond, who first took the Title of King over the French, descended, as I have many times heard, Claudius and Meroveus. This Meroveus had three legitimate Sons, who, when their Father was dead, divided this great Monarchy betwixt them, so that the Kingdom of Metz came to the second, who was Father of the Queen, that is VVife to this Knight. And for this reason he was sometimes nam'd, and entitled King of Metz in France. Now it is not long since Alpatracy took possession of it, and receiv'd an Oath of Fidelity from all his Subjects. But as he was returning into Sicily, he had News, that a near Relation of the Queens was revolted, and had taken by surprize the principal Towns of the Realm, under color of a certain pretended Law, establisht and ordain'd, as they say, by the said Pharamond, by which the Traytor affirms, that the Realm of France must never fall to the Distaff, and that the Kingdom of Metz is subject also to the same Statute, as being a Member and Part of the French Monarchy. This News was as pleasing to the King, as you may imagin it to be; yet he hop'd to avenge himself throughly on the Traytor, which he would easily have done, had not a second and worse Misfortune diverted him. VVhich was, that the Queen Miramynia, and her Daughter, as they were hunting in the Forrest, near Sara∣gossa, were surpris'd by Frandalon the Cyclops, and his Son, two horrible and merciless Gyants, who mauger the Huntsmen and others, sent away the two La∣dies Prisoners into the Isle of Silanchy, where they are yet at present. And these Devils have sent word to the King, that he shall never recover them, unless he come with another, and fight with them concerning the Right, they pretend to the Realm and Countrey of Sicily, which, they say, belongs to them, as having
been at first peopled, and inhabited by their Ancestors: and if they shall be van∣quisht, they will restore the Ladies: but if the King and his Second, shall have the worst, he shall be constrain'd, and oblig'd by Oath, to surrender into their hands the Countrey, they claim, to be enjoy'd by them, as their own, without Contra∣diction. Thus you see, how this poor Prince has been treated by Fortune, which has in a moment depriv'd him of Countrey, VVife, and Child, which he loves, and esteems dearer than his own Person: so that he has been even ready to dye thro' excessive Sorrow. Desirous however to shew the Magnanimity of his Courage, and that not Time, but Vertue, appeas'd his grief, he has so far recomforted himself, that he has undertaken the Combat against the two Gyants. And for this Reason he was sailing towards Constantinople, hoping to obtain of the Emperor some Kins∣man of his, to second him against the Cyclops. Now it hapned that traversing the Strait of the Hellespont, we met a Galley, that was bound for Great Bitain, the Master of which acquainted us, that the Defended Mountain was newly conquer'd by one sole Knight, whom by the marks, I heard given him, I believe to be your self. The King was so troubl'd at this news for the Amity, there is between him and the Emperor, that he would come ashore, and landing over-against the mouth of this stream, saw the Forrest so shady, that, thinking to find pleasure in it, he has been more severely handled, than I should have imagin'd. I have now so well satisfied your Demands, that there remains nothing but the Accomplishment of your promise, which will serve only to augment your glo∣ry and renown. My humble Request therefore is, that you will be pleas'd to ac∣company the King into the Isle of Silanchy, and contribute your Assistance for the Deliverance of the Queen my Mistress. Which will be easie for you to effect, con∣sidering the Prowess, I have with mine own Eyes seen to be in you, who have in this manner subdu'd him; whom I have heard esteem'd one of the valiantest men on earth. In good faith, Damsel, answer'd the Knight of the burning Sword, this I so willingly granted you, that, had you not desir'd it, I should my self have requested it of you, having heard the Nature of the Affair: which if I could bring to an end, I should assuredly account my self one of the happiest Knights living. For suppo∣sing that those, who have forc'd away the Queen, and her Daughter, be of the same Religion with my self, yet would I not support them in their wickedness, ha∣ving receiv'd Knight-hood with no other Intention, but to employ my Endeavors for the Relief of those, that suffer wrong and injustice. And therefore let us go, where you please, and I shall willingly accompany you, whatever Business I have in these Parts. During this Discourse, the King, who had all this while lain in a swound, be∣gan to open his Eyes, which the Damsel espying, went to lift up his Head, and with a smiling Countenance said to him: Ha! Sir, chear up for GODS sake: For∣tune
is at present more favourable to you, than you would have ever thought, ha∣ving so ear you him, who will ease you of your Journey to Constantinople, to find a Second against Frandalon and his Son. How so? said the King. Sir, answer'd she, this good Knight is contented to accompany you into Silan∣chy, and to employ himself for the Rcovery of your loss, Then she punctually related to him all the Discourse, that had pass'd between them, at which the King was so overjoy'd, that he rose up of a sudden, and streching out his Arms, went to embrace the Knight of the Burning Sword, saying to him: Cer∣tainly, good Knight, I now well know, that you are no less endowed with Ver∣tue, than with Prowess and Courtee. And if you will do me so much Favour, as this Damsel assures me, you shall always have a King for your Friend, and ready to do you any Pleasure: for I have such Hope in your high Prowess, that I am in a manner secure, by your means to recover the thing, which I love, and esteem dear∣er than my self, and for loss of which I have already undergone a Discontent, and Sorrow, worse than Death. Sir, answer'd he, I will follow you, where ever you shall command me, not so much to accompany and serve you, as to acquit my self of what Reason enjoyns me: for altho' by reason of the Real Dignity, that is in you, every inferior Per∣son ought to serve you; nevertheless the difference of the Religion, I profess, from that, in which you live, forbids me to favour or assist you; but not to succour the Afflicted, in whose Number I reckon you: and for this good work alone I will put my self in hazard of death, when occasion shall offer. Now Alpatracy was so wounded, that he was scarce able to stand upon his Legs: wherefore the Knight and Damsel took him under the Arms, and with exceeding great difficulty got him back to his Ships, where his wounds were viewed by the Chirurgions, who took such care of them, that they were soon heal'd, as were like∣wise those of the Knight of the Burning Sword, who had also had such a share in the Cake, that he was fain to keep his Bed. In the mean time the King acquainted his Attendants with the Danger he had been in, telling them, that he brought the best Knight in the World to fight against Frandalon the Cyclops, and that therefore their Voyage to Constantinople should be excus'd. Wherefore he immediately comman∣ded his Pilots to set sail for Silanchy, but storms arising drove them far from thence.
CHAP. XV. How Alpatracy and his Fleet were driven by tempest into Great Bitain, where they fought with a Knight, that kept a Passage for love of the Dutchess of Savoy. a wrecked ship coming into port, with various figures in the water and on the surrounding rocks (same figure used in Chapter 58) FIfteen days and as many nights did the King of Sicily and the Knight of the Bur∣ning Sword sail on the Sea with so favourable a Wind, that they made account they should soon be in Silanchy. But Fortune, who cannot continue long in one e∣state, to follow her usual Inconstancy, rais'd so great a Tempest, that both Knights and Pilots were in frequent expectation of the Hour, that, burying them in the depth of the Waves, should make them becme Food for Fishes. For there was ne∣ther Rope, nor Sail, which was not torn in pieces, so that bring wholly in deair, they abandon'd their Ship to the mercy of the Winds, by which they were driven a∣bout for the space of two Months, not knowing whether, or which way they
went. Yet the Divine Clemency was so propitious to them, that one Sunday mor∣ning they found themselves near the Edge of a Forrest, on which the Sea beating, made there an Harbor, tho' little known, because unfrequented. Then the Knight of the Burning Sword askt the Marriners, on what Coast they were. But, when they could not give him any Assurance, he, tir'd with the Fatigue of that tedious Storm, and seeing the Countrey sufficiently pleasant, desir'd the King to go a Shore: which was no unpleasing Request to him. Arming themselves therefore, they caus'd their Horses to be taken out of the Ship, on which they mounted, them∣selves carrying their Arms and Shields: for they had not any Company with them, but Frandamella, having commanded all the rest to stay for them, and not stir from thence: Being entred into the Forrest, they had not travell'd far, ere they met a Damsel, bitterly lamenting a Knight, whom she bare before her on her Hackney, ve∣ry much wounded in his Head, on which she held her hand, to stop the too great effu∣sion of Blood. Then they askt her his Name, and who had thus outrag'd him. Alas! my Lords, answer'd she, my ill Fate alone, and not any want of Prowess in him, who is at this time esteem'd amongst valiant men one of the most dextrous Knights, that can be found, has been the Cause of this Misfortune. His Name is, Farine of Carsantum, and he has been thus treated by a Devil, who at the go∣ing out of this Wood, keeps a Kay, by which for love of a Gentlewoman, he has in his Company, he suffers not any one to pass. Now curs'd be the hour, that ever She, or He came hither: for he has now above fifteen days perform'd this Enter∣prise with wonderful courage and success. I therefore counsel you to turn back, and take another way, at least if you intend to pass the Key, from which GOD, preserve you, and conduct you in safety: for I am going to look for one, that may apply some Remedy to this Gentleman, my Brother, who, desiring to try himself against him, of whom I speak, took me to accompany him: but it is faln out to him but ill, as you see. This said, she pass'd on, and left the two Knights laughing together, at the coun∣sel, she had given them. Then they rode forward, till they perceiv'd another Dam∣sel, coming towards them, mounted on a Palfrey, and bearing a Shield of polisht Steel without any Device, who saluted them, and addressing her self to him of the Burning Sword, said to him: Sir Knight, I am very glad to meet you, whom I was seeking, to make you a Present of this Shield, as being the compleatest Gen∣tleman, I ever saw. And since you receive such Praise of me, I beseech you to grant me a Gift. Damsel my Friend, answer'd he, ask what you please, you shall not be refus'd, especially considering the good Assistance, you give me by these Arms, of which I had very great need, mine being of so little value as they are. And to say the Truth, his Shield was so par'd in the Combat he had with his Grandfather the Emperor Esplandian, that there was scarce enough left to cover his Arm. The Damsel then deliver'd him that, she carry'd and askt him for the oter: which I will keep, said she, in remembrance of what you have pro∣mis d me, and will perform, when I shall require it of you.
Then she smote on her Palfrey, ollowing her way: as they also did, till they came to the going out of the Forrest, where they perceiv'd a rich Pavilion, erected under an high Elm, against w were many Lances leaning, and saw two Esquires leading a great bay Horse, on which there mounted a Knight, in very rich Armor, when presently a Damsel came o meet them, who, saluting them with a very good Grace, said to them: Sirs, The Dchess of Savoy, my Mistress, who is in this Pavili∣on, sends you word by me, that he, whom you see ready for Combat, hath sworn to her, that he will for love of he defend this Passage, during six whole Months, against all Knights, who would pass this way, on condition, that, if he get the better, the vanquisht shall be bound to leave with her his Shield, and his Name in writing, with promise to serve her, whenever she shall require him so to do. And if her Knight be worsted, she will also be bound to give the Conqueror an Helmet, a Sword, and a Shield, the fairest, and richest, that ever were seen. Therefore consider, what you have to do. Damsel, answer'd the King, if we thought, it were the Dutchesses pleasure, that we should take another way, we would do it for her sake, but conceiving, she will receive greater satisfaction in the Honour, we shall do her Knight by following his Enterprise, return and tell her, we will pass the Kay on the Conditions she has sent us. Certainly, said the Damsel, of such fair and dextrous Knights, as you are, I expected no other Answer. You shall by the way understand, that this was she, who conducted Lucencio out of Constantinople, to find the Knight, which had by force taken from her the Hel∣met, and was not long since arriv'd in Great Bitain, whither the Dutchess of Sa∣voy had brought the fair Gentleman to be made Knight by the hand of King Amadis, of whom having receiv'd the Order, he presently undertook the keeping of the Kay, where he had already continu'd fifteen days with so much success, that above Three∣score Knigts had left their Names, and their Sields, according to the Custom there estabisht. By means whereof his Fame was spread in so many Places, that there was not any thing else talkt of. Thus the Damsel return'd towards the Elm, and in the mean time Alpatracy, King of Sicily, desir'd the Knight of the Burning Sword, that he would give him leave first to try his Fortune, which the other wil∣lingy granted him. The King therefore having lac't on his Helmet, and put his Lance in his Rest, rode leisurely toward the Knight of the Dutchess; who, coming forth of her Pavilion, to be old the Combat, fate her down in a Chair, cover'd with Cloth of Gold, having in her Arms te Rich Shield, the Prize and Recompence of the Victorious Stranger. But before te two Combatants began thir dispute, there came on the right side of the geat Forrest two Gentlemen, arm'd a thoe that ae upon the Point of being made Knights, differing nevertheless in their Blazons: the one eating all Black, and the other White: They were attended by Equires, carrying their Helmets and Shields, all which stood still, to see, how the Combatants would defend themselves.
CHAP. XVI. How the King of Sicily, and the Knight of the Burning Sword, fought one after another with the Dutchesses Knight: and what befel of it. THe Knight, that kept the Passage, as you have been told, having heard the Mes∣sengers Answer, and seeing the King of Sicily ready to perform his Devoir, took his Course against him: and their Meeting was with such impetuosity, that their Spears, piercing each others Shield, shiver'd to pieces, their Bodies joining so vio∣lently, that the Knight of the Kay lost a Stirrup and the King came to the ground being squatted on the grass. Yet he very lightly got up again, and putting his hand to hs Sword, said to the other: A light, Sir Knight: for you shall vanquish me with the Sword before you have my Shield. I am well content, answer'd the other. Then he sat foot to ground, and without any farther delay there began between them a very fierce Combat, which continu'd the space of a long half hour, before it could be perceiv'd, which would have the better, or the worse: Nevertheless a little after the King began to be so enfeebled, that he knew he could not much longer resist without being slain or vanquisht: to obviate which he drew a little aside, and said to him of the Kay: Knight, pray let us take breath: The day is long enough for us to finish this Dispute in. Our Combat, answer'd he, is more for pleasure than Enmity: Therefore I grant you this satisfaction, altho' I have no need of it. The King, hearing this gracious Answer, and very well knowing that it was true, bethought himself (the better to preserve his Honour, and avoid the Danger) to cover with the vail of Courtesie, what he wanted in force, saying to him: In good faith, Knight, your Obligingness has so far vanquisht me, that, considering your Enterpize to be wholly caus'd by the Love and Service, you bear her, whose you are, I am very well pleas'd to keep company with so many valiant men, as you have prov'd your self against, and surrender you my Shield, on which I will write my Name, for to serve the Dutchess, when she shall please to command me. Then he took it from his Neck, to present it to him: but the Knight of the Kay, putting it back with his hand, made him this Answer: Stay Knight, you shall not leave me your Shield, but if you please to let me have your Name, I shall esteem it more than all the Wealth in the world, seeing the Prowess, and great Civility, you are endu'd with: Not that I have vanquisht you, who have your self Conquer'd me, so that I shall be all my life indebted to you, in that you would not constrain me to quit this Passage: for I must have immediately retir'd, and lost the Sight of the thing, I most love, which is my Lady. Then he exactly related to him his Intention, in the same manner the Dutchess had told it to the Emperor Esplandian at Constantinople.
In good faith, said the King, had I known so much, you should have yet had a better bargain of me: for I have my self with a thousand labours too much experi∣mented the Evil, Love works through the least disfavour of the belov'd Object. Un∣derstand then, that I am Alpatracy, King of Sicily, and Metz, arriv'd not ten hours since on these Coasts, and that not intentionally, but by the greatest Adventure ima∣ginable. If therefore you please to spare your self the combating my Companion, I will prevail so far with him, that for my sake he shall forbear it. The Knight, very glad of the Intelligence, he receiv'd from Alpatracy, not so much because he was a King, as because he had heard him accounted one of the best Warriours in the World, answer'd him: Sir, I cannot sufficiently thank your Ma∣jesty for the Honour you do me, who am but a simple Gentleman, and you so great a Prince, that I shall esteem my self happy to go and serve you in France or Sicily, as soon as I shall have satisfied my Lady, and of that you may assure your self: but as to your Offer of desiring your Companion to desist from contesting with me, I beseech you, Sir, to pardon me, and to be content, that I entertain the custom of the Kay, being come hither for no other Reason. You shall do as you think best, answer'd the King: it suffices me, that you re∣member the promise, you have made me, to accompany me in the Conquest of my Kingdom of Metz, as soon as I shall have finisht a Voyage, from which I cannot ex∣cuse my self. Then were their Horses brought them, on which, when they were mounted, the Dutchess approacht, to know, what Discourse they had together, which her Knight recounted to her without omitting any thing, whereat she greatly rejoyc'd. And in the mean time he, that came with Alpatracy, took such pleasure in beholding the Ex∣cellent Beauty of this Princess, that he remembred not that he was to Fight, when the Knight of the Kay, who perceiv'd it, call'd to him, saying: Sir Knight, you have mus'd long enough for once: The custom of this Place requires something else, than musing on Ladies Beauties. Think, Sir, on what you are come for. And as he utter'd these words, he went to the Elm, against which the Lances stood, and chose from amongst them the strongest, he could find. Then Alpatracy's Companion well knew, that the Knight of the Kay was a little stung with Iealousy, nevertheless he took so unpatiently this Remonstrance, that he retir'd back far enough to take a Career, and then seeing his Adversary ready, set spurs to his Horse, as the other also did, encountring each other with so much vigour, that they both brake their Spears. Then turning their Bridles, the strange Knight was putting his Hand to his Sword, when he of the Kay desir'd him to just so long, till one, or both of them came to the Ground: to which he readily consented. The Servants then and Esquires advanc'd to bring 'em new Lances, and they brake each of them six staves, without stirring from their Saddles. This so enrag'd them both, tha at the se∣venth charge, their Spears being broken to the very handles, they had such a Ran∣counter of Shields, Bodies, and Heads, their Horses also meeting Head to Head, and Shoulder to Shoulder, that they both fell stunny'd on the grass. Yet the two Com∣batants
soon got up again, and embracing their Shields, fell furiously so to hew and hack each other, that in a short time the place was all over cover'd with the Plates and Pieces of their Haubergeons and Coars of Mail. The Knight of the Burning Sword had indeed a very great Advantage over the other, the Shield, which was pre∣sented him by the Damsel in the Forrest, being of such a Temper, that neither Lance nor Sword could make any impression on it. Nevertheless he of the Kay behav'd himself with so much courage, that for the space of above a long hour it could not be discern'd, who would have the better. Whilst they were thus in the heat of their Engagement, there arriv'd King Ama∣dis, and Queen Oriana, attended by a great company of Ladies, Gentlewomen, and Knights, who, having heard of the extraordinary Prowess of him, that kept the Kay, were come from London to see this Pastime, with purpose not to part thence in a Weeks time. They perceiv'd then the two Combatants in the Condition, I told you, wherefore they stood still to see, which of them would gain the Honour of the Vi∣ctory, King Amadis himself not knowing what to think of it, seeing them so full of Animosity one against the other. Nor was his wonder a little increast, when he was told, that they had been above two hours in these Transports, without taking the least Repose, or Breath, so that the best, they could expect, was the speedy Death of one of them, if not of both together. Which so astonisht the Dutchess, that she knew not what countenance to keep, tho' she put on a smiling and assured look, the better to keep her Knight in heart: who, willing to leave nothing unattempted, us'd all imaginable Endeavours to vanquish his Enemy. But his Adversary was too strong, and pretending also to the same End, at which he aim'd, press'd him so close that he now no longer did any thing, but parry his Shield to the others Blows: at which the Dutchess, as despairing of his safety, so exceedingly chang'd colour, that he perceiv'd it, and entred into such a Rage, that resolving to win the Horse or lose the Saddle, he took his Sword in both hands, and struck his Enemy with so much fo ce, that he made him set his knee to the ground. Yet he got nimbly up again, and, to reenge himself, so handled the other, that his Armor was in no place of strength enough, to hinder the Edge of his Enemies Sword from piercing to the quick, so that it was plainly to be seen, that, if he persisted any longer, his Death was near. Now, as he was in such extremity, there came in great hast a Damsel, Riding on a Palfrey, who at her approach cry'd out as loud, as she could: Hola, Knights, hola, hear, what I have to say. At this cry the two Combatants drew back a little from each other, and the Dam∣sel, addressing her self to the Knight of the Burning Sword, askt him, if he did not know her. Yes surely do I, answer'd he: for you have this day given me the best Shield in the World. 'Tis true, reply'd the Damsel, and I am come to demand of you the Gift, you pro∣mis'd me; which is, that without any delay you leave this Combat in the Condition it is in, and return with your Companion to your Mariners, who expect you.
In good faith Damsel, answer'd he, you are very short with me, yet I will satis∣fy you, what ever may come of it. Scarce had he utter'd this word, when the Damsel, turning her Bridle and whip∣ping her Palfrey, entred the Forrest, and got soon out of sight, leaving the Knight of the Burning Sword displeas'd even to death, for being hindred to prosecute his as∣sured Victory: for his word having oblig'd him, he would not for any thing in the world infringe it. Wherefore having again mounted his Horse, he and the King re∣turn'd back to the Sea-side, thinking well, that the Damsel had not without mystery appeas'd this Quarrel. Being then come to their Ships, and having caus'd their wounds to be drest, they commanded their Marriners to weigh Anchor, and hoye up Sail, once again steering their course towards the Isle of Silanchy. Now because King Amadis had not seen the Combat between the Knight and Al∣patracy, and that he was told, how they had made Peace together, he askt the Knight of the Kay, whether he knew him, and the other also. Sir, answer'd the Knight, He in the rich Arms is the King of Sicily; but of his Companion I know nothing, save that he has given me the best Rubbing I ever had in my life. In good faith, said the King, he is a gallant man, and I am very glad of the Ad∣venture, which thus parted you: Yet had I thought that the King of Sicily was in these parts, he shou d have kept us company a little longer, unless he had positively refus'd me: for I love and esteem him, as one of the best Princes on the Earth. Now the Knight of the Kay was so wounded, that he was fain to keep his Bed for fifteen days together: and therefore we will leave him at present, to follow another matter. CHAP. XVII. How King Amadis had News, that the Emperor Esplandian had reconquer'd the Defended Mountain, and knew, that 'twas the Knight of the Burning Sword, who had so severely handled the Knight of the Kay. THere was mention made in the foregoing Chapter, that, as the King of Sicily and the Dutchesses Knight were beginning their Combat, there came thither two Gentlemen, one in black Armor, and the other in white. Now you shall under∣stand that, after King Amadis had left the wounded Knight, as he was retiring to a Pavilion, which he had caus'd to be set up for himself, where the Queen Oriana at∣tended him, the two Gentlemen, whom I e'er while mentioned, came to meet him, and making him a very low Abaisance, he in the black Arms spake thus: Mst ex∣cellent Prince, this Companion of mine, nam'd Orizenes, Son to your Nephew, the King of California, and my self, nam'd Brabartus of Sircia, Son to you other Nephew King Perion, and the Queen Pintiqunestra, are come expresly to suppli∣cate
your Majesty, to give us the Order of Knighthood, hoping afterwards to go in quest of, and find out, if it be possible, Perion and Lisvart, who are said to be lost with the Emperor of Trebisond, esteeming our Travel very well employ'd to that purpose, if it may be pleasing to you, and you may by this beginning know the desire, we have to serve you for ever. The King, who had never before seen them, embrac't them, and gave them a very good Reception, saying to them: I am indeed very glad of this your good Will, and accept it very kindly. Then he took them, one in his Right hand, and the other in his left, and led them to Oriana, and telling her, who they were, she receiv'd them very affectionately, the King deferring to make them Knights, till such time as the Knight of the Kay was recover'd. In the mean time he resolv'd to Hunt the Stag, to that end sending for Huntsmen and Dogs, with which he often gave the Ladies Recreation. In the midst of these Transactions, there arriv'd a Courier, sent by the Emperor Esplandi∣an to acquaint the King with his having regain'd the Defended Mountain, the Em∣peror having written him a particular Account of all, that had pass'd between him∣self, and the Knight of the Burning Sword, even the Danger he was in of losing his life, had not the Damsel Alquifa parred them. The King was much troubled at this Fews, as well because the Emperor did not tell him, that he was no longer in dan∣ger, as also by reason there came into his mind the Discourses, made to him by the Child in the Forrest, and the Threats with which he then menac'd him, as it is recorded in the sixth Book of Amads of Gaul. Yet he prudently conceal'd, what he thought, making the Courier no other Answer, but that Thanks ought to be rendred to our Lord for the recovery of the Place, and then askt him, whether he had ever since had any News of the Knight of the Burning Sword. No Sir, answer'd the Courier, he went, as the Emperor has written you word, after the Damsel Alquifa, and we never knew, what became of him. He will be found again some other time, said the King, and went immediately to visit the Knight of the Kay, into whose Tent he had scarce set foot, when there en∣tred a Damsel, Sister to Farineus of Carsantum, who, having left her Brother in the Chirurgeons hands, came to give the King notice, she had met the Knight of the Burning Sword, for she knew by Report, that he had conquer'd the Defended Mountain. And for this cause, as soon as she saw Amadis, she fell down on her knees, and said to him: Sir, the Knight who, as they say, fought Frandalo, and his People, is to my certain knowledge in this Country. Is he so? said the King: and have you seen him? Yes Sir, answer'd the Damsel Then she related to the King, how she met him in the Forrest, as she was carry∣ing her Brother: And for the greater certainty, said she, he had yet his Shield with the Burning sword, and was accompany'd by another in the richest Armor, I ever saw in my Life. Never trust me, answer'd the King, if it were not he, that thus severely treated
our Knight, having chang'd his Arms the better to conceal himself: But had I known him, I would have given him the Honour, and good Entertainment, he merits. Yet he spake against his own Conscience: for he would have undoubtedly put him to death, not being able to forget the Childs Threatning, which I just now mentio∣ned: for which cause he would have sent after him, had he not remembred the Re∣quest, the Damsel made him, to return to his Ship. Now there were many good Knights, who knowing, that the Knight of the Burning Sword was thus escap'd, without being any farther try d in Great Britain, were very much displeas'd: for they would willingly have combated him, to know by experience, whether, what Fame reported of him, were true. And he of the Kay promis d himself, that, after he had recover'd his Health, and acquitted himself of his Oath to the Dutchess, he would not stay in any place, till he had found him, and fought him again. Nor was it long ere he was strong enough to bear Arms: which being come to the knowledge of King Amadis, he told Orizenes and Bavartus, that he would on the mrrow give them the Order, for which cause they kept the watch, and in the morning were made Knights, the Queen her self girding on their Swords. And to the end she and the other Ladies might thenceforth better, and with more ease see the Iusts and Com∣bats, which should be perform'd at the Kay, the King commanded a Seaffold to be e∣rected, on which they continu'd not long idle, before they perceiv'd six Knights come out of the Forrest, marching leisucely towards them. The Dutchess, seeing this, sent her Messenger to acquaint them with the usual Covenants whom they answer'd, that they would for this reason pass the Kay. Then they made themselves ready to fight, as did also the Dutchesses Knight, who so fu∣riously encountred the first, that he threw him to the ground. But he soon got up again, and putting his hand to his Sword, had the Knight of the Kay alight, or he would kill his horse: for he would essay, whether Fortune would not be more favou∣rable to him on Foot, than on Horse-back. This the Dutchesses Friend would no contest with him, but leapt down on the ground, and there began between them a Combat, fierce enough at first, but with this end, that the Stranger was forc'd to leave his Name and Shield, accoding to the Agreement. And to the end I may not hold you any longer in suspence, who it was, he was call'd Atalio, Son to Olias, and the others that accompany'd him, were Garimont, Son to the King of North-Wales, Brucellis Son of Brandoivas, Ysany, Yrguian Son of Count Gandalin, and Brianses his Brother, all which were in such manner receiv'd by the Knight of the Kay, that they had no cause to brag of their Entertainment. Nevertheless making the best of their I-Fortune, the came and paid their Reverence to te King, and the Ladies, converting their Disgrace into pleasant and delightful Discourses, which lasted not only that day, but even to the third day following, when eight other Knight thinking to revenge this injury, fell into the like Mishap: for they left there their Names, Reputations, and Shields. At which King Amadis amaz'd, and in a mn∣ner jealous, deliberated from that time to know by Name the Dutchesses Knight,
very much importuning her to tell him it; but she refus'd it with so good a Grace, that he was contented to expect still, that he might see, whether his Fortune would continue, as it was begun. CHAP. XVIII. How the Knight of the Kay vanquisht Orizenes and Bravartus, who came to as∣sault him in disguise, and of that which hapned. THe Overthrow of the six foregoing Knights gave such an Example to light Vn∣dertakers, that for four days after not one presented himself to hazard his Re∣putation against him, whom they nam'd The Wont to overcome. Nevertheless be∣fore the Week was out, as King Amadis, newly risen from Table, was walking along a Gallery, he descry'd far enough off, two Knights advantageously arm'd and mounted: To whom the Dutchess (according to the Custom) sent her Damsel Mes∣senger, to acquaint them with the Place, by which they were to pass, and the Con∣ditions, to which they were oblig'd. She, who was no Apprentice in such Ambas∣sades, did what she was commanded; but the Knights answer'd her, that they came for no other purpose: wherefore she return'd. Soon after the Dutchesses Knight took one of the biggest Lances, he could find, and setting Spurs to his Horse, ran so vigorously against him, who presented him∣self, that their Shields were pierc't, and their Staves broken to the very Gantlet, disjointing their Armors even to the Flesh, without receiving any other hurt, as they well gave to understand: for at the end of their Career they turn'd about, and putting their hands to their Swords, began to treat one another, not as in a Tour∣ney for Pleasure, but as if they had fought for some Quarrel, which they were obli∣ged to maintain with their Lives. Nor was it a little Honour, that the Knight of the Forrest gain'd there: for, during the Space of a long hour and above, he be∣hav'd himself so valiantly, that the Dutchesses Knight knew not where he was. Wherefore irritated with extream Choler, he lift up his Sword, and thinking to beat down the other, rusht upon him with all his force; but he wth his Shield war∣ded off the blow, which was so violent, that making way through all oposition, it fell upon the Horses head, who immediately dropt down dead, carrying his Master along with him, and so disadvantageously, that he was not able to get up again, the Beast lay so heavy on his Right Leg. And as the Knight of the Kay was alighting, to make him swear the Performance of the usual Covenants, the other cry'd out, that he accorded him both his Name and his Shield, since Fortune had so disfavour'd him through the fault of his Steed. Then there came Servants and Squires, who freed him out of this little ease, and he stood by with a great deal of Confusion, expecting what would befall his Compa∣on. Who seeing the Dutchesses Knight in the lists, and with a new Lance, ran
against him, both gallantly breaking their Spears; but their Meeting was such, that the Dutchesses Knight lost one of his Stirrups, being ready to fall, had he not caught hold of his Horses Mane. The others luck was yet worse: for he and his Steed were in one moment overthrown, so that they were both thought to have broken their Necks, which gave the Dutchesses Knight great occasion to alight, and see how it was. Yet could he not make so much hast, but that his Adversary was got on his Feet, and with his Sword in hand, and Shield before him, fully determin'd to Re∣venge the Injury he had suffer'd. Then they charg'd one another so furiously for three quarters of an hour together that it could not be known which of them had the Ad∣vantage. Nevertheless they were fain in the end to rest, tho' this Repose lasted but a little, e'er they began again their Dispute with greater fierceness, than before: whence there proceeded such Execution, that their Arms were batter'd, and unrivet∣ted, and their Flesh in many places dy'd with Blood, altho' neither the one nor the o∣ther made (for all this) the least shew of fear, but kept up yet a long hour, still persisting to do better and better. But the Spectators were all amaz'd, seeing the Knight of the Forrest, as he was giving a step aside, fall in a Swound to the ground, at which his Companion, who beheld him, being exceedingly discontented, as thinking him to be dead, made the greatest mean imaginable, and throwing his Helmet far from him on the ground cry'd out so loud, that every one heard him: Alas! our foolish Presumption has well de∣ceiv'd us, and yet better chastis'd us: for we ought to consider, that this is the best Knight in the World; and yet we were so temerarious, as unfortunately to set our selves against him. Then were they known, the one to be Orizenes, and the other Bravartus, who (the better to make tryal of their Persons against the Dutchesses Friend) had thus disguis'd themselves, and that to their Dammage: for they were both in danger to lose their Lives, especially Bravartus, who was incontinently disarm'd, and so well lookt after, that he began to grow better than 'twas expected. Yet was not King Amadis pleas'd with their Folly, but privately remonstrated to them, that they ought to have so born this Enterprize, considering the Experience, they had seen of the strange Knight, who was no les glad of his Victory, than the others were sorry for being vanquisht, tho' he were constrain'd to keep his Bed, as well as Bravartus and Orizenes. And in the mean while the Dutchess, who bare him Company, askt him from time to time how he did. Madam, answer'd he, the Joy, I have, in beholding continually your excellent Beauty, so much eases my Illness, that I feel no Pain in any wound, how dangerous soever, especially since they were gain'd in your Service. Alas! my Friend, said she, you do so much for me, that I ought not a little to re∣joyce at it: since there is not in the World any Princess so great, but would esteem her self hapy to have you for hers, considering the Goodness, and high Chivalry, with which you are endow'd. How then shall I, who am but little in respect of an Infinity of other greater Ladies, presume in my Person to merit you? Certanly
there is not any thing else, but the extream Love, I bear you, which promises me, that I ought before all to have the first Place in your Favour, the which I humbly beseech you to grant me. You shall make me, answer'd he, what you please, and I well know, that none can better judge than my self, of how great worth you are in your own person, set∣ting aside your Quality, and the House, of which you are descended: insomuch that neither Lisvart of Greece, esteem'd the Flower of Knighthood, nor all those, who are reckon'd at this day amongst the Valiantest Men on Earth, are worthy to give so much as one Glance of the Eye on the least of your Perfections. And I, who am in comparison of them but a Dream, how much am I render'd yours by the Fa∣vours, you do me? For by them has that Successfulness in Feats of Arms, for which you give me so much Praise, been known to be in me, with all the rest of that Goodness, if I am indu'd with any. I will therefore dye, but I will obtain the Rich Helmet, with the Sword, and Shield of value, which you promise to the best Combatant: well knowing, that, letting them be lost, I shall lose your Love, with∣out ever daring to appear before you. In good faith, my great Friend, said she, you do me wrong, to doubt thus of my Constancy, since there is not any thing either in Heaven, or Earth, that can efface out of my mind the Good, I desire you. And should we happen by Fortune, or otherwise, to be separated one from the other, believe me, I would at the same time separate my Life from my Body, which is, and shall be yours to the end. In this manner did the Dutchess content her passionate Heart, expecting the Re∣covery of her Knight, whom the King visited almost every day. Now Orizenes and Bravartus found themselves some time after strong enough to Travel: Wherefore they humbly besought Amadis to give them leave, to go in quest of Perion of Gaul, and Lifvart of Greece, which he willingly granted them. And for this cause, taking leave of the Court, they Embarkt in the Ship, in which they came, and hoising up Sail, Lancht forth into the open Sea, very much displeas'd at the Fortune they had, in their beginning to bear Arms; nevertheless considering the Valour of him, who had the Advantage over them, they bore this Trouble, the best they could. But forasmuch as we have too long left behind us the Knight of the Burning Sword, we will return to speak of him: and in the mean time Amadis shall remain at the Kay with the Dutchess and her Knight.
CHAP. XIX. How the King of Sicily, and the Knight of the Burning Sword Arriv'd in the Isle of Silanchy, where they fought Frandalon the Ciclops and his Son. THe King of Sicily, and the Knight of the Burning Sword, being departed from the Place, where they had fought the Dutchesses Friend, rode on with ran∣damella, till they came, where they had left their Ships. Having caus'd their Wounds to be carefully lookt into, they commanded their Marriners to steer as di∣rectly, as possibly they could, to the Isle of Silanchy; but they were scarce got a League from Shore, when Frandamella, addressing her self to the Knight of the Burning Sword, presented him a Letter from her, who, as you have heard, parted from him at the Kay, telling him, that she had expresly charg'd her, not to deliver it to him any sooner, and therefore he might read it at his leisure. Then the Knight, taking it, brake open the Seal, to see the Contents, which were, as follow. Ʋrganda the Ʋnknown to the Knight of the Burning Sword sends Greeting. Know that to free another out of Prison, thou shalt within a few days enter into the grea∣test Captivity, ever poor Slave was in, and shalt have thy Soul and Body so affli∣cted, that the same Sword, which has many times sav'd the Place, whence thou art issu'd, shall pierce thro' thy Body, whence it shall be afterwards drawn out by the hands of her, who, thinking to save her self, shall restore thee a Life, worse than a thousand Deaths together. And this Bitterness shall last thee, till such time as thy Fathers House, being at the point to fall to Ruine, shall be preserv'd, and sav'd by its first Possessor. Believe me: for it shall come to pass, as I foretel thee. And to the end thou mayst credit it, understand, that, to preserve thee from a Mis∣fortune, into which thou wast this day about to fall by fighting with the Knight of the Kay, I presented thee the white Shield, and asked thee the Gift, thou grantedst me, and performedst, and for which thou oughtst to give me thanks: because without my Providence thou wert salling into a Repentance for all thy life, as thou wilt better know in time. And sooner trouble not thy self with thinking to know any thing of it: for it would be Labor lost, as it would be als to look for me. Let it suffice thee, that I know thee better, than thou knowst thy self, and that for hope of a Succor, I expect one day to have of thee, I would shew the this Favor. For the rest, follow thy Enterprize, without delaying it on any occasion whatever, since it is the Will of him, whose thou shalt sometime be. Exceeding Pensive was the Knight of the Burning Sword, and what rendred hm yet more Melancholy, was, that he could not comprehend any thing in it, but what seem'd to him grievous to be born. He said nevertheless within himself, that he
was indeed extreamly bound to Urganda, who had done so much for him; but since he could not resist the Destinies, he would pass it over as well, as he could. The bet∣ter therefore to conceal his Thoughts, he began to look pleasantly, saying, Urgan∣da acquainted him, that the Countrey, they had then left was, Great Britain, and that they should thenceforward have fair weather. Thus sail'd they with so favourable a Sea, that the King, and he, being cur'd of all their Wounds, discover'd one Sunday Morning Frandalons Fortress, at the neerest Port to which they Anchred, and went all a Shore, except the Mariners, who continu d aboard, expecting what would be the Issue of this Enterprize, to which the King went, accompany'd by thirty Knights, beside him of the Burning Sword, fearing, that Frandalon, who had taken away the Queen and Lucella, would not re∣store them according to the Conditions of the Combat, he had granted; but instead of doing it, would endeavour by some Treason to Arrest him also. For this cause they marcht in very good Equipage strait to a Grove of Trees, where they were descry'd by the Sentinel of the Castle, who winded a Horn so loud, that they heard him: and soon after they saw, coming towards them with great speed, a Damsel, mounted on a Palfrey, who addressing her self to the King, whom by the Richness of his Armor she took to be the chief amongst them, said to him: Knight, My Lord Frandalon the Ciclops, sends me to know, who you are, that have en∣tred so familiarly into his Land without his Permission. Damsel, answer'd the King, acquaint him, that, if he will accomplish his Pro∣mise, made to Alpatracy, whose Wife and Daughter he injuriously detains, he shall find him, and another Knight, ready to fight him and his Son. But because we cannot confide in his Word by reason of his wicked Disposition, he must send us an Hostage, before we enter the Field one against another; else we shall consider, what we have to do. Ha! ha! said the Damsel, smiling, and shaking her Head: You have Reason: but he comes soon enough, who seeks his own Misfortune, which, assure your self, will soon be shewn you. Then going back the way, she came, she re-entred the Fortress, whence she re∣turn'd a little after to tell the King, it would have been more agreeable to Frandalon, that he had freely and without dispute surrender'd him the Countrey of Sicily, which belong'd to him by rght of Inheritance: Nevertheless, said she, since you are o∣therwise inclin'd, he will send you his only Daughter for the Security, you demand, on condition, that you send back all your People, keeping only with you, him, that is to be the Companion of your Infelicity: for there is none in his Castle, but him∣self and Son, of whom you should have any doubt. Damsel, answer'd the King, his Daughter being come, we shall do, what is fit for us. Then the Messenger return'd back again, where she stay'd not long, before she ought forth Frandalons daughter, so fair, well dress'd, and of such good Behaviour,
as you shall hear. She was a Giantess, with one only Eye, having on moreover a Gown, the Train whereof was an Ell long, cover'd with little Scales of Fishes, and on her Head a Vall, powdred with Snail-shells. Such was the Accoutrement of this Virgin, whom the King courteously saluted: and yet she regarded him not, but addrest her self to the Knight of the Burning Sword, whom she saw without a Beard, and said to him: Are you then he, who are to fight with the King against my Father and Brother? Yes, Madam, answer'd the Knight: but why do you ask? Because, reply'd she, I think some of my Women much fitter for such Dances than you, whom a Ladies Hood would better become, than that Helmet, which thus heats your Head. Tho' the Knight of the Burning Sword perceiv'd himself jeer'd, yet did he but laugh at it, saying to her: In faith Madam, if all the Beauties of this Countrey re∣semble you, it will never be thought, I came hither to make love, and much less, that You and I are one mans Children. Whilst they were in this discourse, they perceiv'd Frandalon, and his Son, come forth: wherefoe the King commanded his Folks to retire, and take with them the Giantess for Hostage. 'Twas not long ere the two Ciclops approacht, the Father being mounted on a Beast, almost like a Dromedary, and having no other Arms, but a Shield of fine Steel, hanging about his Neck, and in his hand a Battle. Ax, massy, and weighty, fit for so genteel and gracious a Gentleman, as he was. So it is, that there was not seen in his time any man bigger than himself, nor had he any more Eyes than his Daughter: and for this reason was he also call'd Ciclops His Son, who was much less in Stature than himself, was Arm'd with a strong Haubergeon. having a great Semiter at his Girdle, and bearing a stiff Lance on his Thigh. Now when they were come within a Career of the King, the Giant cry'd out to him as loud, as he could: Surrender to me my Countrey, if thou art wise, and enter willingly into my Prisons, or thou shalt dye piteously by my hands, and the Villian also, that ac∣companies thee. Ho great Loggerhead, answer'd the King, dost think, we have traverst so many Seas, to be in such manner caress'd by thee? No, no, I am come from Sicily with a good intent to break thy head, as that of the vilest Traitor, and wickedst Wretch that was ever born of woman. Sir, said the Knight of the Burning Sword, I beseech you to let me dispute this Quarrel with him, whilst you take the other to task. I will do what you please, answer'd the King. At this word the Knight pull'd down his Visor, and ran with such str ngth a∣gainst Frandalon, that he nail'd his Shield and Thigh together: Nevertheless the Giant thought, as he pass'd, to be even with him, and separate him in two; but as he lifted up his Arm, the Knight of the Burning Sword avoided the Blow, and the
Ax fell in vain, their Bodies meeting with such force, that Frandalon, wounded and weakned in his Leg, could not keep his Saddle, no more than could the Knight, who with this great Sheck, and by the strength of his Lance, the Girths and Bows of his Saddle breaking, was carry'd over his Horses Crupper, tho' without receiving any farther hurt. Yet was he not at all contented with his Fortune, but getting up in a rage, set his hand to his Sword to strike Frandalon, who being thus wounded, as you have heard could not stand on his Feet, but was fain to sit on the ground, kee∣ping nevertheless an assured look, and giving the Knight at his approach so great a Blow, that had he not supported himself by clapping down his right hand, he had faln flat on the ground. But before the Giant could recover his Ax, the Knight of the Burning Sword, taking him unprovided, cleft his Head asunder, he having nei∣ther Headpiece, nor Cap to save it. His Son (who had not stir'd till then, nor yet the King, the better to behold the Combat of the two others) seeing this, was so surpriz'd, and inflam'd with Choler, that he ran with full speed against Alpatracy, to whom he gave so great a blow with his Lance, that wounding him severely in the Breast, he threw him to the Ground: At which the Knight of the Burning Sword exceedingly discontented, as doubting him to be dead, resolv'd to revenge him; but the young Cyclops little car'd for it, thinking soon to bring him to Reason. And for this cause couching his Spear, he thought at least by running his Horse over him to example him down, when the Knight, who was nimble and quck, turn'd aside, and in his turning gave the others Horse such a Blow, that he ham-string'd him, by which the young Frandalon was constrain'd to alight, and figt on foot. But in the mean time the Knight of the Burning Sword seiz'd on the Giants Ax, with which he made head against the other, who thought with one Blow of his Semiter to hew him down: which without doubt he had done, had it not so turn'd in his Hand, that the very weight of the Blow forc't it from him. But the Knight of the Burning sword was more successful, striking the Giant so home with his great Ax, that cleaving down his right Shoulder, he parted his Soul from his Bod. Then the Conqueror came to the King, whom Frandamella held in her lap in a Swound; nevertheless as soon as his Helmet was taken off, that he might have Air, he began to breath again. Now the Queen Miramynia, and Lucella, had seen him overthrown, and doub∣ting him to be worse than he was, wept and bewail'd him bitterly, and so loud, that the King heard them cry, and lament: Wherefore he took heart, and to recomfort them, got up, feigning that he felt not either Hurt or Pain. The same also he affirm'd to the Knight of the Burning Sword, who, ere he was aware, felt the Blow of a Mace given him by the Giantess, wife to Frandalon: for she, knowing the Death of her Husband and Son, issu'd forth of the Castle, and being full of Rage and Despair, came secretly behind the Knight, thinking to beat out his Brains, and indeed the blow he receiv'd from her, was such, that it made the very Fire fly out of his Eyes, He
would not however strike her with his Sword, but took a Truncheon of a Lane, with which he made her such a Fly-slap, that she began to Stagger, as if she were giving up the Ghost. Then the Knight left her, and return'd to the King, who embrac'd him, saying to him: Alas! Blessed be the day of your Birth: for besides my Life, which you have sav'd, I recover this day by your means, what I most prize of any thing in the World. Sir, answer'd the Knight, give thanks only to your good Right: for I have done nothing, but what I was oblig'd to by reason. But does it not please you, that we go to the Queen, and my Lady your Daughter, whom I see at the Win∣dows of yonder Tower: For I believe, they expect you with very great de∣votion. Let us go then, I beseech you, answer'd the King Then they went towards the Castle, and when they were come nigh, the Qugh call'd out to them, that they should take the Keys from the Giantess, since they could not otherwise get into the Tower, in which, she and her Daughter were enclos'd. The King therefore sent Frandamella to ferth them: and in the mean time they went on into the outer Court, whither they were no sooner got, but they heard their Damsel crying, and calling out for help: wherefore hasting towards her, they per∣ceiv'd her running with full speed from the Giantess, who follow'd her, with the Truneheon of the Lance; so that the King and the Knight could not forbear laugh∣ing, to see the Race, that was between them. Nevertheless fearing, lest Franda∣mella might be out tag'd by the Giantess, they stept forward to save her: but the Giantess turn'd back cross the Fields, carrying along with her the Keys of the To∣wer, and running so fast, that they could not overtake hee Moreover (the better to secure her self) she went so far into the Take which on one side environ'd the place, that the Knight of the Burning Sword could not get near her; but giving her to all the Devils, return'd towards the King, who had in the mean time sent Frandamel∣la to the Shore, to fetch thence Ten of his Knights, who might force the Giantess. They, understanding, in what manner the Fight was ended, were fill'd with unex∣pressible joy. They made hast then out of the Ship, and went strait to the Castle, where before their Arrival, the Giantess, who had seen the King and the Knight of the burning Sword go into the inner Court; and the Queen also withdraw from the Window, came forth of the Water, and ran straight tho' the outward Court into an Hall, where she caught up a strong Bow, and a Quiver full of Arrows, with which returning back, she took the Shield of the Giant her Husband, and a great Semiter which hung at his side: and then got back again into the Lake without be∣ing perceiv'd by the King, or any other: for they were gone up into the Chambers, where they found two men weeping, whom they commanded to shew them the door of the Tower. They trembling through Excess of Fear, led them to an Iron Door, fastned with
a great Pad-lock, whither being come: There is (say they) besides this another door, stronger, and better barr'd, and both of the one and the other the Giantess has the Keys, so that 'tis impssible to get in without her. Sir, said the Knight of the burning Sword, you are greatly wounded: I am of opinion therefore, that you disarm your self, and ly dwn on this bed, to the end I may bind up your Wounds, and then I will consider of some means to reco∣ver your Queen and Daughter. To this the King accorded, who soon after fell asleep, and for this cause the Knight of the burning Sword went forth of the Chamber, to meet those, whom Fran∣damella had been to fetch, whom he saw at the Lake, pursuing the Giantess, but she so infested them with her Arrows, that one of them fell down dead, at which the others, extremely vext, entred so far into the Lake, that they thought, they should not get out again. Then this She-Devil let fly her Arows, with one of which she pierc't a Sted into the Head so that he tumbled down into the Water, carrying his Master along with him, which so terrified the rest, tat they began to draw back. Now the Queen and Lucella beheld this Sport through the Window of the Tower, which the Giantess seeing, let fly at them with such fury, that the Arrow hit against the middle of the Bar, without doing them any hurt, whereat they were astonish'd, as was also the Knight of the Burning Sword, who was then underneath, the Ar∣row falling at his Feet, which so irritated him, that reproaching those, who for fear of death had left the Giantess in Peace, he forc'd them to return to the Assault. Then the Old Woman well knew, that she should hae enough to do, and yet resol∣ving rather to dye, than to fall into their hands, sho so tast at them, that she mor∣tally wounded two of the most likely amongst them, and then went so far into the Water, that twas impossible for them to get near her, unless they swam: Which nevertheless one, more adventurous than the rest, attempted, but as he thought to joyn her, she, raising her self a Tip-toe, gave his Steed such a blow with her Semiter between his two ears, that Horse and Man sank down to the Bottom, not being any more seen. By this the Knight of the burning Sword well knew, that he should never have her without some other Artifice: Wherefore he made them all Retire, and hoping to gain by words what he could not get by Arms, speak to her in this manner: Lady, give us the Keys of the Tower, and I promise you on the faith of a Gentleman that you shall not receive any displeasure; otherwise your Daughter shall pay her Head for your Folly. But she made no account either of his Prayers or Threats: wherefore the Knight return'd to the Castle, and the rest with him, there to find out with the King, some better Expedient: for the Queen and her Daughter were almost famisht; nor could they tell how to give them any Victuals.
CHAP. XX. How the Knight of the Burning Sword slew the Giantess, Wife to Frandalon the Cyclops, and fell in love with the fair Lucella, for whom he did afterwards many high Feats of Arms. NIght being come, and the Knights betaking themselves to their Repose, the King, whose Thoughts were ruminating on his Queen, and Daughter, that remain'd still shut up without Food, or any means of being speedily succor'd, had not yet clos'd his Eyes, when he heard the Voice of one, who cry'd out for fear: Where∣fore suddainly starting up, he call'd out to the Knight of the Burning Sword, saying▪ As I live, my dear Friend, I am greatly mistaken, if they are not outraging the Queen: for I have heard a great cry. At this the Knight rose hastily up, and taking his Sword in one hand, and a Flambeau in the other, ran to the Place, where he heard the Noise, and, as he was going down the stairs, saw the Giantess, who carried the Queen, and her Daughter under her two Arms, flying with all the speed she could toward the Lake. And the the Burthen was very heavy, yet she made such hast, that he could not overtake her, till she was gotten up to the knees in the Water: But then he so surpriz'd her, that she never more parted thence, but immediately dy'd, letting the Queen and Lucella fall into the Water, of which they at that time Drank more than they did of Wine, In the mean time came the others, whom the King had likewise ak'd, and that just in the nick, as the Knight of the Burning Sword was hard put to it, to save the Mo∣ther and the Daughter. Thus were the Ladies assisted, and whilst those, that came last, took up the Queen, he carry'd Lucella to Land, whose Elegancy and excellent Beauty gain'd such power over him, that he found himself seiz'd with Love, a thing very new to him, who had never till then experimented the force of that little god, who nevertheless treated him with so much Gentleness, (tho' contrary to his Cu∣stom) that at the same time he inclin'd the heart of the Princess to a Reciprocal af∣fection, making her no less desirous, than desired. Nevertheless both the one and the other with great Prudence and Discretion carefully conceal'd this Passion, tho' the Knight of the burning Sword had no sooner freed her out of Danger, and set her on firm Land, but (making her a great Reverence) he askt her, how she did. Alas! Sir, said she, my heart beats so vehemently, that I know not, whether I am dead, or living: For GOD's sake conduct me to the King, and tell me whether he be much wounded: for when I saw him yesterday, I was in great doubt of his safety. Madam, answer'd the Knight, he is certainly wounded, but not so much, as you may think, and the Joy, he will receive by your presence, will make him for∣get the greatest part of his pain. Indeed Sir, reply'd Lucella, you have so much oblig'd us, that we are bound to
you for ever, especially I poor Gentlewoman, who never merited Favour of such a Knight. Ma am, said he, I shall esteem my self the happiest man in the World, if you graciously accept the little I have done for your deliverance, since I am so much yours, that under your sole Favour I resolve henceforth to follow Arms, and no o∣therwise, giving my self the Glory to be servant to the fairest Princess, this day living. Vttering this word, he felt the new Distemper of love so strong, that, had the Night béen clearer, his Coulor might have been seen to change ten times in one In∣stant. He would have said more, but the others who had assisted the Queen, approacht, and they went together towards the Castle, where they were met by Frandamella, who with great Ioy cast her self at the Queens Feet, by whom she was graciously ta∣ken up and embac't: for the Queen greatly lov'd her for the sake of ristion her Fa∣ther, who was Governor of Sicily, when Alpatracy and she were disenchanted. Then they Ascended the Stairs, and went into the Room where the King lay sick, who seeing the Queen and Lucella in good Health, was (as you may believe) so fill'd with Ioy, that his Speech fail'd him, and stretching out his Arms, as these two Ladies paid him their Respects, he embrac'd them, the one with his right hand, the other with his left, the Tears falling abundantly down his Cheeks. Then all of a suddain fetching a deep sigh, he lifted up his Eyes to Heaven, and cry'd out: O Soveraign GOD! prais'd be your holy Name! since it has pleased you, after having deliver'd us out of the cursed Conjuration and Enchantment, in which the Sorceress Medea had put us, to grant me this farther Blessing, that I should this day see with my eyes the two persons, that are dearer to me than my own life. Ah! ah! Knight of the Burning Sword! How is it possible, that I shall ever be able to acknowledge the Benefit, I receive by your means? On my faith we are so much oblig'd to you, that we may with reason call you our second Father, as having given us a new life: since without your Assistance we had been certainly lost, these Ladies with ill Usage, and I with Discontent. Now the Queen and Lucella had not eaten any thing in two days: Wherefore the Knight of the burning Sword, seeing that the King was entring into a Discourse, which was like to hold him long, interposs'd, saying: Sir, your new Content makes you forget the long Time, that these Ladies have been without Food. Does it not please you, that some Victuals be brought them? I beseech you, let it be so, answer'd he: for I believe they have very great need. Then were the Tables cover'd, and in the mean time the Queen recited the fear, she was in, till such time she saw the Giantess dead. And who slew her? said the King. Sir, answer'd she, shewing him the Knight of the Burning Sword, this Gentle∣man cleft her Head in two, and she remain'd bury'd in the Mud of the Lake. She's very well lodg'd, said he, GOD, or the Devil will henceforth treat her as she has deserv'd.
In these and other Discourses they pass'd the Time till the Knight of the Bur∣ning Sword bad the King and the Ladies good Night, for to retire till Day into ano∣ther Chamber, where, instead of Sleeping, he threw himself cloath'd as he was, up∣on a Field-Bed, and having before the eyes of his soul, the Beauty of his new Mi∣stress, entred into so profound a Cogitation, that he even forgot himself: Neverthe∣less after he had sufficiently tumbled both on the left side, and the right, he fetcht a deep sigh, and remembring the Threat, that Urganda made him by the Letter she left him at his going out of Great Britain, began to say within himself: Alas, Wise Prophetess, I now well perceive, that the Advertisement, you gave me, is true: for the very day, that my Lady came forth of Prison, I was so made her Captive and Slave, that I have nothing in me free, or that is not subjected to her. Ah, ah! poor Knight of the Burning Sword! Hast thou then hopes ever to receive cure? Certainly thou may'st well discern the assured Perdition: for thine eyes have plac'd the Ladder of thy Faith so high, that thou oughtst rather expect to fall, than to get up. Thus the greatest Damage will be thy own, since thou shouldst have known thy self to be one, that ought not to think of obtaining such an Happiness. O Wret∣ched Slave to thy self! thou wilt henceforward pine away by little and little, desi∣ring that, to which thou art not capable to attain: since the greatest Honour thou canst boast, is thy Education in the Court of King Magadan, from which thou art also causelesly banisht. How dar'st thou then consume thy Time in Thoughts more vain, than can be imagin'd? No, no, learn to command thy self, at least, if thou desir'st to live. Then all of a suddain changing his Opinion, he said: But perhaps I am descended of such a Lineage, that I ought not to have so mean a conceit of my self; and my Heart's taking so high a Flight is an Argument, to make me believe that my Father was a Gentleman, and that it merits something. Ah! how I now dream! Cer∣tainly my Folly is too apparent: For were I son to the greatest Princess on the Earth, yet must I confess my self unworthy to srve such a Lady. And bsides she and I are of different Religions: thus (put case I should arrive at my preensions) I must in gaining her forget our gods, and lose both my Body and Soul, henceforh adoring her, as my only Lady and Goddess. Shall I do it then? Why not? Yes, surely, and, come what may, I will never, while I live, repent so Noble a thought: being assur'd it would be a true Heresy, to essay the withdrawing me from it. Death may indeed well use his power over my body, but not over my Affectins: for, whether he will or no, they shall live for ever, and for ever remain where I have placed them. A Thousand and a Thousand other Disourses made the Knight of the Burning Sword all night, so that he could not take one wink of Sleep till break of day, when he slumbred a little, till one tame to tell him, that the Ladies were ready: wherefore he arose, and entring into their Chambers, after he had humbly saluted them, en∣quir'd how the King did. So well (answer'd he, who overheard him) that I resolve without any farther de∣lay
to return into my Ship, where I hope to have a speedier Cure, than in this place, in which I have receiv'd so much Displeasure. And tho' the Queen and the rest us'd their utmost Endeavours, to disswade him from it, till he were better recover'd; yet could they not in the least prevail with him, who, as soon as ever they had din'd, caus'd them to put up their Baggage, and Em∣bark, commanding the Pilot to set Sail. Which when Galfadea, Daughter of the Cyclops, who had (as you were told) been given in Hostage, perceiv'd, she began ex∣ceedingly to lament. Now she had till then heard nothing of her Parents death; but when she understood, how all had pass'd, never was Woman more discontented. Nevertheless Lucella in such manner comforted her, that moderating her Passion, she no longer dispair'd, but govern'd her self with Patience, knowing, there was no other Remedy. Then the Marriners askt the King, whither he would have them steer their Course. To France, answer'd he: for I design not to return into Sicily, before I have fought the Villian, who has so treacherously caus'd my Kingdom of Metz to revolt, at least, if it please you (said he to the Knight of the Burning Sword) to bear me company. This he willingly granted him, not so much to do him service, as for the Plea∣sure, he took in the Presence of his new Mistress, who, infected with the like Disease could not forbear meditating day and night on his Perfections. And tho' they bore about them the Remedy, proper for their intire Cure, yet they conceal'd it for a time, but at last the Box was open'd, and the Vnguent so fitly apply'd, that their Pain had some ease, as you shall hereafter fully understand. CHAP. XXI. Of a Wonderful Adventure, that befel the King of Sicily, the Knight of the Burning Sword, the Queen, Lucella, and Frandamella, by which they were separated from their Fleet, and in danger of being drown'd. SIx whole Weeks Sail'd King Alpatracy, and his Company, with so favoura∣ble a Wind, that all things went according to their Wish, and the King was so carefully lookt after by his Chyrurgions, that his wounds were wholly Cur'd. But that of the Knight of the Burning sword grew daily worse and worse, seeing so near him (and yet so much out of his Command) Lucella, whom he most affectionately lov'd: and what yet more griev'd him, was, that the Queen never let her be out of her sight. Thus had they not any means to Confer familiarly with one another, but liv'd in hopes, that Place and Time would one day afford them a better conveni∣ency. And in the mean time their sole Delight was to discourse together, conten∣ting their Affections with Amorous Glanses, shot from their Eyes, which
often carry'd News to their passionate Hearts, of what they most desir'd. In this manner they continu'd their Courte, till one Evening about Sun-set, they discover'd within a League of them a little Island, which seem'd to them so plea∣santly planted with Trees, and water'd with an Infinity of little Rivers, that the Queen, weary of the Sea, desir'd the King to Land there, and refresh them, which was no disagreeable Request. He therefore caus'd a Boat to be let down into the Sea, into which He and the Queen went, accompany'd only by Lucelia, Frandamella, and the Knight of the burning Sword, who took his Arms, as the King also did, together with their Steeds, to defend themselves, if any Adventure should give them occasion. Then Frandamella, who serv'd for Pilot, set her self to row, for she had heretofore handled the Oar, for Divertisment. By means whereof she in a moment carry'd them off from the Principal Ship, which the King comman∣ded in the mean time to ride at Anchor, intending to make a speedy Return. They had not Sail'd long, e're driven and master'd by the Wind, they came within a Bow shot of a very high Rock: high and steep I may well call it, for it in a man∣ner toucht the Clouds, and was cut either by Nature, or with such Artifice, that it seem'd to have pass'd the Hatcher or Chisel. On the Top were an Old Woman and an Old Man, holding each other by the Collar, and wrestling with so much Agility, that at every turn the one, or the other, appear'd likely to be thrown. And in fine they mutually tript up each other with so great Violence, that they both without let∣ting go their hold fell into the bottom of the Sea, and immediately also the Rock sank with such an Emotion and Tempest, that the Waves swell'd up with so great a Contrariety of Winds, that the Boat which was guided by Frandamella, was above an hundred times tover'd with Water, and ready to be swallow'd up, greatly terrify∣ing them, and taking from them all hopes of ever getting to Shore, for their guide was so astonisht, that abandoning Rudder, Oar, and whatever was serviceable to them, she fell down without stirring either Hand or Foot. This when Lucella saw, trembling like the leaf of the Tree, she knew no better Place of Security, than the Arms of her Knight, into which, as her last Refuge, she cast her self. Then (tho' the Inclemency of the Weather presented them with so Evident a Danger) this Favor of his Mistress was so agreeable to him, that, as one Nail drives out another, he forgot the Peril of Shipwrack; to let her understand that, in which his life was through the excess of his love, unless she took pity of his Person. For the obtaining of which he began to make her this Remonstrance: Ma∣dam, I humbly beseech you to believe, that the Rigor of this Sea cannot be so cruel or dreadful to me, as is the Violence of that Flame, which consumes me, who love you with such an Affection, that none but my self can feel, or comprehend, unless he will measure it by the Greatness and Excellence of your Beauty: And in this case every person of good Judgment will bear me witness, that tho' I should dy an hun∣dred times a day, yet would not these Deaths be sufficient to merit the least Favour of your good Grace. If then you know, with what Affection my Heart has under∣taken
to serve you, 'tis Imposible, but you should accept it, whih I humbly request you to do fr your own Honor, who are and ever shall be my only Lady & Mistress. These Remonstrances were intermixt with Sighs, accompany'd with such abun∣dance of Tears, that the Fore-part of his Armor was all wet with them. Neverthe∣less she made a shew of not understanding him: but dissembling the great Pleasure, she took in hearing him, grounded her Extreme Fear on the pesent Danger: and un∣der this Color she began to shut her Eyes, and lean back her Head on her Lovers Bo∣som, as if she were in a Swound. But love let him then know, that all this made for his Advantge: Wherefore seeing her so much desir'd Face and Mouth, lying so fit for his purpose, e could not forbear kissing her above a thousand times. Ah! ah! Happy Tongue and Contented Mind! How can my Pen at this time express the Ioy, the Satisfaction, the Content, the Bliss, the Paradice, in which you then were, whilst you were so near one another! Certainly such Felicity is so far from being utterable, that it is unimaginable, and he alone, who has ap∣proacht such Pleasure, ought to be esteem'd happy, for this is the strait way, lead∣ing to the Garden, where is the Rose Bush and Bud, the Fruit and Recompence of all loyal Lovers, for the obtaining of which so many Persons have labor'd: some in vain, and others with content. In this manner receiv'd Lucella these sweet Caresses, the Obscurity of the wea∣ther, the Rain, and the Trouble, they were then in, keeping them from being per∣ceiv'd by the King & Queen: Which so imboldned the Knight, that gaining ground, by little and little; he proceeded from Kisses to pressing her Breasts, which con∣strain'd, Lucella to fetch a déep Sigh, who feigning to be return'd to her self, cry'd out sweetly: O Sovereign GOD! how long shall we be in this danger! Ah my Knight! forsake me not, I beseech you: For without you I had been already dead. The King, hearing her make such pitious Moan, call'd her to him and the Queen. Now the Air was (as I told you) so cloudy, and the Mist so thick, that they could not see one another, which made Lucella wish she had refrain'd speaking, that she might not have lost the Pleasure, she receiv'd from the sweet Caresses, made her by her Lover. But now there was no Remedy. She must (in obedience to the King) rise, and with the Knights Help go to the other end of the Boat, where the Queen was de∣voutly making Vows and Prayers to GOD for their Safety, of which she had little or no Hopes: for the Storm so master'd their Vessel, that during all that day they could not see either Heaven or Earth, nor discern any thing, but an imperuous Tem∣pest, and Clouds, driven by Wind, intermix'd with Hail, Thunder, and Lightnings, horrible enough to daunt the most resolute Courages. In the mean time, those, who remain'd in the great Ship, as the King had com∣manded them, seeing the Weather and Sea change of a suddain, their Sails, Masts, and Rigging shatter'd, and broken to pieces, were constrain'd to follow Fortune, with∣out being able to stay any longer, how unwilling soever they were to leave, and aban∣don those of the Boat, whom they lookt upon as lost. Being in this manner carry'd
away by the Impetuosity of the Winds, they were about the end of the Week driven on the Coast of Sicily, where they entred into Harbor, resolving by common accord to conceal the Misfotune of the others, and to affirm tat they were still in the Isle of Silanchy, the King having sent them away with Frandalon's Daughter. This was easily Credited by those of the Countrey, when they saw Galdafea, who was then put into safe Custody, those of the Vessel relating before all, how the Knight of the bur∣ning Sword had defeared Frandalon and his Son, and deliver'd the Queen and her Daughter, together with the Trouble, given them by the Old Giantess, who slew three or four of their Companions. Then, assoon as their Vessel was repair'd, and resitted, they set forth again to Sea, Steering that Course, in which they soonest hop'd to have News of those, whom they held in a manner for lost. CHAP. XXII. How the King of Sicily, and those, that were in the Boat with him, were driven into the Isle of Argenes, and what befel them. Small boats rowing up a river through a town; to the right, a male and female figure perhaps overlooking the river THe Boat, in which was the King the Queen, the Knight of the Burning Sword, Lucella and Frandamella, was all that day, and the night following, in won∣derful danger, and yet more the next morning: For it spilt upon a Sand, adjoining
to an high Rock, where they were miraculously sav'd, with all, that was in the Boat, nothing at all being lost. And tho' the Countrey was unknown to them, and that they saw neither Path, nor Way, to get up; yet they thought themselves much better amongst the Shrubs and Briars, than amidst the Rage and Tempest of that merciless Sea, where they had been so much tormented. Now Neeessity, which is, as every one knows, the Mistress of Arts, made them search diligently about, till they found a Path, a little beaten, and frequented. Then the Knight of the Burning Sword said to the King; Sir, I think, it would be best, that we should go up, and see, if we can discover any House, or Cottage, where we may get Shelter. Well, let us go then, answer'd he. So they all took horse, and climb'd up, till they discover'd the Tops of certain Buildings, towards which they rode, so that about the closing of the Evening they might easily see the Fortress, which was a great square Castle, environ'd with thick Walls, having Battlements, and being in good Defence. But before they could come near it, they saw at a good distance two great Marble Pillars, where there began a Wall which went to a very fair Tower, and thence to another about a Bow-shoot off where were likewise two Pillars and so to four more, each at a Bow-shoot Distance from the last, before it, and thence to the Castle, which compleated the number of seven. But they saw neither Man, nor Woman, of whom they might enquire con∣cerning the Place, which made them certainly believe it to be uninhabited. Never∣theless considering the Danger out of which they were just escap't, nothing could present it self to their Eyes, which seem'd capable to offend them. They went on therefore, till they came to an high erected Pillar of Crystal, on the Top of which was a great gilt Statue; representing the Person of a Queen, holding in her left hand a Roll, so long, that it reacht down to the Basis of the Pillar, wherein, with excellent artifice were graven certain Caldean Characters, to which she pointed with her Right. Then the King askt the Knight, whether he understood any thing of it: Who, answering, that he did, began to interpret it to him in this manner. Zirfea the Magician, Sister to the great Soldan of Babylon, Queen and Lady of this Isle of Argenes, and of all those, who either are there, or shall arrive here without our Leave, whether of the Pagan Religion, or of the new Law of CHRIST make known. That we have by our Art and Industry built this Palace, call'd the Fortress of Treasure, which shall be defended by seven Guards, appointed there∣unto till such time as the Fair one shall seize on the cruel Sword, to defend and secure her self against the dreadful Lyon, by whose Roarings her doubting and passionate Heart, shall recover new Force, driving away all Feminine Weakness. Then and not sooner, shall these Enchantments end, which we have here establisht. In good Faith, said the King, this is a strange Hap. As far as I can see, we are then arriv'd in the Isle of Argenes, of which I never heard, as I know of: at worst we shall see, what Enchantments and adventures are here.
Sir, answer'd the Knight, Night comes on upon us, and I am of Opinion, that we pass no farther till to morrow, when we will enter the Castle if we can. This was very agréeable to the Ladies: wherefore they Alighted, and (unbrid∣ling their Horses, to let them feed,) sat down at the Foot of the Pillar, where they had not long been, when there came towards them a very Ancient Gentleman, hav∣ing a Faulcon on his Fist. He, knowing, that they were Strangers, askt them, what they were doing: For, said he, if you be perceiv'd by those of the Castle, you cannot avoid being put into the most doleful Prison, that ever wretched persons en∣tred into. Knight, answer'd he of the burning Sword, declare to us then, if you please, on what occasion, and by whom this so unhappy Custom has been ordain'd. I shall willingly do it, reply'd the Old Man, for the pity, I have of you. Under∣stand then that this Countrey is the Isle of Argenes, and this Effigie's the Repre∣sentation of Zirfea, Lady of it, but at present absent, as she has long been, nor is it well known, where one might have News of her, if any one should desire to find her. True it is, that she has left in her place a Daughter of hers, nam'd Axiana, the fairest, I think, in the World, and with her seven Knights, esteem'd amongst the best of Asia, of which four are Giants, and every one of the seven has the kee∣ping of one of these Towers, with express command from the Queen, that no Knight arrive in this Countrey, but that he be kill'd, or taken. Now I am come to acquaint the Guards, that Axiana will within two days return from Hunting, where she has been all this last week. But doubt not, that I will say any thing to them of you: for I would rather divert them from doing you hurt. Then bidding them good night, he spur'd towards the Castle, leaving them in great doubt, and ready to take another way, if they could tell how; but the Knight of the burning Sword stopt them, telling the King, that, since there was but one Guard in each Tower, they ought to try their Fortune: For I hope, said he, that with the help of our gods we shall defeat them, and have the Place at our Command, before Axiana returns. And should it not be so, you know, Sir, the little means, there is to save us, this Countrey being encompast with the Sea, and we without Ship or Boat: So that it were much better to dye speedily, than to languish longer. One thing there is which exceedingly comforts me, to wit, a firm Belief, that, what ever has hitherto befaln us, is some fatal Destiny, the Issue of which will perhaps be better, and more honourable, than we expected: and therefore I beseech you not to be troubled, but to recomfort these Ladies, whom the seeing you so perplext has very much discontented. And to say Truth, they wept, like Persons in despair, which gave the King bet∣ter occasion to believe the Knight recommending their Fotune to his Powess: and for this cause the King told him that he believ'd him, and that, as soon as it was day, they two would take Horse, to go and fight the Guards, whilst the Ladies re∣pos'd themselves. But this the Queen would not hearken to, saying, that she
would be present at the Good or Evil that might befall them. At which the Knight of the burning sword receiv'd great Pleasure, hoping to do such Feats of Arms be∣fore Lucella, as should make her love him the more. CHAP. XXIII. How the Knight of the burning Sword conquer'd the Castle of the Isle of Argenes and of the Combats he fought there. THus they pass'd a great part of the Night, till such time as the day began to ap∣pear. Then they all took Horse, and the Knights making themselves ready for the Comat, marcht on to the first Tower; and, as they went, the Knight of the burning sword besought the King, that since they were to fight the Guards one after another, he would be pleas'd not to enter into fight, as long as himself, should have Ability to resist them: which the King willingly granted him. Whilst they were discoursing thus, they came to a very deep River, over which was a Bridge of Wood, whereby they were to pass into the first Tower. Then they presently heard an Hon sound, and perceiv'd a Knight of immense Bigness come forth, mounted on a marvellous strong Steed, who from the Entrance of the Bridge, call'd out to him of th burning Sword, (for he march'd before the King) saying: Sir Knight, leave your Arms, and come without constraint into my Prison, else I will make both you, and your Companion, lose your Heads. But he answer'd not a word to all these Threats, so that running one against a∣nother, they met with so much violence on the Bridge, that their Staves breaking, the Knight of the Tower and his Steed were tumbled into the River, whence the Horse at last got out, leaving his Master in the bottom, who never in the least com∣plain'd of it. And the Knight of the burning Sword marching on, the Watch, who had sounded the Horn, made a great cry and went off. Then the King and the Ladies, which accompany'd the Knight of the burning Sword, drew near, and pass'd the Tower together, at coming out of which they heard another Horn sound from the next Fortress. This they rightly thought to be the calling forth of the Guard to the Combat: wherefore the Knight of the burning Sword went to meet him: and when they were within a Career of one another, the Knight of the Tower, riding on a great black Horse, cry'd out as loud as he could: Yield your self, poor Wretch, and resolve to suffer perpetual imprisonment, and Hunger: for by you has my Companion lost his Life, as we have understood by the cry of the Watch. Now the Knight of the burning sword had gotten the King's Lance, wherefore holdng himself more secure, he thus answer'd the other: By my Head, Sir Knight, i your Companion be dead, so much the worse for him: and because He, who
thinks to revenge anothers Disgrace, very often increases his own, I am of opini∣on, that you should forbear any farther Threats, and think of defending your self against me. Then they Spur'd one against the other, and their meeting was such, that the Guard break his Spear on his Enemies Shield, who, having better taken his Aim, pierc'd him quite thro' the Body, so that he fell dead on the Grass. Which the second Watch seeing, made the like Cry with the former, and then disappear'd, whilst the King and the Ladies approacht the Tower, which they found shut; but the Keys hanging in an Iron Chain by the Gate, they open'd it. They were scarce entred when the third Watch, sounding as the two former had done, call'd them forth to meet the next Guard, who was ready for the Combat: Wherefore the Knight of the burning Sword advancing, so coming from far, a great Giant, arm'd in very strong Armor, having two Steel Maces, one upon his Shoul∣der, and the other at his Saddle-Bow, who, before they met speak thus to the Knight of the burning Sword: Knight, the Combat between thee and me is (according to the Custom of this Tower) to be perform'd with Maces: wherefore take, which of these two thou wilt, and think of doing thy Devoir: nevertheless if thou wilt yield to my Will, I shall perhaps have mercy on thy Person, which is in so great Danger. Certainly, reply'd the Knight of the burning sword, I will first see how thou canst strike: for I never had a Desire, or Thought to receive Mercy of such, Perso∣nages, as thou art. Well, choose then; Said the Gyant, presenting him the two Maces, of which the Knight took that, he lik't best, and immediatly they began in assault each other with such Fury, that at the two first Blows they both fell down, as dead: Wherere the Watch of the third Tower cast forth a louder and more pitiful Cry, than any of the rest, and incontinently absented. Lucella then certainly thought, that she had lost her Love, at which she so exceedingly, tho' inwardly, griev'd, as to wish her self dead; when she saw him get up again, and run upon the Gyant, whom he thought to be only stunny'd. But his Condition was much worse: For his two Eyes were started out of his Head, and his life wholly gone. Then the King brought the Con∣queror his Horse, and the Ladies drew near, to know, how he did. So well, answer'd he, that I have no Hurt, to hinder my passing on, if nothing worse befalls me. In good faith said the Queen, if you continue, as you have begun, you will with good right gain the Name of the best, and happiest Knight; that ever was. Saying this, they pas'd the Tower, and the Watch of the fourth sounded, as the others had done. Then of a sudden there presented himself a Knight of a wonderful Stature, having his Head like to that of an English Mastiff, his Armor being a Shirt of Mail, with a great and strong Shield, a Semiter by his Side, a Bow in his Hand, and at his Back a Quiver, hangingfull of Arrows, one of which he held rady to shoot. And because he was of an Isle, nam'd Cynocephalia, where all the
Inhabitants have the Faces of Dogs, he had thence taken his Name, being call'd Cynocephal. Now he came to fight on foot, which made the Knight of the Burning Sword, think, he should have enough to do with this new sort of Arms; neverthe∣less bowing down his Head, he resolv'd to expect his Fortune, which was such, that Cynocephal, seeing him march strait towards him, before his Approach, let fly an Arrow with such strength, that piercing the Horses Frontal, it entred into his Brain, and kil'd him. Then he took another, wherewith he wounded the Knight in the thigh, which so enrag'd him, that feeling nothing at present of the Wound, he got hastily up again, and ran upon his Enemy, being well cover'd with his Shield, in which he receiv'd two Shots more from the Dogs-face, with whom, in fine, he came hand to hand, and their Combat was so sharp and cruel, that the Pieces of their Armor fell thick to the ground. And thus striking on the right hand, and the left, the Knight of the Burning Sword, sorry, and asham'd at so long a Delay of his Victory, especially in the presence of his Lady and Mistress, stept forward, and lift∣ing up his Arm, as if he would strike the Cynocephal on the Top of his Head, seiz'd with his left hand on his Shield, which he pull'd to him with so much strength, that plucking it from his Neck, he brought him with his Nose to the Ground. Never∣theless he suddenly got up again, and thinking to revenge himself, let fall his Semiter with all the force, he could, at the Knight of the Burning Sword; but he stepping aside, avoided the Blow, and as he turn'd, gave the Dogs-face such a Thrust in his Throat, as cut his Wind-pipe: At which the Watch of the fifth Tower won∣dering, wound his Horn, and crying out with a piteous voice; disappear'd, whilst the King and the Ladies advanc'd, doubting their Knight to be more wounded, then he was. To remedy which, Frandamella instantly alighted and bound up his wound with a clean Linen Cloth. The Blood was no sooner stopt, but the Guard of the fifth Tower presented himself, no less furious than the rest, for besides that he was a Gi∣ant of a very fierce Counteance, he would have the Combat to be with Axes, bring∣ing for that purpose two upon his Shoulders, of which he gave the choise to the Knight of the Burning Sword, who, in fine, discomfited him, and the Sentinel sounded after∣wards as the former had done. The fifth Tower being then conquer'd, and the King with his Train having pass'd there came forth of the sixth a young Knight, about thirty years old, having no o∣ther Arms, but a sword and a Cloak, with which he hop'd to defend, what he was ap∣pointed to. Then he marcht towards him, who had already Conquer'd so much, and at his approach began to say to him: Certainly, Sir Knight, you ought in reason to be much esteem'd having defeated five such, that it is difficult to find their Equals: And to shew the Truth of it, it is not within the Memory of Man, that ever any, besides yourself, got by force to the third Tower: but since Fortune has been so favourable to you, and you are, as I see, resolv'd to follow it, you must observe the Conditi∣ons requir'd in this place, which are such. The Combat between us two is to be with Sword and Cloak, without any other Arms whatever: Therefore
you may well ease your self of all this Armor, which is, I believe, very burden∣som to you. Now the Knight of the Burning Sword was excellently well skil'd in fencing, and for this cause not willing to refuse the others Offer, made him this Answer: In good faith I am displeas'd at the Death of your Companions, tho' you cannot but know, that it was not so much thro' my Fault, as their own, and the perverse Custom of this Place, for which I am sorry, that if you think sit to leave it at present, with∣out constraining me any farther to fight, assure your self, you will lay an Obligation on me for ever. For, besides that you seem to me a valiant man, you have in the beginning so prais'd me, that I know not, what Thanks to give you. Truly, said the other, were I Master of my self, our Accord would be easily made: but I have given my Faith to her, that brought me into these Coasts, to defend the Tower to my death. And I was indeed much surpriz'd, when I oblig'd my self to it: For she askt me a Gift, which I granted her, without knowing what, whereof I have had leisure enough to repent me. Since it is so, answer'd the Knight of the Burning Sword, I would not for any thing desire ought of you, that may blemish your Honor. Then he call'd Frandamella to help him off with his Harness, of which, when he was devested, the Knight of the Castle, seeing him so fair, and well-proportion'd, con∣ceiv'd a very great Esteem for him. Now he wanted a Cloak or Mantle: but Lu∣cella, who heard all the Discourse, sent him hers by the Damsel, whom she charg'd in her Name to desire him, that he would for her sae be very careful to defend himself. It is for you, perfect Lovers, to judge, how great Pleasure his Soul then re∣ceiv'd: Did not Love then do much for him, manifesting to him at that time, and so apparently, the Good she desir'd him, for whom he dy'd day and night? Truly you must confefs, that this sole Favour was sufficient to inspire him with so much Courage, as he would not only have dar'd to fight the Gentleman, that assail'd him; but even Atlas himself, nay the very Giants, which Jupiter enclos'd in the hollow Mountains, he over turn'd upon them. This he well let be understood by the Answer he made Frandamella, saying, M dear Friend, since my Lady has had such Remembrance of me this precious Mantle shall not part from my Arm, till either the Honour of the Combat be holy granted me, or Death separate my Soul from my Body, which in this world is only to obey her, as the fairest, discreetest, and most virtuous Princess on the Earth. Scarce had he utter'd this word, when the Damsel retir'd: for the Knight of the Castle would proceed to the Combat which was between them the most gallant that ever was seen. For if the one understood the Art and Method of such Sort, the other shew'd himself an expert Master i it: so that to consider it well, it was no less pleasant to behold them, than the Exercise was to them dangerous. However they continu'd long, and many Blows and Thrusts pass'd betwixt them, without ever coming to the quick, so valiant, vigilant, and dextrous they were. And tho' he of the Tower us'd much Artifice, and made many false Osiers, to endae,
and surprise the other; yet could he not in the least injure him, nor yet so much as touch his Cloak, which he guarded and defended, more than his own Person: where∣at his Enemy being irritated, as thinking he disdain'd him, stept forward, and in step∣ping lifted up his Arm to cleave his Head, which the Knight of the burning Sword so well obviated, that falling back, he made an offer of giving his Adversary a Thrust directly in the Breast, but letting fall his Arm, gave him such a cut in the Leg, as brought him to the ground, being not able to stand any longer: wherefore he cry'd out: Ah, ah, Knight! since success is so much at your command, pass on, and fol∣low your Fortune. And as he would have spoken more, the Watch of the next Tower (instead of win∣ding his Horn, as the others had done) made a great Exclamation, crying out: Come forth Soldiers, come forth, or we are all lost. The Knight of the burning Sword then well thought, that he should now find more to do, than he had done hitherto: wherefore he came to Lucella, and putting his knee to the ground, gave her her Cloak, as whole, as he had receiv'd it from Frandamella, saying to her: Here, Madam, is, what you lent me, which I have to the utmost of my Power defended against my Enemies Sword, to shew, how dear I esteem what∣ever comes from you. Then he hastily took his Arms: for, he already eard the Noise and Bustle of those that were coming forth, whom he instantly receiv'd, being six arm'd, and accoucred Knights, and four Servants, having Habergeons, and Head-pieces of Iron, who all ran together upon him. Then began a Fight of ten against one; but the King would take a Paty, and fell in amongst them, like one, whom the matter nearly con∣cern'd. Which the four Slaves seeing, they went aside, and seiz'd on the Ladies, whom, notwithstanding all their Crs and Lamentations, they carry'd into the For∣tress. Which caus'd such a Fury in the two assaulted Knights, that sparing neither their Skin, nor their Flesh, four of the others fell dead in the place, the two, that remain'd, flying with all speed to save their lives; but they were soon overtaken, and Treated like their Companions. Thus the King and the Knight entred into the Tower, into which they had seen the Ladies carry'd, whom they found not there: and for this cause the went towards the seventh, near which they met the four Villains, returning from their Enterprize, to assist those, that were assaulted, but whatever Resistance they could make, the two principal of them were slain on the Place, and the others taken to Mercy, on Promise of declaring, what they had done with the Queen and her Company. Now as they were going into the Castle, the Knight of the burning Sword seeing that the last Guard did not appear, as the other had done, enquir'd of the Villains, where he was. My Lords, answer'd one of them, the Infant Ariana our Princess, who Inti∣mately loves him, has taken him within these few dayes an hunting, and we were told yesterday by one, who came from them, that they would be here this day, or to morrow at farthest. Nor could any thing have befaln you, more favourable
than their Absence: For if he, for whom you ask, had been here, tho' your Prowess be great, nay extream, yet could you never have escap'd out of his Hands without Death, or Imprisonment. So long continu'd they this Discourse, till they came into a lower Hall, where they found the Queen, her Daughter, and the Damsel, ty'd with great Cods, and more dead, then living: But their Fear was soon over, when they perceiv'd the King and the Knight of the Burning Sword, who incontinently unbound tem. It was now Night, and they had neither eaten, nor drank all that day: Wherefore they askt their Prisoners, whether they had any Food, who answer'd them, that they had. Go then, and fetch some, said the King. They did so, and He, with the Knight of the Burning Sword, and the Ladies took their Repose. And when it was thu to be take themselves to Rest; they were conducted into a Chamber; where there were three Beds, having about them Curtains of Gold and Silk, the Hanging of the Room being exceeding rich, and curiousl wrought. And whilst the were busy'd in viewing them, the King perceiv'd the Entrance to a Stair-case, th stes whereof were of Porphyty and Iasper, which made him askt, what airs those were. Sir, answer'd he, to whom he spake, 'tis the Ascent to the Chamber of Treasure, into which none can enter: But he, who sees the Riches of the Perron plac't before it, has enough to wonder at. It shall be then for to morrow, said the King: Repose being at this time very necessary for us: Nevertheless, good Sir, I would gladly know, by whom the Cham∣ber is so well defended, and what Treasure there is in it, that ought to be so much esteem'd. Sir, answer'd he, this I cannot well tell you none but the Queen Zitfea, having ever entred into it, not so much, as her own Daughter. I have indeed heard it often affirm, that so great Riches are scarce to be found in the World besides. But it is so guarded by Enchantments, that none dare approach it. We will not, said the King, stick in so fair a way, but will to morrow combat the Devil, rather than not see, what it is. Go you therefore to sleep, and leave us two lighted Tapers in this Chamber. The servants having done, what he commanded them retir'd. The King then, and the Knight of the Burning Sword lay'd themselves down, arm'd as they were for ea of being surpriz'd. The Ladies also repos'd themselves on another Bed, without put∣ting off their Gowns, or any other part of their Habits.
CHAP. XXIV. How the Knight of the Burning Sword went up to the Chamber of Treasure, where the Emperor of Trebisond, Lsvart of Greece, and Perion of Gaul were Enchanted: And what befel them. THe Knight of the burning Sword, having two several Wounds, one in his Leg, made by Cynocephals Arrow, the other in his Heart, by Lucella's Beauty, could not take any rest for the Light of the Tapers that were burning in the Chamber: But assoon as they were extinct, thinking by the Help of the Darkness to close his Eyes, there came such a Brightness from the Stair-case, we lately mention'd, as made him suddenly start up: And doubting some Treason, he hastily took his Hel∣met, and his Shield, and with his Sword in hand going strait to the Place, whence this great Light proceeded, he began to ascend the Steps towards the Chamber of Treasure, till he came under a Perron, supported by seven Pillars of Iarinth, so transparent and shining, that he easily perceiv'd in each of them an Image of Gold, so curiously wrought, that they wanted nothing but Life. Two of these represented the Effigies of Men, and all the Rest of Women: Whose Robes were so cover'd with Diamonds, and other precious stones, that from the Splen∣dor of them issu'd such a Light, as twenty Torches could not have yielded a greater. Now each statue had in its left hand a Roll of Gold with Latin Letters, and with the Right pointed to the Walls, towards which their Faces were turn'd, whereon were painted with marvelous Artifice certain Histories, which I am going to re∣hearse to you. The first statue, representing a Man, had on his Head an Imperial Crown, and in his Roll were written these Words: Apolidon, Emperor of Constantinople, the most excellent of all Magicians, that ever were. The Histories, he pointed to with with his right hand, were the Proof of the Ark of loyal Lovers, and the Defended Chamber, where Amadis and Oriana acquir'd greater Fame than all others, that attemted to enter. The Trial of the Sword and Gar∣land, with the Kerchief, cover'd with Flowers, which this excellent King and Queen gain'd, as you find it discrib'd in the second Book of Amadis of Gaul. Hard by was pictur'd, how Lisvart of Greece pluckt the Sword out of the Lyons Body before the Well Gate of Constantinople, at such time as it was besieg'd by Armato, and those of the Firm Island were disenchanted. The next Statue was of a very ancient man, in whose Roll were the following Words. Alquif, the great Philosopher, more intelligent insupernatural things, then any man in his time.
The Histories, he shew'd painted on the opposite Wall; were the Ship, govern'd by Apes, when he sent to fetch the King of Great Britain, and those, whom Urgan∣da had stay'd in the Palace of Apolidon by Force of her Conjurations: the manner, how he arriv'd at Fenusa, where Perion of Gaul, and Lisvart of Greece (surnam'd, the one the German, and the other the Solitary Knight) justed against all Comers, and were by him discover'd, after they had a long time conceal'd themselves. Next to this on another Pillor, was the Image of a Queen, holding her Roll, on which was witten: Medea, expert and skilful above all others in the Secrets of Nature. The Painting over against her represented King Alpatracy and his Wife enchan∣ted, with the Helmet and Crown, gotten by Lisvart of Greece, and Onoloria, as is recorded in the sixth Book of Amadis of Gaul. The next Statue was of a Woman, whose Roll had these Words: I am the Damsel Enchantress, who was second to none. The opposite Painting shew'd, how the Emperor Esplandian got the Sword, the Treasure, the Image of Jupiter, and the Lion, with the Tombs, as it is at large in the fifth Book of the said History. The next Image shew'd an honourable Old Woman, wearing a Crown, in whose Role was this Line: The Princess Melia, the most exquisite Sorceress in the World. The Wall was painted with the History of the Adventurous Fountain, where Esplandian found the Infanta Eliaxa; the manner, how the said Melia was, toge∣ther with King Armato, brought Prisoner into Constantinople; how the Dragons carryd them, and Urganda the Unknown, away in a Chariot; also the Comet of the Flaming Sword, which so long held all Thrace in fear, when Lisvart was Prisoner. The next Statue was also of an Ancient Woman, cloath'd like a Matron of that time and in the Writing, she held, were these Words. Organda the most wise Enchantress. She directed to the History of the Enchantment, made by her in the Castle of Apo∣lidon over the Kings Amadis, Galaor, Agraies, and other Princes, Lords, Ladies, and Gentlewomen, as you find it amply related in the fourth Book of the said Histo∣ry. The Ship also of the Serpent, with the Frights, she many times caus'd by her Arrival at the Port of Fenusa. The seventh and last Statue represented the Effigies of a Queen, holding so long a Roll, that it environ'd the whole Circumference of the Perron, having these words engraven in it; Zirfea, Queen of Argenes, Magician, a Lover of Knowledge, and of the Knowing in the Art, wherein I have been instructed, by which (to perpetuate my Memory) I have built this Perron, and what it contains, especially to put Posterity in admi∣ration by the strange Facts of those, that are here represented, who have neither before, nor since, had their Equals.
With her other hand she pointed to the Entrance of a Stair-case, the steps where of were of white Saphire, the Perron being all cover'd with Vine-work, the Leaves of which were of Gold, and the Grapes of Rubies, Diamonds, and Emeralds, with an infinite Number of small Birds, and little Creatures, so curiously wrought, that they seem'd to have been forg'd by Nature her self. The Knight of the Burning Sword took so much Pleasure in this place, that the longer he lookt, the less weary he was of looking, contemplating the Historys, pain∣ted about the Perron, most of which he had often heard recounted in the Court of King Magaden. And as he was turning thus from one side to another, he espy'd a great Lyon, sleeping close by the latter Stair-case, up which he went, and having A∣scended the first four or five steps, he perceiv'd a Portico, under which was a Door shut, and all of a flaming Fire; nevertheless there was a Damsel leaning against it, who seem'd to him of a Stature, above the common Proportion of others, but otherwise very fair, tho' her Countenance seem'd full of Discontent, and deep Melancholly, for she held her Head leaning upon her left hand, and in her right hand a naked Sword, from the Pommel of which proceeded a Brightness, like to that of the Planet Mars, when he is in his greatest Vigor. And altho' she had her Eyes shut, like one in a slumber, yet did the Tears trickle down her Face, and she ever and anon fetch'd such deep sighs, as struck the Knight of the burning Sword with so great wonder and com∣passion, that addressing himself to her, he said: Damsel, I beseech you, conceal not from me the Cause of your sorrow: for I assure you if I can remedy it, you shall find me ready to serve you. At this word she open'd her Eyes, and seeing him so near her, rous'd up her self, as one throughly frighted, answer'd him with great wrath: Ah! rash and premsuptuous wretch! hast thou then dar'd to attempt the Coming up hither? Thou shalt indeed presently receive thy Reward. Then stretching out her Arm, she gave him such a Blow with the Sword, as pierc't his Shield, Armor, and Body, to the very Hilt, the Knight falling all along on the Place. But then, as if she were come to her self out of a deep Sleep, she presently cry'd out: O Iupitor! Alas what have I done? I have crully slain him, on whom my Life depended! Then sitting on his knees, she took the Knights Head in her Lap, and having fixt her Eye on it, her Sorrow grew so strong, as if Heart would have cleft asunder: And in this Passion she fell down in a swound upon the wounded Body. Lucella was not then asleep, but sollicited by the Love, she bare her Friend, had him continually before the Eyes of her Imagination, and heard the Damsel's Re∣grets and Cries: Wherefore not knowing, what to think of it, she look't strait to∣wards the Place, where she had seen him ly down, but he was no longer there: at which, surpriz'd with an unusual Iealousy, she rose up, and ran hastily towards the stair-cae, whence, in her opinion, the Lamentations proceeded, which gave her this Trou∣ble. She went up to the Perron, where she again heard a Voice, saying pitifully: Ah, ah, poor, miserable, and unfortunate Gradafilea! What will become of thee,
having with thine own hands slain the Person, thou most lovedst in the world, and whom thou hast taken so much pains to find? O thou most unhappy of those wret∣ches, that live banisht from all Felicity, how is it possible, that seeing, with thine own Eyes, the Death of him, caus'd by thine own Act, who was more dear to thee, than thy self, thou shouldst any longer continue in this World, out of which thou hast driven him! Ah Queen of Argenes! thou greatly deceivdst me, when, at my entrance into this place of Tribulation, thou assuredst me, that at the time, my Hope should be wholly lost, my heart should have Repose, seeing him, whom I desir'd to find. But (alas!) this promise of thine is quite overthrown, and I cannot well ima∣gin, what displeasure I have ever done thee, that thou shouldst purchase me so into∣lerable a Discontent! One Remedy there is, which thou cannot deprive me of, which is, the death that I will give my self, to follow, and bear him company, in so severe cruelty, as has parted from these hands, stain'd with the blood of my Friend. When Lucella had some time hearkned to her, and perceiv'd, she spake of the death of a Friend, her Blood was in such a Commotion, that she could no longer bear, what she thought, so that she went up to her, who was endeavouring to pluck out the Sword for to murther her self: Where seeing the Knight stret'ht out at his length, she cast forth so loud a Cry, that the Lion, who was asleep, awak't, and fell a roaring in the most dreadful manner, that ever was heard, so that Lucella, with the Fright, was fly∣ing away, when the Beast caught hold of her Gown, by which, with his Sharp claws, he so violently pluckt her to him, that she was ready to fall down backwards. The poor Lady was then in certain expectation of death; nevertheless, whether thro' Cou∣rage, or thro' excess of Fear, she had recourse to the Sword, that she saw in the Body of her Lover, which she so strongly pull'd at, that she got it out of his Body, not without great Mystery: for the burning Door instantly flow open with such impetu∣osity, that the Inhabitants, ten Leagues round, assuredly believ'd the Ruine of the Place, and of the whole Island. And the Flame so evidently pass'd thro' the Halls and Stair-cases, that the King and Queen, who were asleep, awake, but not without being frighted: Because this Brightness pass'd away like a Shadow, leaving the Place so dark, and full of Smoak, that for above a quarter of an hour, there was no∣thing to be discern'd, but Obscurity and Blackness: During which, the Knight, whom Gradasilea and Lucella thought dead, rose up well and lusty, and yet more amaz'd to see them both stretcht out on the Grownd, not stirring either Foot or Hand. Now take my word for't, he paid. Vse for the Displeasure, his Mistress had receiv'd: For seeing her in such Condition, he was ready to despair, and make himself away, when taking her in his Arms, to give her a Farewel kiss, no sooner were their two Mouths joyn'd together, but that her vital Spirits return'd to their Natural Head, so that coming again to her self, and knowing him to be alive, whom she esteem'd, as bead, she said to him. Ah, ah! my dear Friend! Do I dream, or did I not just now see you wounded thro' the Body? I take GOD to witness, that I verily thought your Life at an end.
Madam answer'd he, there is nothing more true, than that from you alone I hold my Life, and that you only have Power to give it me, or take it from me, when you please, as being she on whom all my Good, all my Happiness, and all my For∣tune depends. As he finish't this Word, Gradafilea, who had likewise been in a swound, rose up and seeing the Knight of the burning Sword well, and on his feet, cry'd out a loud: O Infanta Gradafilea! Now certainly I esteem all the Affliction, thou hast pass'd thro' well employ'd, since the Promise, which heretofore the Queen of Argenes made thee, is truly accomplisht. Then csting her Arms about the Knights neck, she said: O my sole Friend, Lisbart of Greece, how many ill nights, and worse days have I endur'd, to recover you: but thanks to the gods, now that I hold you embrac'd, this Torment of mine is wholly turn'd into pleasure and repose. During these Caresses, the Knight of the Burning Sword could not imagin, whence they proceeded, having never seen Gradafilea: nevertheless he thought, that perhaps she knew his Father and Mother, and that his name was Lisvart, as she call'd him. But Lucella, who found her self concern'd, was not so satisfy'd, perswading her self, that she alone, and none else, ought to have share in her Lover, who, loving Gra∣dafilea, had thus conceal'd himself from her. And to say the truth, the precedent Lamentations and Regrets, gave her a great Mistrust, which was much augmented, when she saw him let himself be embrac'd, without contradicting it, tho' his Inten∣tion tended to another end, being only desirous to know of Gradafilea, where she had seen him, to know him so, as she made a shew of; and for this reason he said to her: In good faith, Madam, I believe, that you take me for another: for I never in my life, had any Acquaintance with you, as I know of. How? answer'd she: Are not you then Lisvart, Son to the most renowned Em∣peror Esplandian, and the Empress Leonorina? He, whom I deliver'd out of the Prison of the Infanta Melia, for saving whose life, I was almost put to death? And you tell me, that you never had any Acquaintance with me! Certainly, if you call to mind Gradafilea, Daughter to the King of the Giants Island, you will soon change your Opinion: for I am she, and no other, who have for your sake remain'd thirteen years in this Place, enchanted, as you found me, with as much Bitterness, and Grief, as ever any sorrowful, and wretched Woman suffer'd. Nevertheless, all this Affliction is so well overcome, that I am at present the most Joyful, and con∣tented on the Earth. In good faith, said the Knight, you may put me in mind of what you please, but I as little know the Emperor and the Empress, you speak on, as I do you: Nor can I tell, who are my Father and Mother, which is indeed, the greatest Trouble, and Displeasure, I could have in this World. Gradafilea than more attentively view'd him, than she had hitherto done, and as well by the Brightness of the Swords Pommel, lying on the Floor, as by the light
and flame, coming forth from the open Chamber, knew, that she was indeed mi∣staken: wherefore she retir'd in very great Confusion. At this very Instant came the King, accompany'd by the Queen, and Frandamel∣la, wondring to see the Knight between Gradafilea and his Daughter. And as he was opening his mouth, to ask them, how they came there together, he saw the Sword at his Feet, which he knew by its shining Pommel, and taking it up of a suddain, said: By my Head, this is not the first time, I have handled thee, and I know, that thou belongedst to the best Knight in the World. Ah Sir, and who was he? said the Knight. You shall know, said the King, but not now. We must first see the Wonders of this Place. Then he advanc'd towards the Burning Door, which was immediately chang'd into Chrystal, and they all entred without any danger into the Chamber of Treasure, where there befel a Case worthy Recital. There appear'd in the Air two Hands, holding a golden Crown, enricht with ma∣ny great Rubies, Pearls, and Diamonds, which they plac'd upon the Head of Lu∣cella, and then disappear'd at the sound of a voice, which cry'd out: Receive, fair Lady, this Reward, in testimony of having put an End to the strangest Adventure, that ever was, or shall be prepar'd for Lady, or Gentlewoman. This being said four tall Statues of Alabaster, which in the four Corners of the Chamber represented four Ladies, holding each of them an Harp, began to play so melodious a Tune, that the King and the rest thought, they heard the Ioys of Pa∣radise: and indeed to consider the Place well, there seem'd also to be in it some Di∣vinity. For the Walls were of pure Chrystal, under which appear'd, painted in Gold and Azure, many Histories of the glorious Feats of Arms, perform'd by several Illustrious Personages, which had been from the Time of Deucalion till then. The Cieling and the Floor, being all of Mosaick Work, wrought in Chrysolite and Par∣phyry, rendred the Place so admirable, that it might be properly said to have been the Worst, not of Vulcan, or Neptune, who built the Walls of Flium; but of Pallas, who had employ'd in it all her Industry. In the midst of this Room was also a Monument of Iacinth, to which there was on every side an Ascent of five steps of gray Marble, and upon it the Representation of a great King, compleatly Arm'd, except his Head, which was cleft in two with a blow of a Sword: This rested on a Pillow of Cloth of Gold, which a Knight held between his Arms, the King having in one hand a little Key of Emerald, and in the other a Padlock, made of a great Carbuncle, which lockt up the Sepulchre, environ'd with Seven and Thirty Kings of Massy Gold, behind whom a little higher stood twelve Nymphs of Azure stone, holding Silver Trumpets, as if they were ready so Sound. And that it might be better known, whose Body it was, that lay in this Magnificence, there was at his Feet a Tablet of Agat, on which in the Caldean Tongue, was graven the following Inscription.
This is the Representation of Zarzafiel, Soldan of Babylon, who, being at the Siege of Constantinople with King Armato, was slain with the blow of a Sword by the hand of King Amadis, as is seen by his Figure: And the Kings, that are about him, being in number seven and thirty, represent so many Princes, subject to them, who all dyed in his Company, fighting like valiant and hardy men, as they were. Now to perpetuate his Memory, his Sister Zirfea, Queen of Argenes, has caus'd the Ashes of his Body to be put in a Vessel or Gold, here underneath, giving by the Magnifi∣cence of his Burial a Testimony of the Affection, she bear him, when living: and yet the more to honour him in his death, has given him in keeping the Key of this unparallell'd Treasure, which shall be well defended, till such time as the most per∣fect accomplisht Knight in the World shall enter in here, accompany'd by the fairest Lady, then living: who by Vertue of the secret Love, they shall bear one another, shall seize on the Key, and open the Padlock. In good faith, said the King to the Knight of the burning Sword, this Prophesy is, I think, addrest to you, and none else. Ah Sir, answer'd he, all asham'd, you have power to stile me, as you please; but I am indeed of opinion, that my Lady your Daughter, who has begun to break the Enchantments, take the Key, to accomplish the rest. Well then, sad the King, at worst she can but fail. Then he commanded Lucella to try. But she excus'd her self, affectionately desi∣ring Gradafilea to make the first Proof, and she would afterwards second her, if it were necessary. Now Gradafilea was exquifitly fair, which made her assuredly think, that, if the Adventure was to be ended by Beauty, she should go a great way in it. For this cause she readily consented to Lucellas desire, so that approaching the Statue, which held they Key, she did her utmost to seize it, and take it from him: but so far was she from it, that she could not so much as stir it, which made her blush, and retire, to give Place to Lucella: to whom, as she advanc'd, the Statue stretcht out his Arm, and presented her, what she desir'd, at which the Knight of the Bur∣ning-Sword greatly rejoyc'd, more esteeming the Honour of his Lady, that if himself had obtain'd all the Glory in the World. Then Lucella opened the Padlock, with which the Tomb was clos'd, and took off the covering as easily, as if it had been of Cork, or Fir: and immedatly the Ima∣ges of Azure-Stone began to Sound their Trumpets so loud, that they were heard all over the Palace, at the Sound whereof, there rose out of the Tenth, the Emperor of Trebisond, Lisvart of Grece, Perion of Gaul, and the Prince Olorius of Spain, who had till then been Enchanted, and laid asleep under that Plate, without the know∣ledge of any one but the Queen Zirfea. Certainly I cannot well tell who was most amaz'd: Whether the King of Sicily, ad his Company to see these four Persons thus resuscitated; or the Emperor, and his, to find themselves in so unknown a Place, and amongst Knights arm'd, and ready for fight: So that, if the Emperor, being without Arms, far'd, they should be assaulted; those of the other side thinking them to be Phantasms, were not over∣well
assur'd, when Gradafilea knew Lisvart yet doubting, that she was in a dream, she durst not at first approach him, but sixt her Eyes upon him, as he did upon her, yet without speaking one Word for a pretty while. Now these four Knights had been so depriv'd of their Vnderstanding by Zirfea, that without knowing any thing of one another, they were brought from Trebisond, and put in so strait a Place, by such means, as you shall presently hear. CHAP. XXV. How Zirfea enchanted the Emperor of Trebisond, Lisvart, Perion, and Olorius in the Castle of the Isle of Arenes: Where she afterwards stay'd Gradafilea, being in quest of Lisvart. THe History of Lisvart of Greece, recited at large in the sixth Book of Amadis of Gaul, Records, that at the Siege of Constantinople, where King Amato was in person, himself with the greatest pat of the Pagan Princes, has an End put to their Days by the high Chivalry at King Amadis of Gaul, his Son Esplandian, and others, whose never dying  registred in the said volumes. Now among these, that were thus n by this King of Great Britain, was Zarzafiel, Soldan of Babylon, who had a Sister, nam'd Zirfea, a Woman of great Skill in Magick, which she had in her younger years learnt of the Infanta Melia. In this t she became so expert, that disdaming the Court of the Soldan her Brother, she relir'd into the Isle of Argones, where the better to experiment her Science, she did many incredible things, in the Castle of Treasure, as we have already discrib'd it to you: From which she could not, by any Intreaties, or Letters, sent her by the Soldan her Brother, be withdrawn, whilst he liv'd. Now Zirfea writ several times to him, that he should by no means go to the Siege of Constantiople, assuring him, that he would infallibly be slain there, with all, who should Accompany him. But he made flight of this Advertisment, thinking, that it proceeded from her Fear of losing him, which she preferr'd before the Honor and Glory, he might get there so that he went, and was there slain, as you have been told. Of which Zirfea, his only Heir, being advertis'd she incontinently set forwards towards Babylon, hoping to gain possession of the Country, where she found one, that her Bro∣ther had left there for Governor, who either thro' Love, or Force, had already receiv'd the Crown, and obedience of the Subjects: And for this cause he commanded her to be gone, and void the Realm, or else he would ut her to death. This Message seem'd to her very hard of Digestion; but seeing, there was no Re∣medy, she packt up her Baggage, takig with her (for all her Inheritance) the Body of Zarzafiel into the Isle of Argenes, where being arriv'd, she Sacrific'd it to the God Mars, causing the Ashes to be carefully gather'd up, and enclos'd in the clft Head, erecting him the Sepulchre, we have already told you of. And to the end a
Death, which so nearly toucht her, might not go unreveng'd, she deeply, and solemn∣ly vow'd, to procure all the Dammage and Displeasure she possibly could, to King Amadis, and the other Christians; she accordingly us d all her Endeavor to put in exe∣cution this Resolve: Wherefore being one day advertiz'd that Lisvart of Greece, and Perion of Gaul were in Trebisond, she put to Sea, and as she was sailing, invented for their Surprizal the Deceit; recorded in the said sixth Book of Amadis of Gaul, lay∣ing her Project so well, that in fine she not only brought away them, but also the Emperor and Olorius, all which she would have instantly put to death, had she not foreseen by her Magick, that from them should proceed one, by whom her Lineage should in time to come be greatly illustrated, tho' she neither knew when, nor how. For this only cause were the four Knights preserv'd, and put into her Bark, where she was afterwards enamor'd of Olorius, with whom she had such Converse, that her Belly began to swell, she being with chield; yet being no more willing to pardon him, than the rest, being arriv'd in her Isle of Argenes, she enchanted them, and put them all under the Soldans Tomb, unknown to any one, even to their own selves: Then she conjur'd the Chambers, and clos'd the Doors by the Fire which continually burnt there Now it hapned some time after, that Gradafilea, understanding the loss of Lisvart, put her self in quest of him: And having travers'd many strange Countries, without learning any Fews of him, she come at last to Zirfea, to whom she entirly declar'd the Occasion of her Travel, very earnestly beseeching her, that she would please to deliver her out of his Pain. Zirfea promis'd her, she would; and de facto having fasted her some dayes, brought her to see the burning Doors, before which was plac'd Lisvarts Sword. She then askt her if she knew it. Alas! Yes answer'd Gradafilea: For GOD's sake tell me, what is become of him whose it was I will tell you, reply'd Zirfea, you shall keep it till his Return: For it is reasona∣ble, since you are so much his, that you should have the Enjoyment of it. Then she took it out of the Place, where it stuck, and put it in Gradafilea's Hands, conjuring her in this manner: Your abode shall be in this very place, till such time as being in despair of ever seeing him any more, you shall recover him to your great Ioy, and Pleasure. The Queen having utter'd these Words, the Infanta was so firmly enchanted, that she remain'd still there at the Arrival of Lucella, by whom the Conjurations, were brought to an end. Which yet Zirfea did not imagin, but made account, that very difficultly would meet there at the same time, the best Knight, and the fairest Lady in the world, at least that should murally bear each other such perfect Love, as she had establisht by her Magick. And to make the Entrance into the Place yet more strange, and difficult, she built a little lower the Perron, where were the seven statues, holding their writings and other Singularities. Then she found the means, to procure five Knights of excellent
Prowess, to whom she gave the keeping of the five first Towers, expresly praying, and commanding them, that no person, of what Estate or Condition soever, should arrive in Argenes, without being stay'd and taken Prisoner, whence it happned, that several pass'd there many ill Days. Having thus order'd all these things, being surpriz'd with the Pangs of Child-birth, she brought forth a Daughter of an exquisite Beauty, whom she nam'd Axiana. This Daughter being arriv'd at the Age to be lov'd, and serv'd, as well for the great Gifts, with which Nature had imbellisht her, as for the good behaviour and gentle Education, with which she was endow'd, Zirfea caus'd her to embark, teaching her the means to recover Lucencio, whom she brought with her, for the Rea∣son we shall tell you in one of our following Chapters. At Axiana's Return, Zirfea left her the Government of the whole Island, to go after an Affair, which imported her, and where she was to make a long Abode, which being afterwards come to the knowledge of the Sage Alquif, and Urganda the Un∣known, from whom no earthly thing could be conceal'd, they seeing the Knight of the Burning Sword, and Lucella in the Isle of Silanchy, with the perfection of their mu∣tual Love, believ'd there could be no better Time to disenchant the Emperor of Tre∣bisond, and the others, that were so much Regretted. And for this purpose they made the Enchantment of the two Old Persons, wrestling on the Rock, which sank into the Sea, as Alpatracy and his Company were then Sailing by, who were after∣wards by the Storm and Tempest driven into the Isle of Argenes, where the things, we have told you were already accomplish'd; when the fair Axiana, with her Company, came back from Hunting, as you shall understand. CHAP. XXVI. How the Emperor of Trebisond, Lisvart, Perion, Olorius, and Gradafilea, being out of the Enchantment, in which they had been held so many Years, had several Discourses with Alpatracy, and the Knight of the Burning Sword. LAzarus, coming forth of the Grave, whence he was rais'd by JESUS CHRIST, was not more amaz'd to see himself again liing in the World, than was the Emperor of Trebisond, and the three Knights, who had so long been Enchanted with him, in the Chamber of Treasure; and that without one's knowing any thing of the other: so that for some time they look'd upon each other, without being able to utter the least word, till at length the Emperor, lifting up his Hands and Eyes to Heaven, began to say aloud. O Soveraign GOD! who by your infinite goodness have created all things of no∣thing, and who at no time forget those, that are yours, not having regard to the Merits of their Works; but extending over them your ineffable Bounty and Com∣passion, and that principally, to the end, We, poor Sinners, may know the great
Power of your Divine Majesty: How can we ever give you thanks for so great Mer∣cy, as you have shewn us, unless you, O Lord, enable us to do it? O Emperor of Trebisond, thou oughtst certainly to esteem the long Abode, thou hast made in this place, well employ'd, and no way to complain of Fortune, since she has given thee such noble Company. Then embracing now Lisvart, anon Perion, and now again Olorius, he said to them: Ah! my dear Friends. The love, you have hitherto born me, is at present well manifested: since you have not in this miserable Prison ever abandon'd me. Assure your selves, that, as long as my Soul shall remain in this old Body, I shall hold my self greatly oblig'd, and indebted to you. Sir, answer'd Lisvart, I know not who laid us in so sound asleep: but on my Faith, I no more remember the time, we have been here, than if it had never been: and we must say, that she, who took us in Trebisond, desir'd to make us take along Repose, thinking (I believe) that we were yet weary and toil'd with the past Wars. But he it as it may, let us, if you please, go thank these Knights for our liberty. Then he cast his Eye upon Lucella, whose Beauty caus'd in him a Remembrance of the Princess Onoloria, so that his Heart began to beat, when presently he knew Gradafilea: but not the King or Queen at the first sight. He did indeed think, he had seen them, but could not tell when or where, no more than could any of the rest, to∣wards whom the King with his Company advanc'd, knowing, that they were a lit∣tle astonished at their so suddain and wondrous waking. But Gradafilea, whom Love in that respect commanded more than any of the rest, being assur'd by the Emperors Discourse, that Lisvart, whom she had so long sought and expected, was indeed there, came to him, and casting her self at his Feet, said: Ah! my only Lord and Friend, if you were thro' my means sometime in Prison, I have since over paid the use of it, having endur'd the most strange and unhappy life, that ever poor Gentlewoman suffer'd, even to this very day, when by the means of this fair Princess I see the thing, I most desire in the world, which is your Person, so much regretted by great and little, and which being so accomplisht in all Vertue, you will, I hope, have compassion of me, and no more fail me, than I did you, when you had most need of my assistance. Lisvart, who knew the danger, she had put her self in, to save his life, and how much he was on that occasion oblig'd to her, tho' he had suffer'd more, than ever any Knight did, thro' the false Report, made of him and her to the Infanta of Tre∣bisond, answer'd her, without thinking on the Mark, at which she aim'd: My dear Friend, I am so many ways indebted to you, that I would gladly employ my self in the things, which concern you, as if it were for mine own person; else I might (with reason) be nam'd the most ingrteful man, that ever was born of a Woman. And I assure you, that the Prison, in which you have, as you say, been detain'd, and the pain, you have endur'd, is as grievous to me, as if my self had undergone it. Whilst they were in these Terms, the Emperor and the rest took Acquaintance of one another: and the Knight of the burning Sword, said to the Emperor: Sir, altho'
I am not of your Religion, I shall not however forbear to assure you, that, in what place soever I am, you shall have in me an affectionate Servant, for the Good I have often heard of you. In good faith, Knight, answer'd he, seeing the Beauty and Goodness, that is in you, and the Offers, you make me, I cannot choose but be sorry, that you are not a Christian for the salvation of your soul: we being all so much bound to you, that we ought in reason to love and honour you for ever. Sir, said the King of Sicily, you are indeed more bound to him, than you think for. Certainly I believe it, answer'd the Emperor, Embracing him, and Kissing his Cheek. Then the Knight of the burning Sword, seeing Lisvart leave Gradafilea, with whom he had been long discoursing, and by whom he knew, who he was, went to salute him, saying to him: To you, Sir Knight, more than to any other is due all the Honour that can be given to the bravest man on Earth: for such have we esteem'd you even to the day of your Absence, during which your Prowess and high Feats have been pub∣lisht in all places, so that you are, and will be an Admiration, not only to the pre∣sent, but future Ages: which makes me devoutly thank our Gods, for having gran∣ted me the Favor to be born, during the Age wherein I might see you, and, which is one of the greatest Felicities, I could obtain of their Divinity, have the hopes sometime to try my self against you, who are the Miror of all Chivalry, with whom I desire to combat, not for any Glory, I expect by it, except in being able to vaunt my having been so far honor'd, that the Flower of all Goodness has vouchsafe'd to st his Hand to Arms, and exercise his Valor against me. Nevertheless kowing the Time to be now so little fit, I shall put it off to some other, when we shall m postponing all Danger, that may befal me by it: For otherwise, had I ended the strangest Adventures, without having Combated you, I should think my self not to have finisht, but only to have begun, what might turn to my Praise, since the End and Beginning of Knighthood is in you, and by you must be terminated: so hat, whatever good Countenance Fortune hath hitherto shewn me, yet have I great Rea∣son to blame her, since she has call'd me upon the Consummation and End of the Height, to which Arms can ascend, you having left nothing behind, to illustrate those, who came after you, obscuring by the Sun-beams of your Prowess, what ever can for the future be attempted. Whilst he was making this Harangue, Lisvart view'd him, as one, whom Nature would have taught him to know: for the Father was speaking to the Son, and the Son to the Father; and yet both the one and the other was Ignorant of this Provi∣ity of their Blood. They had indeed a certain Instinct, which caus'd them to bear each other a more than common Love and Respect: Nevertheless, when Lisvart, who was a no less discreet, than stout and valiant Knight, heard himself at the same time both prais'd, and challeng'd to Fight, desiring to satisfy him, that speak to him with as much Magnanimity, as Courtesy, he made him this Answer: Knight, I thank you for the good Testimony, you give me; yet will all these Praises return
to your Glory by the Combat, you so much desire to have with me, when a con∣venient Opportunity shall offer: which, if you think fit, shall not be any farther delayed, provided I can recover Arms and Equipage necessary, or if you will put it off to another time, let it be as you please: For I accept and grant it you, at the day and hour, you shall assign, and of this present you my Pledge. Then he threw down a Glove, he had in his hand, and the Knight of the Burning Sword stept forward to take it up. But King Alpatracy caught him hold by the Arm, saying to him: My dear Friend, I beseech you, that, in this time of Pleasure, there be no mention of any thing, which may cause our Discontent! You will hereafter find a fitter opportunity: in the mean time I entreat you both for my sake to de∣fer it. Let it be, as you please, Sir, answer'd the Knight of the Burning Sword. Then they both, without shewing any Alteration obey'd the Kings Pleasure, not without good hopes, when Conveniency should serve, to let each other know by expe∣rience the Prowess, that was in them, turning themselves at that time to other Dis∣courses, and to behold the Singularities of the Chamber, out of which at last they went. And they were no sooner forth, but the Doors shut of themselves, not being open'd of a long time, but so Transparent indeed, and Diaphanous, that whatever was within, might be seen thro' them. Thence they went down to the Perron, which, when they had view'd, and read the Inscriptions that were there, Alpatracy, who had yet Lisvarts Sword, presented it to him, who was not a little glad of it? for he thought it had been lost. The King then told him, how he found it, and before their Departure thence, they all related what had befaln them, even to Lucella her self. In good faith, said Lisvart then to the King, if I have heretofore done you any service, in delivering you from the Conjurations of Medea, my Lady your Daugh∣ter has so well recompensed me, that I shall be her Servant as long as I live. Now so long did they amuse themselves in comtemplating the Particularities of the Place, that the Dawning of the Day began to appear: wherefore they went down into the Chamber, in which the King had slept, where they found some of the Castle, whom the Fright had awaked, when the forementioned Images sounded their Trum∣pets: amongst which a Servant stepping forward, told the Knight of the Burning Sword, that Gradamart, he, whom he had fought with at the last Tower, desir'd to see him before he dy'd: For, said the Servant, he is very weak, by reason of the blood; he lost last night, and has so great an esteem for you, that he will think his soul much at ease, if you do him the favour to visit him. Gradafilea, hearing the Name of Gradamart, and doubting as the Truth was, that it was her Brother, of whom the Messenger speak, cry'd out pituously: O Iupi∣ter! what can this be! Is it the Son to the King of the Giants Island, whom this Misfortune has befallen. Yes Madam, answer'd the Servant, 'tis the same.
Alas! said she, I well know that Fortune is not yet weary of tormenting me. Alas! it is then mine own Brother, who, as you say, lies a dying. For Gods sake, Friend, conduct me where he is, and perhaps his Death and mine will without delay accompany each other. Let us all go, said the King, be deserves we should do him honour. Then went they all to him, whom they found lying on a Bed, having a great many Wounds, but all small ones, except that in his Leg, which could not be stan: wherefore Gradafilea, more dead than living, fell down between his Arms, where she continu'd a long time without being able to utter one word, so much was her heart opprest: But if she were thus troubled, Gradamart was not less comforted, and so well pleas'd, that; notwithstanding his Pain and Weakness, he rais'd himself up a little, and kissing, and embracing his Sister, began to say to her: Ah! my dear Si∣ster! How oft have you been desired by me! In Truth, my Heart, which was ready to dye, feels it self in a manner reviv'd, seeing you so near your Brother, who so dearly loves you. O immortal gods! your great Names be prais'd: for it has pleas'd you to permit me, before I leave the World, this day to embrace her, whom (if I dye) I more regret, than mine Life. Gradafilea, hearing her Brother still speak with so much strength, took heart again, and having recover'd her Speech, made him this Answer: My dearest Brother, your Life and Death are at their Disposal: but if they have ordain'd the Removal of you out of this World, I desire you, before I see your Eyes clos'd, to put an end to my days with your Hands, that our Spi∣rits may accompany each other before them, and never be separated, whether in Hell, or in the Elysian Fields, as it shall please them to ordain. Then she renew'd her Lamentations, that Lisvart, mov'd with Compassion, took her back from Gradamart, whom her Grieving exceedingly disturb'd, and so comforted her, that seeing her self entertain'd by the Person, whom she most lov'd in the World, she appeas'd her Sorrow. In the mean time the Knight of the burning Sword drew near to Gra∣damart, who, to excuse his having sent for him, said to him: Sir Knight, the Cause, which emboldned me to entreat a Visit from you before my Death, is the Esteem, I have of you above any other, I know: as well for the Prowess that is in you, as for the Courtesy, you us'd yesterday towards me, giving me my life, when you might have taken it away upon the Place. And in this you will shew the Conformity, there is between your Virtue and your Valour, no less knowing to pardon the vanquisht, than to vanquish the prou∣dest most and robust. And for this cause, whether I dye, or whether my days be reserv'd for a longer time, I shall be for ever yours, desiring above all things your Friendship, whom I will obey and serve, whereever and whenever it shall please you to command me: letting the whole World, by this understand, that Vertue can do more, than all the Force and Valour of the greatest Champions: for by Vertue you have conquer'd my Will, over which, none, but the Gods, have power.
The Knight of the Burning Sword, considering the Honour, which Grada∣mart did him, would in Complacency grant him, what he with so great Instance desir'd, which was his Friendship, in doing of which he made use of the like gracious Speeches and Expressions, as the other had done, saying to him: By my Head, Sir Gradamart, if the Glory of Victorious Combats ought to be pre∣sented to him, whose just Due it is, I ought in reason to offer you my Sword; for you have gain'd so much upon me, that I am henceforth wholly yours, very well knowing, that Vertue alone is indeed more powerful, than all the forces of men. Having said this, he drew his Sword out of the Scabbard, and setting his Knee to the Ground, presented it to him. But Gradamart, who was not able to rise, that he might return this Honour, join'd his Hands, and stretching out his Arms, said to him: For God's sake, Knight, never do me this injury, after having so much o∣blig'd me, but honouring me, as you have begun, let us, if you please, embrace, and let our Friendship be henceforth irrevocable. This the other so willingly granted him, that it continu'd a long time after, as by the sequel of this our History you may understand, Then all the rest made them∣selves known to Gradamart, every one offering himself to him, when Word was brought them that Axiana would presently be there. This made them all run to their Arms, and strongly bar up the Gates. Whilst they were thus making themselves ready, one brought Lisvart the Scab∣bard of his Sword, which had been found amongst the other Harness in the Armory, where Zirfea had laid it up of which he was so glad, that he would not have chang'd it for the best City of Asia. Now the King of Sicily kept still with Lisvart, with whom falling from one Dis∣course to another, he relaed to him all, that he had understood of the Knight of the burning Sword, even to his Conquering of the Defended Mountain, which Aug∣mented his Desire to fight with him, if ever he found an Opportunity. But if this were his Intention, the others Inclinations were not at all different, tho' he then thought of nothing but keeping Company with Gradamart, who in the mean time acquainted him with the manner of his Coming into the Isle of Argenes. Understand then, said he, that my Sister having been above two Years absent from the Country of the King my Father. I, being troubled, that I could not see her, went in quest of her, and having Travell'd over many strange Countreys, I was at last inform'd, that the best Way to have speedy and certain News of her, would be to address my self to the Queen of this Island, to whom I repair'd, and having got Admission, punctually related to her the Occasion of my Arrival, She promis'd me, that, if I would grant her one Gift, she would make me recover her. The Gift I willingly granted her, as loving my Sister no less than my self. The Queen then pray'd me to keep the sixth Tower of this Castle, during he space of six Years, with such Arms as I should best like, at the Expiration of which Time I should have of her, what I would. Now I had all my life been addicted to fencing with Sword and Cloak, at which I thought my self more excellent than any, that could come:
wherefore chose that manner of fighting, in which I have vanquisht many, till ye∣sterday, when Fortune treated me, you know how. In good faith, answer'd the Knight of the burning Sword, the Queen made you pay dear for the Desire you had to see your Sister, and I wonder how she fell into such ill hands. Then Gradamart, who was present, related to them from point to point all her Adventure, in such manner as we have declar'd it to you in the foregoing Chapter. They all together then fell a cursing the Enchantress, who had so mfortunately in∣clos'd the Emperor, and the rest, unnown to any Body, even to Aana her self. It was now about Noon, and neither the Emperor nor any of his Company, had yet eaten any thing: Wherefore Gadamart who knew better than any of the rest, how Victuals was to be procur'd) call'd a Servant, whom he commanded to make ready Dinner, and conduct them into the next Hall, keeping only his Sister, and the Knight of the burning Sword, to eat together with him. The Servant spee∣dily an diligently did, as he was commanded, and they went to take their Repast. When they were risen from Table, the Emperor and the rest came again to see him, whom they found discoursing of the Prisoners, that were shut u, some having been there a long time, and others not many dayes, according as Fortune had brought them thither. He commanded them immediatly to be sercht, being to the number of Fifty, all lodg'd in a deep Dungeon, chain'd with grea Ts, and having Ma∣nacles on their Hands, and Fetters on their Feet, so that they endur'd a Life, more miserable than a thousand Deaths together. When therefore the Goaler made them ascend by a Ladder, he let down to them, they thinking, that they were going to receive their last Punishment, fervently desir'd him to tell them, in what manner they were to end their dayes: Since it cannot (said they) be so cruel, as not to be more agreeable to us, than this long and hard Prison. My Friends, answer'd the Gaofer, you will be better us'd than you expect, follow me. He then guided them to Gradamarts Chamber, into which six of them entred first, dragging along their great Iron Chains. Being come in, they put their Knees to the Ground, and prostrated themselves, saluting the Company, by whom they were presently known, one of them being Adariel Prince of Naples, the rest, the two Brothers Suycias and Abies of Ireland, Sons to King Cildadan, Vaillades, Son to Don Bruneo the Count of Alastra, and Alarco, who being in quest of the Emperor, and the other Knights, after they had pass'd through many Adventures, too tedious to tell you, fell into the Hands of Zirfea, who imprison'd them with the rest, she had before. The Emperor and the rest them embrac'd them, rejoycing, and wondring both at their bad and good Fortune. Neither was their any Prisoner, who did not recount, how all had befaln him, the Misery, and great Hunger, they had so long endur'd: In fine, they prais'd GOD for their Deliverance, concluding together, that they, who fear, serve, and honor him, shall never be forgotten by him.
CHAP. XXVII. How one single Knight fought against six, before the Castle of the Isle of Argenes, and what befel them. a battle on horseback (same figure used in Chapter 5) NEws then being brought, that the Infanta Axiana drew near her Castle, the Emperor with the other Knights entred into Consultation, what was best to be done. Some were of Opinion, to run upon her, and surprize her with her Company. But Perion of Gaul, one of the most courteous and gentle Princes, then living, advis'd the contrary, saying, it would be better to send one of them, who might acquaint her, with what was befaln the Guards of her Fortress; but that ne∣vertheless, if she pleas'd to lodge there, she should be receiv'd with all the Honor and Reverence, her Greatness and Beauty merited. For, said he I shall always commend the treating an Enemy with respect, principal∣ly when he is in greatest Adversity, leting every one understand, that honour is insepa∣rable from a Noble and generous Heart, shewing it self no less in the depth of Mis∣fortune and Infelicity, than in the height of Prosperity and Happiness: So that, tho' Fortune may often enough bring to nothing earthly Goods, which are subject
to her Inconstancy; yet has she no Power over the Merit and Vertues of the Per∣son, which reside in the Soul. To this Resolution every one agreed, and as they were considering, who was fittest to carry the Message to Axiana, the King of Sicily remonstrated to them, that none could be more proper, than Frandamella: For, said he, Axiana receiving this dispeasing News by a Woman, the Fury, which may surprize her, cannot bring a long with it such speedy Vengeance, as it might against one of us; but will be mi∣tigated, seeing with whom it shall have to do: So that all will go the better. For this reason was the Damsel sent, who, being amply instructed for her Ambassy, and having an Esquire to guide her, set forth on her way towards the Infanta, that was come to dine in an House of Pleasure she had, situated by the Sea-side. But Frandamella was soon perceiv'd to turn back in great hast, and ascend the Castle stairs, till she came into the Chamber, where all the Knights were still discoursing together, whom she thus bespake: My Lords, if you please to see the Combat of one Knight against six, come to the first Tower, where I have left them, and you shall there have that Diversion. Lisvart Perion, and Olorious, hearing the News, ran thither armed, as they were; as did also the Knight of the Burning Sword; and being arriv'd, where Fran∣damella had directed them, found the six fiercely assaulting him, that was alone, who was a comely and couragious Knight, mounted on a sturdy steed, and so valiantly behav'd himself, that he had already wounded the other in several places. Now he was arm'd in black Armor, without any Devise, save that on his Shield there was in a Field Or a Castle Gules, and he so bestirr'd himself, that they, who beheld him, could not say otherwise of him, but that he was a gallant man: for he had in an in∣stant slain out-right two of the stoutest; yet the four that were left, displeas'd at this loss, spar'd him so little, that it was to be wondred, how he was able to resist them. He nevertheless shew'd them such play, striking on the right hand, and the left, so thick and home, that he soon dispatch't likewise the third. Wherefore their Companions, growing more Outragious, fell in upon him, and by strength of Arm threw him (whether he would or no) out of his Saddle upon the Grass: but he car∣ried two of them along with him, holding them so closely embrac't, that they could no way offend him: which greatly amaz'd the Beholders. The last seeing this, ha∣stily set foot to ground, thinking to relieve his Companions, and murther the other, which he had questionless done, had he not been hindred by those, that were looking on, who call'd out to him to Retire, or they would certainly fall upon him. The Gallant, much astonisht at this Menace, and doubting worse, suddainly took Horse again, returning with full speed the way he came. In the mean time, those that were thus linkt together, so long strove and struggled, sometimes upper, some∣times under, that they were forc'd for want of Breath to let go their Hold, and get up again, yet not ceasing their Fight, which they began again with their Swords, as if they had done nothing all the day. Whence it came to pass, that after many
Charges, given and receiv'd, the Assailants had the worse, being brought to that Condition by the single Knight, that they now did no more but ward his blows. CHAP. XXVIII. How the Knight, which fled, return'd to his Companions, bringing with him Lu∣cencio, who fought against the Knight of the Burning Sword. THe two Knights being thus handled, and as it were ready to lay down their Arms, he, that had fled, was seen to return, accomyany'd by another, moun∣ted on a great black Horse, and clad in Green, Armor, powdred all over with Quivers and Arrows of Gold, and bearing in his Shield a Ladies hand, holding a Bow, with an Arrow ready fixt. He was no sooner come thither, but he Alighted, and embra∣cing his Shield, drew his Sword out of the Scabbard, which was all over cover'd with Pearls, Rubies, and Diamonds: But the Knight of the burning Sword doub∣ting, he would fall upon him in the black Armor, (whom he judg'd within himself to be one of the bravest men in the World) covering himself with his Shield, and ha∣ving his Sword in his hand stept forth, and said to the new Commer: 'Tis with me Knight, 'tis with me, you have to do; and not with him, who is already tir'd by having so gallantly performed his Duty. Nor would it be reasonable, that you, who are fresh, and unlabour'd, should assail him so much to your Advantage. How? answer'd he, Will you then hinder me from revenging my People, whom he had slain? Since you are so void of sence, as thus to engage your self in anothers Quarrel, stay, and you shall have the Chastisement you deserve. This being said, they began to charge each other with so much Fierceness, and Nimbleness, that the Spectators said, they had never beheld a better Combat: of which Perion, Lisvart, and Olorius, were not a little glad, that they might know, by the Effect, whether he of the burning Sword was so good a Knight, as he was af∣firm'd to be. Whilst these things were doing, he in the black Armor had slain one of the two, with whom he was fighting, and was now ready to dispatch the last, who by casting himself at his Feet, and begging his Pardon, preserv'd his Life. Yet the other, who fled to fetch Succour, minded him not, but set himself against the Knight of the burning Sword, thinking, that, if he were defeated, the other in the black Arms would be more easily master'd. But as he was couching his Lance, to run against him, Olorius, catching hold of the Straps of his Shield, pull'd him with so much violence, that he brought him to the Ground, where he so treated him with the Pom∣mel of his Sword, that, the Laces of his Helmet breaking, his Head was disarm'd. He then cry'd out for Mercy: but Olorius answer'd him: Rascal, you shall dye: for the World cannot but be the worse for your abiding in't: and with that lifting up
his Fist, he gave him such a blow on the Ear, with his Gantlet, as put an End to his Life. Already had the two others fought so long, that every one wondred at it, and yet neither of them appear'd in the least weary'd, but still continu'd better and better: wherefore Lisvart desir'd Frandamella to go fetch the Emperor, and those, that stay'd with him, assuring them, they should see, what would give them Pleasure. The Damsel ran to 'em, and told 'em, all she had seen of the Combatants: wherefore they made hast thither, where they found the two Knights still as Active, as if they had but just begun. The same Moment arriv'd there also Axiana, who had stay'd behind, having a great Attendance of Ladies, Gentlewomen, Esquires, and others. She was excee∣ding fair, and of an excellent Meen, being mounted on a white Palfrey, adorn'd with Housings of flower'd Cloth of Gold, hanging down on every side. But when she saw the cruel Combat between the two Knights, and so great a Troop, amongst whom she discern'd those at Liberty, whom she was wont to keep Prisoners, never was Woman more astonisht: for she had not yet understood any thing of her loss, which could not (had she known it) have so much troubled her, as did the Danger, in which she perceiv'd him in the Green Armor, whom she lov'd better than her self, to be: at which being wholly disturb'd, and almost beside her self, she was ready to sink down in a swound. But shame hindring it, she alighted off her Horse, because her Knight was fighting on foot. Then Lisvart approacht, and making her a very low Reverence, askt her, whe∣ther she pleas'd to have a Chair brought her out of the Castle, that she might place her self more at her ease. She, seeing him so fair, humble, and well behav'd, thus answer'd him: Knight, if my Ease would be any greater for being sat, I would not refuse this offer; but it is so disturb'd by seeing the Danger of these two Combatants, that it would be impossible to be more: I nevertheless heartily thank you, and desire you to tell me, who you are. Madam, answer'd Lisvart, who ever I am, you have in me, a Souldier, to serve and honor you, as I use to do all such fair Ladies, as you are. Ah! said the Infanta, The Day will come, when I shall (perhaps) have a better Opportunity to thank you for this Civility. They had continu'd their discourse longer, had not the Peril, she saw her Friend in, imploy'd her Thoughts on somewhat else. Nevertheless, neither of the two Knights could gain any thing over the other; but they so bravely maintain'd them∣selves, that for the Space of two long hours it was not known, to whom the greater Glory was to be attributed, they growing both so weary, that they were forc't to take breath, and rest themselves a little. I may well say a little: For the Green Knight, seeing the fair Axiana full of Trouble, and her Countenance pale, and without colour, thro' the great Perplexity, she was in, was so mov'd, that parrying, what was left of his Shield, he recharg'd his Enemy with marvellous Fierceness. Nor
was the other much behind him, so revenging himself, that the Grass, on which they stood, grew red again, and the Spectators certainly thought, that they would both there leave their Lives, their Animosity still increasing; so that they seiz'd each other by the Arms, striving to gain that by strength of Body, which they could not obtain by their Swords. Nevertheless it was impossible for either of them to get any Advantage over the other; but after much and long strugling, with all imagina∣ble Industry, they return'd to their Swords, with which they laid so desperately about them, that they had scarce any Armor left, with which they might cover, or defend themselves: So that their bare Flesh was seen, the Blood streaming down on all sides, and their Armor ready to drop off by pieces, if they fought any longer. Then Axiana, no farther able to hear her Friends Danger, began to wring her hands, and cross her Arms, like a Woman, pierc't with sorrow. Which the green Knight seeing, took such Courage, that (thinking to cleave his Enemies Head) he lift up his Sword with both hands, to which the other oppos'd his Shield; and yet the Blow was such, that parting in two, what it met, the Point fell with such Force on his Helmet, that his Eyes sparkled, and he stagger'd, ready to fall to the ground. Nevertheless he soon recover'd, and to revenge himself, flew with such Fury at him, who had so much out-rag'd him, that seizing the straps of his Shield, he pull'd it so violently to him, that he got possession of it, and threw it behind him in great spight. At which the Green Knight being amaz'd, as knowing the want he should have of it, shew'd himself thence-forward more fearful, then he had till that time done: For he knew not, with what to cover himself, nor how any longer to resist the other, who press'd him so close, that every one evidently discern'd his Fortune to be adverse, and that the Victory would certainly be the Knight's of the burning Sword. Ah! ha! poor Axiana! where it not better, you would find some means to sepe∣rate them? Alas! why do you delay? You see your Friend at the last point of Dan∣ger, and yet you remedy it not. And to say true, she was so troubled, and full of Bitterness, that she could not utter so much as one word. At which Lisvart mov'd with Pity, could not forbear saying to her: I wonder, Madam, why you consent thus to the Death of two such Knights in your Presence: Indeed you will do very ill, if you permit them to sight any longer, For God's sake then, since you can remedy it, separate them, and desire them at your request to be∣come Friends: And if they will not consent for love, give order, that you be obey'd by force; or else the Loss of them will be an incomparable wound to all Knight∣hood, they being such valiant men, as every one may see. Alas he exactly hit on the Evil, that tormented her, nor could he at that time have made her any Discourse, more agreeable to her. And therefore following Lisvarts Counsel, she took Heart, and went straight to the Combarants, who (in respect to her) retir'd at her approach. Then having her Face cover'd with Tears, she began to say to them: I desire you, Knights, that you will for my sake desist, and make Peace together: Which, I be∣lieve you will not refuse me, since I beg it of you with such Affection. And besides,
where Prowess and Valour is so apparent, Courtesy cannot be far away, which you will favourably exercise on me, who am such, as My Presence may testify. The Knight of the Burning Sword, hearing her speake so sweetly, was willing to let every one know, that he was no less affable, than valiant: wherefore he thus answer'd her: Madam I will obey you, if he, with whom I have to do, will con∣sent to it. I undertake, said Axiana, he shall do it: for he his mine, and will no way contra∣dict, what I shall command him. Since it is so, Madam, answer'd the Knight of the burning Sword, I beseech you to tell me his Name, that I may henceforth know him, who has made me suffer more than any other, I ever fought with. That I will do for your sake, said she, and you shall see him presently bare-fac'd, to the end you may the better know him. Then taking off his Helmet, she said: Now see, if you shall know him again, and then I will tell you his Name. In good faith, Madam, answer'd he, I should never have thought to find so great Va∣lour in so fair and young a Gentleman. And to say the Truth, he was one of the most excellent Personages, that could be seen. Then Axiana, continuing her Discourse, said: His Name is Lucencio; but we must desire to be excus'd from giving you account of his Parentage: since neither he nor I know any thing of it. As I live, Madam, answer'd the Knight, of the Burning Sword, it would be then very unseemly for us two, between whom there is so great a Conformity, to fight one against the other: for I know my Father and Mother as little, as he does his, and this makes me think, that perhaps we may be Kinsmen. This, though spoken at random, was yet Truer, than he was aware: for they were both Cosens, he being Son to Lisvart of Greece, and Lucencio to Person of Gaul, the Fathers and the Children, being all four Assembled to∣gether, the neither then, nor of a long time after, knowing one another. And to omit nothing that belongs to our History, you shall know, how Axiana brought Lucencio into this Isle of Argenes. You well remember, I believe the Dutchess of Savoy's Arrival at Constantino∣ple, caus'd by a Tempest, which ave her Ship on the Coast of Thrace, as she was conducting the fair Gentleman into Great Britain, there to receive the Order of Knighthood, and in what manner Lucencio undertook to go and fight the Knight, who had took the Helmet from the Gentlewoman, as you were told at large in the beginning of this Book. Now Axiana was she, by whom he recovered what he sought for, and to whom he promis'd also a Gift, for the Accomplishment of which, he entred into her Vessel, sailing with her, till they came into the Isle of Argenes, where going ashore, Lucencio was, by Axiana, requir'd to keep the Seventh Tower of the Castle, in which was the Chamber of Treasure: and this she did by the Coun∣sel of her Mother Zirfea, who gave her the Direction and Means of finding him, yet
without telling her any thing of his Lineage. She perswaded her indeed, that his Company would be very agreeable to her. And in this she deceiv'd her not: for from their first Enterview they so mutually loved each other, that Axiana granted him, what she most esteem'd, provided he merited it by his Valour, of which he should make proof, by keeping the Tower two whole Years. And he was now at the end of them, when Fortune brought into the Island the Knight of the Burning Sword, with whom he fought: for returning from Hunting, to which Axiana, to keep him from Melancholly, often took him, six of his Knights met him in the black Arms, and fell upon him, hoping to take him, and imprison him, according to the Custom. Now the Infanta staid behind with Lucencio; but he, that fled from his Companions at their need, hastned them; and they were both afterwards treated, as you have heard. Thus have we resum'd the Thred of our History, by returning to him, whom we had left at the beginning; but the Matter being now dispos'd to bring him again upon the stage, you see him return with his green Armor and Shield, on which was painted the Bow, the Quiver, and the Arrow, to testify the Passion of his afflicted Heart, loving (as he did) the Queen of Argenes fair Daughter, to whom the Emperor, to let her understand the Pleasure, he receiv'd by the Agreement of the two Knights, said very respectfully: Indeed Madam, you this day oblige many worthy persons, by ending the Quarrel between two such Knights, as yours, and him of the burning Sword: And we must confess, that the great Beauty, with which Nature has endow'd you, has more prevail'd over them, than all we toge∣ther should have done. And because she had never seen the Emperor, Lisvart acquainted her, who he was. Now she had hitherto thought him lost, and could not imagin, in what manner ei∣ther he, or any of the rest, came into Argenes: Nevertheless converting at this time her wonder to a more suitable Discourse, she with very great Respect said to him: Sir, I beseech you to pardon me for not having at first made you the Reception you merit, for, had I known you, I would certainly have paid you the Respect, due to your Quality, not considering the ill will, I naturally ought to bear you, who partly caus'd the death of my nearest Relations. But since they cannot be recall'd to life, reflecting, that rather through their own Unhappiness, than otherwise, the Fortune of VVar treated them in this manner, I will attribute nothing to you, intreating you (at least) to tell me, how the Guards of this place have so easily suf∣fer'd your Abode here, and who has oblig'd them to set at liberty those, whom I held in my Prisons. Madam, answer'd he, your Guards are defeated, and slain, in revenge of the per∣nicious Custom, too long maintained by them under you, these three Knights and my self having been miserably inchanted, and laid to sleep in the place, where the Queen your Mother has detain'd us, and also all these poor captive Strangers in Dungeons in very great misery. This News could not but be very displeasing to her, tho' she then shew'd her self rather constant, than vanquisht with passion, saying to the Emperor: How? Are
my people then defeated? and is my place lost? VVell! Fortune however shall never have the power to make Axiana lose the Magnanimity of Courage, which is natural to her, as being descended of so noble a Race: for knowing her inconstan∣cy, and the Moveableness of her wheel, I know well, she cannot continue, or stand firm: and therefore I desire you to give me leave, at least, to retire with this Knight of mine; my VVomen and Servants shall, if you please, stay in this Castle, which the Gods will at some other time put again into my hands: and in the mean while, I shall learn in time to digest, what my heart thinks, and my Tongue con∣ceals The Emperor, hearing her speak so discreetly, and without astonishment, greatly commended her in himself, and thus answer'd her: Madam, if you please to keep us company, Night now approaching, we will do you all the Honour we can; but if you like better to take some other way, you may freely do it, and those also, that will follow you. Sir, reply'd she, you shew your self so gracious to me, that I must give you thanks for so great Civility: Nevertheless the gods forbid, I should grant my Enemy the Favour, which is in my power to deny him: I will go then (since you permit it) with a Resolution never to re-enter this Castle, till it be mine again, as it was. Then she caus'd her Palfrey to be brought, on which the green Knight plac'd her, being very glad to see the Emperor of Trebisond, of whom he was descended. Ne∣vertheless fearing to displease Axiana, he wisely conceal'd his Thoughts, and fol∣lowed the Infanta, who with her Company returned the way she came. And arri∣ving at her House of pleasure, where she had Dined, she incontinently caused her Knight to be disarmed, for he was wounded in several places; but the Old Man, that carry'd the Falcon; when he found the King and the Ladies near the first Co∣lumns, as you were told before, promis'd her, that he would soon put him out of dan∣ger, so expert he was in such things. CHAP. XXIX. How the Knight in the black Arms was known by the Emperor, and the rest: with the Discourses, they had together. SCarce was Axiana gone a Bow shoot, when the Knight in the black Armor, came to pay his Duty to the Emperor, and putting his Knee to the ground, would have kiss'd his Hands: to which the Emperor would not any way consent; but lifting him up, said: Knight, pray, let me know your Name, that I may give you a fitting Reception and Entertainment. Sir, answered he, I will obey your Majesty, in whatever you please to command
me: but for God's sake tell me, whether Perion of Gaul, and Lisvart of Greece, who were taken with you, be yet living? Living are they indeed, and there they are both, said the Emperor, shewing them to him, who immediately went to salute them, and embracing them both, cry'd out aloud: Now have I before me, what I have most desir'd to see! Ah! my Lords, how great a pleasure doth your presence give me. If we knew, who you are, said Perion, we should perhaps be partakers of your Joy. My Lords, answer'd he, my Name is Balan, Son of Galeotes, whose Father, and my Grand-Father was Bravor, Lord of the Island of the Vermillian Tower. My Mother is Madasima, Daughter to Don Galvanes, Lord of the Island of Mongaza, and I protest unto you, on my Faith, that I have no less desire to employ my self in your service, than my Predecessors had, whom you know, hoping that the Amity you bare them, will not be less to me, who am their Issue. Sir Balan, said Lisvart, you are very welcome: But tell us, what Adventure has brought you hither; and wherefore those, whom you have vanquisht, assail'd you thus? We shall know that answer'd the Emperor, all in good time, but now let us re∣tire. For the Night comes on, and I believe, both he, and the Knight of the burn∣ing Sword, have more need of Rest, than of longer Discourse. This said, they went back to the Castle, whither being come, the Knight of the Burning Sword desir'd, that he might have a Bed made ready in the same Chamber with Gradamart. Then were his Wounds searcht, and found to he more deep and dangerous than those of Balan, who, being with-drawn, could not take any rest, not so much for the Blows he had receiv'd, as for a sorrow, which continually seiz'd his Heart, so that he did nothing but lament and slh, with the cause of which, his Me∣lancholly, I am going to acquaint you. It is recorded in the History of Amadis de Gaul, how Amadis marryed Bravor, Son to the Giant Balan, with the Daughter of Darioletta, and that of him descen∣ded Galeotes, of whom mention is made in the sixth Volume of that History. This Galeotes being at London, had News of his Fathers Death, but before his Depar∣ture, the King caus'd him to Marry Madasima, Daughter to Galvanes, whom he took along with him to the Island of the Vermillion Tower, where they were re∣ceiv'd by his Subjects, who did him Homage, as their True and Natural Lord. The Year following Madasima was brought to bed of a Son, whom from his great Grand∣father they nam'd Balan, and this is he of whom we now speak. He then being come to the Age of Eighteen Years, as Galeotes and his Wife were one day toge∣ther with their Son, recreating themselves on the Sea-shore, not any way distrusting Fortune, the Giant Gandalfe, Lord of the Sagittary Island, Sailing along that Coast, Arm'd and Equipp'd like a Pyrate, as he was, went ashore to refresh him∣self, where he surpriz'd Galeotes and his Company, whom he carry'd away Priso∣ners: for they had neither Arms, nor time to get any; nor yet to retire into their
Castle, of which the Giant made himself Master by surprize. Then Balan, young, and full of Courage, seeing this Misfortune befallen, and his Father and Mother Prisoners, was ready to dye for spight: and tho' he had not yet receiv'd the Order of Knighthood, he could not forbear saying to Gandalfe. As GOD shall save me, Sir Knight, if the Right, you have usurpt in this Countrey, were to be determin'd by Combat between you and me, I should not question, but to make you know, that you have Cowardly and Unjustly entred into it; and would send your head to King Amadis, whose Vassals we are, and whom, by treating us in this manner, you Affront. The King of the Sagittary Island, was not a little displeas'd at this his Speech, which put him in such a Rage, that he commanded Galeotes and Madasima to be taken and whipt with the Horses Reins in their Sons Presence, to whom he said: Hearken, Balan, I leave thee at Liberty to go where thou list, and receive Knight∣hood, swearing to thee by the great God Iupiter, that I will stay for thee, and fight with thee, as soon as thou shalt Return. And that thou mayest have more Reason to make hast, there shall not, by my Fathers soul, pass a day, but these, whom thou hast seen so well scourged, shall be yet more severely handled in despight of thee, and thy King Amadis, that he and all others may know that I can chastise such fools, as believe in any Gods but mine. Then he commanded a Bark to be provided, into which Balan entred, very glad of the means, he had to prosecute his Revenge; but no less discontented for the Torment, in which he left Galeotes and Madasima. To remedy which, he Sailed straight into great Britain, and landed at the Port next to the Kay, where King Amadis was, daily beholding the great Actions, done by the Dutchess of Savoys Knight. Balan acquainted the King with all, that had befallen Galeotes, who was much troubled at it, but, to comfort him, said, that by the Grace of GOD he would provide to remedy it. Thus eight Days pass'd, during which the Dutchesses Knight behaved himself so valiantly, that Balan besought the King, he might receive from him the Order of Knighthood. This so pleas'd Amadis, that be∣fore the end of the Week the Dutchesses Knight gave Balan the Order, tho' not though in white Harness, according to the Custom, but in black Armor, with the Shield, be∣fore described to you, signifying the Loss of his Countrey, and the Imprisonment of his Parents. The new Knight then, having thank'd the King, and him, from whom he receiv'd that Honour, entred into his Bark, hoping in a little time to see and fight his Enemy. But it fell out quite contrary to his expectations; for the second day after there arose such a Tempest, that from time to and time he expected the loss of himself and his Vessel together, which being driven to fro, was at last cast upon the Isle of Argenes, where he went ashore. And to know what Country it was, he took Horse, and riding towards the Castle, where was then the Emperor of Trebisnd, as you have been told, he was met by six of Axianas Knights who assail'd him, to take him and imprison him according to the Custom. But he so gallantly defended himself, that the Event was such, as you have heard.
CHAP. XXX. How the Infanta Axiana, being arriv'd at her House of Pleasure, sent to fetch the Knight of the Burning Sword and Gradamart, that they might be better lookt to, than where they were, having no Chirurgion, to dress their Wounds. TO continue then the Discourse of our History, you shall understand, that on the morrow, Balan recited at large the state of his affairs to Perion and Lisvart. At which every one was grratly mov'd to compassion, promising him Aid and Suc∣co, principally the Knight of the burning Sword, who desir'd to be his Friend and Companion: So that they pass'd afterwards many Fortunes together, as you shall understand in the sequal of this Discourse. Now it hapned, that the next day, as the Emperor, with the Ladies, and the rest of the Knights, were walking upon the Bridge near the first Tower, they perceiv'd coming towards them two Damsels in very good Equipage, accompanying a Litter, cover'd with Velvet, carry'd by two ambling Mules. Being come a little nearer the Knights, they stopt, to ask, which amongst them was the Emperor of Trebisond. Damsels, answer'd the Emperor, I am he: What is your Pleasure? Sir, said one of the Damsels, the Infanta Axiana my Mistress intreats you to send her in this Litter the Knight, that fought yesterday, assuring you, that he shall be every way better treated than he can be in this place, where amongst other Reme∣dies, there wants a Chirurgion, as she very well knows: And this Courtesy she will do him in acknowledgment of that, he shew'd her yesterday. And doubt not Sir, of his being very kindly entertain'd: For my Lady determins to honor him for his Virtue: Therefore consider, what Answer to make. Damsel, reply'd the Emperor, I should be greatly satisfy'd to serve your Mistress: But as to the Request she makes me, I assure you, I have no farther Power over the Knight, than what himself will give to my Entreaty. I shall indeed, and willingly, perswade him to obay her, and if you will go along with me, you shall hear, what I will say to him. Sir, said Balan, not to give you that trouble, I will, if you please▪ do the message: And I believe, he will readily hearken to it, seeing the Condition, he is in. Go then, answer'd the Emperor, and bring us Word, assoon as possibly you can. Then Balan departed, and went to the Knight of the Burning Sword, who was in his Bed by Gradamart, Gradafilea bearing them company, and entirely related to him Axiana's Message, telling him the Desire, she had to treat him, and that two of her Damsels had brought him a Litter in very good Equipage.
My dear Friend, answer'd he, Axiana does so much for me, that I know not how, during my whole life, I may be able to acknowledge this her Favour; yet will I not forsake my Companion Gradamart: So that if she will have one, she must have both together. Well then, said Balan, I will go and give them this Answer, and return to ac∣quaint you with their Reply. Then going forth of the Chamber, he came to the Place, where the Emperor ex∣pecting his Return, was discoursing with the Damsels to whom Balan declar'd the Intention of the Knight of the burning Sowrd: Which, when they had heard, they answer'd, that Axiana had in like manner commanded them to make the same Request to Gradamart, if he were living: For she lov'd him, and much doubted of his being in a worse Condition. When Lucella understood, that her Friend was to remove, she chang'd her Colour above ten times in less than a moments space, one while pale, presently red, now pensive, then inconstant, dissembling nevertheless, as much as was possiible, the amo∣rous Passion, which caus'd such an Alteration in her: And with the best assurance, she could, she return'd to accompany the Queen, and the Damsels, into the Chamber of the wounded Knights, who were without delay carry'd by four Servants, and put into the Litter. Now the Messengers had not yet taken notice of Lucella's Beauty, which they no sooner beheld, but they durst to affirm, that Nature had never produc'd any thing, more excellent, or more worthy of Admiration. And immediatly they took their Leave of the Company, the two Knights promising the Ladies to make a speedy Return, if it pleas'd Heaven to be assisting to their Cure. Removing then, they went gently on, for fear of disturbing the Wounds of the Knights, yet nevertheless they came before Sun-set to Axiana's Palace, which was wonderfully built: For the whole Building was of Iasper, Porphiry, white, gray, and black Marble, with a vast Number of Towers and Turrets, along which were many guilded Pipes, receiving the Waters from four great Parts of the House in a Square, the Walls of which, within and without were enricht with the most curious work, that Apelles ever wrought, either in Imagery or Painting. To this Palace was adjoyning a Park, containing in compass six great Leagues, full of so many Curiosities, that I know not, whether the Palace of Apolidon could shew any thing beyond them: For Zirfea had employ'd all her Skill to render it perfectly curious, having beautifyd with whatever Art or Nature could afford, as you shall hereafter understand. And tho' the two wounded Knights were in so much Pain, that Rest was much more convenient for them, than their Amusing themselves, either in beholding or discoursing about Buildings; yet having heard the Damsels by the way relate the Perfection of the Place, they took so great Pleasure in viewing its Out-side, that they scarce thought of entring in, when Axiana, in∣form'd of their Arrival, by a Page, came to receive them with such a Countenance, as
shew'd her more content and satisfy'd, than if she had regain'd her Castle, and Cham∣ber of Treasure, she had lost. Which the Knight of the Burning Sword perceiving, said to her: Madam, you have been so mindful of our Healths, that should we dye a thousand times in your service, yet can we never recompence favour we receive from you: But the as the Sun is natually bright, and cannot be otherwise; so you being descended of the house, you are, and so well educated, cannot shew your self other than wise, prudent, fair, and ver∣tuous, using Sweetness and Courtesy, as that, with which you are born, and which naturally, accompanies you to render you the most accomplisht of Ladies. Sir Knight, answer'd she, you give me great and undeserv'd Praises, for that which I could not have omitted, without offending against the three principal Points, requisit to a Person of my Condition. The first of which is, to acknow∣ledge in time of Adversity the Pleasure one has receiv'd from ones Enemy, letting every one know, that he, who, when afflicted, can requite a Favor, has also the Means to avenge himself of the Injuries suffer'd, during his Misfortune. The se∣cond, to shew ones self at all times civil and compassionate, as occasion requires. And the third, never so to trouble ones Mind, for any Discontents or Crosses, which may happen, but that Reason and Discretion still keep the upper hand. And these three Points are evidently necessary to all generous Persons, for the preserving their Greatness always firm and unchangeable: For undecaying Virtue renders a person much more noble and exalted, than all the corruptible Goods of Fortune, which are always subject to her Passions and Inconstancy, and but too often bestow'd on such, as never deserv'd them. But 'tis quite otherwise with Virtue; for he alone obtains it, who does Acts worthy the gaining it: And for it alone, ought men to be esteem'd, and honour'd, yea, and reputed Richer, than if they possess'd all the Trea∣sures of the word: Because the true and never fading Riches, is the Renown of good and heroick Actions, perform'd by the vertuous Person. The Knight of the Burning Sword, hearing her speak with such a Grace, conceiv'd a very great Esteem for her: But she was Daughter of one of the discreetest Ladies in Asia, and of Prince Olorius of Spain, a most wise and prudent Knight, from whom it would have been difficult for her to have degenerated. And to speak true, when we consider the tenderness of her Age joyn'd with her Discretion, Nature shew'd in her a Master-piece, admirably well deserving the highest Commendations. Wherefore he resol'd to do her all the Honor, he could, and she very courteously embrac'd him. Then were he and Gradamart brought into a fair Chamber, where, being laid in two several Beds, they were visited by the old Knight, whom we formerly mention'd, who, thro' his great skill, and long Experience, sav'd their Lives, as he had done of many other valiant men, who held themselves therefore very much oblig'd to him.
CHAP. XXXI. How the Knight of the Burning Sword caus'd Axiana's Castle to be restored to her, and the Discourse the King of Sicily, and she had together. FOur whole days did the Knight of the burning Sword and Gradamart, continue under the Old Mans Hand, without any discerning of Amendment in them, till towards the end of the Week, when the Feavor left them, and their Wounds be∣gan to Heal. Axiana in the mean time treated them in the best manner, she could imagin, and sent to desire the King of Sicily, that he would come and visit them. Which he very readily did, Gradafilea also bearing him Company. They then being come to the Infanta's House, whilst Gradafilea was entertain∣ing her Brother Gradamart, the King of Sicily discours'd with the Knight of the burning Sword, who falling from one matter to another, the Knight began to say to him: Sir, tho' the little Service I have hitherto done you, is so far from deser∣ving any Recompence, that it merits not the least Thanks, nevertheless, consider∣ing your Goodness, Liberality, and courteous Disposition, as you also, I believe, have already some Assurance, how much I am yours, and into what danger I would put my Person for any thing, that might redound to your Service; I have taken the boldness to make you the Request, you will hear. You know, Sir, in what man∣ner the Chamber of Treasure was Conquer'd, and the Guards slain, at which (as 'tis to be thought) the Infanta Axiana receiv'd a double Discontent: And never∣theless for my desisting at her Request from the Combat against her Knight Lu∣cencio, which was as great a Benefit to my self, as to him, she has taken such care of my Health, that, laying aside all the ill Will, she might reasonably bear me, she has so preferr'd Virtue, that 'twere impossible for the greatest Prince in the World to be more honour'd, or better treated: Which has constrain'd me, Sir, humbly to beseech you, that you will be pleas'd to give me, what we have won from her, to the end I may make her a Present of it, acknowledging in some manner the great Civility she has shewn me. The King, who desir'd nothing more than to please and satisfy him, being very glad of this Overture, thus answer'd him: My dear Friend, I could wish you had askt also of me the three best Citys of my Kingdoms, that I might have had an Op∣portunity of shewing you how sensible I am of the Obligations you have laid on me, who owe you even my Life: as for what you now request of me, you alone have the Absolute Right to dispose of it, at your pleasure, having purchas'd it with your blood; it seems therefore injurious to me, to ask me that which is already your own, and in which I have no part: but if you please to accept of any thing that belongs to me, you shall freely have it, how dear soever it is to me.
The Knight of the burning Sword very humbly thank'd him. This Discourse was scarce ended, when the Infanta, who had been to visit her Friend Lucencio, came in. The King immediately went to salute her, with his Knee, in a manner, to the Ground, and she, who was of an Accomplisht Behaviour receiv'd him very humbly. Then they sat down in two Chairs, near to the Knight, who, addressing himself to her, thus began his Discourse: Madam, you have already done me such Favours, that 'tis impossible for so poor a Knight, as I am, ever to return you sui∣table Thanks: I have nevertheless, by my Entreaties, so far prevail'd with the King, that he has, of his Liberality, been pleas'd to bestow on me the Place, you lost some few days since, to the end I may restore it into your hands, which I very willingly do: entreating you, that of your wonted Goodness, you will pardon me the death of your people, who (undoubtedly) ended their daies, more thro' the ill Custom of the place, they kept, than for any Desire I had to do you a discourtesy. Therefore, Madam, with Thanks to the King, you will please to accept this pre∣sent, and to esteem me, as one, who would hazard his life, and whatever else is dear to him, for your Service. Tho' Axiana was exceedingly overjoy'd at her so easy recovering, what she despai∣red of, yet concealing the Excess of her Ioy, she modestly thus answer'd him: In∣deed, good Knight, the Offer you so liberally make me, and the Displeasure I have receiv'd in losing, what you have gain'd from me and mine, put me in great confu∣sion; because, considering in what manner my place has been conquer'd, and then restor'd, and put into my hands, my honour seems not however to be satisfied, un∣less the Death of my men were reveng'd as severely as the greatness of the Offence deserves, not so much in respect of them, as of my person, against which, the prin∣cipal Injury has been committed, and which ought to have a suitable satisfaction. And on the other side, the Favour, Benefit, and Honour I receive from the King and you, summons me to forget all past Offences, not so much for the value of the thing you present me, as to take away the Opinion, that might be conceived, not only of my ingratitude, but that the cause of my Refusal proceeds from a De∣spair of ever being able to return you the like: Which, the Gods forbid should befall Axiana, and much less, that she should shew in the State and Rank she bears any mean spiritedness, which is a Fault, that never she or any of her Lineage were guilty of. And therefore conforming the Time to my Fortune, my Thanks for the Restitution you make me, shall be such, that I wait for some time to requite you, not as for a Benefit bestow'd on the Queen of Argenes Daughter, but as a bounty, proceeding from such noble Persons to me, who expected it not. In the mean time you shall have, for a pledge, my good Will, with what ever else is in my power. Ah! Madam, said the King, I will no longer contend with you▪ well knowing, that your Courtesy can overcome a much better speaker than I am: but let it suffice you, that all those, who see you, fall into a Desire of doing you ser∣vice,
which Desire brings with it so much force, that every Knight who serves you, thinks himself well recompens'd, if his service is agreeable to you. Now Axiana had not yet perceiv'd Gradafilea, who, to hear what they said, left her Brother, and came towards her. Then they saluted each other very courteously. They had not however any long Discourse together: for Night drew on, and the King of Sicily would return, whence he had parted in the morning. Which Axiana knowing, besought him, and Gradafilea also, not to forget the Way, but to bring thi∣ther the next day the Queen and Lucella, with all the rest, whom she would enter∣tain in the best manner, she could: and upon this they gave her the good Fight. And coming down into the Court, they took Horse, and went back to the Castle of the Chamber of Treasure, where they were very well receiv'd, especially by the La∣dies, who desiring to know in what disposition the two wounded Knights were, the King was oblig'd to relate to them, more than once, all he had seen and heard. And in the mean time, the Knight of the burning Sword and Lucencio, some∣times visited each other, whence they began together such a Friendship, as lasted e∣ver after. CHAP. XXXII. How the Emperor of Trebisond, the King of Sicily, and all the others, as well Knights, as Ladies, and Gentlewoman, that were in the Castle of the Cham∣ber of Treasure, went to see Axiana: And of the Wonders she shew'd them. SO well did the did Knight order those he had undertaken to cure, that he set them on their Legs sound and lusty: At which the Infanta Axiana much rejoycing, and desirous to treat the Emperor and his Company, requested the Knight of the Burning Sword, and Gradamart, to go, and desire their Company at her house, where she design'd to feast them. Which being heard by the Knights, they one day very early in the morning took horse, and having put on Scarlet Cloaks, which she had given them, with no other Arms but their Swords, they went on to the Castle, where they were very well receiv'd. Then the two Knights told those of the Castle Axiana's Desire, to satisfy which, they resolv'd to set forth immediatly. Sending therefore for their Horses, they rode to the Infanta's House, who being acquainted,
that they were alighted in the lower Court, came to receive them with so pleasing a Countenance, as was highly to the Satisftion of all the Company. a wedding (same figure used in Chapter 52) Now as she saluted them one after the other, seeing the great Beauty of Lucella, of which she had been told, she could not forbear saying to her: In my Conscience, Madam, you are the compleatest Beauty, I ever saw in my life and I no more wonder, that the Adventure of my Castel is ended, the Gods having bestow'd on you so great Excellence. Lisvart, who heard this Discourse, and the Praises, which Axiana gave the Princess, desiring in some sort to acknowledge the Pleasure, he receiv'd by it, spake thus to her: By my Faith Madam you have in my opinion no cause to complain of them: For if they have given this Infanta any Beauty, you also have so good a share of it, that you come not far behind her. And to speak Truth, after Lucella, one could not easily have found any one, that equall'd her; and yet she could not forbear smiling and blushing together. She would not however contest any longer, but changing the Discourse, brought them in∣to the Hail, where the Tables were cover'd for dnner, and they were so abundantly serv'd with all sorts of Delicacies, that 'twas to be admir'd. Dinner being over, and they having discours'd a little of such things, as most de∣lighted
them. Axiana, willing to shew them the Beauties and choicest Rarities of her House, address'd her self to the Queen, saying: You Madam, and this excel∣lent Company, having so far honour'd Axiana, 'tis reasonable she should endea∣vour, in some sort, to acknowledge it by giving you the Pleasure of certain singula∣rities which are here, and which several have sometimes thought to be strange. Will it please you therefore to see them. Yes indeed answer'd the Queen, 'tis what we request of you. Then they arofe from their Places, and not to tire themseles over much, sent for their Horses, on which being mounted, they entred first into a great Park, part of which was curiously planted with Rows of Orange-trees, Lemon-trees, Myrcles, Pomegranates, Cypres, Lawrels, Lentisk, Pines, Fir-tres, Palm-trees, Olive-trees, and several others, wonderfully pleasant. A little higher, on a small rising, was a Thicket of Codars & Plain-trees, whither repair'd all sorts of Animals, wild and tame. And at the foot ran a Rivulet, proceeding from many pleasant Foun∣tains, which water'd the Place, where 'twas convenient; in the midst of which there was an high Pillar of Amber, that cast forth such abundance of Water, as made a spacious Lake. Then going on the left hand, they entred into a long Walk, set on each side with Elms, Lime-trees, and Sycomores, which so shaded it, that the Sun in the height of Summer could not have offended the Eye of any one, and to rest ones self, there were, on the Sides of it, Arbors of Woodbines and Box, entermix'd with Laurels and Laylacks. And in the midst was a Round of an hundred yards over, where were Pallas, Juno, and Venus of white Marble, who look on Paris, sleeping on a Rock of Chrystal, whence issu'd another Fountain, in which they all took so much Pleasure, that they had not any thoughts of Returning, when there arose so obscure & dark cloud a Cloud, that they all lost sight of each other, and suddenly heard a ser∣pent hiss, and beat his Wings, so that the whole Park resounded the Noise. A∣las, poor Ladies, were you not then afraid. Yes certainly were you, and in such manner, that you thought immediately to dye: For the last mention'd Fountain was chang'd into so great a Fire, that the Flames seem'd by little and little to have seiz'd on the whole Park, those who beheld this wonder, expecting nothing but a miserable and desperate end, and cursing Axiana, who had so subtilly bought them thither, to take, as they thought, vengeance for the Displeasure, she had receiv'd of them. And the more to encrease their Fear, they heard, on the geat Lake, such a Noise & Thun∣der, that they thought, Heaven and Earth ould came together, when they perceiv'd making from thence towards them a great and terrible Serpent, casting Fire and Flame thro' his Eyes, Nostrils and Thoat: And upon him the Infanta Axiana, holding in her hand a naked Sword, with which she gave the Beast such a Blow be∣tween his Ears, that, thro' the Greatness of the Pain, he leapt into the Basin of the Fountain, where he began so to bestir himself, that the Knights, Ladies, and Gen∣tlewoman, were washt with the Water, which spurted up, and fell from their Horses to the Ground, yet without receiving any farther Hurt. Then the Darkness vanish∣ing, and the Heavens becoming clear and bright, they all found themselves in the
midst of the Wood, and Axiana amongst them, having Lisvarts Sword, and without any more seeing any thing, that might trouble them. Wherefore the Knights, knowing their Illusion, and past Fear, fell a laughing; so did not the Ladies, but trembled like the Leaves on the Tree, what fair Words soever Axiana gave them, who would have brought them farther: But Lucella very farely told her, she would not for any thing in the world go on, unless she promis'd to free her from these Plantasms. She was indeed more like one dead than living, and utter'd these Words with such a Grace, as encreas'd the Laughter. Wherefore Axiana gave her Lisvart Sword, saying to her: Madam, the better to secure you, take this Staff, which has such Vertue, that no Enchantment can hurt the Person, who bears it: And for this cause did I request the Lord, whose it is, to lend it me at our entrance into this Park. Which he did, and I deliver it to you, to defend yourself & the rest, if you are assaulted with the like fear, as you have been. Certainly answer'd Lisvart, I should willingly choose such Defence from her, and so, that I am ready to confess, that she and such like have more Power over me tha any one, who should be arm'd, and in a will to sight me. Well then, said Lucella, on this word I receive it, and will defend you, if Occa∣sion offers. They thus jesting one at the other, the Knight of the burning Sword, who thought, that Lisvart spake thro' Affection, and that he was in love with Lucella, en∣tred into so strong a Iealousy, that he would gladly have found a Pretence to have ought him presently: But neither Place nor Opportunity being dispos'd for it, he kept in his heart this ill Will, to make him sometime repent it, tho' this Suspicion was very unjustly conceiv'd. For all the good Entertainment, he made this Lady, was only in remembrance of the fair Onoloria, whom she resembled, and for whom he dy'd day and night. CHAP. XXXIII. How Alquifa arriv'd in the Isle of Argenes: And of the Departure of the Empe∣ror and the others, to return into their Countrey. EVery one being, as you have heard, recover'd of their Fright, they all took horse again to visit the Remainder of the Park, going on, till they came to the Sea-Shore, by which it was on that side enclos'd, where, they discover'd a far off a great Ship, making towards them with wonderful Swiftness: Wherefore they stay'd, expecting to know who was in it. And when the Vessel was within two Bow-shoot of the Shore, they that were in it, put forth a Boat, which two Mariners began to row, binging with them nine Damsells, holding each of them an Harp, the Sound of which, eccho'd y the water, was wonderfully sweet. A little after they came a∣shoe, and Alqufa, who was one of the nine, was known by almost all the Knights,
even by him of the Burning Sword; for he remembred it was she, wh sir'd him to leave off the Combat against Esplandian in the Defended Mountain. For this cause every one was pleas'd to see her, and the Empero a'd her, as did also the Knight of the Burning Sword, who said to her: My great Friend, give me leave to kiss you. She, who well enough understood, what he asm'd at, humbly saluted him, an∣swer'd: Sir Knight, you know the great Desire I have to do you service, and how much I am yours. Lisvart and Perion, wondering at this Acquaintance, knew not what to think of it: Nevertheless they took at that time no notice, but after they had receiv'd her, as she deserv'd, she said to them: My Lords, my Father, and Vrganda salute you in all humility, and send you word, by me, that for your Good you enter without Delay into this Ship, since 'tis requisit, you be henceforth seen by those, who have desir'd you, and are in very great Pain for your Absence. Therefore consider if you will believe their Counsel, for they love you, and desire your profit, as you have often enough experimented. The Emperor (who had been of Opinion, he should never see the Day or Means to return into Trebisond) considering, that Alquif and Urganda sent them not such a Message without occasion, answer'd before them all: My great Friend, I think, that none of us would disobey Persons to whom we are so much bound. As for me, I am ready, without returning to the Place, from whence we departed this Morning. As much said the others. Now Lucencio very well remembred the Promise, he had made to the wild woman, whom he found in the Forrest, when he was hunting, as you were told in the be∣ginning of this Volume, nevertheless he would not, at that time speak of it to Lis∣vart or Perion, hoping, that the Queen of Argenes, being retunr'd, he should get from her, and go to find them in Trebisond, whence he would bring them to her, who askt so much after them. And on this Point the Emperor, and the other Knights, Ladies and Gentlewo∣men, took leave of Axiana, offering her, whatsoever was in their Power: For which she heartily thank'd them, and she recommending them to the Protection of her Gods, they entred into Alquifa's Vessel, which a little after put off from Land, the Empe∣ror thinking to go strait to Trebisond. But he was for this time mistaken, as you shall understand in the persuit of our History.
CHAP. XXXIV. How Malfadea, Daughter to the Giant of the great Siclades, came to ask help of King Amadis, who went with her, to revenge her of the Giant Masearon. IN the beginning of this History, you have been told, how King Amadis took a singular Delight, in seeing the Feats of Arms, every day perform'd by the Dut∣chess of Savoys Knight, who kept the Kay, whether he had caus'd his Tents and Pavilions to be brought, so that he stay'd there four whole Months: during which 'tis incredible, what a Number of Shields were lost by several gallant Men, accor∣ding to the Custom, establisht at the Passage. At which, the King conceived such a Love for the Knight, that, to draw him to his Service, and continual Residence about his Person, he shew'd him great Honour and Sign of Love. Now it hapned one day amongst others, that his Huntsmen brought him Word of a great Wild Boar, which they had found in a Thicket near the Sea-side. The King, who lov'd Hunting, commanded presently the Toils to be spread, and with his Grey-hounds, Hounds, and other great Dogs brought him to a Bay, and at last kill'd him with a Bore-Spear. And because he found himself weary, he went to re∣fresh himself on the Sand, where he had not been long, when he saw a Boat, brought to the Shore by two Mariners, and with them a Damsel, carrying on her Shoulders two Giants Heads, one a Mans, the other a Womans. She, of whom I speak to you, shew'd so much sorrow, that a pityless heart would have been mov'd to com∣passion. The King, and those who were with him, drew near to hear the Cause of this Sorrow, and what Adventure brought this Woman thither. But she prevented them, asking them with Tears in her Eyes, if they could direct her to King Amadis, the Rampart and Refuge of such desolate Persons, as she was. The King hearing, that she desir'd to speak with him, answer'd mildly: Dam∣sel, I am he, what would you have with me? At this word the Giantess prostrated her self at his Feet, and increasing her tears and sighs said to him: Alas! if in the time, when you were a Knight Errant, you sought strange Adventures, to repair Wrongs and Outrages, especially such, as were done to Widows and Orphans, now that you are King, Reason obliges you not to leave this so good, holy, and just Custom. For GOD bestows not his Favours and great Benefits on such, as you are, but for the Preservation of Justice, and Assistance of the Poor, who are all stript of Relief, as I am. My Friend, answer'd the King, you say true, and certainly I will do so, if I can, whenever I shall have Opportunity: Wherefore delay not to acquaint me with your Grief, assuring you, that I will remedy it as far as I am able.
O good Prince, said she, with this hope I am come to you, and most humbly be∣seech you to grant me a gift, which 'tis necessary you should do, if you intend to re∣venge me of the wrong that is done me. I grant it you, answer'd the King. Understand, Sir, said she, that the Gift you have given me, is, that you alone, being Arm'd, enter presently into my Boat, to the end you may revenge me of the wicked Person that has slain my Father and Mother, whose Heads these are: and the Remainder, Sir, I will tell you at leisure, as we are sailing. In good faith, answer'd the King, it shall not be my fault, if your Will is not ex∣ecuted: for I will follow you, where-ever you desire. Certainly, said the Damsel, this Confidence I have always had in your Vertue and Goodness, therefore send for your Arms, and let us go. The King call'd the Count Gandalin, and commanded him to fetch them with out saying a word to the Queen, or any other, till such time as he was departed. The Count obey'd his Command, tho' very unwillingly: but knowing his Masters di∣sposition, who would rather dye, than break his word, he went on. Nor was it long, e're he return'd, and the King arm'd himself, bidding King Arban acquaint the Queen, with what he had seen, and desire her in his Name not to be troubled for him. Then he went into the Boat, and, without knowing whether he went, be∣gan to Sail, leaving his People in a wonderful fear of losing him. And because you may, Readers, think it strange, that this good King, who was fourscore years old, could yet undertake the Execution of such an Adventure, you must understand, that in his time the most magnanimous Knight, and of the greatest Courage, that could be found. Nor were the days of Men so short then, as they are now: for they liv'd some Two Hundred, nay some Three Hundred Years and lon∣ger. And which is more, the Vertue of the Water, wherewith Urganda the Un∣known washt him in the Palace of Apolidon, when she enchanted him, was very Advantageous to him in this Affair. But to return to our Story, King Arban, having follow'd King Amadis with his Eye, till he was out of sight, came to the Queen, and acquainted her with the King's Command, at which she became so troubled, that fetching a deep sigh, she began to say: Good GOD, the King's great Heart is an Enemy to his Person, and to me, seeing the Dangers it exposes him to at every turn! Alas! is it not time for him now to rest, and leave such youthful matters to be undertaken by so great a Number of good Knights, who desire nothing else? Madam, answer'd Angriote, you say true: but what? the King, who is born to gain to himself alone the Honour of all, desires thus to do, and to leave nothing behind for us, thinking, by the great Benefits, he bestows on us, sufficiently to satisfy us for the Service and good Will, we bear him. Many others endeavour'd to comfort Queen Oriana, to whom they alledg'd so many Reasons, that at last she took some of them in payment, knowing no better
Remedy: wherefore she resolv'd to return to London. Leaving therefore the Knight of the Kay, and the Dutchess of Savoy in the Protection of our Lord, she departed the next morning betimes. CHAP. XXXV. How Malfadea the Giantess related her Misfortune to King Amadis: and of the Discourse, they had together. KIng Amadis, being thus gone off from the Coast of great Britain, and seeing his Guide a little pacify'd, requested her to acquaint him with the occasion of her Parents Death, and her Discontent. This she willingly granted, saying to him: Your Majesty will be pleas'd to un∣derstand, that my Father was Lord of the great Siclades, so call'd for being lon∣ger and larger than any other of the four and fifty Islands. And tho' he was a Giant, yet had he many good and vertuous Customs: he was very just, compassionate, and a Practiser of friendly Hospitality towards his Neighbours. One of which, who was a wicked and traiterous Dissembler, abusing this my Fathers Courtesy and good Nature, pretended to be so much his Friend, that he lov'd him above all others. He, of whom I speak, and who is nam'd Mascaron, came not above fifteen days since, with a Cousin of his into the great Siclades, where they were very well re∣ceiv'd. Now the next day after dinner, this Villain askt my Father, that he might have my Company to walk in the Garden. My Father, innocent of the Rascals Malice, commanded me to go along with him: and Mascaron and I were some time together without his speaking any thing that might displease me: but at last he pray'd me to grant him my Love. I then, being much amaz'd, frankly answer'd him, that I would rather dye, than do this Injury to my Lineage, setting before his Eyes the good Entertainment, and great Reception, my Father had given him, to which he ought to have regard. Say you so? said he. Yet must you obey me, whether you will or no: nevertheless I pray you, it may be by Amity, and not by force. Certainly, answer'd I then to him, I would first kill my self with mine own hands. Notwithstanding this, my Refusal hindred him not from attempting to defile me by force, which made me cry out so loud, that my Father, who was then discour∣sing with Mascarons Cousin, came to my Assistance, asking me the cause of my Cry. Alas, said I, this Villain would have dishonour'd me by force. My Father, not without cause, provokt hereat, stoop'd down to take up a stick, which lay at his Feet, and before he could get up again, the Traytor, drawing a Scymeter, which hung at his side, gave him such a Blow on the neck, that he se∣parated his head from his Body.
Then I poor wretch began in such sort to howl and lament, that my sorrowful Mother came to me, who finding my Father thus murder'd, and the Scymeter in the hands of his murderer, flew at him, and like a furious Lioness, which sees her man, overwhelmed with Despair, could in such a case do. And she had with∣out doubt kill'd him, but that the other, taking his part, first threw my Mother on the Ground, and then drawing his Sword, murder'd her. Then Mascaron took me by the hair, telling me, that, to make me suffer the more he would not kill me, as he had done the rest, but would force me on the Bodies of my murder'd Parents, that I might receive the greater injury: and thus he executed his damn'd and unhappy Will, what Resistance or Threat soever I made him. Then he kickt me on the Belly, saying to me: Go, wretched Creature, seek who may honour thee more, or restore thee the Estate, thou expectedst to enjoy for the future. And leaving me alone, he, and his Cousin return'd to the Castle, where ha∣ving most inhumanly butcher'd many poor Servants, they took possession of it, and keep it still. Which I seeing, took the Heads, you may here behold, and entred into this Boat, attended by this Servant of mine, who has brought me to you for Refuge: and so indeed I commanded him, having often heard it affirm'd, that you never fail'd your Assistance to any poor desolate Woman. In this manner, Sir, all has past, and this is the unhappy end of those, from whom I had my Life. Then she fell a weeping so bitterly, that it seem'd, as if she would have melted into Tears. At which the Kings heart was in such manner touch'd with Compas∣sion, that he could scarce forbear weeping: wherefore he said to her: This certainly is the greatest and most Villamous Treason, that could be imagin'd, and which I have good hopes not to leave unpunish'd. Alas, Sir, answer'd she, I beseech GOD to be aiding to you herein. Thus went King Amadis and Malfadea discoursing with so good a Wind, that the Thirteenth Day after they arriv'd within Twenty Miles of the great Siclades. Which the Mariners let the King understand, assuring him, they should come to Harbor the next day before eight a Clock. Well then, answer'd the King, we shall see whether Mascaron or I shall have the fairest Mistress.
CHAP. XXXVI. How the Emperor of Trebisond, the King of Sicily, and their Company, failing by Night, there pass'd by them a Boat, in which was a Knight, and a Lady that wept bitterly. WE not long since told you, in what manner the Emperor and his Company put to Sea at their departure from the Isle of Argenes, at which there was not any of them, but was greatly pleas'd, hoping to go strait to Trebisond: but they counted without their Host; and indeed very great Dammage would have been caus'd by it: to prevent which Alquifa was sent to them, as you will understand in the following Chapter. This Company then Sailing the space of a whole Month, without knowing whi∣ther, or which way they went, the Vessel being guided of it self without any Pilot or Governour, (for so had the wife Alquifa ordain'd) it one night hapned, that the Knight of the burning Sword, not being able to Sleep for thinking on his Love, heard the Moans of a Woman, lamenting, as he thought, and bitterly weeping: wherefore he awakned his Companion Gradamart, to whom he bare a singular Friendship, and askt him, whether he had heard this Complaint: for, said he, it seems to me to be some of our Damsels. I have well heard the Complaint, answer'd Gradamart, but it comes from far∣ther off, and to shew 'tis so, the Water carries away the noise by little and little. God never help me then, said the Knight of the Burning Sword, if I do not go to know, what it means. And do you think, answer'd Gradamart, that I will stay behind? Then they got hastily up, and wrapping themselves in their Cloaks, came upon the Deck, where they enquir'd of the Mariners, if they had seen any one pass that way, who wept or made any noise? Yes, answer'd some of them, 'twas a Damsel, whom a Knight carries away in a Boat, with two Oars. As God shall help me, said the Knight of the burning Sword, he forces her then, and 'twould ill become me to have so long born Arms, and not to remedy it; and 'tis probable, I heard not this noise without the Will of the Heavenly Powers, who would have me to look after it. And therefore, Sir Gradamart, I desire you to help me arm my self: for I would not for any thing in the world delay to follow them in our Skiff, with one or two of our Mariners. How, answer'd Gradamart, do you think my Friendship to you so little, that I would let you go thus alone? On my soul, tho' you so far disdain'd me, yet will I not forsake you, without having share in the good or evil, that may befall you by it. When the Knight of the burning Sword heard him speak with such Affection, dou∣ting, that he had displeas'd him, he embrac'd him, and said to him: Pardon me, my
dear Friend, for I swear to you by our great Gods, that no other thing made me use this Language to you, but the fear of over toiling you: for I have more plea∣sure in your Company, than in any other I can keep. And therefore I promise you, that I will not henceforth transgress your Commands, but dispose of me, as you shall please. Then Gradamart made a sign to the Mariners to let down the Skiff into the Sea, and in the mean time they went to Arm themselves the most secretly they could, fear∣ing, lest the King, or some other, might divert their Enterprize. Being Arm'd, they went forth of the great Ship, taking only two Men to guide them, whom they commanded to steer their Course that way, they had heard the voice complain charg∣ing the others on their Lives to say nothing of their Departure, till the next mor∣ning, when they should, in their Names, beseech the Emperor to stay for them two days, if it were possible. Then the Skiff began to Sail, and those of the Ship did, as he had commanded them: for day being come, the King of Sicily, thinking to go and visit the Knight of the burning Sword, and not finding him, where he was wont to test, knew from the Mariners, in what manner Gradamart and he, was departed, at which he was very much displeas'd, as was also Lucella, till she knew, what they had requested of the Emperor, which was to stay for them. But a Tempest, arising at break of day, contradicted it: so that 'twas impossible for them to bring the Ship to Anchor, but they were forc'd to remove, whether they would or no, and follow Fortune, Alquifa perswading them, that all this was or∣dain'd by Mystery, add that the Knight of the burning Sword and Gradamart would be found again in time. And, in the mean while, we will return to the King of great Britain, who was Sailing with Malfadea. CHAP. XXXVII. How King Amadis went a shore in the great Siclades, and sought against Masca∣ron: And of the Danger, he was in, from which he was deliver'd by the Knight of the Burning Sword, and Gradamart, who came thither in good time for him. GRadamart, and the Knight of the Burning Sword, caus'd their two Mariners to row with all the speed they could, that they might overtake him, who carry'd away the Damsel, as you have been told, whom they discover'd about break of day, at whch they receiv'd great Satisfaction, hoping he should never escape from them. And following him with great hast, when it had been now day a full hour, they saw him go a shore on a neighbouring Island, and one of those, who guided the Boat, en∣ter into a strong Castle, whence he soon return'd to the Knight, who stay'd for him on the Sand.
Then they stay'd a while together, and a little after perceiv'd coming towards them a Giant compleatly arm'd, and with him another Giant, and some Number of Peo∣ple unarm'd: Wherefore the Knight embrac'd his Shield, & lacing down his Hel∣met, took his Sword in his hand, and march'd straight to the Giant, who put him∣self in like readiness to fight. Then they began so furiously to charge each other, that the sparks of Fire flew from their Armor, as from a Furnace, blown with a Smiths Bellows. And thus they held on, curting each others Shields, and un∣riveting their Armor, so that the best of them was in a manner naked, the Knight of The Boat shewing himself so Active, Couragious, and Nimble, that he often made his Enemy lose his Blow, and treated him so ill, that the Blood ran out in many places from his Flesh. At which the Giant grew very fearful, and seeing his End near, cry'd out with a loud voice: Cousin, Cousin, and you my men, revenge me of this Devil: For if he were Mortal, he could never have done, what you have seen. Ah Villain, said the Knight, dost thou think thus to preserve thy Life? By my head, all the help of these Traitors shall not save thee from my hands. Having said this, he began to press him more close, than he had done all the day, and the Giant did nothing but parry to his Blows, expecting his Men, who were all gone to fetch their Arms at the Castle. Whence they hastily return'd, and fell upon the Knight of the Boat, whom they encompast on all sides. Now a little before the Knight of the burning Sword and Gradamart, who had from a far, seen the beginning of the Fight, began to say to one another: Behold, how much we were deceiv'd: He, who, we thought, carry'd away the Damsel by force is come to revenge her of some Injury, she has receiv'd from this Giant: Let us ap∣proach, and see, how 'twill go. Then they commanded their Mariners to draw to the shore, and the nearer they approacht, the more they wondred, who he was, that fought so valiantly, and, as they might plainly see, manag'd his Enemy at his Pleasure. But they perceiv'd the Assistance come, and assail him on all sides: Nevertheless the Knight so well defen∣ded himself, seeing his Death before his Eyes, that he seem'd, as if he had not struck a Blow all the day, tho' he had to do with two Giants, and twenty others, as well Servants, as Esquires, by whom he was so molested, that 'twas a Wonder, how he could bear up against them. Gradamart, and the Knight of the burning Sword who were in their Skiff, making towards the Shore, drew near the Boat, in which the Damsel was remaining, who, wringing her Hands, and tearing her Hair, made the dolefulest Lamentation in the world, cursing and banning Fortune, which was so contrary and injurious to her. Then the Knight of the burning sword askt her, why she lamented in that manner. Alas! Sir answer'd the, if there is in you any goodness▪ for GOD's sake succor this good Knight, who has, for my right, undertaken this hard Combat against the
most cruel and traitorous Giant, that ever was born of Woman, who, violating his Faith and Promise: thus disloyally causes King Amadis to be assaulted, whom you may see in the danger he is for my sake. When the Knight of the Burning Sword heard the Damsel say, that he, who fought against so many, was the King of Great Britain, he greatly wondred, and spake thus to Gradamart: Indeed, I believe that whatever Fame has heretofore publisht of him, is true, and yet it is nothing in respect of what I see with my two Eyes: Wherefore I will never consent to his being thus outrag'd by these Villains, but will help him to my power, tho' I am sure he hates me more than any man living. And nevertheless, I think my self happy, that I am come in time to let him know, that (setting hatred aside) I am more a Lover of Vertue than Enmity: It being a more commendable thing to vanquish ones self, than all others. Therefore my Companion, I beseech you, let us chastise these Traitors: For Knight-hood is principally ordain'd for such occasions. Then they went upon the Sand, and Embracing their Shields, fiercely Assailed those, who held the King thus besieged, the Knight of the burning Sword, crying: Be gone, Villains, be gone you shall all dye for having thus laid hands on the best King in the World. And at the same time, he gave such a Blow with his Sword, to the first he met, that he cleft his Iron Cap, and his Head, even to the Shoulders. Then thrusting himself into the Croud, he struck on the right and left with such force, that whom he firmly hit, had no need of a Chirurgion. Gradamart on the other side, did not much less, as, who was of a Giantly Rare, an hardy and valiant Knight, and he would gladly let King Amadis know, that for sake of Lisvart of Greece, with whom his Sister was so much in Love, he willingly employ'd his Person in his Service. Now Amadis was at that time very much wounded, nevertheless, finding himself assisted, and by such gallant men, had his Heart so rais'd, that he recover'd new strength, and smote Mascaron so home, that he separated his head from his shoulders, crying with a loud voice: This day, Traitor, thy Life and thy great Disloyalties shall come to an end together. In the mean time, Gradamart was fighting with the other Giant, who perceiving his Cosin Mascaron in so piteous a condition, began to lose heart, and recoile bark, step by step, that he might escape being kill'd: but the Knight of the burning Sword, finding him in his way, gave him so great a blow on the Shoulder, that he cut off his right Arm in such manner, as one might see his Liver, whereon he fell imme∣diately dead. The rest of the Assailants were so terrify'd at this, that they betook themselves to their heels flying as fast as they could towards the Fortress. Which profited them little, for at last they lost their Lives, some few being excepted, who yielded to Mercy. Then the Giantess Malfadea, knowing the Victory to be turn'd in her favour, & seeing the Head of her Enemy on the Field, ran to take it, and began to tear it with
her Teeth, as the hungry Woolf does the tender Lamb, that he has stoln from the Shepherd: At which the King began to laugh, saying, he never thought, there could have been so great an Heart in a Womans Body. Sir, answer'd the Knight of the Burning Sword, she will compleat her Venge∣ance, and shew by effect, that such Constraints are often familiar to her, and such, as she. Truly said the King, you may well name it Extremity. But my Friends, I be∣seech you, take off your Hlmets, that I may know you: For you have done so much for me, that I hold my Life only from you. Sir, answer'd the Knight of the burning Sword, it will please you to give us leave, because we can make no longer stay with you. Ah! ah, my Friends! said the King, embracing them, Will you leave me then so soon, without telling me your Names? By all, that I hold of GOD, it will be a very great Displeasure to me. Sir, answer'd the Knight of the burning Sword, to obey you, you shall see us bare-fac'd, tho' you will know as little, as before: Nor did I think to do you ser∣vice in this place; but our Minds change with the time, and the gods often dispose, quite otherwise, than Men propose. For the rest, I assure you that thy longer stay here would be damageable to several: Therefore you will at this time excuse us, if you please. King Amdais, who, during these Discourses, beheld them attentively, had his Heart wholly mov'd; For he began to think his Grand on Lisvart, whom he re∣sembled, and suspected immediately by the Marks, which had been given him, that 'twas undoubtedly he, who had conquer'd the Defended Mountain, and fought in his Presence with the Dutchess of Savoy's Knight: Wherefore having more Desire to know the Truth, he said to him: Knight, I heartily thank you for the Benefit, I have receiv'd by you, and the more, because the Enmity, which you say, you bare me, did not divert you from doing so good an Act. As for me, if you are he, whom I imagine, and whom I have hated more than all the men in the world, I will now swear to you, that for the Esteem, I have of your Person, the Ill Will is wholly forgotten on my Side, which you shall see by experience, when you please. Sir, Answer'd the Knight of the burning Sword, I know not, whether I am he, whom you presume, but I should think my self very happy to be the Friend and Servant of so good a Prince, as your Majesty; for Testimony whereof, and in assu∣rance, that we will continue yours, you shall presently know, who we are, and some News, which will give you yet more Desire to wish us well. My Compa∣nion is Gradamart, Son to the King of the Giants Island, and I am a poor Soul∣dier, call'd the Knight of the burning Sword: to tell you more of my being I cannot, for I know it not my self. The News, I have to tell you, is, that your Chil∣dren,
Perion of Gaul and Lisvart of Greece are hard by with the Emperor of Trebi∣sond, where we left them in a Ship, near which you pass'd last night: and we came after you, thinking by the Moans of this Damsel, that you carry'd her away by force against her Will. The King, who thought his Children dead, hearing, that they were in good health and so near him, was surpriz'd with such extream Pleasure, that lifting up his lands to Heaven, he cast himself on his knees, and cry'd out: O Soveraign God! how great and admirable are your Judgments! and what assistance do you send those, who unfeignedly call on you, to the end your ineffable Greatness may be known in all places! I give you Praise, O Lord all possible Praise and Thanks: For 'tis not long since I thought my self at the end of my life, and having deliver'd me from death by the hand of him, I hated most in the world, have also by the same Person immedi∣atly let me know the best News that can befall me. Then he arose up again, stretching forth his Arms, went to embrace the Knight of the burning Sword, saying to him: Ah! my Child, certainly I cannot call you otherwise seeing Reason obliges me to love and esteem you more than any Knight living, I beseech you to pardon me the little Reception, I have hitherto given you: For your Vertue deserves well, that you be honor'd amongst all the worthy men, I know. I beseech Almighty GOD to grant me the favour, that I may one day ac∣knowledge to you this so great Good, you have done me, and you will yet, if you please, do me another Courtesy, VVhich is, that these Seaman shall return to the Emperor and my Children, to acquaint them, with what is befaln me, and in the mean time you shall bear me Company: For I believe that when they shall under∣stand, the wounds, I have receiv'd, make it impossible for me to cme to them, they will not fail to set sail this way. Sir, answer' the Knight of the burning Sword, I my self will be the Messenger of such good News, and will bring them more easily than those whom you will send. VVell, said the King, go then in the Protection of our Lord, whom I beseech to be your Guide, and I will retire into this Place, till your Return. Then Malfeada drew near all bloody with the Caress, she had made her Enemies Head, who thanking the Knights with great Affection for their good Assistance, caus'd King Amadis to be brought into her Castle, where she Visited his Wounds, applying to them such Ointments and Remedies, as were necessary: For she was well skil'd in that Art. And on this Point Gradamart and his Companion, having Leave of the King, return'd into their Ship, hoping soon to see him again
CHAP. XXXVIII. How the Knight of the Burning Sword and Gradamart, sailing on the Sea, arriv'd by Fortune in the Isle of the Vermilion Tower, where Gandalfe was combated, and defeated and Galeotes and Madafima, the Father and Mother of Balan, de∣liver'd out of Prison. AFter the Knight of the burning Sword, and Gradamart, had taken leave of King Amadis, and were return'd to Sea, they commanded their Mariners to steer their Course to the Place, where they had left their Company: And this they did, hoping to be quickly there, and relate to them, what they knew of King Amadis who expected them, as you have been told. But no more finding either the Ship, or any Man, of whom they might enquire, what was become of it, the Knight of the burning Sword was ready to dye for displeasure, tho' Gradamart comforted him as much, as possibly he could, knowing, whence this his Discontent proceeded. They resolv'd then, as hast, to return to King Amadis, and take their way together to Great Britain, where perhaps they might have News of what they so much desir'd: For, said Gradamart, 'twould be difficult for such Persons, as the Emperor, and the King of Sicily, to be long conceal'd, without being discover'd. For this cause they acquainted the Seamen with their Intention, who, resitting their Vessel began to Sail with a favourable Wind, which lasted but a little while, for there arose suddainly such a Tempest, that they were often in Danger of being Cast away, and were sorc'd to abandon their Sails and Oars to the good Pleasure of Fortune, which drove them four whole days without sight of Land, or of any thing, that might give them the least hopes in the World to Escape. But on the fifth mor∣ning their Bark came to the shore of an Island, into which they made a Descent, gi∣ving thanks to their gods for this Relief, tho' they knew not the Countrey, where they perceiv'd, not far from them, a Castle▪ built of stone, as red as Blood, and pre∣sently the Knight of the Burning Sword call'd to mind, that Balan hear such an one for his Device: wherefore he said to Gradamart: Never trust me, dear Friend, if we are not arriv'd in the Island of the Vermi∣lion Tower, and if this Place is not the Castle, where the Father and Mother of Balan are detain'd Prisoners, which greatly moves me to go see Gandalfe, and de∣sire him for courtesy to deliver them, and the Land also to whom it belongs These ae words, answer'd Gradamart, I have heard Gandalfe so much blam'd, that Vertue has no part in him: Nor will he do any thing but by force. And as they were thus Discoursing, they saw come towards them, an Esquire, ri∣ding on a Nag, who, without saluting them, said to them: Knights, Gandalfe, King of the Sagittary Island, greatly wonders, what has mov'd you to set Foot
in this Countrey, which is his, without acquainting him, and sends you word by me, that you come willingly to his Prisons, otherwise, he will put you to the cruelst Death, he can imagine: however, if perhaps Balan, Son of Galeotes is one of you, he would have him understand, that he is very glad of it, not for any Good he de∣sires him, but in hopes to take off his Head, and send it with his Fathers and Ma∣balimas, to that wicked King Amadis, with whom he so braggingly threaten'd him. But he thinks, that the person, I speak of, has no leisure to return, for fear such an Happiness should befall him, seeing 'tis so long, since he promis'd to come back and fight him. The Knight of the burning Sword was exceedingly mov'd at the hearing himself threatned with a Prison, and angrily answer'd the Esquire: Friend, return to thy Master, and tell him, that he shews himself, by thy Message, a more foolish and proud King, than we are rash, for having entred into the Countrey, which he shall short∣ly lose; and where we know that he has nothing of right. Tell him also, that the coming of Balan will make him as sorry, as he brags he should be glad: And for to give him certain assurance of it, I am Balan, who could come no sooner to fight him, not for any fear of him, but for want of Time and Opportunity convenient. And therefore let him perform to me, what he is oblig'd to, and I will likewise on my part keep my promise with him, which is to present his Head to King Amadis, a Prince more Vertuous and Debonnair, than he is Traitorous and wic∣ked. The Esquire, having heard him, began to shake his head and smiling, to say to him in mockery: In good saith I well know now, that your Brain is weaker, and more disturb'd, than I thought for: Nevertheless, your being a Fool, is no Argument to hinder your being chastis'd as you deserve. But stay, I am going to fetch one that will teach you henceforth to speak more dutifully, and respectful, than you have done of the Person of such a Prince as King Gandalfe my Master. Then he turn'd his Bridle, and setting Spurs to his Horse, went back the way he came, leaving Gradamart very much displeas'd, that the Knight of the burning Sword had alone granted him so great a Matter: For he knew by Report that Gandalfe was one of the cruelst and strongest Giants in the world, and for this cause he said to his Companion: As GOD help me, since you concern your self so much in the Affairs of others, you ought much more to take some care of your own, and I won∣der how you have so lightly undertaken this Combat, without giving me some part in the Danger or Honour that may come of it: Since I much better resemble Balan, both in Stature and Countenance than you do, and should be pleas'd that Gandalfe should think me so, and that you your self would assert it to him. By your doing this I shall know that you are willing to recompence the Love I bear you: otherwise not. Ah! my great Friend, answer'd the Knight of the burning Sword, the farther we go, the more (methinks) is our Mutual Love manifested, wherefore there is
now no need to make any Proof of it: And as for the care, you say, I take of o∣thers Affairs, indeed they are not others, but our own; seeing you sufficiently know the good Will that Balan bears us, which obliges us to defend, what con∣cerns him, as it were our own. Yet will I not excuse the wrong, I have done you in not asking your Counsel, before I answer'd the Esquire: But the Indignation, he put me in by his Threats, and the high Words, he gave us, made me thus forget my self, for which, I beseech you to pardon me. Whilst, they were debating these matters, the Esquire went to carry the King the Answer of the two Knights, at which he was like to run mad for spite. Then he hastily dmanded his Arms, and Arm'd himself, ordering his Servants to take espe∣cial heed, that Balan did not fly: for, said he, I will have him burnt with those I keep Prisoners. And immediately he commanded a great Fire to be kindled without the Castle, over against which he caus'd Galeotes and Madasima to be bound. Now they knowing nothing of the Combat, which was to be fought, but thought they should surely dye, when they perceiv'd the two Knights, that expected Gandalfe, who seeing these poor Captives in such Misery, having their Flesh ton, and all bloody with the Torments they daily suffer'd from the Rosts and Scourges could not forbear weeping, especially for the Moan they made, calling for the Assistance of their Son, whose Arrival in time they never expected. Then came Gandalse, to whom the Knight of the burning Sword address'd him∣self, saying to him: King, 'tis just that before our fight, thou swear to me, that, if the Victory be on my side, none of thine shall do me any hurt. Ah! wretched Creature? answer'd he, dost thou think to fall into this hazard? No, no, I will take care to keep thee from it: and to the end thou mayst not doubt of it, I swear to thee by the great god Iupiter, that if I can possibly avoid it, I will not kill thee in this Combat, but will take thee alive, to give thee afterwards at leisure a thousand Deaths one after another. Therefore from this time look to thy self. At this word the Knight of the burning Sword advanc'd, and the two Champions entred into so wonderful a Combat, tat at the two first Blows, had not their Hel∣mets been strong and well Steel'd, they had broken each others Heads. But at length, the Knight of the burning Sword, being exceeding light and dextrous, avoi∣ded the Edge of his Enemies Sword, whom he so endamag'd, that finally the worst was on his side: yet did he not shew himself theefore the least disheartned, but know∣ing, that the longer they lasted, the Knight was still lutier, and himself more out of breath, thought to seize him about the Body, and endeavour with all his Force to sti∣fle him. Nevertheles, the other, who took heed to it, stept aside, and with a back blow, wounded him grieously in the right Arm, yet did Gandalf so pursue his En∣terprise that, whether the Knight of the burning Sword would or no, he was con∣strain'd to struggle with him, arm to arm. Being therefore grapled, the Knight be∣hav'd himself so well, that they were both overthrown, tumbling one upon the other,
sometimes upper, sometimes under, not having means to offend each other with these Swords. But to what purpose is it to describe particularly all these Stratagems, and so many Blows? being finally both tir'd, and out of breath, they got up again, and, as if they had yet receiv'd no Dammage, began afresh to assault each other with greater violence. In the mean time Gradamart approacht Galeotes and Madasima, who were bound naked to a Post, as you have been told, and unty'd them, remonstra∣ting to them, that this Combat was undertaken for their Liberty, and that they should therefore pray to GOD for the Victory of the good Knight: for besides, said he, that your Affairs would go ill, if he should miscarry, 'twould be very great Dammage that he should dye. They, who had to this time been ignorant of the Occasion of the Combat, lifted up their Hands to Heaven, and weeping bitterly, made devout Prayers and Orisous. In the mean time the two Combatants, who us'd their utmost endeavours to defeat each other, were constrain'd again to take breath, and go back. Nevertheless this rest lasted little: for the Knight of the burning Sword, seeing his Shield hackt, and his Armor in several places dy'd with his blood, was so animated, that boing down his had he re-charg'd Gandalfe, pressing him so with his Sword, that his ht be∣gan to fail him, and grow heavy in his Harness, so that he, who was dust, and li∣pish of Nature, lost as it were the means of lifting up his Arms, either to defend or revenge himself. At which exceedingly dispited, he turn'd to his Gods, and con∣juring and cursing them at every moment, he lifted up his great Cutlass with both his hands, hoping well, that the blow would be advantageous: but the Knight slipt aside, and parry'd his Shield before it, into which it entred above a great hands breadth, of which nevertheless, he ad well reueng d himself, had not his Sword turn'd in his hand with so much misfortune that it struck so fiercely with the flat instead of the edge, that it brake into Three pieces. If Gandalfe was then glad, you, my Lords, who have heretofore seen such Pastime, may easily Iudge, as also of the dis∣pleasure that Gradamart had at it, who, considering the Danger of his Compni∣on, and the little means he had to help himself thenceforward, was siez'd with such Fury, that forgetting the common Right, observ'd in such Ats, he drew hastily his Sword, and would run to Gandalfe, when the Knight, full of Courage, and great∣ly displeas'd put himself between them, crying to him: Ah! my Lord Gradamart, do not kill me, thinking to give me Life: for I had much rather dye, than you should do any thing, that may defame you. Gradamart, hearing himself nam'd, stopt, as if he had been awaked  of a long sleep, and knowing his fault, retir'd to give place to the Enemy: who began with such Advantage to prosecute the Knight of the Burning Sword, who was neverthe∣less no way astonisht, but with the little Shield, that was left him, pary'd some∣times to the blows of the other, or so dextrously stept aside, that he would not be ∣red. Nevertheless considering, that at the length he should be overcome, he bow'd down his Head, and slipping under Gandalfe, pusht him in such manner, that he fell, backwards to the ground with such force, that his Sword flew out of his hand, which
the Knight so nimbly seiz'd, that before Gandalfe had means to get up again, he set his foot on his Throat, and thrust his Sword into it. CHAP. XXXIX. How the Knight of the burning Sword sent King Amadis the head of Gandalfe, by the Damsel Macetta, and permitted the Body to be carried into the Sagittary Island, to be buried. THe Giant then being dead, as you have heard, Gradamart came to the Knight of the burning Sword, and weeping for great Ioy, said to him: Alas, my Com∣panion, in what Discontent was I ere-while for the Misfortune, that befel you. I beseech you, dear Sir, tell me, if you are much wounded. Not to death, answered the Knight, at least, in my Opinion. And as he finisht this Word, Galeotes and Madasima, came and threw themselves at his Feet, saying: O good Knight! We are now so poor and weak, that we have nothing in our power to present you: but may God vouchsafe, by his grace, to re∣ward so great a Benefit, as we this day receive thro' your Means. My Friends, answer'd he, raising them up, give thanks to your son Balan, for whom I would do more, and let us go and refresh our selves; for I think, you have as much need as I. Then they entred into the Fortress, where the Servants of Galeotes, who had been long kept Prisoners by the Giant, were immediately released. And because the Knight of the burning Sword was wounded in several places, he was disarm'd, and his wouns visited by an honourable Old man, who was very well skill'd in the Art of Chirurgery: wherefore, whilst he was in cure he resolv'd to send Gandalfes head, to King Amadis, and to acquaint him in what manner they had fought. This Charge was committed to Macetta, one of Madasima's Women, whom the Knight of the burning Sword fully instructed, in what she had to do: And if you shall not, said he, find the King, address your self to the Queen from Balan, who, to keep his word sends her this present. But if the King is there, present him with the most humble Respects of my Companion Gradamart and my self, beseeching him from us to pardon our fault in not returning to him according to our promise. Which 'twas impossible for us to do, the storm driving us, whether we would or no, into this Island. How, said Galeotes, have you then found King Amadis out of Great Britain? I beseech you, Sir Knight, relate us this Adventure. Which he willingly did, whereat Galeotes devoutly thank'd Almighty GOD. And the same day the Damsel embarkt, carrying in a Box Gandalfe's Head, very glad of having an Opportunity to acquaint the Queen with the good News of the King, if he were yet Absent, and to let Balan understand the Deliverance of his
Parents, for whose Torments he was much afflicted: and the Knight of the burn∣ing Sword, yet more for his being thus separated from Lucella by the Fortune, you have understood, CHAP. XL. How the Emperor of Trebisond, and his Company came to the coast of Great Bri∣tain, where they landed, and went to the Kay, kept by the Dutchess of Savoys Knight, with whom Perion of Gaul had a Combat, which was separated by the Dutchess of Austria, the Knight of the Kay known. an entourage or army of armed men led by two mounted figures, entering a town THe Ship, in which the Emperor was accompany'd as you have heard, continu'd at Sea, after the Departure of the Knight of the burning Sword, for the Spce of three Weeks, without staying, or their knowing, towards what Countrey it droke: But at the end of that time, one Monday early in the Morning, it came to surge along a Coast near a great Forrest. The Emperor and his Company were very glad to have an Opportunity of going ashore, and refreshing themselves, particularly, for the Necessity they had of sweet Water: For that of their Vessel stunk. Wherefore they caus'd their Horses to be set ashore, themselves also landing, and commanding those, whom they appointed to look to their Vessel, not to part thence, till they had News from them. Then the Knights arm'd themselves, and conducting their Ladies, well
accoutred, and maskt, that they might not be known, entring into the thickness of the Wood. In this Company were the Emperor, the King of Sicily, Lisart, Perion, Olorius, the Prince Elinius, Adariel, Suycius, and Abies of Ireland, Alarin Brother to the Duke of Ortilensa, and the Count of Alastrum, who all, desiring to find some Body, that might tell them what Country they were in, followed a beaten Path, in which they had not Travel'd long, when they saw coming to them a Dam∣sel, riding on a black Hackney, who stay'd to behold them pass, and in their passing, saluted them, saying to them: Perhaps, my good Lords, you are going to try your selves against the Devil that keeps a Kay here-by, for the sake of a Damsel, who accompanies him, and there are already six Months, that he has perform'd this en∣terprise, in which he has behav'd himself so valiantly, that his Renown is spread through all this Countrey, so that there is no longer any Knight who dares At∣tempt to fight him, he has vanquisht so many. When the King of Sicily heard her speak, he said to the Emperor: My Lord, assure your self that we are in Great Britain, and the Knight, of whom she talks so much, is he, of whom I have heretofore told you. 'Tis true, said the Damsel, that you are in Great Britain: and I advise you to take another way, if you wll not be molestd. At this Counsel all the Knights fell a laughing, resolving nevertheless to pass on. Wherefore she recommended them to the keeping of our Lord leving them very Ioyful for their Arrival so opportunely in a Countrey, where they hop'd not only to be well receiv'd by King Amadis; but also to have the pleasure of seeing the Iusts, held by the Knight, Lover of the Dutchess, against whom Perion desiring to try himself, besought the Emperor and the rest to let him have the first Course, which was granted him. And passing on, they came to a cross way, where they were joyn'd by a Lady, mounted on a very handsome Nag. She was cloth'd in black Silk, and had her Face so cover'd, that there was nothing but her Eyes to be seen, she was ac∣company'd by ten Knights, compleatly Arm'd and four very fair Damsels. She saluted them courteously, and they return'd her salutation, asking her, whither she was going? My Lords, answer'd she, we are going to see the Wonders done by a Knight, who keeps a Kay hard by, and whose Renown is such, that I am come expresly from my Countrey to see him. In truth, said the Emperor, we will then accompany you thither: for some of ours desire to try themselves against him. In good time, answer'd the Lady, I am very glad of it, we shall see, whether 'tis true that is said of him. As they were discoursing thus, they went out of the Forrest, and perceiv'd in the Plain, two Rich Tents, set up in a Grove of Elms, against one of which there were many Lances leaning, and under the shade was a Chair of State, in which was sit∣ting a very fair Damsel, and near her a Knight compleatly Arm'd, who seeing this
Company approach, set her immediately on a stout Nag, which two Esquires held by the Reins; which done, she rid directly to the Emperor and his Company, and said to them: Sirs, the Dutchess of Savoy, my Mistress, sends you word, if you resolve to pass the Kay, it must be on the same Conditions, that all others do: which she declar'd to them. Perion, who was the first to enter into play, took the word before all the rest, and answer'd her: Damsel, we are come on no other occasion, and therefore 'tis not needful to say any more of it: wherefore return to your Mistress, and tell her, that we will keep the Law which is establish'd. So much the better, said she, and, suddenly turning her Horse, went back. In the mean time the Knight of the Kay, knowing that Perion was making him∣self ready to Iust, charg'd a great Lance, and covering himself with his Shield, march'd slowly to meet him: but approaching the Career, they ran so stifly one against the other, that their Staves flew in shivers, themselves meeting with Shields Bodies and Head, so that they both came to the Ground, and their Horses under them. Ne∣vertheless they got up again, and putting their hands to their Swords, began to Assault each other so outragiously, that they well shew'd themselves to be no Pren∣tices in that work. For this first Assault continued above two hours without their taking breath, or without its being known, who had the better or the worse: and their Shields were so hack'd, and their Armor so endammaged, that not being able to re∣sist any longer the edge of their Swords, the pure blood was seen to trickle down from their Bodies to the Grass. The Dutchess who piteously beheld her Knight, chang'd colour every moment, because the longer Perion continu'd the more brisk and couragious he appear'd, mak∣ing himself so much dreaded by his Enemy, that he thought he never found any Man, except the Knight of the burning Sowrd, that put him so much to it: ad for this cause praying within himself, he said: O GOD, who hast so long kept my Honour, abandon me not, I beseech thee, to this devil, who will dishonour me if he can. A devil certainly he is, though he has the shape of a Man: for if he had been other, he could not have treated me so rudely: wherefore, permit me not, O Lord, in five days, which remain to accomplish my Oath in the keeping this Pass, to fall into any shame, or danger of my body. Now Perion thought no less on his side: Nevertheless he would rather have chose never to have been disenchanted than to be so unhappily vanquisht, and that in Great Britain: the thoughts of which so enrag'd him, that he redoubled his blows, whereof the Dutchesses Knight made little Account: nor could any Ad∣vantage be discern'd more on the one side than on the other, tho they were hath so dy'd with blood, that their Harness, before bright, was become red, which very much displeased Lisvart, who thought, 'twould be impossible, Perion should not hve an ill Issue of it. And for this cause he lookt on him with a piteous eye, which Pe∣rion perceiv'd: and thinking, that he accus'd him of faint-heartedness, supriz'd
with shame, mix'd with Anger, he lift up his Arm, and thinking to strike his Ene∣my with all his force on the head, his Sword entred so far into his Adversaries Shield, that it cleft it, the point only reaching to his Forehead, which it wounded in such manner, that he stagger'd two or three Paces backward. This, when the Dutchess saw, she chang'd Colour, which was perceiv'd by her Knight, who, desir∣ous to recover his Reputation, and rejoyce her, who was almost dead at the sight of his misfortune, flew at Perion giving him such a blow on the Helmet, that, if it had not been one of the best in the world, his life had been infallibly gone. But by mis∣fortune, his Sword brake, leaving nothing in his hand but the hilt: yet through the great fierceness of the blow, the Laces of Perions Helmet brake, so that his head re∣main'd disarmed, and he was fain to clap one hand on the Ground to keep himself from falling. But rising nimbly up, he took his Sword in both hands, and was ready to give his Enemy the like, when the Damsel, whom they had met in the way, attended by so fair a Company, alighted from r Horse, and catching hold of Perion, stopt him, saying: Ah! ah! my Lod, 'tis enough! for GOD's sake forbear; for he, whom you are going to kill, is your Son Don Florelus, and she that holds you is his Mother. Perion, much astonisht at her Words, suddenly knew her to be the Dutchess of Austria, who came to seek him in Trebisond, to defend her Land, which he re-conquer'd for her, as you have been told in the sixth Book of Amadis of Gaul, whereat he then receiv'd great Ioy. And nevertheless, as if he had been in the Presence of his Lady Gricileria, he could not forbear to blush, fearing she would be discontented at it: But finding Florelus to be so good a Knight, that there was not known any Diffe∣rence between them, he perswaded himself, she would easily forgive him this Fault, Flo∣relus then understanding, by his Mothers Discourse, that he was Son of Perion, was the joyfullest man in the world: she had indeed formerly told him of it, but he had never seen him, and therefore resolv'd as soon as his Enterprise was finisht, to go and seek him where-ever he might be. Wherefore seeing himself deliver'd from this Travel; and the Offence, he had committed, he threw his Helmet on the Ground, and kneeling down to kiss his Hands, said to him with Tears in his Eyes: Alas! My Lord, pardon me this Fault, for which I am certainly very well chastis'd, tho' I esteem my Wounds as nothing, and less the Resistance, I have made against you: For if there is any Goodness in me, it proceeds from you, who are my Father. Perion, being unspeakably glad, took him up, and kissing, and Embracing him, answer'd him thus: In good Faith Son, where there is no Offence, there is no need of Pardon: And moreover 'tis I, that have failed in having thro' Gaye∣ty of Heart, foolishly undertaken that which I might well have let alone: But if I have done it, I heartily repent it, since by the great Prowess, which is in you, every one may know, that the worst of the Combat was on my side. And therefore 'tis reasonable, that my Shield and Name should accompany the Rest you, have conquer'd, and that my Person sould henceforth be employ'd in the Service
of the Dutchess, whose you are. Go now, and pay your Respects to the Emperor of Trebisond, your Cosin Lisvart, and the other Knights, to make them all Parta∣kers of our joy. My Lord, said the Dutchess of Austria, never was woman more discontented, than I have been for a time: For he left me, and my Country, without taking leave of me, to go, as I have since understod, into Savoy, whither I was already on my way to Follow him, when News was brought me, that he was in these parts, where I have found him opportunely, both for you and him. Madam, answer'd Florelus, I beseech you to pardon me. And as he would have made his Excuses, the Emperor and the other Knights, having heard and seen things, as they pass'd between the Father, Mother, and Son, were alighted, and intending no longer to conceal themselves, came to them, the Emperor saluting the Dutchess of Austria, and saying do her: Madam, you have reason to be contented with your Voyage, for without your so seasonable Arrival, the flower of your friends had this day been in wonderful danger. The Dutchess made him a very low Reverence, then the Emperor embrac'd Flo∣relus as did also Lisvart, the King of Sicily, and all the rest. I leave you to imagin the Ioy and Pleaure the Dutchess of Savoy receiv'd by this Knowledge, especially when she had understood that her Friend was Son to Perion, to whom she addrest her self, and carrying in her Arms wrapt up in a Scarf, the Rich Sword, Shield, and Helmet, which were as you have been told, to be the Reward of him that should vanquish at the Kay, she presented them to him, saying: Sir, receive these Arms, which are justly due to you, having done so well against our Knight. Madam, answer'd he, it well becomes you, who are amost courtuous and beauti∣ful Princess, to say as you do: and 'tis my duty to return you my most humble thanks, and to deliver you also my Shield, according to the Custom, to be enroll'd with those, who are Oblig'd to serve you. Then he took it from off his Neck, and offer'd it to her. But she humbling her self before him faid to him: Sir, your Shield is your own, and these ohers also, with the Knight that conquer'd them. And I yet more at your Command, answer'd Perion. Then the Queen of Sicily and Lucella, who had hithto kept themselves on Horseback, approacht, being just alighted, to have part of this Pleasure. They were receiv'd by the two Dutchesses with very great Respect, principally Lucell by Flore∣lus's Mistress, who wondering at her extream Beauty, said within her self, tha she had never seen any Woman, who came near her. Then they went into the Dut¦chess of Savoys Tent, where the two Knights, Father and Son, were disarmd and Chirurgions came to visit them. And because their Cure took up a long time, the Emperor sent for Balan from the Ship, where he remain'd sorrowful, and discon∣tented,
for the Imprisonment of his Parents, of whom, if it please Heaven, he shall soon have such News as will rejoyce him. CHAP. XLI. How Alquifa went to acquaint Queen Oriana with the News, that Perion and Lis∣vart were in her Countrey. WHen Alquifa, who had seen the End of their Combat, and the beginning of their Peace, understood that lorelus was Son to King Perion the thought she would go and carry the first News of it to King Amadis, and his Queen: and therefore without saing a word to any of her Company, she stole away, and set for∣ward strait for London. But in the way, she was assur'd, that the King had not of a long time een in the Countrey, which had so difcontented Oriana, that she did no∣thing night and day but weep. Yet Alquifa did not therefore forbear to proceed on her Iourney, but about Sun-set, reacht the Town. Then she went up strait to the Palace, and because she was cloth'd in a strange sort of Dress, several followed her, till she met the Damsel of Denmark, who knew her, and with stretch'd forth Arms went to receive her, saying to her: Ah, my dear Friend Alquifa, you are very wel∣come: what good Adventure brings you now into these parts? You shall know, said she, when you have introduc'd me to the Queen, who will be pleas'd with the News I bring her. Then she took her by the hand, and entring into the Queens Chamber, they found her at Prayers, having in that manner spent all her time since the Loss of the King. The Queen, who knew Alquifa, thinking that she came not without occasion, felt a great Emotion in her heart: wherefore she rose up, and having gave her a fitting Re∣ception, enquir'd by little, from what Countrey she came, and whether she had heard any thing of Perion and Lisvart, who were given for lost: Which, said she, so much troubles me, that I am ready to dye. Madam, answer'd she, I have not seen your Majesty, since their being in these parts, where I assure you, they still are, being this day arriv'd, where they have found an increase of kindred. Ah good GOD! said the Lady, is it possible, that my Children are alive, and in Great Britain? Ah, my dear Friend; tell me where, and who this new kinsman is, you speak of? Madam, answer'd she, the Knight, who has so long kept the Pass at the Kay for love of the Dutchess of Savoy, was this day found to be Son to Perion, and the Dutchess of Austria, who is arriv'd in this Country by the greatest Adventure in the world: for, had it not been for her, the Father and Son were in danger of Death.
Then she related to her the Combat that had been between them, from the begin∣ning to the end: and also how the Emperor of Trebisond, the King of Sicily, the Queen, the Infanta Lucella, Prince Olorius, and several others were in the Dut∣chesses Tents, with Lisvart and Perion. Alas! said the Queen, this is good News. I beseech GOD to grant me the Grace, that I may soon hear the like of the King. The Noise of this ran immediately through the whole Palace, so that it came to the Ears of Arban King of North-wales, Angriot d' Estravaux, and several other good Knights, all which came to the Queen, who made themselves partakers of her Pleasure: nor did Alquifa forget to tell them, in what a wonderful manner the Em∣peror and his Company had been disenchanted by the Knight of the burning Sword. Certainly, said the Queen, I did not think, he would ever have done me so great a Favour. In good faith, Madam, answered Alquifa, he is so vertuous, and so good condi∣tioned, that nothing but happiness is to be expected from him. And will he not come to see us? said the Queen. No, Madam, answer'd Alquifa: for he was separated from us by a strange Ad∣venture. Ah GOD! replyed the Queen, how am I displeas'd at it! For, though at first he gave us much trouble; yet will I not fail to honour him, since he has done, what you assure us. Madam, said Alquifa, you will, as I think, soon have the others here, among whom is the King of Sicilys daughter, who is the fairest and discreetest Princess, you ever saw, and by whom these Enchantments were in part brought to an End. Madam, said King Arban, it is then my opinion, that I go (if you please) to them to morrow, and intreat them in your Name to come to London: for I am sure, the King would be much displeased, if the Emperor and the King of Sicily should not be received, as the greatness of their Quality deserves. I beseech you do so, answer'd the Queen, and take with you such persons from hence, as you shall think good. Tell them from me, that the Kings Absence shall not hinder me from giving them the best Reception I can, and recommend me affe∣ctionately to their good Graces, especially to the Queen of Sicily, and the Infanta her Daughter. Tell my Children also, that they by no means delay to come and see me, and bring all the rest with them. King Arban then parted the next day, and with a good Company of Knights and Esquires went to the Kay, where he found the Emperor with the rest hearing Mass, to whom he related the Queens Message, inviting and requesting them in the best manner he could. Certainly, said the Emperor, we would in no wise fail so good a Princess; but I doubt our Sick Men will not be able to remove, they are so exceedingly wounded but let us go see them, and we shall know their Opinion.
Then they went into the Pavilion, where Perion and Florelus were. Perion, who presently knew King Arban, stretching forth his Arms, embrac'd him, and ask'd him, whether the King and Queen were in good Health. My Lord, answered he, I can give you no account of the King, who is absent; but the Queen desires you and Lisvart to come and see her, as soon as possible you can, and to bring with you these Lords and Ladies. To day, said Perion, it cannot be; but to morrow it may, and in the mean time I will cause a Litter to be made, to carry this wounded Knight and me. You will therefore return to her, with our Excuses and Recommendations, to her good Grace. Therefore King Arban, after he had discours'd some time with him, and taking leave of the Emperor, return'd back to London, where he acquainted the Queen with the Answer of these Lords, that they would be with her the next day at Dinner. And for this cause, she commanded her richest Hangings to be put up, and her Palace to be adorn'd in the most Magnificent manner possible. CHAP. XLII. How the Emperor of Trebisond, and his Company came to London, to visit Queen Oriana: and of the Discourse, they had together. AFter King Arban had left the Emperor and the rest at the Kay, the Dutchess of Savoy, knowing that they were all to part for London gave Order for the making a Litter to carry Florelus and Perion. So they pass'd the Remainder of that day in all pleasure, and the next day every one of them took Horse, except the two wounded Men, who were carry'd in Mens Arms, that they might not be too much shockt by the way. And behind them came the Dutchess of Savoy in a great Chariot, cover'd with Cloth of Gold. At her Neck hung the rich Sword and Shield, and round about her were the Shields of the vanquisht Knights, and their Names underneath, for a Testimony of Florelus's Victory, and Triumph, which so pleased Perion, that he sent her his, praying her to put it in the rank with the others, or else he should be displeased. She, who durst not refuse it, took it, and said to the Esquire, that brought it: My Friend, tell my Lord Perion, that I will obey him, since 'tis his pleasure; but I will put it in the place, it deserves. Then she askt for a Lance, to the Head of which she caus'd the Shield to be fastned, and raised it up to the top of the Chariot, sending her own rich one, with the Sword, to hang at Perions Litter, who would not at first permit it, and in such Equipage, they entred into the City of London, there going forth to meet them King rban, Angriote d' Estravaux, with several Dukes▪ Earls, Barens, Knights and E∣squires. Great was the Reception they gave each other, and the Honour, that was
done them at their Entrance into the Town. The Emperor led the Queen of Sici∣ly, Olorius of Spain, the Infanta Lucella, and Lisvart Gradafilea, with which she was more content, than if Great Britain it self had faln to her by Succession. Balan en∣tertain'd the Dutchess of Austria, but he was so melancholly, that he thought on no∣thing but having his leave to go and fight King Gandalfe: and in such order they a∣lighted at the Palace, where the King of Sicily took the Dutchess of Savoy under the Arms for the sake of Florelus, whom he lov'd, and greatly esteem'd from the day they try'd themselves together, every one of the others led his, as you have been told. Then came the Queen Oriana, clad in black Cloth, for the Absence of King Ama∣dis, and at the Entrance of the Hall, gave them a very great and sumptuous Re∣ception. With her were so many fair Ladies, and Damsels, and so richly adorn'd, that they seemed rather Goddesses descended on the Earth, than Mortal Women. The Reverences then, Welcoms, Kisses, and Embraces on the one side and the other, being thus begun and ended, Queen Oriana addressed her self to the Infanta Lucella, and said to her. Madam, as I have been given to understand, I have at this day by your Means my two Sons: You are more than welcome. Madam, answer'd she, your Majesty is to give thanks only to one, who is at this time absent from this Company: Seeing the Goodness and high Prowess, that is in him, was the Cause of their being disenchanted. GOD, said the Queen grant me the Favor, that I may one day see him in the Presence of the King: For I am sure, he will honor him, as he deserves: And as for me, I shall all my Life be thankful to you both, for what you have done. During this Discourse, Oriana took such Delight in beholding the very great beau∣ty of Lucella, that she could not take her Eye from off her, when Lisvart came to pay her his Respects, presenting to her Gradafilea, whom she had formerly seen at Con∣stantinople. 'Twould be little to the purpose to acquaint you with the Discourse they had together, let it suffice, that they were all highly satisfied with the good Re∣ception, and Honour, that was given them. And because Perion and Florelus had been conducted into their Chamber, without entring into the Hall, she went to visit them, and embracing them one after the other, she said to them. Alas! my Children, over dear has this first knowledge cost you, I could heartily wish it were GOD's Pleasure, that you were in better health, than I see you. And you Son Florelus, what an Injury have you done your Mother in concealing your self so many days? Indeed you have much offended me. Madam, answered he, I beseech you to pardon me: For my keeping my self thus conceal'd, was the more to honor the King, and your Majesty, to whom I durst not own a Relation; not having done any thing, that might render me worthy of such an Alliance: Especially considering the Goodness and Prowess of my Father, so much esteem'd amongst the best Knights in the world.
On my Faith, said the Queen, my Friend, you are such, that my Son Perion ought to praise GOD, and think himself happy for having so compleat a Person to his Son. Indeed, so I do, Madam, answerd Perion. And because the Tables were covered, and Dinner ready, she left them in the keep∣ing of their Chirurgeons, and went to the Emperor▪ and the rest in the great Hall, where they were magnificently, and in abundance served with all sorts of De∣licates, CHAP. XLIII. How Macetta arriv'd in the Court of King Amadis, with the head of King Gandalfe, and of the News she brought thither, which made Balan remove, and take his way to the Island of the Vermilion Tower, where the Knight of the Burning Sword and Gradamart then were. THis Noble Company being at Table, making the best Chear they could devise, except Balan, who thought on nothing but going to Fight his Enemy, and deliver his Father and Mother from the cruel Prison, in which they were detain'd, there entred into the Hall a Damsel, carrying in her hands the Head of a Giant, which she held by the hair. This Woman was soon known by Balan: for 'twas Macetta, to whom the Knight of the burning Sword had delivered King Gandalf's Head, to present it to King Amadis. Balan, not having understood the good Fortune befaln in the Island of the Vermillion Tower, but doubting, lest through his long Absence, the Tyrant had slain Galeotes, and that these were the signs of it, found his Heart began to beat, when Macetta askt aloud, which of them was King Amadis. Damsel, answered the Emperor, he is not here at this time, for which we are much troubled. It may well be, said Macetta, that he is not yet arrived, but his return will not be much longer delayed: and in the mean time I pray you to shew me, which of these Ladies is Queen Oriana, to whom, in the Kings Absence, I am commanded to address my self. My friend, answered the Queen, I am she: would you have any thing with me? Madam, answered the Damsel, the Knight of the burning Sword, the most ac∣complisht of all men this day living, sends you this Head of the King of the Sagit∣tary Island, to acquit Balan, son of Galeotes, of the promise, he had made. And to let you understand how all goes, this Valiant Knight, desirous to amend the Wrong and great Outrage, which this wicked King Gandalfe did to Galeotes and Madasima, whose Servant I am, had the most cruel and wonderful fight with him, that ever was seen: but in the end, GOD, the true Justice, has given the Victory
to the Just, who has so well abated the pride of the Tyrant, as you may see, and they are now at liberty, whom he has so long detained Prisoners, all which in great humility kiss your hands. This News indeed very much pleased all that heard it, who more and more prai∣sed the Prowess of the Knight of the burning Sword, and amongst the rest Balan, who in his heart, besought Almighty GOD, to give him an opportunity sometimes to acknowledge to him the Favour, he had done him. Then the Queen answered Macetta: In good faith, Damsel, the King and I are bound to the good Knight, whom I heartily wish in this Company: for Balan is now delivered from the great pain, and his promise well performed. Damsel, said the King of Sicily, can you tell me any thing of a Knight, who car∣ried away by force a Damsel, to follow whom the Knight you speak of left our Vessel. Yes indeed Sir, answered she, that Knight forced neither Lady nor Damsel, but went with her, you mention to fight a Traytor who had killed her Father and Mo∣ther. And you may be pleased to understand, that it was King Amadis, who was never in such danger, had it not been for the Assistance given him by the Knight of the Burning Sword and Gradamart, who arrived there very Opportunely. Then she began to relate all that had passed, which gave both wonder and joy to the whole Assembly, who, to be bief, concluded that the Knight of the burning Sword might well be stiled the most Excellent Person in the World: at which Lucella was not in the least discontented, thinking her self exceedingly happy to be Loved by him, as she assuredly knew she was. But when Queen Oriana heard that the King was in the great Siclades, she dispatched the same day Count Gandalin with a stout Ship, to go and see for him. And the Head of Gandalfe was at the Request of Balan set up over the principal Gate of the Palace, to be seen by every one. This done, Balan, having taken leave of the Emperor, and the whole Assembly, he Em∣barkt with Macetta, going strait to the Island of the Vermillion Tower, not without being both requested by Lucella, to present an infinity of humble Recommendations to the Knight of the burning Sword, and to desire him, that, to accomplish the Pro∣mise made to the King her Father, he would come to them with all the speed he pos∣sibly could, assuring him, he should be well received, and as one, whom she much long∣ed to see. Macetta willingly took this, and very well performed it at her Arrival, which was some days after. During which, Oriana besought the Emperor and the rest to stay till the Return of King Amadis, whom she shortly expected. Which they granted her, at least for a Month. But Fortune called him else-where, as you shall understand.
CHAP. XLIV. How the Giant Lerfan of the Rock came to the great Siclades, where King Ama∣dis gave him to Wife Malfadea, and then turn'd back for Great Britain. FOur days did King Amadis stay in the great Siclades after the Departure of Gra∣damart and the Knight of the burning Sword, expecting them from hour to hour, but seein he had no News of them, he became much troubled, nevertheless he was well satisfied that it proceeded not from any Fault of theirs, but from the Sea, which was swoln with the Winds and Tempess that arose on it. Now Malfadea lookt so carefully to him, that he bagan to amend, and his wounds to close and consolidate: so that within three Weeks he was wholly cured, and ready to bear Arms and take his Iourney. And he was in a Resolution to return, when there Arrived in the Port a Ship, in which there Sailed several Knights, who accompanyed a young Giant, a Valiant Man, named Lerfan of the Rock, so called for a strong Castle, he held an Island, scituated on the Top of an high Rock. Now Lerfan had been adver∣tised of the Treason, committed by Mascaron, and for the Love he bare Malfadea, un∣dertosk to revenge her injury, and restore her to her Countrey: and to do this, he swore never to rest till he had defeated Mascaron, and those that belong'd to him. For the performance whereof having prepared himself, he came into the great Siclades, with a good Troop of young Knights, and other Persons. Which being come to the knowledge of King Amadis he sent one of Malfadeas People, to see what he wan∣ted. And by this Lerfan of the Rock understood the Traytors Death, which gave him no small Pleasure, though his Ioy would yet have been greater, had he himself Arrived time enough to execute this Revenge for her: wherefore he gave the Mes∣senger this Answer. Friend, recommend me affectionately to your Mistress, and tell her that I parted from my Countrey, to chastise Mascaron: and nevertheless, since another has pre∣vented me, request her, that I may at least see her before my Removal, which will partly he a satisfaction to me, for the pains I have taken for her sake. The Messenger returned, and did as he was commanded, at which Amadis and Malfadea were so pleased, that they sent back to tell him he should be very welcome. Then he set forth towards them in good Order, and they gave him a suitable Recep∣tion. Lefan would gladly have known the Knight that fought Mascaron, and therefore enquired of Malfadea whether he were still in the Countrey. The King, who was present, answered that 'twas he, and desired to know why he askt for him. Sir Knight, said Lerfan, for no other Reason, but to serve and honour you: for besides the favour you have done my Lady, by undertaking so much in her Quarrel, I have understood that you have restor'd into her hands this land, which belongs to her, for which I give you very great thanks, and beseech you, that for your sake, and
for the Love, I have born her all my Life, you will pray her to love me, and receive me for her Husband. Amadis, not knowing the Damsels Mind, and could not tell, what to answer: But she took up the Discourse, saying: Indeed my Lord Lerfan, I have long known the Affection, you bear me, so that if the King commands me, he and you shall be obey'd. Since you both consent, answer'd Amadis, I will not contradict it, let us go to dinner, that we may have the better Courage to perfect, and give an End to this Beginning. Then were the Tables cover'd, and they were serv'd with a Banquet of such Provisions as could be gotten, during which the Discourse grew so hot, that bfore Night came on, the Contract was finisht, and they lay together to the great Content∣ment of them voth. And the King staid there till the first day of the next Week, when he embarkt, taking leave of the new marry'd Couple, who would have given him a great Train to conduct him; But he refus'd all, except the two Mari∣ners with whom he set Sail, laching forth into the Deep. CHAP. XLV. How King Amadis, sailing thro' the Mediterranean Sea, to enter into the Ocean, met Queen Buruca, Wife to Magadan, King of Saba, who was in quest of the Knight of the Burning Sword, to defend her against the false Accusation, which Maudan, had made of their Loves. KIng Amadis, being parted from the Port of the geat Siclades in the Guidance of his two Mariners, pass'd ineontinently the Aegean Sea, at the going out of which there join'd them a light Ship, wherein there was a Pavilion of Cloth of Gold, and under it a very rich Field-bed, on which repos'd a Morish Queen having a Crown on er head, cloth'd besides only with course Freez, and appearing exces∣sively discontented. At her feet set two Damless, leaning their Heads on their left Arms, like Women, opprest with Grief: And by her side, were two black Knights, so weak, that they were even double with Age, and notwithstanding arm'd with Arms of great Value. The King was in some sort amaz'd, yet he curteously saluted them, and one of them, returning his Salutation, said to him. Good Champion, GOD give you a favourable Adventure: Can you tell us any News of a Person, nam'd the Knight of the Burning Sword? The King in whom the Desire of knowing, what they would have with hm, in∣creas'd more ad more, answer'd: My Lords, he parted from me not many dayes since, and 'twould be difficult for me to tell you at this time, where he is, and more difficult, as I believe for you to find him. But forasmuch as I greatly love and e∣steem him, if you please to acquaint me with the Business, you have with him, I will
endeavor to tell you farther, what I know of him. And if I can, there is nothing how grievous soever, that I will not in his stead undertake, to do him Pleasure and Service. On this assurance, answer'd the old man, and also because you seem to me a vali∣ant man, I will satisfy you. Understand, Sir Knight, that this Lady, whom you see lying here, is Queen of Saba, Wife to King Magadan, whose near Kinsmen we are. This King taking Pleasure to make use of white Persons, some of his gave him about ten or twelve years since a Child, call'd the Gentleman of the burning Sword, for the Representation of a Sword, which he has naturally printed on his Stomach, red as blood, with certain white Characters, which have not yet been understood by any one, as we know of. The King did him so much Honor, as to breed him up with his Son Fulurtin, and gave them both Order of Knighthood, so that instead of Gentleman he is at this day nam'd the Knight of the Burning Sword, We are now seeking him, and to find him, are parted from Saba in the Equipage you see. And to the end you may the better understand the Affair, this Knight of the burning Sword being yet in Saba a Gentleman, Son to one of the greatest Princes of Morona, acquainted the King, that he, of whom I speak, com∣mitted Treason against his Majesty abusing the Queen Beruca, who is here pre∣sent, at which the King exceedingly displeas'd, thought to ascertain this unworthy Act, by surprizing them together; but he was deceiv'd: For the Knight of the Burning Sword was advertiz'd of it, and absented himself, so that since we have had no News of him. And, for this cause the King commanded the Queen to be tak∣en, and kept strickly, till such time as he had recover'd the Adulterer, to burn them in the same Fire. Nevertheless seeing, that this cruel sentance had been already ma∣ny dayes delay'd, and that the other was no longer in his Countrey, he resolv'd to put it in Execution against the Queen. But she offered to prove her innocence by a Knight, who should fight Maudan: For so was her Accuser nam'd. To which the King would in no wise have given Ear, had not we, who are his Uncles, and many other princes of his Blood, mov'd with Compassion, perswaded him to grant it: Which being come to Maudans knowledge he came with a great Bravado to remonstrate, that he would not only de∣fend his Assertion, but would bring a Coufin of his, that should maintain it to the Death, and that they two together would enter the Field against two others, such as the Queen could find. And having so said, he threw down his pledge, but, tho' the Queen has many great kindred, yet none advanc'd to take it up, not for any doubt of her Innocence, but for the great Prowess, that is said to be in the two Assailants. Then was Prince Fulurtin so sorry, that he took up the pledge and Offered him∣self alone to fight in person for the Justification of his Mother. Which they re∣fus'd, saying, that they would never put hand to Sword against the only Son of their Soveraign Lord. Thus was the good Lady, distitute in a manner of all Re∣medy,
imploring with join'd hands the Kings Mercy, with six months time, to seek some stranger, that would defend her, since there was not any one in Saba and Morana, that offer'd himself. And tho' Magadan at first seem'd deaf, yet impor∣turn'd by us two, he in fine granted her Request, on condition we should accompa∣ny her whither she would have us, and at six months end on pain of Death bring her back again. Which we solemnly sware to do. Then we caus'd this Ship to be equipp'd, and from the Nile entred into this Sea, where we have been already above these twelve weeks, enquiring with great Diligence for the Knight of the burning Sword, in whom lies all the Queens hopes: Because he alone knows better, how this Affair goes, than all other men be∣sides. And this good Lady, well knowing his great Courage, makes no doubt, but assoon as he shall have News of it; he will leave all things to defend this Quarrel. Now have you at length understood the Occasion of our Voyage: therefore we affe∣ctionately desire you, if you know any Remedy to teach it us: Otherwise if the gods provide not for it, this good Lady is in very great danger, both of her Honor and Life. During the Discourse the Queen so wept and lamented, that the hardest Heart in the world would have been touch'd with Compassion, and it fell into King Ama∣dis's Mind, that she was really innocent: Which made him suddenly think, that he had a very good occasion to requite the Knight of the burning Sword for the Assi∣stance, he had receiv'd of him in the great Siclades, and for this cause he said to the old Man. If the Queen will swear to me on her soul, that she is falsly accus'd by Maudan, I will go with you, and fight him: For perhaps you will not in ten years find him, whom you seek, and in the mean time her Affairs would go very ill. Ah! ah! Sir Knight answer'd the Queen: I swear to you by the high Name of Iupiter, that we never so much as thought of the Disloyalty, with which we are charg'd. Madam, said Amadis I believe your Word, have therefore good hopes in GOD: For he is just, and will do you Justice, if you are just. Then were the two old Knights very joyful for having thus shortned their Iour∣ney, and so fitly found a Knight, that would fight Maudan, and maintain the Queens Right who very affectionatly thanking him, as did also her two Vncles, besought him to come into their Ship. I will do it answer'd he on the Protestation, you all three make me, that the Ac∣cusers Quarrel is false: 'tis also very requisit, that you have more hopes in your good Right, than in my strength; Otherwise thinking to preserve you, Madam, said he to the Queen, I should ruin you, and my self also. Alas, Sir Knight, said she: I beseech you to believe that knowing the good Will, you have to defend me, if my Cause were in the least dubious, I would not hazard your life for the Preservation of mine own, which is already so troublesome to me, that I esteem it less than nothing.
And in this belief answer'd Amadis, I will take the Charge of it: And desire you not to wonder at what I have remonstrated to you, seeing every Knight who enters into the Field of Battle, greatly fails, if he goes not with assurance, that the Right is on his side. That I swear to you again, said the Queen. 'Tis sufficient answer'd Amadis, let us go when you please. Then he went into the Ship, and discharging his Bark, chang'd his Name, caus∣ing himself to be call'd the Vermilion Knight, because his Arms were all red, being those which Alquif sent him, when he embarkt after his Disenchantment, to go to the Siege of Constantinople. Thus those of Saba return'd back, discoursing toge∣ther of the most agreeable Matters, they could, till they entred into the Mouth of the Nile, along which they sail'd, and went ashore at Terrodin; where the Queen said to Amadis, Good Vermilion Knight, we are now in the Country, where I hope in our gods, in you, and in the good Right I have, that you will make the wicked, who accuse me, acknowledge their Treason: For 'tis not above a dayes Journey from hence to Sa∣ba, where we shall find the Court. So much the better Madam, answer'd he. Now the Citizens were incontinently advertiz'd of their Princess Return, and the Aid, she brought with her: Wherefore they went to receive her, and do her Honor: For she was greatly lov'd of them all for her Vertues. And for this Cause they presented her Horses, and what was necessary for her going to the King. Before whom, assoon as they were come into Saba, his two old Vncles presented Buruca, and the strange Knight. Magadan, & the Lords of his Court wondring at the Queens so sudden Return, and yet more at him, who would fight the two Knights, that accus'd her, began to cast their Eyes on Maudan, to see, what Countenance he kept, when Buruca brake forth into this following Discourse to the King. Sir, to shew you, that the Traytor, whom I see here present, has unjustly, falsly, and disloyally accus'd me of Adultery, I present you this Knight, who, if i pleases our gods, will so perform his Duy, that my innocency shall be verify'd, and the wicked Accuser punisht according to his Desert. Madam, answer'd the King, if your Knight does so much for you, you will be exceedingly oblig'd to him. Let him come forward then, and declare with his own Mouth, what he has undertaken. King Magadan, said Amadis then, because I have understood, that the Accusati∣on, which is brought against this Noble Lady, was invented with the greatest Ma∣lice in the world, I am ready to fight the Traytors, to and prove against them, by force of Arms, that they have falsly, and maliciously accus'd her, and that in all the Evil, they have said of her, and the Knight of the burning Sword, they have ly'd in their Throats. No sooner had he finisht this Discourse, but Maudan stept forward, and holding his Cosin by the Hand, answered with great Boldness: By my Head, poor Stran∣ger,
thou art mightily deceiv'd, thinking thus to save the Queen, who deserves to be burnt, that she may serve for an Example, not only to the noble Ladies of Saba, but to those of the whole Earth: For 'tis certain, and we will maintain it, that she has offended against the King by the Adultery, which the Wretch, who is fld, and she have committed together. And because thou art so forward, I tell thee, that thou thy self ly'st, and that you both deserve the Fire, or else to be drawn by four Hor∣ses thro' the street of this Town. Ah Villain, answer'd he in the red Arms, if thou knowest as well how to fight, as to rail, thou must be a brave Fellow: Nevertheless one thing perswades me, that thou art no such, since to second thee in so wicked an Act, thou tak'st as honest a man as thy self. Thus are you both nothing worth, and against both will I maintain the words, I have spoken before the King's Majesty, and so many Lords here pre∣sent; and here is my Pledge to defend it in open Combat, and that presently, if it please the King. Then he stretcht forth the fore-part of his Armor; which Maudan took hold of, and pull'd so roughly to him, that King Amadis was ready to fall, at which he was so displeas'd, that putting his hand to his Sword, he was about to draw, had not the Consideration of the Place, where he was, with held him, as also that King Magadan concern'd himself in it. And knowing, the wrong and injury, the other had done him, spake this to Maudan in great Wrath: How now? Is it fit for you to be so presumptuous in my Presence? By all our gods, if I take you in hand, I will make you repent it: Be gone, and never offer to contest so much any more in my sight. Let the Combat be to morrow as this stran∣ger has requested, to whom I swear on the Faith and Word of a King, I will cause such exact Justice to be done, that he shall have no Cause to complain. Then he rose up and went very angrily into the Chamber with Fulurtin, and the others, that were most intimate with him: In the mean time Maudan and his Cosin returned home, the Vermillion Knight also retiring himself in the Company of those, who had brought him, with great Honour and good Entertainment, ex∣pecting the Time appointed for the Combat.
CHAP. XLVI. How King Amadis fought Maudan, and his Cosin Azaruc, whom he defeated, and then embarkt to return into the North. a joust (same figure used in Chapter 11) NOw the Story says, that Amadis armed himself betimes the next day, devout∣ly bseeching GOD, that he would be pleased to preserve him from the Dan∣ger, into which he was entring, as he had several times done, especially seeing the Iustness of Buruca's Quarrel, whom, that he might the better defend, one of the Kings Vncles sent him by an Esquire a very Stately Steed, on which he mounted. And to conduct him to the Field, there came Seniel, one of the Iudges, whom King Magadan sent thither, accompanyed by five Hundred Knights. So Seniel bare his Lance, and the two Old Dukes his Helmet and Shield. Thus they marcht toge∣ther in good Order to the Place, appointed for the Combat, which, when they had rid thrice round with the found of Trumpets and Clarions, they placed him at one end, under a Pavilion, expecting the two Assailants. Maudan and Azaruc, who in like State entred a little after into the Lists, without which, a little aside, there was a
great Fire kindled, and near to it the Queen, with some Gentlemen▪ appointed for her Guard, and behind her the Executioner, ready to perform his Office, if the Ver∣milion Knight should be vanquisht. But Buruca had so good, and so assur'd a Con∣stancy, that every one prayd for her, reputing her innocent, and wrongfully accus'd. To the which, the better to perswade them, she wore that day all the most precious Ornaments she had. So she had on the Crown and Diadem, according to the Cu∣stom of Saba, which so augmented her Champions Courage, that he thought long, till the Heralds gave notice for the beginning of the Combat. Which was done soon after, for by the Command of Magadan, Maudan and Azaruc being on the one side, accompany'd with two Counts their Kinsmen, who serv'd them for Sureties, and the Vermilion Knight on the other, between the two old men, who had brought him thi∣ther; a King of Arms made Proclamation aloud, that none should be so daring, or presumptuous, for any Good, or Evil, that might befal the Combatants to give them any sign, by any Look, Word, or otherwise, either to incite, or discourage them: And this on pain of Death. Then he cry'd out with a loud voice three seve∣ral times in these following words: Let the good Combatants go and do their Duty. At this Cry the Sureties on both sides retir'd, and the Trumpets began to sound. Then the two Cosins set forward against the strange Knight, who ran directly a∣gainst Maudan, whose Death he desir'd for the insolency, he had shewn at his present∣ing him the Pledge of Battle, and met him so fiercely, that breaking his staff even to the handle, a Truncheon stuck in his Shoulder-piece, and pierc't him through with so much Pain, that he fell out of his Saddle to the Ground. Which Queen Buruca seeing, was very glad tho' this Ioy lasted her but little: For Azauc, couching his Spear low, wounded Amadis's Horse in the Shoulder, so that he fell down, and his Master under him, who nevertheless got up again, before Azaruc had finisht his Car∣reer, and taking his Sword in h s hand, went towards Maudan, who was already on his feet, and, as if he felt no Pain from the wound, he had receiv'd in his Arm, fierce∣ly pull'd out the Truncheon, and threw it far from him. Then the Knights fell cruelly on each other: But Azaruc, who was alone on Horseback, spur'd up, and thinking to beat down Amadis, and trample him under his Horse-heels, came furiously against him. The King, who perceiv'd him, stept aside, and with great Address, as the Horse, that was in motion, pass'd on, struck him on the Ham, so that his Leg being lam'd, he fell down, yet not so suddenly, but Azaruc found Means speedily to quit his Stirrup, and al got to assist his Companion whom the Vermilion Knight fiercely pursu'd, and as one, who was no Apprentice at the Trade, bestirr'd himself so couragiously betwixt them, that every one began to judge, he would gain the Victory: Because they had nt fought long, before he struck Azaruc on the Top of his Helmet, which with great foce he fo atter'd into is Brains, that he fell dead in the Place. That Maudan thn wist himself far from thence, I can assure you in his behalf: For his Heart began to fail him, so that he visibly lost all Countenance, wherefore Amadis cry'd to him: Now, Traytor, shall
thy Baseness be manifested, and thou shalt receive the Reward of the Affronts, thou didst me in the Kings Presence Maudan, more amaz'd, than can he imagin'd, answer'd not a word, and without either defending himself, or resisting, did nothing but fly to and fro. But Amadis taking him by the Straps of his Shield, pluckt him so roughly, that he brought him with his Nose to the Ground, and fell to caressing him so tenderly with the Pommel of his Sword that Maudans Helmet coming off from his Head, the Vermilion Knight immediatly sat his Foot on his Throat, and lifting up his Arm, made an Offer to kill him, when Maudn cry'd out: Ah, ah, Vermilion Knight, have pity on me and spare my Life. Rascal, answer'd he, if there were any hopes of Amendment in thee, I would do it: But thou being a Traitor as thou art, 'twould be a wrong to shew thee Com∣passion. Nevertheless, if thou wilt confess to me before the King, and the Prin∣cess of his Court, the Truth of the matter, I will pass no further. Maudan, fearful of Death, and regardless of Honor, promis'd to do it. And for this Cause Amadis call'd the Iudges, to whom he declar'd, what you have heard, de∣siring them to send for the King, and the other Lords of Saba. Which they went immediatly to tell Magadan, who came down from his Theatre, attended by Fulur∣tin, and many gallant Men, before whom the Queen being present, Maudan fell on his knees begging Mercy with lifted up hands, and to obtain it, address'd his Dis∣course to the King, saying to him: Sir you may see in me, how Fortune triumphs over such wicked persons, as I am: Nor has it indeed been ever known, but one sin draws on another, and a se∣cond many more, till at length they so blind those, who commit them, that, think∣ing to go the high way, they fall into the Ditch, which themselves have digg'd▪ whence they cannot afterwards get out. This is at present manifest in me, who envying the Honor, you did the Knight of the Burning Sword, invented what I told you of him and the Queen, to drive him from your Court, and get into his Place. Then he related all the Particulars of his Treason, not omitting the least Cir∣cumstance; after which he thus went on. Now I have been the Cause of much Mischief, and well know, that I deserve to be exemplarily punisht: Nevertheless I beseech Your Majesty, that preferring Pity and Mercy before the Rigour of your Justice, You will be pleas'd to pardon me, letting every one thereby know, that, if my Sin is heinous, your Clemency and Goodness is no less extraordinary: Which, as it will greatly redound to Your Majesty's Honor, so also shall I and mine ever re∣main more bound to serve you, than any other of your Subjects, you having thus pardon'd and remitted my most grievous Offence. Whilst the Traytor was making this fair Harangue, the King of Saba was so perplext, that he could not utter a word, considering the wrong and Injury, he had done the Queen thro his over Lightness in believing, for which he should be eternal∣ly
blam'd: Nevertheless before he retir'd, e counnanted the Traytor to be thrown in∣to the Fire, and by a perpetual Edict vanisht all hi Kindred, who for this cause depar∣ted the very same day. Then the King return'd into his Place, whither Queen Buruca was brought with as great Triumph, as if she had made a Second Entry. And being come before the King, she threw her self at his Feét, sayig to him. Sir, since my Innocence i manifested, I beseech you to receive me into your Favor, as before, and remember another time not to blieve so easily, nor to use your Power over the Accus'd; till his Defence has first been heard: Considering, how you have proceeded rigorously, not only against my Chastity, but also against my Honor, and that of the House, from which I am descended. The King, who was then besieg'd with a great Remorse of Conscience, rais'd her up, kissing her with Tears in his Eyes, answered her: Madam, I well know, that I cannot indeed excuse my Offence, for which I beseech you to pardon me and to forget it, swearing to you by my Crown, that I will satisfy you and yours for it, as you shall think fit. Ah, ah! Sir said she, had it not been for the good Vermilion Knight, my Affairs had gone ill: For GOD's sake honor him, and let this, if you please, be the first satisfaction, you shall make me. And as she finisht this Discourse, her two Vncles brought Amadis, who entring into the Hall, Magadan and Buruca went to receive him, and embracing him, the Queen said to him. Certainly, good Knight, I know not, how I shall ever be able to acknowledge, what you have done for me, having giving me both Life and Honor. Madam, answer'd he, the good Right, you have, appears manifestly: For GOD, who is just, never permits injustice without Vengeance, tho' it be some∣times long in coming. Thus, you being innocent, had not I undertaken the Com∣bat against the Traytors, some other would have come, and done what I have perform'd. My great Friend, said the King, had I known you as well yesterday, as I do at present, I should have given you more Respect: But the Trouble, I was in at the wicked Words, I heard spoken of the Queen, made me forget all Courtesy, and even my own natural Disposition, which is to receive graciously all stran∣gers, that come to my Court. Therefore I beseech you not to take in ill part this my Fault, but to excuse it, on Condition, I shall hence forth endeavor to amend it. Ah, Sir, answer'd Amadis, You do me Wrong: I am a simple Knight, who should think himself happy, if he were able to do any Service to so great a King, as you are. No, no, said Magadan, if you will stay with me, there is not any thing in my Power, that shall be refus'd you.
King Amadis very humbly thankt him: And because the King thought he was much wounded, he gave his Son Fulurtin to bear him Company, and conduct him into one of the best Chambers of the Palace, where he disarm'd himself. And al∣tho' he was old, as you may well believe, yet did the Water, with which Urganda washt him in the Castle of Apolidon, keep him so fresh, that he seem'd not to be above fourty: And he so much resembled the Knight of the burning Sword, that Fulurtin could not forbear having his Eye on him, who was so like the Person, whose Absence he hourly more and more regretted. Amadis then being disarm'd, & without any wound, constraining him to keep his Chamber, return'd into the Hall with the Kings Son. And because the Table was cover'd for Dinner, Magadan made him wash with him and sit down by the Queen, who very instantly pray'd him to tell, what he knew of the Knight of the burning Sword. Which he obey'd: And all those, who heard his great Prowess, exceedingly wondered, so that Fulurtin took a Resolution to go and seek him. Then Dinner being over, Amadis who thought it long, till he saw Queen Oriana knowing the Trouble, she was in for his Absence, resolv'd to request the King to give him a Vessel, fit for his Return to the Place, where Queen Buruca had found him. And tho' he with great Earnestness urg'd his Dismission, yet could he not obtain it till four dayes after, during which he was greatly feasted. And in the mean time a Ship was equipp'd for him, in which Fulurtin thought also to embark, and go seek his Companion; but the King would not at that time permit him. And for this cause he besought Amadis to leave him his red Armor, which he would wear for his sake, and in remembrance of the best Knight in the World. Amadis refus'd him not, and Fulurtin gave him another Suit, all white, and much richer. Then with his leave he put forth into the Nile, and from thence into the Mediterranean Sea, by a Wind fit for his Return into the West, whence he came. GOD then be his Guide. And to embellish our History, and give it some Varie∣ty, you shall understand, how in the mean time went the Affairs of the Emperor Arquisil, of whom there is so much Mention in the Book of Amadis of Gaul. CHAP. XLVII. How the Emperor Arquisil being in the City of Mentz, there arriv'd at the Court Acayus, Son to the King of Thessaly, whom Manasses, Son to the Duke of Buillon, slew thro' his Jealousy of the Infanta Esclariana. ARquisil, Emperor of Rome, sojourning in his good City of Mentz, with the Empress Leonorina, Dinerpious, and his wife Brisenna, Daughter of King Amadis, thinking on nothing but Feasting and rejoycing in the best manner, they could, the Court being then fill'd with Princes, as well Natives, Forreigners, the
most part of which were come expresly to see Esclariana, Daughter to Prince Dener∣pius, and Brisena, the Fame of whose Beauty and Gracefulness flew into all Coun∣treys, wholly in a manner resembling the Excellence that was heretofore in her Grandmother Queen Oriana. Which coming to the Ears of Acayus, Prince of Thessaly, he would be of the Party, hoping to ask her of the Emperor for his Wife. And for this cause he parted from his Country, & with a fair and great Train came to Mentz: Where Arquisil receiv'd him courteously and honorably, as well for the sake of his Father the King of Thessaly, as because he was a fair, young, and good-con∣dition'd Prince. Acayus was greatly pleas'd with it, and much more, when he had seen and discoursed with Esclariana. Whom he found means to acquaint with the occasion of his Arrival at Court, promising her, if she thought good, to request the Emperor's, and the King of Thessaly's Consent to the Marriage of him and her. The Infanta, not us'd to such Discourses, blusht at first, thanking him nevertheless for the Honor, he did her, and as a discreet, and well advis'd Lady, excus'd her self from making any further Answer. Now there hapned to be present, when Acayus and Esclariana were discoursing to∣gether, another young Prince, nam'd Manasses, Son to the Duke of Buillon, who, pretending to the same Happiness, Acayus did, felt in his Soul a great Disturbance at the good looks, they gave each other, and thence entred into such a Iealousy, that it produc'd afterwards a great deal of Mischief, as you shall understand. This Son to the Duke of Buillon was a young, lusty, and good Knight, as one shall see, but Esclariana knowing, that he came from a Race of Traytors, made no Account of him, what Love and Service soever he offered her, or she took notice of: So that she would not, to be Empress of the whole world, have had him for her Husband. And what incensed him more was, that he had found Means to understand part of the Offers which Acayus had made the Princess at which he was so inflam'd, that he resolv'd to be revenged of his Corrival, and by killing him to get wholly rid of him. And what, much contributed thereto: Vnderstand, that the Emperor had, on occasion of so great a Court, caus'd Lists to be set up for turneying, and Scaffolds round about: Where∣fore Acayus put himself in the best Equipage, he could, hoping in savour of his Mis∣tress, to Do feats of Arms, and shew himself such, as he was. And to the end, she might the better know him, one day amongst others he came to the Palace, where the Tables were cover'd for Dinner. Great and sumptuous was the Service, during which Acayus could not be satisfyed with having his Eye continually on her, whom he loved with all his heart. And tho' she minded it not, as being young, and not in∣fected with the like Distemper, yet was Manasses strangely uneasy, and at every turn gnawed his Nails, till the Tables were taken away, and the Knights and Ladies went into the Court, where they found their Horses ready to go & see, who could ride best that Afternoon. Now Acayus stirred not from Esclariana, but took the Reins of her Horse, and led her, discoursing her, as those are wont to do, who desire their Mistresses Favors. At which Manasses grew more enraged, but not being able at that
time to remedy it, he considered to prejudice them both to put himself by their side, and hear them, or keep them from speaking privatly to one another. And neverthe∣less Acayus, who doubted nothing, ceased not to prosecute his Affair, so that he said to the Infants. Madam, if you be pleased so far to favor me, as to give me some Sleeve, and command me to wear it to morrow at the Furney, methinks, no ill could befal me, and my Forces would on your occasion be redoubled. Sir, said she, You are so good a Knight, that your Devoir would not cease to be done without any Sleeve, or other Token, that you can have from me. Manasses, who heard him, could no longer hold, but spake thus to Acayus: Prince, you might well have forborn making this Discourse to my Lady: Since if she would so far extend her Liberality, she might do it to another, who can better serve her than you: And to vaunt your self thus, you should not have left the King your Fathers Countrey, and come hither, where is the flower of all Chi∣valry. Truly Knight, answer'd Acayus, it may well be, that another should serve her; but not better than I, or with more occasion of Right, or Merit. And therefore me∣thinks, you would have done much for your self, to have spoken more courteously, and not with such Audaciousness: For if I am come from my Countrey, I hold my Journey well employed, were it only in having seen my Ladies great Beauty, which has so far emboldned me, as to beseech her, that she will permit me to serve her, as I will do all my Life. I say not, but they are much better Knights, then I am, boh here, and else-where; but 'tis not you, seeing Valor and Prowess are not com∣monly accompany'd with Pride and Arrogance. Fair and softly, fair and softly, said Manasses, have a care of injuring me any more, otherwise I shall shew you, that you are a Fool. Acayus, whose Head and Anger had heated, was so displeased, that he thus ans∣wer'd Manasses. Sir Knight, if the Emperor does not command you to be chastised, I will make you repent this word. I would have you know, that Acayus has an heart good enough, and Means sufficient to punish you, as you de∣serve. Manasses, trusting to a Croud of Kindred, he had about him, could dissemble no more, but suddenly put his hand to his Sword, charging the Prince of Thessaly, said to him: Rascal, does it belong to you thus basely to threaten a better than your self? Then he gave him such a Blow on the Head, as kill'd him, so that he fell dead from his Horse to the Ground, at which there was a great Commotion: For the Princes Attendants, seeing such an Outrage ran upon Manasses; but he was defended by his, so that many on both sides there ended their Dayes: And yet worse had it been, had not the Emperor taken order, who putting himself between the two Parties, com∣manded both on their Lives to retire. And seising Manasses, caused him to be shut
up in a strong Tower, swearing he should pay for it. In the mean time every one departed to his Lodgings, as did also the Infanta Esclariana, exceedingly discon∣tented for having been the Occasion (as it seemed to her) of such a Murther. And on the other side the dead Princes People made such great Complaints, that the Em∣peror, who was exactly just, sent the next day to have him hang'd on the Walls of the Place, where he was imprisoned. But his Friends, being exceedingly discontented, took the Body, and carryed it in∣to the Countrey of Buillon, leaving the Court in sorrow, and very much troubled. For tho' the Iustice of the Action was approved by all good People yet was it publickly said, that the Duke might revenge it, because he was a great Lod, and ally'd to more great Families, than any other of the Empire. CHAP. XLIII. How the Duke of Buillon knew of his Sons Death: And of the great Craft, he used to kill the Emperor and his Son Diner pius, and seise on the Empire. MAnasses being dead, as you have heard and his Body carryed by his kindred in∣to his Fathers Dutchy, never did man make such Lamentation for the space of fifteen dayes: But as all things are forgotten or lessned by Time, the old Mans sorrow was a little moderated, but not the desire he had of Vengeance. For when things were thought to be the most quieted e assembled those of his Image, and hav∣ing taken them aside, said to them. Gentlemen, my good Friends and Allies, you have seen and understood the Dishonor, which the Emperor our Prince has not only done me, but you all▪ as well in particular, as in general: so that having no Regard to us, who are so great and powerful, as every one knows, he has despitefully caused him to be Hang'd, who might after me be named the head of your Arms, and Duke of Bulloign: for which I am so grieved that I dye an hundred times a day. And as to you, his good Kinsmen, I believe for certain, that Nature so stimulates you, that your heart weeps, and this wound will bleed, as long as you and yours shall have the Names of Gen∣tlemen. Nevertheless, if you will follow my advice, we will not so long delay the Vengeance of it: but I will give you such means to recover your Honour, which is so much debased, a shall turn to your Glry, and great Profit. Then they all cryed out, that tey would send their Lives and Fortunes in it. My Friends, said he, are you resolved to follow my Counsel? Sir, anwered the chiefest of them, we swear to you on the Faith we ow to GOD, that we will in this point obey you. The Duke very affectionately thanked them: and, seeing their Good Will, began to ay open hs design, as you shall understand.
Gentlemen, and Kinsmen, said he, I am of Opinion, that, to attain to my purpose, one of you shall go to the Emperor, and present him with my most humble duty, assuring him, that the Justice he has Executed on my son, is well pleasing to me, see∣ing the Injury he had done his Majesty by killing the Prince of Thessaly so inconsi∣derately, and that in his Majesties presence. And that, although Paternal Love cau∣ses in me some Regret, yet, when I think on the Equity, which, as a good Prince, and as a just Emperor, he has used, I find my self so comforted, that I not only ap∣prove his Justice, as being exemplary to all, but moreover humbly thank him for having eased me from being severe to my own Flesh. Which 'twas expedient I should have been, desiring to preserve my Integrity, and the Honour of my house. These, my Friends, are the Artifices, we must make use of, to attain to our desires, to which he giving Credit, will properly resemble the Raven, that held the Cheese, whom the Fox allured to sing, that he might make him let go his Prey. For by this means he will have assurance of us and we may go and take him even in his Nest, and at our pleasure seise on him and his, letting not any one escape, that can con∣tradict my coming to the Empire, to which I shall atain in spite of them, you re∣maining rich with the Spoils of your Enemies, and I revenged at the price of their blood. Certainly this damnable Counsel and Advice had so much force, that none of the Assistants contradicted it, but approved it, and commended it, choosing immediately for the Bearer of that Message Madaran, a Cousin of the Dukes, and as honest a Man as himself: who parted from them, and being come to the Emperor knew so fitly to palliate his Message and Treason, that the good Prince believed more, than he should have done, saying before all, that the Duke of Buiiion was indeed one of the discreetest Knights in the World, and who best deserved the Government of a Monarchy. He gave therefore great Presents to the Messenger, commanding him to tell his Master, that he desired him to come to his Court, where he would honour him as he de∣served. Madaran, glad of such Assurance, returned to the Duke, who expected him with a great part of his Allies, that kept themselves in a readiness according to the News, they should have of their Messenger, who entirely related to them the Emperors dis∣course. And for this cause they removed the Night following, going strait towards Mentz. And they assembled the most secretly they could, above a thousand, who lay conceal'd all the day in a Forrest, near the City, into which about Evening they en∣tred without being discovered. The Empeor, who doubted not in the least of any Treason, seeing the honest Message, the Lord of Buillon had sent him by Madaran, was in his Palace, discoursing with the Empress, and several Knights that ac∣companyed him, when the Duke came in compleatly Armed, and with him twenty or thirty more, who, putting their hands to their Swords, ran on those they met. At which the Emperor, much affrighted, endeavoured to get away, but Madaran stept be∣fore him, and striking him on the head, said: Stay Emperor, stay: and remember the Injury thou hast done the house of Buillon.
The blow was Mortal, and the good Prince fell dead in the place. Which Diner∣pius seeing, he entred into such Fury, that, disarmed as he was, he flew at the Mur∣therer Arm'd, striking him so firmly, that he cleaved him to the very brains. Then the bustle grew hot: for many Gallant Men, who were there present, wrapt their Cloaks about their Arms, and with their naked Swords a long time resisted the Traytors. Now Dinerpius knew that he could not avoid present death: wherefore he resolved to sell his Life dear, so that he met not any Man but he fell without speaking a word more, notwithstanding by misfortune one of the Traytors got be∣hind him, and wounded him through the body. Ah! said Dinerpius, Villain thou hast slain me: And turning about separated his shoulder from the rest of his body. Then they both sell at the Feet of the Duke, who fearing lest Dinerpius should get up again, cut off his head. Thus the one Assailing, and the others defending, Brisenna and Esclariana, who were in there Chambers heard the noise, and sent suddainly a Damsel to know what the matter might be: but as soon as she came into the Hall, she perceived the Em∣peror dead, and the Empress in a Swound on the body. At which being greatly af∣frighted, she returned to the Ladies, to whom she said, sighing and weeping: Alas, alas, Ladies! Would you know the matter? The wicked Duke of Buillon has murdered the Emperor, and all those that accompanyed him. At this cry the Princess Brisenna found no better remedy than to take her Daugh∣ter, and flying under the Vaults of the Palace, came to a Sally-port on the side of the River, where they perceived a Fisher-boat, into which they entred: and setting it a drift, the Stream began to carry it down with so much swiftness, that they came to the Sea before it was day. In the mean time those who lay concealed in the Dukes House, and who only waited for the Slaughter, ran forth strait into the Market-place, killing and wounding all they met. There was a pittiful and horrid Specta∣cle: for these wicked Men often spared not the poor Women, who with their Hair about their Ears lamented, one for her Husband, another her Father or her Brother. And nevertheless the Fury of the Traytors did not decrease till it was day, and the Duke commanded every one should endeavour to find out the Princess Brisenna, and her daughter Esclariana: for he had the Empress and all her damsels in safe custody. Then was search made in every place: and nevertheless they could have no News of them. At which the Duke being exceedingly vext, caused it to be publisht by sound of Trumpet, that they should be brought forth on pin of death: and that if they should be found after the Proclamation, those that should have concealed them, should be han∣ged. But 'twas in vain, the Good Ladies were out of his power, and of the Mercy of GOD and the Waves. By means whereof the Traytor s ized on the Empire: and sent to raise Soldiers on all sides to destroy who evr should contradict him And for this cause there were assembled in a little time above twenty thousand men, with whom he did innumerable Evils, commanding, before he went forth of Mentz, that the Emperor and his Son should be Hanged in the same place where M∣nasses
had been before. And there they stayed many days, as you shall hear about the end of this Book. CHAP. XLIX. How the Princess Bienn and her daughter Esclariana were lost at Sea, and taken by Pirates. a sea battle VEry lamentable it is to describe the Fortune of Brisenna and her Daughter: who being carried down the Stream of the Water in the little Vessel, weeping and lamenting, came into the deep Sea, just as the dawning of the day began to appear: and in less than a moment they were driven in such fort, that they lost sight of Land. But litle did the two good Ladies care: for they (more dead than living, and with∣out thinking on the new Danger into which they were faln) held each other embraced, desiring for their better Comfort their approacing death. And thus being driven too and fro, as it pleaed the Wind and the Waves, they remained two days and two
nights without eating or drinking, or any way minding themselves: All they were me by a hip in which were two Hungarian Pirats, who accompanyed by fifteen as honest Persons as themselves, and whom they had in their pay, Robbed and Pl∣laged whoever fell into their lands. They thn wondring to see in this little Boat, thefe two Ladies in so good Equipage, and shedding so many tears, immdiately thought, that they should get a good Ransom for them: and went therefre to ee them, before they perceived it, but being amazed at Esclarianas great Beauty, they were moved to so much Compassion, that they courteously saluted tem. Now the Princess Brisenna was still so disturbed, that she certanly thought they were some of the Duke of Buillons Men: wherefore exasperating her self against them, she began to cry out, saying: Traytors, Murderers, disloyal to your Natural Lord, what will you have with me, or this poor Maiden, who is Fatherless, and depriv'd of all things? Make an end, Wretches, of killing us, and let your Rage be glutted with our blood: for to live any longer is troublesome to us. Then she held her peace, and soon after began again her Lamentation more bit∣terly than before, and with so many Complaints, that the very Tyrants could not forbear weeping: wondring nevertheless, what caus'd in her such a Passion. Where∣fore they graciously answer'd her: Lady, there is none in this Company, that will do you any displeasure, nor have we ever as I believe, seen you before: and yet we should be glad to avenge you on those, of whom you complain, if we had an Opportunity: wherefore tell us, if you please, who they are, and the Occasion of your Discontent. At this word Brisenna recoverd a little her Spirits, and knowing for certain, that she was mistaken having taken them for the Duke's Soldiers, earnestly de∣sir'd them to excuse her, thanking them heartily for the Offers they made her. And think it not strange, said she, if my Sorrow is extream: For I see my self at this day without help, without wealth, and wholly ruin'd: nevertheless, I hope that at length the Pleasure, we shall receive from you, may in time be well recom∣pens'd, which makes me humbly beseech you, since Fortune hs thrown us into your hands, that our Honour may be preserv'd, as we have Confidence in your Goodness and Courtesy: for nothing else is left us. Be assur'd, answer'd the Pirates, that we will in nothing injure you, and that we will serve and honour you to our power. GOD give you the grace so to do, said Brisenna: and on this Faith we yield our selves to you. Then the Pirats took them under the Arms, and led them into their Vessel, where with great Earnestness they requested them to eat wich at length tey reus'd nor, so much were they perswaded by their curteous Entremies. But tis Court  a∣sted but little, so soon did they return to their Nature. So they led them into the Cabin of the Ship, and there was brought them a Bed to rest on: then leaving them alone, they wnt forth upon the Deck, paising to one another Esclarian's excllent
Beauty, the two Pirats pretending, this great Sorrow being appeas'd, to find means to make her their Mistress, tho' they dissembled it the best they could. Thus the good Ladies remain'd wonderfully discontented, yet comforting themselves by the Words of the Pirats, and the Promises they made them, till Supper-time, when they sent for them by one of their Soldiers, who, speaking to Esclariana, found himself so surpis'd with her Love, that he knew not what Countenance to keep. And he never took his eye from her, till they were again retir'd into their Cabin, where being waried and tired with their past Toil, they lay down in their Cloaths, and fell asleep, the three Lovers remaining every one of them in Pain, to find the Means of attaining to the Enjoyment of the Fair One. CHAP. L. How one of the Soldiers, belonging to the two Pirats, stole away the Infanta E∣sclariana, and, being about to force her, she was succour'd by Dom Florestan, and of a strange Adventure that befel them afterwards. AFter the Ld were faln asleep, he, who had last beheld Esclariana with an Vncha Eye, as we have told you, was so inflam'd with her Love, that he did nothing all Night but Sigh, Musing how he might attain to his desires. And in this thought, hearing his Companions short, he arose softly up, and came to the Door of the Cabin, where the Ladies were which he opened: And because they slept soundly, he came very near them, and the more he beheld the Infanta, the more did the Fire, already kindled in his Entrals, increase, so that he said within himself: Alas! if I do not soon enjoy this Woman, 'tis impossible that I can live! In an ill hour dd I see that great Beauty, with which she is edow'd. Then he began to think with himself, that he might easily carry her away with∣out noise: wherefore he went, and arm'd himself, and returning speedily into the Ladies Cabin, he took the Far One gently in his Arms and without ever waking her, so soundly did she sleep, carry'd her into a Skiff, fastned to the Ship, which he suddainly unty'd: and covering is Prey with his Cloak, began to Sail away with∣out being perceiv'd by any one. Thus they pass'd on all the Night, she never awak∣ing: but about an hour before day, this Knight, no longer able to endure the Thirst that tormented him, being so near the Fountain he above all things desir'd▪ let loose the Reins of his Passion, and approaching Esclariana, went about to uncover her, when she awaking, started up, and finding her self thus alone, began to cry out: Blessed Lord, help me! What is this! Do I dream, or is it Truth, that I see? And you, said she to the Knight, who are you, that have awak'd me? Dear Madam, aswer'd he, what you see, is no Dream, but I have brought you away in this Boat, as well for the Love, I bear you, as to deliver you out of the
hands of those, who would undoubtedly have dishonour'd you, and enjoy'd, what none but I deserve, having resolved to make you Lady of my self, as her, whom I love and esteem above all things in this World. And therefore, dearest Madam, I beseech you, have pity on me, and grant me freely your Love, without which I can∣not live. When Esclariana heard him speak thus, she was so enraged, that without fearing any thing, she thus answered him: Sir Knight, carry me speedily back to the Place, from whence you have taken me, without making me any more of these Discourses: for I am not so inconsiderable, that you should be admitted to such a Familiarity with me. And GOD forbid I should ever so much stain my Family: certainly I would first kill my self before you with mine own hands. Very much amaz'd, and sorry together, was the Knight, who, hurried on by the Violence of his Passion, was about to use Force, nevertheless he would first en∣deavour to gain her by words, saying to her: How? do you think your self better than me? No, no, I am a Knight, who deserve you, and more: And therefore enter not into these Contestations, but yield to me, if you will have me pardon the injurious Words, you have too indiscreetly given me: Otherwise I will shew you, that your feeble Resistance shall not preserve you; but that, whether you will or no, you shall satisfy my Dere. Esclariana, who heard these Threats, saw well, that 'twas in earnest, neverthe∣less without appearing any way daunted, she speedily answered him: Do you threa∣ten me? have a care what you do: for you would be made to pay dear for such force, were it only by him who is in Heaven, and who will not, if he pleases suffer it. Ha, ha, said the Knight, smiling, I will now see whether HE concerns himself with such matters. Then he went about to throw her down, and prosecute his beastly Intent: But she taught hold of his Hair, and crying out with a loud voice, begged the Assistance of Almighty GOD, who graciously and mercifully heard her: So that at that very Instant there passed by a Boat, and one Mariner, carrying a Knight, who, hearing this Voice, immediately commanded his Guide to make towards it with his Boat, that he might see, what the Matter was. Which he obeyed with great diligence. And though the Sea was covered with Mists, yet he got so near the Skiff, that they saw the Villian holding the Damsel under him, who endeavoured with all her might to get out of his hands, with a loud voice lamenting her Misfortune. At which the Knight of the Boat being displeased, he cryed out to the other: Ah! Traytor, leave the Damsel: now cursed of GOD be such Wretches as you, who will use force. When she, who was in a manner out of Breath, heard him speak, you may ima∣gin how much she was rejoyced, and imploring his Aid, she said to him: Alas, my Lord, help me against this Traytor, who will dishonour me. That will I not fail to do, answered he.
And he was about to leap into the Skiff; but the other let go his Prize, and ran to take his Arms, saying: By my Head, Sir Knight, the Joy, you have made me lose, shall turn to your Displeasure. This said, they charged one another, and their Combat was at the beginning ve∣ry fierce: for the Pirat was nimble and dextrous; yet could he not long resist the Knight; but was forced, whether he would or no, to give back, and the other entred into the Skiff. Then began the break of Day to appear, and the Infanta perceived, that he, who fought for her Defence, was Tall, Well-proportioned, and Armed in black Armor, without any Device, except in his Shield, where he bare Or, an Heart divided Gules. And because the Victory began to appear visibly on his side, she de∣voutly praed our Lord, that he would preserve him to the end, which happened soon after: For the Knight of the Boat gave the other two such blows together with his Sword, that he was fain to put his knee to the ground: which being redoubled, Death followed, and he fell into the Sea. Which Esclariana seeing, said aloud: Henceforth, Villain, shall Damsels be de∣livered from thy hands, and out of thy Power. Now the Sun began then to display his Beams, the Knight of the Boat not ha∣ving yet minded Esclarianas Beauty: but when he beheld her, Love so strongly sur∣prised him, that forgetting the Anguish and Discontnts he had so long suffered for Love of her, who had first deprived him of his liberty, and for whom he had put him∣self into an Infinity of Dangers, Tra ersing so many strange Countreys, where he put an end to several fair Adventures, be fell so in love with this, that he began to change Colour, and to become Thoughtful and Pensive At which she being grieved, as thinking im wounded, she said to him: Alas, good Knight, I beseech you bear your self up: for to see your Looks, I can have no Joy in my heart: seeing the Obligation I have to you, and what you have done for me. Alas, if you are wounded, shew me where, that I may remedy it in the best manner I can. At this gracious word the black Knight found himself unspeakably eased, and put∣ting both his knees to the ground, answered her: Pardon me, Madam, if I have not at first shewn you the Respect I ought: for your excellent Beauty so alienated the soundest Parts both of my Heart and Spirit, that I found my self in an instant free, and immediately a Captive wounded with so mortal a Wo nd, that no other Re∣medy can do it good, but your gracious Favour, which I beseech you to grant me, telling me your Name, and what Adventure brought you hither, that I may serve you as you shall command me. She, who had seen him Fight so well, hearing him speak with such a Grace, and perceiving him to be one of the fairest Knights in the World, wisht suddainly with∣in her self, that he were of a Family worthy to be her Husband; nevertheless she at that time dissembled this Thought, and feigning not to understand him, made him this Answer: Indeed, good Knight, I cannot sufficiently thank you for the
obliging Offers you make me, to help me in my Affairs, which within these eight days have been so strange, that I my self, in whom they are pass'd, cannot comprehend, nor understand them: Save that I can swear to you, there never was a more poor and desolate Damsel, than I am; hoping ne∣vertheless in GOD's mercy, that the good Succour, you have given me in my great Necessity, shall not remain long unacknowledged, but shall in time be recompensed, since 'tis impossible, Fortune should continue long so severe to me, as she has been at the beginning. Wherefore I entreat you to Con∣duct me into great Britain: For you cannot easily have me back to the Place whence this Villain stole me, as I was sleeping near a Lady, who will be greatly discontented at my Absence. And being come before King Ama∣dis, you shall intirely know my Descent, and who I am. In the mean time your self will do me the Favour to tell me who you are, to the end I may not fail to give you the Honour and Respect that is due to you. When the black Knight heard she would go into Great Britain, he had a more desire to know her than before; nevertheless fearing to displease her, he would not importune her any farther, but answered her thus: Madam, I am so much yours, that I will not disobey you in any thing, but will con∣duct you into Great Britain, or elsewhere, as you shall think good My Name, since you desire to know it, is, the Knight of the Divided Heart and this Shield well signifies the sorrow, in which I have to this day lived, till it was almost stifled by length of Time: But I have now found it in such manner renewed in me, that this Name is more sutable to me than ever. And have you no other Name, said Esclariana. Yes indeed, Madam, answered he, Lady of my Heart: For it is yours, and it would not be reasonable it should conceal any thing from you, that you desire to understand; and therefore I acquaint you, that I am Florestan, Son to the King of Sardinia, who has not this long time heard any News of me, because I have Traversed many strange Countreys, enduring so many Passions for the Love of a Lady, to whom I had given my heart, and who has so severely treated it, that never any Knight sufferd so much, even to this day, that I am faln from one Disease to a greater. And may Heaven be pleased to give you knowledge of the Good I wish you, and the Evil I suffer for your Love, which indeed burns fiercer in my Soul, than ever did the Heat, that heretofore tormented me for being Loyal to her, who left me sorrowful and without any Joy. And this indeed was the Truth: For the Emperor of Trebisond having Marryed Griliana to the Duke of Breigne, he grew so discontented, that he went incognito, wandring through the World, and had a Combat with Lisvat, as you may find in the Sixth Book of Amadis of Gaul, after which he pass'd into many Islands, finishing several Adventures, by which he gained great
Honour under that disguised Name. And he was yet following his Fortune at Sea, without desiring any Company, but the Mariner, that conducted him, when he came seasonably to the Rescue of Esclariana. But forasmuch as our History is principally designed for another. We have not amused our selves with Relating his Valiant Acts, as what would have been too tedious, and little to our purpose. You may be pleased to be informed, that as soon as Esclariana understood he was Son to the King of Sardinia, whom she knew, as having often seen him in the Court of the Emperor her Father, and to whom she was Related, her Purpose of never having any other Husband, was fully confirmed. Wherfore lifting him up from his knees, on which he had long been, she said to him: My Lord Florestan, if I have not been so respectful to you, as I should, excuse, if you please, my ignorance, and the little knowledge I had of you; but so it is, that I now well see GOD has not wholly forgotten me, since he has made me fall into the hands of such a Knight as you. Now I a∣gain pray you to conduct me into great Britain: For till then you shall know no further what I am: Thus much indeed I will tell you, that if you love me, I also bear you such Affection, that none but you shall ever be my Lord, if you will honour me so much as to receive me fr your Wife. Which may be accorded with King Amadis, for I have at present no other Father but him: Wherefore it is necessary he consent to it, else both you and I should be to blame. Which makes me humbly request you to defer it till then. Madam, answered he, the Assurance you give me, brings me so much Joy, that I know not well what Thanks to return you. And as to the rest, I swear to you never to transgress what it shall please you to command me, but I will conduct you into great Britain, where we shall be welcome, be∣cause the King is my Fathers Brother. I am very glad of it, said the Princess. Whilst they were thus Discoursing, a Storm began to arise, which hourly increasing, so tossed their little Vessel, which their Mariner was fin to leave to the Mercy of the Winds, that they were often in hazard of Drowning, for during the space of eight days, they knew not which way they went, and yet Florestan was so contented with having his Mistress near him, that he minded not the Danger he was in. Being thus Driven by the Tempest, they were carryed at last to a very fair Island, well planted with Trees, where they went ashore. Then Florestan took Esclariana by the Hand, and as he was walking with her to refresh her under the shade, listning to the Notes of many little Birds there flew over their Heads two great Griffins, who so frightned the Princess, that without the Assurance given her by Florestan, she had dyed. Yet did they not therefore stop, but went on to a Clear Fountain, which, issuing from the Rock, made a little Lake, in the midst of which was placed an high Pillar of Marble, having on it the Effigies of a Lady, car∣ved
in Porphry, with a very fair Crown on her Head, and in the Marble were en∣graven certain Caldean Letters, which Florestan, though skilled in many Langua∣ges, could not read. The Water of this Fountain appearing very Fair and Clear, Esclariana had a desire to drink, but she had scarce swallowed the first Draught, when she was changed into an horrible Serpent, which, beating its Wings, and shaking its Tail, leaped into the Depth of the Lake, leaving lorestan the most amazed Man in the World. But presently after rising up again, she came upon the Water, where she stayed not long, before she entred into the Hollow of the adjoyning Rock. Wherefore Florestan, in a manner Desperate, followed her, saying in himself: GOD never help me if I thus forsake my Lady. Then running after her, he had no sooner set his Foot within the Rock, but met the most terrible Monster imaginable▪ for he resembled a Wild Man save that he was without an Head, and had his eyes in his Stomach, being bigger than the talest Giant that ever were seen. In his Hand he had a great Club with which he struck Florestan such a blow on the Head, that, being ready to fall, he was forced to put his knee to the ground: Nevertheless he got easily up again, and approaching of the Monster, gave him such a blow with his Sword, that he separated one of his Legs from his Body, so that he fell down to the Ground, giving a great Cry. Then Florestan fell upon him, and made an end of killing him, when he perceived near him a Lady, having on long white Vails, and leaning on a Staff, who said to him in great Wrath: In an ill hour, Sir Knight, had you ever so much Power, as so light∣ly to kill the Guard of my Cave. This said, she stretched out her Arm, and with all her strength struck him on the Helmet, saying, Well, you shall serve me then, and shall be put in his place. Scarce had Florestan received the blow of the Staff, but he stood upright, and like a Man deprived of his Senses, thought on nothing but keeping the Entrance of the Cave. Then the Lady returned whence she came. And in the mean Time the Ma∣riner, who stayed in the Boat, seeing that Florestan and Esclariana did not return, brought his Vessel to an Anchor and went to look for them. Then he sought every where, till he came to the Fountain, where he drank, and was immediately without any knowledge of himself, only perceiving that two Damsels carryed him away, he knew not whither, till at length he found himself in an Obscure Dungeon, Impri∣soned with several others, whom he could not see for the Darkness of the Place. Now let us leave them all Three in this Condicion, and return to the Princess Brisenna, who had lost her Daughter as she was asleep.
CHAP. LI. How the Princess Brisenna, when she awaked, not finding her Daughter, was ex∣cedingly discontented, and of what happened, and the manner how she was at last delivered. YOu have heard in what manner the Infant Esclariana fell into the hands of the Villain, who would have forced her, and how she was carried away, as she was sleeping near her Mother, without her, or any others perceiving it. Now the good Lady awaked soon after, the Trouble of her mind not permitting her any long Rest. Then she stretched forth her Arms to perceive how her Daughter did, but not finding her, rose up, and with a Torch that was burning in the Chamber, loo∣ked all about, to see whether she had not hid her self, that she might sleep more secure∣ly. Then she well knew she was stol away: Wherefore going forth on the Deck, she began to cry and roar like a mad Woman so loud, that Maragnon (so was the principal Pirat named) heard this Noise, and wondring at it, askt the Princess, what she ailed Alas! Sir. answered she, what have you done with my Daughter! She has been ltely taken from me. Maragnon was exceedingly surprised to hear of this Loss, and doubted, his Com∣panion Brutus had plaed him some rick: And for that he speedily armed himself, and witout answering Brisenna, took a Torch, and went to Brutus's Cabin, who seeing him com in that manner, asked him who disturbed him. Who? answered Maragnon: You your self, who have taken away the fair Dam∣sel, we took Yesterday. Faith, said the other, it is not so, but you your self have stoln her: And im∣mediately would have her sought for even in the retiring place, hoping to defeat Ma∣ragnon's Design, and recover Esclariana. But if the one was disturbed, the other was not at rest: Nevertheless they laboured in vain, as you have understood. In the mean time the Diconolate Mother made pityful Moan, of which Brutus taking Compssion, and more discontented to see himself frustrated of his Intent, put his hand to his Sword, saying to Maragnon: By my Faith you have taken away the Damsel, and I will have this for my self, whether you will or no. Indeed? said the other: and what shall I have? Then they drew near each other, and were about to fight. Which their People would not permit, but interposing between them, desired them to have a little pati∣ence, till a more diligent search was made for the lost Damsel, and if she were not found, that they would cast Lots who should have the Lady. This Advice seemed reasonable unto them, and there was no Cabin, great or little, nor any hole or corner in the Ship, left unransackt: till at last they perceived that one of their Compani∣ons
was missing, and had certainly carry'd her away in the Shiff. This augmented the Tears and Lamentations of the poor Mother, who having before her eyes the damnable Intention of the Picars, that were about to cast Lots for her, the loss of her Daughter, whom she certainly thought to have been forc'd both in Body and Ho∣nour, and the Remembrance of her Husband, so lately Murthered, was ready to fall into Dispair, and at the point of throwing her self into the water, rather than suffer∣ing any more. Which she had undoubtedly done had not the fear of losing her soul withheld her: as also the coming on of a great Adventure put a stop to their De∣signs. Some of the Ship discovered a Vessel, which the Storm had driven into those parts: which they no sooner perceived, but there began an Alarm amongst them, crying out to go pillage it, and take those that were in it Prisoners. Then the Pi∣rats put themselves in a readiness to fight, and drew near the Vessel, which they joyn∣ed with Hooks and Grapling-Irons. But they entred not into it so easily as they thought for: For a Knight, covered with very Rich Arms, who was in it accompa∣nyed with fifteen others, presented themselves well Armed, and with a very good will, not only to resist them, but also to defeat them, if they passed any farther. And what gave them yet more occasion so to do, was, that he, who was so well Armed, presently knew the Princess Brisenna making her Lamentation, and calling to GOD for suc∣cour: at which he had such compassion and displeasure, that without demurring any longer, he ran upon the Pirats, and supported by his Companions, entred into their Ship: then with his head bow'd down, what hinderance soever they gave him, he took the Princess by the arm, and led her into his Vessel, whilst his Companions made him way. So he delivered her to the guard of his Esquires, and returned speedily to the Battle, where all behaved themselves so valiantly, that there was never seen a more cruel Sea-fight, for the few people they were. For he in the Rich Arms and Maragnon, joyning each other, sufficiently, shew'd the little Amity there was between them: So that by their well fighting, each of the two Pirats took Courage, and grew bold, they being indeed all stout Knights, especially Brutus. Nevertheless the Corsaires began at last to stagger, and retreat into their Vessel: for Maragnon, be∣ing beaten down, was carryed in by two Servants, thinking to save his life. Nor could the others any longer resist him in the rich Armor, when it fortun'd, that there came by a Boat with two Oars, in which there Saied a Knight, arm's with white Armor, the fairest and most curiously wrought, that vr was seen. He of whom I speak, went to the place where Maragnon lay, and seeing so different a Combat, en∣quired secretly the occasion. Sir Knight, answered Maragnon, a Rascal whom you see there in rich Armor, has Wickedly Assaul ed me to take from me a Lady, whom I love more than my self: and has her at this present actually in his Vessel. Is it so? said the white Knight: if I can, I will make him repent it. Then he commanded his Boat to go near, and taking his Sword in his hand, he
put himself among the Combatants, on the Pirates side, and striking every way, met with one of the others, whom he slew upon the place. Then Bru∣tus, and his Companions, took heart again; and the others began to give back, till they came near the place where the Princess was: At which he, in the Rich Armor, being vext, and knowing, that this Misfortune befell them by the Effort of the white Knight, made up to him, and gave him such a blow on his Helmet, that he was very sensible of the weight of it, and would willingly have revenged himself; but they were so near to one another, that the white Knight had not room to lift up his Arm: Wherefore he stretched forth his left hand, and caught hold of the straps of his Adversarys Shield, wich he pulled to himself with such force, that he, in the rich Armor, was brought, whether he would or no, with his nose to the ground. Now indeed, said the other, will I make you restore the Ladies which you tke away by force. And taking hold of his Helmet, pluckt it from his Head, and was lifting up his Sword to strike him, when he presently knew him: For 'twas Gan∣dalin, who, as you have been told, went to look for King Amadis, in the great Siclades, and finding him to be removed, would not return into great Britain without him. Therefore he still went about seeking him, till he fell into the hands of him in the white Arms, which was Amadis, whom the Storm had drien into that Sea. That the King was both amazed, and glad at this meeting, you may ea∣sily believe: Wherefore he suddainly held his hand, saying to him he had un∣der him: Ah! Gandalin, is it possible, that you are grown a Taker of La∣dies by force! VVhat will the Countess your wife say, when she knows of it? At this word Gandalin understood his Master's Voice, and being more joyful, than he had been sorrowful, answered him: How, Sir, do you call it forcing of Ladies, when I fought to deliver my Lady Brisenna, your daugh∣ter, from these Corsairs, who were carrying her away against her will? By my Head, you have been exceedingly deceived: for you have almost vanquisht us all. The King, seized with Amazement and Fury, could not answer him: But left Gandalin, and turned against the Pirates, of whom he made such a slaugh∣ter, that the most part of them were put to the Sword, and the rest fell in∣to the Sea. Then the King commanded that all their Speil should be car∣ried into Gandalins Ship, and the other set on Fire, which was immediately done. Then Amadis went to his Daughter, who, finding her self delivered from the Danger she had been in, and seeing the King in good health; the Lamentations, she was before making, were converted into praises of our Lord, and she threw her self at his feet, having her heart so seized, that she
could not speak one word to him. But he took her up, asking her, what Fortune had separated her from the Emperor. Alas! alas! Sir, answered she, You may well name it Fortune, the strangest and most wretched, that ever befell poor desolate woman! For she has thrown me from the high Estate, in which you had placed me to the lowest she could, leaving me without Husband, Children, or any VVealth whatever. Alas! the Traitorous Duke of Buillon has cruelly slain Arquisil and his Son, and my daughter and I, flying the Fury; found means to steal away, and get a little Boat, into which we entred; without any other guide but GOD's Mercy, whom it pleased to try (as I believe) my Patience, to let us fall into the Hands of these Tevsh Pirates, who cunningly, and without my perceiving it, (with so sound a sleep was I opprest) have stoln away Esclariana, and carried her I know not whither. Alas! was this alone left for my Comfort? And it is Indeed a Wonder, I have been able to live all this time: For the Villains were calling Lots to dishonour  Course  arried, with his Company, who vig∣rously  them  Nevertheless, I dout they would have had e∣nough to do, with  your happy Arrival. And this, Sir, is the Con∣dition, in which you find your daughter, full of al Sorow and Discon∣tent. Th she begin to shed Tears, and sigh so bitterly, that she would have  the  heart in e World to pitty. the  again  King, knowing, 'twas not then  what he , fall  her: Daughter, You have Reason to grieve, tho' you cannot by your Tears recall what is done. On lly Point is now lt you, that is, the Punishment of the Trai∣tor, which cannot be so grievous, but his Treasn has been greater. Nevertheless, will th suh manner set my self about it, that it shall be remembred, whilst the World shall last. And as for your Daugh∣ter, I hope in our Lord, that he will not forsake her, no more than he has done you, and that you shall one day see her in good Health, without having suffered Shame or Outrage. Comfort your self there∣fore, and take to you a Man's Hert, tho' you are but a Woman, shewing the House of which you are descended, being Daughter to a King of Gaul, which is indeed the most constant and generous Nation at this day on the Earth. So many other Reasons did Amadis alledge, that she was, in some measure comforted: And the King disarming himself, turned to Gan∣dalin, for whom, that he might change the Discourse, complaining of the great Blow with the Sword, he had received, he said in sport:
How, Count? Do you thus Caress your Friends? In good faith I could never have thought, that you would in such earnest have tried the Goodness of my Armor, nevertheless I heartily pardon you. On my Soul, Sir, answered he, shaking his head, if all your Servants recei∣ved the Marks of your Favour in such Money, as you lately chang'd with me, you would find but a few that would long keep you Company: and you have Reason to pardon me: for 'tis thus, that the Beaten makes the satisfaction. Now it was already lat, and they had not eaten all day: Wherefore the Cloth was laid, and as they were Dining and Discoursing, the King askt, in what Sea they then were. Sir, answered the Marriners, We are not far from Sicily. So much the better, said he. Then he commanded to go ashore at Naples, and send from thence into Spain to King Brian, and his other Friends, and Allies, to ask Assistance for the revenging his Daughters Injury: For he was resolved not to return into Great Britain, till he had performed it. And for this cause having taken Port at Salern, where King Adariel honourably received him, he dispatched Messengers into all Parts. And he Writ at length to Queen Oriana, ac∣quainting her with the Seate of his Health, and Cause of his Stay. Whil he was thus preparing for War against the Duke of Buillon, he one day en∣quired of Gandalin, what had passed in his Countrey, during his Absence, who told him the occasion for which the Queen had sent him, withall, that he knew of the Knight of the Burning Sword, who had sent to London Gan∣dalfes head, of which the King was very Glad for the sake of Galeotes and Madasima And I am sorry, said he, that I was not there to entertain the Emperor of Trebisond, and the King of Sicily, but it shall be for another time. So it is, that I esteem my Journey well employed, for I have restored a poor Damsel to her Countrey that was taken from her; and saved the Queen of Saba's Honour, who was Accused of Adultery. Then he related particularly to him all the Traverses he had made, and the Fruit that was come of them.
CHAP. LII. How the Emperor of Trebisond, the King of Sicily, and others, who ex∣pected the Return of King Amadis to London, seeing his Stay, took leave of the Queen, and departed. a wedding (same figure used in Chapter32) YOu have been told in the foregoing Chapters, that the Emperor of Tre∣bisond, and the King of Sicily promised Queen Oriana to stay two whole months for King Amadis: But at the end of that time, seeing that he did not return, they resolved to depart, to wit the Emperor into Trebi∣sond, and King Alpatracy into Gaul, hoping to recover his Kingdom of Metz: Wherefore the Queen knowing, that she should do them wrong to stay them any longer, would no farther importune them, save that for desired the King of Sicily to leave with her, whilst his War lasted, the Queen and her Daughter, which he liked very well, as did the Ladies also: For this Request came in part from them. And of this Lucella had been the Mover,
that she might stay for the Knight of the Burning Sword, as she had sent him word by Macetta. These Princes then being upon their Embarkment, Lisvart and i∣on, who thought long till they saw their Mistresses, would  he Emperor, and Olorius would willingly have born them  he had promised the King of Sicily to help him, during his Affairs  likewise had Florelus, putting off his Marriage with the Dutchess  o till his Return. Now Gradafilea had long desired to know the Princess Onoloria for the sake of Lisvart: And for this cause she so importun'd him that he yielded to take her with him into Trebisond: of which nevertheless he would willingly have excused himself if he could. And thus they entred into Al∣quifa's Ship, who with her Damsels, which she had brought into the Isle of Argenes undertook to Conduct them into Asia. So after many thnks on all sides and leave taken, they set Sail. And the King of Sicily did the same on the other side. They were no sooner removed, but two young Princesses arrived at Lon∣don, to be bred up with the Queen: The one Daughter to King Galaor, named Galercia, and the other to Dom Bruneo, called Altimonea, both fair in perfection, and who took so great Lode to the Infanta Lucella, that they could not be one without the other. At which Queen Oriana was well plea∣sed, passing with them part of the melancholy she was in, for not having News of the King: In expectation of whom she determined to go to Mirefleur and take them with her. Now she had not been long there, before the Gen∣tleman, sent from Naples by Amadis, arrived, furnisht with Letters and Words of Credence, which when he had declared to her, it rendred her excee∣ding sad, understanding the Misfortune befaln the Emperor Arquisil, and his. And for this Cause she sent immediately for King Arban, and Angriote d' Estravaux, who being come to her, he communicated to them the Kings Mes∣sage, desiring them to give oder with all Diligence for the  an Army, to the end their Masters Intention might have its effect. For which they pro∣vided so well, that in a few days there were found above Ten Thousand good Knights, ready to embark. And there were given them for Leaders and Captains, Giontes Duke of Cornwal, Guillan Duke of Bristow, Angriote d' Estravaux, and Ambor of Gandal, his Son. But as for King Arban, he stayed behind as being he, who (in the King's Absence, and under the Queens Authority) wholly governed the Realm. Now all the others set to Sea, ta∣king their Course for Naples. Of whom nevertheless we shall at present say no more, but return to the Knight of the Burning Sword and Gradamart.
CHAP. LIII. How after the Knight of the Burning Sword was cured of the Wounds, he had received in fighting against Gandalfe, he embarkt with Gradamart, and of a Wonderful Adventure, they met at Sea. BAlan, setting Sail for the Island not the Vermilin Tower to his Father Gaoe, had the Wind  little commodious, that he ar∣rived now ther till eight days after the Knight of the burning Sword had taken his leave of those whom he had restored to their Estate: Now Balan was much troubled at his not finding them: For he de∣termined to make but little stay there, but to go with them into Gaul, to the King of Sicily, and help him in his Affairs. The Knight of the burning Sword and Gradamart, Sailing in full Sea, sometimes with fair Weather, and very often with Storms, there came upon the Knight of the burning Sword a Remembrance of the Fair Lucella, which disqui∣eted him Night and Day: so that he became wholly Solitary, taking pleasure in nothing, but being alone, and musing, saying sometimes to himself. Ah! ah! poor Wretch, had it not been better, thou hadst, remained for ever Enchanted, and pierced with the Sword, which Gradasilea thrust into thy Stomach near the Chamber of Treasure? Alas! She wounded thee, but that Wound was not mortal, as this is, which I now suffer thro' Excess of Love! Ah! Lucella, how is it possible, that you being a simple Damsel, sim∣ple I say, not for the Rank you hold, but for the Courteous Simplicity that is in you, have been able to reduce to so extream Submissiveness, such a Knight as him of the Burning Sword, who, having his Shield in his hard, never feared any Danger, that offered it self before his eyes? And neverthe∣less your charming look has so intimidated him, that he is become your Slave and Prisoner, no being able to endeavour the doing, or desiring any thing, but what it pleases you to ask him, which is the Complement of his Unhappiness. Ah, ah, poor Wretch! knowing thy little merit, and her Highness, the greatest Benefit that can befall thee, is to dye speedily! for 'twere not reasonable that so great a Lady as she is should abase herself to regard the Good or Evil, that is Destined to thee. And moreover, if she should endeavour to cure thee, 'tis certain, that her Reputation would be lessened: Thus instead of receiving Service by the or from thee she
would have Dammage. And since thou callest thy self Servant, the good Ser∣vant ought rather to seek the Honour of his Lord, than his own Life, since in case of necessity he ought to sacrifice himself for him, whose he is, nay to dye more than once, if it were possible. Then he fell into a Fit of Despair and Discontent, that he was almost gi∣ving up the Ghost: and the more he thought to extinguish, or lessen his flame, the more did he resemble him, that throws a little Water on a burning Fur∣n ce. Which Gradamart perceiving, used all possible Endeavours to divert his Thoughts. Whence it happened one night that as they were discoursing together, instead of sleeping, they heard the sound of an Harp, joyn'd with the Voice of a Gentleman, which together made a wonderful sweet Harmony. They both rose up, and perceived a Fleet of Ships, in one of which were twelve Flambeaus lighted under a Canopy of Cloth of Gold, where lay a young and handsome Knight, who Sung and Play'd on that Instrument. He, of whom I speak, had his Armor on his back, but his head and hands bare, and at his Beds-head was set a Perron of Alabaster, very well wrought, and on it the Statue of a Lady, divinely fair, and so exquisitely carv'd, that it wan∣ted nothing but Speech. In her right hand she had a Chain of Gold, which in the form of a Coslar went about the Knights Neck, and on her Head a Crown with a Writing, containing these words: Onoria of Apolonia, Prin∣cess of Beauty. In her left hand she had three other little Chains, with which were fastned by the Neck three Statues of Damsels, crown'd with Royal Cronws, sitting at her Feet, and having each of them her Writing, of which the first was Luciana; the second Imperia Princess of Bohemia; and the third Alegria Infanta of Macedonia. And a little aside behind the Per∣ron, hung a great Shield, of the brightest Steel, without any painting, with the Knights Helmet and Sword. At his Feet were also two other Knights, lying on a Carpet, compleatly armed, except Helmets and Gantlets. Grada∣mart and the Knight of the burning Sword, wondring at that Adventure, caused their Vessel to approach that, in which the Torches were. At that very time the Knight, who had been singing, break forth in these Words: Ah, Lucella, Princess of Sicily, how great Misfortune is be∣faln me, by having heard so great Commendations of you and your Beauty: For, from the day that my heart and mind have had a Te∣stimony of your perfections, I have neither Rest nor Ease. Then he held his Peace, without ceasing to sigh. The Knight of the Burning Sword, who felt himself stung by these Affe∣ctions, became so melancholly and pensive, that he was even ready to Dye, when he heard him name her, whose passionae Servant he was, and said to Gradamart: Brother do you perceive the Arrogance of this Fool, who aspires to that, which he is not able so much as to look at?
Before he gets from me, I will make him change his Opinion, if I can, or it shall cost one of us his Life. In good faith, answered Gradamart, you will not do wisely: For neither he nor any other can do you any injury, by loving where he shall think good: Since if he places his Affection on an Object, not deserved nor attainable by him, he prepares for himself a greater Tor∣ment than any one can give him. 'Tis true, said the Knight of the burning Sword, and I certainly know it my self: And nevertheless 'twould be impossible for him to suffer so much pain, as she, of whom he speaks, deserves praise. But besides, what grea∣ter Glory can he pretend to, than the placing his Thoughts so high? If then such a Thought turn to his Honour and Content, should I not be a very Novice to suffer in my presence the Grass to be thus cut under my feet, Ah! I should think my self unworthy ever to bear the name of Knight: Since also I visibly know, that he carrys this Statue, thus set up, expresly for Love of her. Therefore I beseech you trouble my Head no farther: for in matters of Love, Counsel is no way approv'd. As he speak this, the very Fire appeared in his Eyes, and from the side of his Vessel, he called to the Knight, that held the Harp, saying to him: You Sir Knight, who can sing otherwise of Love than you deserve: Come near, good Sir, or I shall go to you, to let you know how disordered your Head is, since it belongs not to you, nor any that resembles you, to speak of her whom you praise, and for whom you thus suffer. When the other, who was in such a Muse upon his Love, that he had not till then perceived him, heard this Threat, he suddenly threw off the Chain, he had about his Neck, and lacing on his Helmet, took his Shield, and went bravely towards the other Vessel, where he saw Gradamart and his Compani∣on, whom he calmly answered: Certainly, Knight, I will not deny either to you, or any other, but that I am guilty of folly, for loving in the place that my heart hath chosen: for all the merits in the World are in my La∣dy. And nevertheless my Loyalty being so great, that it exceeds my fol∣lys, I have presumed to venture on so high an Attempt: Yet I am of Opi∣nion that neither of them have a greater Share in me, than Pride and pre∣sumption have in you, who make me so uncourteous a Discourse, full of Threats and Injuries. And to the end you may another time forbear gi∣ving of Counsel to those, that ask it not of you, the edge of my Sword shall teach you, that you should have held your peace, when you began for to speak. Scarce had he uttered this Word, but he went up on the side of his Ship, and there began between him and the Knight of the burning Sword the tru∣elest Fight, that ever was seen. At which Gradamart was very much ds∣pleas'd,
yet exceedingly wondring at both their valours. Which the two Combatants themselves also thought strange; for the more they proceeded, the more they were to begin, so that those, who beheld them, expected nothing but their Death, or at least so many wounds on their Bodies, that they would not be quit for a Months keeping their Chamber. Because that when the one had given a blow that drew the blood, his Enemy answered him in the same manner; so that 'twas difficult to discern to which of them Fortune pro∣mis'd the most: and Gradamart would have separated them, could e have sound a means to do it. But at last, seeing that they were not weary, and that their Combat had continued for the space of three long hours, he be∣thought himself, that he might keep em from worse to gain them by Pray∣ers, saying to them: Hold, my Lords, hold, for my sake spare your selves: for 'twould be a great Simplicity for you to kill one another on so small an Occasion. This Speech so displeas'd the Knight of the burning Sword, that looking on Gradamart with a discontented eye, he thus answered him: Ah! Brother do you not wrong me, to esteem that little, which I value more than any thing, that ever befell me? Insomuch, that if this Knight does not ac∣knowledge his Folly, and swear to me never to love her of whom he vaunts, I know not any man, nay not any god, whose Commands can make me put an End to this Battle. By my Head, Sir Knight, said the other, you are then very far fom what you imagin: since for this very Reason, which you alledge I should sight, altho' I were dead. Come on then answered he of the burning Sword. Then they began afresh, and with such Obstinacy, that they mindd more o strike than to ward one anothers blows, so that their blood ran down on all sides, without any Advantage bring discern'd to either of them: But they thought indeed to continue so long, till their strength failing, their life should end also. At which, Gradamart, much troubled, and knowing no Remedy for it, call'd the two Knights, who were on the oher side, and said to them: My Lords, for GOD's sake, cause the Torches to be put out▪ they will at least have some Relaxation. They, who no less desired the breaking of this so cruel Fight, than he who gave them that Counsel, did as he requested them; in that the lights being immediately put out, they were all in Darkness. The two Combatants nevertheless, who were wholly enraged, ceased not, striking this way and that way at a venture. Which Gradamart seeing, requested them to part the Vessels, and set Sail. They did so, Gradamart taking the Knight of the burning Sword about the  and then the other. And the Ves∣sels,
Rowing one East, the other West, were carried Different ways. This put Gradamart's Companion in such a Fury, that he could scarce forbear Outraging him, saying: In an ill hour, Sir Knight, have you bro∣ken my Design; but you shall repent it. Gradamart, knowing the Rage he was in, answered him not a word, and in the mean time their Vessel still Sailed, getting so far from the other, as, it being very dark, they knew not what became of it. By means whereof part of this Fury pass'd off by little and little, and they Sailed all night, so that by break of day they came to a certain Island, where they went a shore, to cure the Knight of the burning Sword, who was so wounded, that his Life was much doubted. And nevertheless, he had such a spight against Gradamart, that he vouchsaft not so much as to speak to him, or look on him with a good eye, swearing and protesting, that as soon as he was well enough to bear Arms, he would not stay an hour till he had fought the Rascal, who had so much offended him, that he would have his life. Wherefore, we will leave him, to tell you in the mean time, what the other did, and who he was. CHAP. LIV. Who the Knight was which had that fierce Combat with the Knight of the Burning Sword, and the Occasion why he Sailed in such an Equipage. DOn Brian de Maniaste, King of Spain, had two Sons, of which the Eldest was named Olorius, a very valiant Knight, of whom our Hi∣story has heretofore made mention. The second, called Birmartes, is he, of whom we now intend to speak, who was so accomplisht both in Beauty of Countenance, Prfection of Members, and all other things, requisit to ren∣der a Man excellent, that there could hardly be found any one, that exceeded him. This Birmartes was Six Years younger than his Brother Olorius, when he was Enchanted: And afterwards his Age encreasing, there encrea∣sed in him also the desire to follow Arms. To which he was farther moved, by the Report of the great Gfts, wherewith Nature had endow'd Lucella, Daughter to the King of Sicily, with whom he fell in Love through Opinion,
only, without having ever seen her: So that he resolved to go to Alpatracys Court, and do him so much Service, that he should willingly give her to him for Wife. And in this Intention, finding one day a fit opportunity, he hum∣bly besought his Father to give him the Order of Knighthood. Which he refused him not, but Armed him, and the Solemnity of it was very great through all Spain. But the same day, as they arose from Table, he put him∣self on his knees before the King, and, with a very Good Grace asked him a Gift. Don Brian, who loved him as himself, was Liberal in promi∣sing. Sir, said he, you will permit me then to make a Journey into Sicily, to see the Infan a Lucella, who is at this day esteemed the most perfectly fair and best behaved Lady in Europe: And if it is so, I will endeavour so to serve the King her Father, that he shall give her to me afterwards for Wife, if I ask her or him. Don Brian, glad to see his Son in this Resolution, commended him, and was content, he should take such Knights of his Court as he would choose, with Money, and Equipage, necessary for so high an Enterprise. For which the Young Prince most humbly thanked him. And then having caused a great Frigat to be made ready, chose to accompany him amongst other Knights, the Duke of Biscay's two Sons, of which the Eldest was named Esquinel, and the other Meander of Spain. And these were the two who separated him, at the perswasion of Gradamart, as he was fighting against the Knight of the burning Sword. They then being Embarkt in very good Order, Sailed a∣long the Coast of Africk, and leaving Sardinia on the right hand, Arrived at Messina, where they had News of the Rape, not long before committed by Frandalon Cyclops, and his Son, on the Queen of Sicily and Lucella. And for this cause Brartes commanded his Marriners to take their Course to Silanchy, throughly resolved to Fight them, whatever should come of it. But his Labour was in vain, because he found there no body but the Governour, whom Alpatracy had left, by whom he was acquainted with what was pas∣sed. Which wonderfully displeased him, and he cursed his Fortune for ha∣ving deprived him of so fair an Occasion, by which he might have gained what he much doubted to lose. Then he returned again into his Ship, and taking leave of the Governor, went back towards Sicily, where he thought to find what he lookt for. And some days after he met a Giant, that was carrying away several Christians Prisoners, with whom Birmartes had a fight, and finally van∣quisht him: The Duke of Biscays two Sons defeated also six of his Knights, freeing all the Slaves, who were then in the Pirates Ship, and giving them Liberty to go, whither they pleased. And thus following their way, to take
Harbor in Sicily, the Sea grew so tempestuous, that they were, by Fortune, e∣ven against their wills, driven to the Kingdom of Apolonia, where they went ashore. And to refresh themselves, being weary of the Sea, they design'd to spend a Month in Visiting the Country. And for this cause commanding their Marriners not to depart from the Port, all the Knights mounted their Horses, taking their Way strait to the great City of Apolonia. And, as they travell'd, they learnt, how Branzahar Duke of Clarence, guarded in a Tower Onoria, Princess of Apolonia, who was reputed to be one of the fairst Ladies on the Earth. And that you may understand the manner and Reason of this Guarding, you will know, that this Duke of Clarence was a very powerful Knight, but hard favoured, deform'd, Ill-behav'd, and besides de∣scended of a Giantly Lineage. Now the great Beauty of Onoria had been so advantageously related to him, that his Heart was smitten with the Re∣port: And to see her, he came to the King her Fathers Court, accompany'd by two Giants his Cosins: But the Ladies Presence so depriv'd him of his Liberty, that he thought, he should dye, if he had her not for Wife. Where∣fore with great Earnestness and Importunity he requested her of the King, who knowing him to be such an one, that is Daughter would never consent to it, excus'd himself, by pretending, that she had no Inclination to marry. The Duke, much astonisht at this News, was ready then to dispair: Ne∣vertheless for the last Remedy he said to the King, that since Fortune had been so unkind to him in denying him the thing, he most lov'd in this world, he should never have any Ioy in his Heart; yet in recompence of the Pains, he had taken to come to his Court, he desired him that he would be pleased to grant him a Gift. Which the King would not deny him, provided his Daughters Honour were not offended by it. That certainly Sir, said he, it shall not be: For I would sooner consent to my own Ruin. But since she will spend her Life without an Husband, and that her Beauty puts those who see her in an unparallel'd Torment, 'tis reasonable for the avoiding so much Mischief, that she be henceforth shut up in a Tower, where she shall be seen by none but you, the Queen, and those that shall be ordained to serve her. And I and these two Giants will keep the three first Entrances, so that none shall pass them, unless it be by force of Arms. And moreover he must, for her Service, accomplish the Conditions, which I shall cause to be written, and hung upon certain stones, that shall be erected in this Tower: by which, said he, shall be known the greatness of your Daughters Beauty, and how much I suffer, and will suffer for her sake. Then was the King displeased at his having so lightly promised, what he could not with his Honour revoke, and would gladly have found an Excuse,
that might have contented the Prince of Clarence, but the stone being thrown, and out of his hand, could not be recalled: wherefore he resolved to bow down his Head, and permit his Daughter to be shut up, as he had been desired. And to do this Banzahar sent for VVork-men from all parts, who in a few days built in the Tower a square Chamber, to serve as a Prison for the Princess; I may call it a Prison, because it was Scituated in the midst of a great Hall, and inclosed round about with great Bars of Gold, through which, and no o∣therways, might be given her such things as she should have need of. True it is, that, for the little Room that this Square contained, 'twas not possi∣ble to see any thing Fairer or Richer: For the Cielling and Floor were cove∣red with great Plaes of Gold and Silver, curiously Damaskt, and the VValls were covered with Hangings of Gold and Silk. Divinely wrought for the excellence of the Manufacture. In the midst there was a Bed, of which the Canopy, Curtains, Coverings, and Bases, were of Crimson Satin, Richly Embroidered, and set with Pearls, Rubies, Diamonds, and Eme∣raulds: And beside it, hung all sorts of Musical Instrumenes, on which O∣noria could play. This Prison then being finisht as you have understood, Branzahar appointed to be set before it a Pillar of Allabaster, and on the top of it the Effigies of the Princess cut to the Life, with a writing round about her Head in the form of a Ducal Cap, which contained these words: Onoria, Lady of beauty. This done, he took the Infanta, and shut her up under a strong padlock, of which himself kept the key, and leaving her Damsels without, he said: Here shall you be inclosed, to Recompence the Cruel Prison of Love, in which you keep me Captive, and shall not come forth till such time as he comes, who, easing me of this pain, shall himself receive a greater, in seeing your over great and dangerous Beauty. Then he fastned a Writing to the pillar, the contents of which were these: Thou Knight, who by thy Prowess art come to this place, where thou mayst see the Fairest Princess of the world, be not so hardy as to take her forth, before thou hast carryed this Image, which represents her Person, through the whole Earth, and maintained by Force of Arms, that she, for whom it was made, is the first in great Beauty. And if thy Fortune is so prosperous that Victory always accompanys thee, yet art thou bound to brng hither the Images of the Ladies, Mistresses of the Knights, vanquisht by thee, with their Names written underneath. Then, and no sooner, shalt thou be per∣mitted to take the Fair One out of Prison. But in case thou shalt find a bet∣ter than thy self, by whom thou shalt be conquered, if thou shalt bring the Permission of such thy Conqueror, signed and sealed, with his Mistresses Name and Seal, then may she go forth in Liberty at her Plea∣sure:
For such is the Covenant between the King of this Countrey and me. Having fastned this Writing, he caus'd another Pillar to be set up be∣fore the first and principal Gate of the Tower, with a Roll containing what follows. Let none henceforward adventure to pass any farher, unless it be by force of Arms: Because the Countenance of Onoria, Lady of Beauty, shall no more be manifested, till he shall come, who shall wholly deliver her. For Branzaar, Prince of Clarence, will defend this Passage even to Death. And presently he appointed one of his Giants for the Guard of this gate, and another for the second, and himself for the third: And they three, Arm'd with very rich Armor, undertook to fight all Comers. At which the King exceedingly wondred, that such and so great a Lord as Branzahar, would put himself in such subjection, and danger of his Person. Now he was a good Knight, and they whom he had chosen, strong and hardy, which made the speedy Deliverance of Oriana little expected: But the King and Queen might see her when they thought good, and this little she took as a great com∣fort in her Fortune. Of which Birmartes advertiz'd, immediatly thought, according to the Renown of Branzahar, that she, for whom he undertook so great a Charge, must needs be very fair: Wherefore he askt some of the Countrey, whether this Adventure had not yet been try'd by any one. He was answer'd, that above an Hundred Knights, as well of the Court, as Strangers, had done their Endeavours, but they had all been vanquisht by the Giant of the first Gate: So that 'twas now six Months since any one had dar'd to present himself before him. Now the more that was said of it to Birmartes the more did his Desire of going to see this Fair One encrease: so that he resolved, what ever might happen, to try his Fortune for the set∣ting her at Liberty. But he knew not what was contain'd in the writing, fastned to the Pillar of the Image, as you have been told: For it was indeed unknown to all. By occasion of which many good Knights put their Lives in hazard, hoping to gain Honour, and the love of Onoria. So Birmartes, and his two Companions Esquinel and Meander, travell'd till they came to the City of Apolonia, where he desired they would shew him Onorias Tower. Which a Knight of the Countrey willingly did. Then a geat Number following him, some ran to acquaint the King, that a Stranger woul fight the Giant of the first Gate: And believe it, Sir, said they, 'twould be impossible to find a more Fair, Young, and Dex∣trous Kight than he is. The King, vry glad of this News, suddenly took Horse, and went to see Birmartes, who had just made an end of reading the writing on the first Per∣ron. Then they saluted one another, and the King, bowing himself, said
to him: Good, Knight, if Fortune will so favour you, that you can pull down the Pride of the Duke, and deliver my Daughter, assure your self, I will greatly recompence you. Birmartes, seeing the good Reception the King gave him, thus answered him: Sir, he, in whose hands all things are, knows the desire I have to serve you, and such as you: especially in such Acts, in which, besides the Honor that may be gain'd, consists the liberty of such a Princess as my Lady your Daughter: Not that I will presume to promise my self the putting an end to that, to which so many good Knights could not attain: but at least I will do my Endeavour, being assured, that, so doing, Death or Life can∣not but be honourable to me, imitating the Gallant Men, who have tryed it before me, and in comparison of whom I am nothing. Then he prepared himself to begin the Fight, because the first Giant stood ready to receive him. They delay'd not therefore long to run one against the other, neither of them missing his Blow: For the Gyant struck him with such force on the Shield that he pierc'd it, and his Spear, pas∣sing under his Arm, appeared above a yard on the other side. But Birmar∣tes, who ran in a more even line, aiming lower, struck him between the Saddle-bow and the Stomach, so that, the Plates of the Gyant's Armor, not being strong enough to resist the Fierceness of the blow, the Lance en∣tred into his Guts, and he fell dead to the Ground, without stirring either foot or hand. Of which all the Spectators were very glad, douting never∣theless, that Birmartes was cruelly wunded. But this Opinion lasted not long: for he, withdrawing his Lance, march'd towards the second Gate, where he found the other Guard, exceedingly troubled for his Cosins death, to revenge whom, he coutch'd his Spear, and setting spurs to his Horse, mist his blow. But so did not Birmartes, who met him so roughly, that his Lance flew into shivers, and with the shock, their Horses gave each other, they both fell, and their Masters under them. Nevertheless Birmartes got speedily up again on his feet, and taking his Sword in his hand, perceived the other, who lamented exceedingly for the extream pain he felt, having his left Leg bruis'd in three or four places, and his Steed so lying on him, that he was not able to stir. Wherefore Birmartes coming to him, said: Giant, thou art dead, if thou dost not yield thy self vanquisht, and permit me, without any fur∣ther hindrance, the Entrance of this Gate, as I shall think good. Ah, answered he, that you may well do, and I yield my self wholly to your Discretion. Then Birmartes pass'd on, and perceiv'd Branzahar, mounted on a great black Horse, who came to meet him. Now he was hard-favor'd, and ill-shapt,
and had nevertheless in himself many good Conditions and Courte∣sies, as he then shewed, saying to Birmartes: Knight, thou hast already gain'd so much Honour, that the Glory of it will remain with thee for ever: and tho' it has been against my Will, and my Heart cannot be contented with the Loss of my Friends, whom I so much lov'd, and whom thou hast slain, but I am call'd to revenge them: Nevertheless considering, that this Misfortune is befaln them through thy only Prowess, as thou wast doing what thou oughtst to do for the obtain∣ing Renown amongst valiant men, I cannot forbear using to thee the Cour∣tesy, that Reason commands me, seeing thee weary, without Spear and without Horse: so that if I should have the better of thee, equipp'd and mounted as I am, such a Victory would rather turn to my Disgrace than Glory: wherefore I choose rather to alight, and being equal in Arms, to let Fortune play her part, stretching forth her hand to which of us two she pleases Saying this, he set foot to ground, and embracing his great and strong Shield, with his naked sword in his hand, march'd towards Birmartes, who having heard him speak so graciously, answer'd him in this manner: My Lord Prince, your Courtesy has more amaz'd me, than the greatness of your Body, and the strength and largeness of your Limbs: for the Magnani∣mity of Hearts consists not in the Mass of Flesh, but in Generosity and Ver∣tue of the Person, who loves Honour, and desires to perpetuate his Memo∣ry, not by boasting and Arrogance, but by doing his Duty with few and gentle Words, and Vigorous Execution: so that having already found in you one of these two points, which is Courtesy, I make no doubt but the second is not far from it: seeing they are seldom, or never asunder, no more than Fire is from Heat, and Heat from Fire. VVherefoe, if it were honourable and reasonable for me, I should ra∣ther and more willingly make Friendship with you, than pass any farther to the tryal of our persons one against the other. But there being no Remedy, neither you nor I can refuse the course that is offered: Forasmuch as it would be an Injury to you to leave the En∣terprise you have begun, and I should be greatly blam'd not to per∣sue the Fortune, which has given me such a beginning, as every one may have seen. Let the Victory therefore be to him, on whom it shall please Fortune to bestow it. At this word they would no longer spend the time in Discourses, but charg'd each other with such fierceness, that all the Beholders stood amaz'd. One great Advantage Birmartes had over the other: He was so nimble, dextrous, and active, that of ten blows, which Branzahar struck, not one
did any Dammage to his Enemy, so well could he shield himself, or slip from them. But it was not so w th his Adversary, who was so big, that his Legs were scarce able to bear the weight of his Body: Insomuch that Bir∣martes began to treat him so roughly, as made him doubt the Issue of the Fight, and with good reason, fo the loss of his blood, that streamed forth from the many wounds he had received, and which by little and little so weakned him, that after several great blows, given on both sides, he fell down in a swound. Wherefore Birmartes, setting his foot on his Sto∣mach, pulled the Helmet from his Head. But as soon as he had Air, his spirits returned, and Birmartes said: At thi blow shall thy days be ended, and the Love thou hast born the fair one, unless thou grantst me the Entrance into her Chamber at my plea∣sure. And to the end I may be as gracious to thee in effect, as thu hast been to me in words, granting me what I ask thee, I will give thee thy life, without taking to my self the Honour of the Victory, which indeed I could not have over so good a Knight as thou art. Branzahar, seeing himself in this Extremity, had his heart much oppres∣sed; but not knowing how to remedy it, he thus answered Birmartes: I now well know, that 'tis a great Folly to attempt the breaking and forcing what Fortune has ordained, who has hitherto been so contrary to me, that by making me love her, who is fairer than beauty it self, I am reduced to the shame, in which every one may see me: therefore, Knight, do with me what thou pleasest, since 'tis in thy power, if thou thinkst good, to give me my death, which considering the Misfortune of my life, I desire more than thou imaginest. Go then at thy ease to see her, whose look alone has such Power, that the force, thou hast had against me and mine, will not perhaps be able to preserve thee from dying at the sight of her. Then mayst thou know, how much greater a benefit thou wilt do me in taking away of my life by a sudden death, than in leaving me to dye so many times a day, as I shall if I live any longer. When Birmartes heard him speak thus, he had so great Compassion of him, that he humbly besought the King to cause him to be lookt after by his Chy∣rurgeons But Branzahar refusing it, commanded his Servants to pro∣vide a Litter for him, and the other wounded Gyant: and without any far∣ther stay took his way to Clarence, where he led afterwards the most melan∣cholly life in the world, having always before the eyes of his mind Onorias Beauty, and the shame he had received by loving her too much.
CHAP. LV. How Birmartes went to see the Fair Onoria in her Prison: and the Discourse they had together. Two mounted figures entering a town BRanzahar, Prince of Clarence, being carry'd out of the Field, and Bir∣martes remaining gloriously Victorious, the King came to embrace him, saying to him: Ah! fortunate Knight, and more couragious than can be express'd, let us go, if you please, to my Daughter, whom I hope, thro' your Prowess, shortly to see at liberty, and my self quit of the promise I made the Prince, who kept her so closely imprison'd to my great Re∣gret. Let us go, Sir, answered Birmartes. Then, accompany'd by many gallant Knights, they went into the Hall, where Onorias Prison was, as you have heard. Now the Heat of the day was so excessive, that Birmartes took off his Helmet, and delivered it to one
of his Attendants, having an unusual colour in his face, when the King presented him to his fair Daughter: who, having already understood by her Damsels the Issue of his fight with Branzahar, whom she mortally hated was the Ioyfullest Woman in the world. And this pleasure render'd her Countenance so gay, that join'd with the Excellence of her Beauty, it made her come very near Lucellas Perfection, this her Cheerfulness having given her a Grace more Divine than Humane. Then the King said to his Daughter: Child, look on this Knight, who has for your sake done this day incredible Feats of Arms, and will, I believe, soon give you the opportunity of going forth from this Place: wherefore 'tis my Opinion, and Request that you treat him with Respect. In good Faith, Sir, answered she, I should be very ungrateful, should I fail to do it, seeing the Obligation I have to him, who has already done so much for me. Saying this, she stretcht forth her Arm thro' the Grate, to lift him up: for he was on his Knees, as surpriz'd with her Love, and that with such ve∣hemence that, forgetting the Affection he had to that time born to her, for whom he had Travers'd so many Seas, the word Branzahar had said to him, was found true in him, which he remembred very well: and therefore took her gently by the hand, and kissing it, said: Madam, the Prince did as he ought, in keeping you from being seen, since your gracious look is ca∣pable to kill men without Remedy. Onoria blusht a little at this praise, but not for any Displeasure, she had at it: for Birmartes seem'd to her so accomplisht a Knight, that she was ex∣ceedingly taken with him. And as she was going to answer him, the King interrupted their Discourse, and shewing Birmartes the Image and Writ∣ing fastned to the Pillar, said to him: My dear Friend, you have already done so much, that you may be stiled the best Knight in the world; yet there is more to be done, if you will finish this Adventure. See here the condition establisht by the Prince of Clarence, which I believe will give you more trouble, than the combat of the three Giants, Then Birmartes dew near and read the Writing, at which he was no way amaz'd, but thought that if he could perform it, besides the Honour he should get by it, he might also gain the Heart and Love of the fair one: Where∣fore he ansered the King: Sir, I know not why you think this Enterprise so difficult, since no Knight, how little Valiant soever, need fear going, thro' the World to maintain my Lady your Daughters beauty: for she is such, that if the Victory in Fight follows Reason, 'tis certain he cannot be van∣quisht, but shall be Victorious in all places. And to shew you that this is true, I accept from this time this office, trusting, that where Prowess shall
be wanting, Reason and Justice shall supply it. In good faith, said the King, I am more secure of your Courage, than of my Daughters Beauty: And affectionatly thank you for the Ho∣nour and Good you desire me. But let us go to my Palace, where you shall be well lookt to: for I am sure you are Wounded in several places. Nevertheless Birmartes would first take leave of Onoria, who had heard all he said of her, & the Promise he made to defend her Beauty throughout the World. Which caus'd in her such a Regard for him, that beholding him with her gracious Eye, she humbly entreated him, that he would, after he was Cur'd, come again to her before his Departure. This request he wil∣lingly granted, and bowing very low, went his way, leaving her no less de∣sirous of him, than he was ready to serve her all his life. For Love at that instant seiz'd of their Hearts, mutually transferring them by his Divine Power into each others body, without their having any Perception, or Sen∣tinent of it, but by the heat of the lasting fire, which he then kindled in them. Thus Birmartes followed the King, who, as they went along, askt him his Name and Quallity, but he besought him to excuse him for the pre∣sent, telling him that he should at another time understand it all: VVhere∣fore the King, seeing him desirous to conceal himself, would no farther im∣portune him. Discoursing then of other matters, they came to the Palace, where Birmartes was very kindly welcomed by the Queen and the Ladies, who conducted him into a richly furnisht Chamber, and to do him the grea∣ter Honour, disarm'd him with their own Hands, and put him to Bed. Then came Chyrurgions to visit his wounds, of which they promis'd him a speedy Cure, desiring every one to retire and let him sleep. But when he was alone, he began instead of resting to meditate on the Beauty of his new Mistress, no longer complaining of Lucella, who had been the cause of his coming into these Parts, where he had seen what gave him so much Tor∣ment, Onoria, for whom he was tormented suffering no less. But Bir∣martes, not able to keep this fire any long time smothering within his breast, discover'd some few days after his thoughts to his two Companions, Es∣quinel and Meander, who comforted him in the best manner they could, gi∣ving him hopes, that he being return'd, and having finisht what he promi∣sed, the King of Appollonia would think himself happy to give him his Daughter to Wife.
CHAP. LVI. How Birmartes, being cur'd, departed from the King of Appollonia, and Onoria, to begin his Enterprise, and the success of it. THE Desire Birmartes had to accomplish his Promise, made to maintain Onorias Beauty in all places, very much forwarded the Cure of his wounds, which being perfected, he caus'd his Ships to be put in such Equi∣page, as the Knight of the burning sword found them in, when they fought. Then the day of his Embarking being come, he address'd himself to the King, and said to him: Sir, forasmuch as I resolve to set forth presently to Sea, I humbly desire of you, that I may see my Lady your Daughter be∣fore my Departure, to the end she may in your presence, and with your leave grant me a gift, that I will ask of her. Well then, answered the King, let us go thither. So the King brought him to the Tower, whither being come, after Salu∣tations on both sides, Birmartes set knee to the ground, and addressing him∣felf to Onoria, said to her: Madam, I am, according to your command, come to take leave of you, for to accomplish what I have wilingly oblig'd my self to, hoping (with Just Reason) not to fall into any danger that can hurt me, being accompany'd by your good wishes, with which I beseech you to favour me, as also with the Honour of stiling my self henceforth your Knight n all Places. Onoria, very glad to see that presented to her, which she with all her heart desir'd, made him this Answer: In good deed I find my self very hap∣py, that such a Knight, as you are, vouchsafes to name himself mine, and I should be too indiscreetly nice should I refuse this Offer, which I accept, and request it of you, as much as possibly I can, trusting so far in your Valour, that my Beauty (which is little in respect of so many other excellent Ladies) will gain repute thro' the world, your Courage supplying in it, what Nature has omitted: But one thing more I will desire of you, which is, that you tell me your Name, to the end I may henceforth better know him, who is mine. Madam, answer'd he, I will never disobey you, be pleased then to un∣derstand, that I am nam'd Birmartes the Amorous, and that with good Reason: For only Love, and she, whose I am, have Power over me.
This surname did Birmartes give himself, which he never afterwards lost. Onoria very well understood the End, at which he aim'd, as did also the King, who did not at all dislike it, but immediatly resolv'd, that at his re∣turn, if he were found worthy of her, he would give him his Daughter in Marriage, who (had it not ben for the Kings Presence) would not have stuck in so fair a way, having matter enough for a longer Entertainment with her Friend: But she durst not say any more, nor he neither, who had her Adieu, leaving her in strange Pain, thro' the Fire kindled in her heart by Love, who before Birmartes's Arrival had not the least Power over her. But he then shew'd himself victorious, so that to manifest the Beginning of his Trophy, he fill'd her Eyes with Tears, and her heart with sighs and sor∣rows. Thus it is, that this Beautiful Boy treats those, that obey him, who are very often reduc'd to such Blindness, that nothing pleases them, but what is most hurtful for them. Birmartes then, being gone forth from the Presence, come to the Piller, and took her Image, saying so loud, that every one might har him. Certainly, Portraiture, 'tis my Intention to bring you back to this Place, so well accompany'd, that every one shall know your Glory. Then he went out of the Hall, and with the Kings good Leave, having arm'd himself, went aboard his Ship, and placing the Effigies, he brought with him upon a rich Pillar, he set sail strait for Constantinople, where he went ashore, and there in the Presence of the Princes and Lords re∣lated the Occasion of his Voyage. Wherefore a Son of the King of Hun∣garies, loving above all others Luciana the Emperors Daughter, undertook to maintain, that his Mistress was fairer then Onoria: Whereupon they came to a Fight, in which Birmartes was Victorious, and carry'd the Por∣traiture of Luciana into his Vessel, where he fastned it to the Pillar with a little Chain underneath the other. After this he had several Combats with many other good Knights: But he car'd not for having the Effigies of those, they lov'd, not thinking them worthy to accompany his Portraiture, unless they were the Daughters of Emperors or Kings: For to that, and no more, he was oblig'd. After this he made no long stay in Constantinople, but taking leave of the Emperor and the Knights of his Court, went to Macedonia, where he won the Image of the Infanta Alegria, the Kings Daughter, gaining the Victory over a Duke, who was greatly in love with her, as also over many others, which would be tedious to name. Thence he took his way to Bohemia, where he entred the Field against another Duke, from whom he gain'd the Statue of Imperia, Daughter to King Grasandor, and Queen Mabita, who was a beautiful and gallant
Princess; but yet she remain'd there for a Pledge, accompany'd with many other Ladies and Gentlewoman: Whence his Fame spred so far, that he was from that time in all those parts nam'd the Knight us'd to over∣come. Then seeing, that there was none left in Bohemia to oppose him, he took a Resolution of going to Naples, having been advertiz'd that the King had a Daughter nam'd Jufaliana, a Lady of extraordinary Beauty. And indeed he was sailing thither, when he met, the Knight of the burning Sword. So they fought, and were at last parted, as you have heard, at which he was so displeas'd, that he said at every turn, he never should have any Sa∣tisfaction, till he found him again. Wherefore we shall say no more of him till a fitter Opportunity: For you well know, that this History is not so much for him, as for the Knight of the burning Sword, whose Prowess and valor we intend chiefly here to describe. CHAP. LVII. How the Knight of the Burning Sword Stole away from Gradamart, to go and seek Birmartes, and what befel him. YOV have heard, how much displeas'd the Knight of the burning Sword was for having been parted from Birmartes by Gradamart, with whom he shew'd himself so offended, that during the stay, he made for the Cure of his wounds, he would not so much as speak to him, or have any Discourse with him. Nevertheless the other ceas d not to perform the Office of a true Friend, in treating him in the best manner, he could, being however very much troubled at the ill Countenance, he shewed him. Now it hapned one night that the Knight of the burning Sword being almost recovered, and Musing on the fight, he had with Birmartes, grew so discontented, that he quite lost his Rest: And turning first on the one side, then on the other, he said within himself: What dost thou, poor Wretch, so long in thy bed, dishonor'd as thou art? VVho hinders thee from go∣ing to take Revenge of him, that loves her, whom none merits to serve? I know not, why thou wert ever born into the world: nor what Reason mov'd thee to take Arms, making such ill use of them, that thou hast been sain to endure in thy Presence a Stranger bragging, and singing the Love
of thy Mistress, and (which is worse) to depart from thee with so much Glory. Ah! Madam, perhaps you also love him, who thus (to my great Regret) publishes the Perfection of your Praises! How unfortunate to me ws the Day, I first saw you so beautifu, that being near you I dy, and ab∣sent from you, I cannot live! For GOD's sake let me understand, if you have left me, to love this other, that obeying your VVill, I may find him where ever he is, not to do him any hurt, but to serve him all my Life, if it is pleasing to you. And nevertheless it cannot sink into my mind, that you have in so short a time forgotten your Loyal Slave; since my heart (where ever you have been) has always spoken to you plainly, and without Dissimulation: VVhich makes me believe, that you are not angry with me. VVherefore I will stay no longer in this place, but will go and avenge you of him, who has rashly (without your Command) presumed to serve and love you, which he shall pay dear for, if I find him, r it shall cost me my Life. Having said this, his Fury in such manner encreas'd, that he rose hastily out of the Bd, and seeing, that Gradamart was asleep, he put on his Armor, and having himself bridled nd sadled one of the Horses, which Galeotes had given him, he rode to wards the Shore, where his Marriners were waiting, who all wondered to see him at such an hour. Then entring into his Ves∣sel, he commanded them to weigh Anchor, and follow Fortune, which could not (he said) be so contrary to him, but that 'twould guide him to the Place, where he should meet the Knight, that had parted so well from him. Then those of the Ship askt him, whether he would please to stay for Gradamart. No, answered he: He shall no more hinder me from executing my Will, so to disgrace me, as he has done. This Command they durst not any further dispute, but letting loose their Vessel, without either Rudder, or Oar, went away with the Curent of the stream, being driven along by the Wind and Waves, six days toge∣ther, at the End whereof they met a Ship, on the Deck of which sat a very ancient Man, whom the Knight of the burning Sword saluted, saying to him: Honorable Father, GOD preserve you: I desire you of Courtesy to tell me, if you have seen met, or know any News of a Knight, that sails along this Sea in an unusual manner: for I must find him dead or living. Then he gave him the best Description, he could, of Birmartes: whch the Old-man having heard, made him this Answer: Your finding of him, Sir Knight, will perhaps be much more to your Dammage than Profit, he being such an one, that there are few better, or indeed so good to be found
in the world. Nevertheless, since you so affectionatly request it, I will tell you what I know. He has taken his Course towards Naples, in the way to which I met him: and that is all you can at this time learn of him. GOD give you a good Voyage, said the Knight of the burning Sword: You have greatly satisfied me. Then commanding his Steersman to make strait for Naples, they soon lost sight of each other. In the mean time Gradamart, who had fetcht a long sleep, awoke, and finding neither his Companion, nor his Arms, was exceedingly discon∣tented. Then he went strait to the Shore, thinking to meet the Vessel, in which they came: but there was not the least Sign of it. Wherefore he began to curse and ban his Fortune, which was so contrary to him, that ha∣ving on so Good an Occasion preserv'd two of the Best Knights in the World from Death, he should Receive for it so much Displea∣sure. And in this discontent he cry'd out: Ah, ah! Knight of the Burning Sword! how ill do You know the great Amity your Friend Gradamat bears You! You had surely little reason thus to forsake me. Little Rea∣son did I say? No, no, You had great Reason, since I bear such Affection to him, who so little esteems me, having so strangely absented himself from me. But, let what may befal me, I will never cease Travelling, till I have found you, that I may complain of you to your self. As he was thus venting his Discontents, he perceived on the Shore a Fisher-Boat, into which having put some Provisions, he entred, and having unfastned it from a Post, to which it was ty'd, abandon'd it to the Waves, that in a little time carry'd him out of sight of the Land, so discontented, that he every moment wisht his own Death, when he met the same Old-man that had spoken to the Knight of the Burning Sword, whom he askt, whe∣ther he could tell him any News of a Knight, great of Stature, and Ar∣med in white Harness, who Sailed in a Boat, accompany'd only by two Marriners. In truth, answer'd the Old Man, you enquire after him, in finding whom you shall have greater Joy than you imagin: and you your self shall be more sought after by him, than he is by you: and more I will not tell you at this time. Gradamart greatly wondred at this Discourse, and would have desir'd him to tell him what he meant: but the Old Man had scarce finisht his speech, when a brisk Gale of Wind carry'd away the Vessel he was in, so that Gra∣damart could no more get near him. Wherefore he resolved to follow his
Adventure, and not to leave seeking his Companion, who steering, as you have been fold, strait towards Naples, bethought himself to change his Name, commanding his Marriners to call him thenceforward only the Knight without Fortune. Now it happened that the second day after he had spoken to the Old-man, the Sea grew so Temestuous, that he was forc'd to take Port in Civita Vecchia near Rome, where he went ashore, bidding his Marriners to go and stay for him near Naples, whither himself would go by Land. Wherefore he mounted his Steed, and took the great road: along which he perceived a Damsel coming, accompany'd by one only Squire, carrying a Pacquet, wrapt up in red Camblet. The Knight of the Burning Sword courteously saluted them, and they returned his salutation, the Damsel saying to him: Perhaps, Sir Knight, you are one of those who have slain the Emperor of the Countrey. Why do you say this to me? answer'd the Knight. Because, reply'd she, that, if you are of that Faction, I advise you to take another way, than this of Rome: for the Marquess of Mantua is entred into it, with a good Number of Soldiers, and keeps it for the Empress Leo∣norina, and her Grand-daughter, to whom the Empire comes by right of succession. And whatever Knight, or other Person he finds, holding the part of the Duke, he certainly puts them to death. I pray you, Damsel, said the Knight of the Burning Sword, to give me an Account of this Emperor's Death: For I never heard of it, but from you. Then she began to relate to him the Dukes Treason, as you have heard it. And, said she, the Marquess has, within these few days, had News, that King Amadis is arriv'd at Naples, to revenge the Death of the Emperor, his Son-in-law: at which several of this Countrey are very joyful, and expect great Forces from all parts, as is reported. As the Gods may help me, Damsel, answer'd the Knight of the burning Sword, I am very glad that I am arriv'd in time to do service to the King you speak of: for I greatly love and esteem him Ah! said she: You have Reason, and as far as I see, my way is shorten'd, because I was charg'd to address my self to the first Knight, I should meet on this way, making me such Discourses as you do, and present him what is in this Pacquet. And nevertheless I will cause it to be carried for you to the City of Naples, whither I will accompany you, as I am charg'd: and there I will tell you who it is that sends it to you and other things, for which you will not be sorry. In the mean time consider if you please to command me in any thing, for I will obey you in all.
In good Faith, Damsel, answer'd the Knight of the Burning Sword, you make me wonder at the News. As for me, I have nothing to do at Rome, and I think it best, that we should go straight to King Amadis; for it seems already long to me, till I see the Present display'd, and know, who does me this Favour. Let us go, said she, I pray you. Then they both went on together; but they had not been two days in Company, when they entred into a long Forrest, where they met Five Knights compleatly Arm'd, who, addressing themselves to him of the Bur∣ning Sword, cry'd to him: Stay, Knight, stay: You must tell us, whom you will Assist, whether the Emperor of Rome, or his Adversary. I will help, answer'd he, those, in whom Treason has no Part, and will be against the Duke, who has so basely Murther'd his Lord. This, reply'd they, is the Way, you should take to a speedy Death. Having said this, they all couch'd their Lances, and ran upon him with such violence, that they wanted but little of throwing him out of his Sad∣dle; yet he kept firm, and gave one of them such a Blow, that he never Spake more: Then he drew his Spear out of the Dead-Mans Body, and Charging the Four others, Kill'd the Second on the Field, his Staff breaking to Shivers. Then he suddenly put hand to his Sword, and there began between them a wonderful Fight, which yet soon came to an End; for the Three that remain'd, could not bear the Fury of him, who, in such manner Assaulted them, that the Third had his Head Cleft asunder; which the Two last seeing, turn'd their Backs, and Fled away full Speed. But the Knight of the Burning Sword let them go, and without pursuing them any farther, follow'd his way with the Damsel, who, much wondred at his great Prowess, and high Chivalry. Now these Rascals were Allies of the Duke, who, lying in Ambush in the Forrest, watcht such Knights as were ill Accompany'd, and fell upon them, when they understood them to be of the Deceas'd Emperor's Party; so that many Worthy Men had already, in this manner lost their Lives, when they met with the Knight of the Burning Sword, who, Chastis'd them, as you have heard. And for this cause, we will leave him to Travel with the Damsel, and change our Discourse.
CHAP. LVIII. How the King of Sicily, and his Fleet, had News of the Emperor Arquisils, and his Sons Death, and of their Arrival at Naples. a wrecked ship coming into port, with various figures in the water and on the surrounding rocks (same figure used in Chapter 15) OVR History has before acquainted you, how the King of Sicily, Olorius, and Don Florelus, Embarkt in Great Britain with a good Number of other Knights, and set Sail for France. Now they had not Sail'd Eight whole Days, when they met some Vessels Commanded by the Count of Armignac, a Kinsman to the King of Metz, for whose sake they were Cruising along the Coasts to hinder the Sicilians, or any other of their Party from taking Port in Sicily. Now the Count immediatly knew
by the Banners and Colors, that the King of Sicily, was in the Fleet; wherefore he commanded his People to assault it on all sides, hoping to take him Prisoner. Then the two Fleets joyn'd, and with Hooks and Grapling Irons, coupled their Vessels, so that the Fight was Fierce and Bloody; but at length the Armignacians had the worst, being all either Slain, or Vanquisht, and the others remain'd Victorious, by means whereof they un∣derstood from the Prisoners, how the Emperor Arquisil, and his Son Di∣nerpius were Slain, and that King Amadis was Arriv'd at Naples, where he was gathering People from all Parts, to Revenge their Deaths; as al∣so that the King of Metz was Raising a great Army to Succor the new Emperor. This being heard by the King of Sicily, a thought came sudden∣ly into his Mind, that since his Enemy was taking that way, he should ne∣ver find a better Opportunity to Recover his Kingdom, than whilst his Adversary was absent; and for this cause, he order'd his Pilots and Mari∣ners to make all the speed they could; but as it often happens, that Man proposes otherwise than GOD has dispos'd, the Night following there arose such a Tempest, that being carry'd along by the Violence of it, they found themselves the Sixth Day after in the Spanish Sea, and were, whe∣ther they would or no, forc't to pass Hercules's Pillars, and enter into the Mediterranean: Wherefore they wholly chang'd their Design, and the King of Sicily was of Opinion to go and find King Amadis, that they might to∣gether Fight the Vsurper of the Empire, and his Ally, since they were joyn'd. Thus they took their way to Naples, where they arriv'd almost at the same time as did Don Florestan, King of Sardinia, who was come thither with a great Fleet, and the Duke of Calabria, who, being in Love with the Fair Jufaliana, Daughter to the King of Naples, had brought a great Army by Land. They were all very honourably Receiv'd, principally by King Amadis, wo, was but a little before, also, by Adariel, Prince Eli∣nius, Suycius of Ireland, Abies, and several other Renowned Knights, who were all come to this War. Now they being all Assembled in Coun∣cil, it was resolv'd, they should expect the Army of Don Brian, King of Spain, and that, which King Amadis had snt for out of Great Britain; and that in the mean time, word should be sent to the Princes of the Em∣pire, who were of their Party, to keep themselves in a Readiness to move, when Notice should be given them. Thus they all staying in the great Ci∣ty of Naples, visited every Day the Queen and the Ladies, the King keep∣ing so Noble and Magnificient a Court, that they all wondred at it.
CHAP. LIX. How Dirmartes arriv'd at the Court of Naples, where he defy'd all the Knights who were there, concerning their Mistrsses Beauties, and the Wonders he did. THese Kings and great Lords being one Day sat at Dinner, there en∣tred into the Hall, a Tall and Comely Knight, compleatly Arm'd in a Rich White Armor. In his Hands he bore the Effigies of a Lady, at whose side were certain little Chains of Gold, to which were fastned thrée Images, that were supported by two Knights. He, who Marcht first, was Birmartes the Amorous, of whom our History has formerly spoken at large, who (without doing any Act of Reverence) askt a loud, if the King of Naples was there, and was answer'd, that he was, and was shewn him. Then did he address himself first to the King, and afterwards to all the other Knights, saying, Most Mighty Kings and Lords, think it not strange, that presenting my self before you, I have not shewn that Sub∣mission, which your Excellencies deserve; the Reason of which is, that I bear in my Arms this Image, which is the Representation of a Princes, whose Greatness is such, that She ows no Respect to any King or Emperor, how powerful soever. And this I say farther, that my Arrival in this Court is only to maintain against all Knights, that Onoria, Lady of Beauty, Infanta of Apolonia, is Fairer than any other Lady or Damsel in the World. And this I intend to prove by Arms against any one, that will contradict it, on such Condition, that, if the Opponent is Servant or Friend to the Daughter of any King or Emperor, for whose Love he enters into Fight against me, he shall be Bound to bring her Image Crown'd, and her Name Writ underneath, which he shall lose, and I will joyn with these others, in case the Victory is mine; but if the Knight has a Mistress of Meaner Rank, he shall be excus'd from bringing her Image or Portraiture. Now then, Sir, said he to the King of Naples, since this Adventure is ar∣riv'd in your Court, before it is in any other of these Princes, I beseech you to cause the occasion of my Coming, being such, as I have at present declar'd to you, to be Publisht by Sound of Trumpet, to the end every Knight, who will Combat me, may know, that I will expect him in this
Meadow in a Tent, which I will cause to be set up, and will Fight him with such Arms, as he will Choose. Having said this, he went out of the Hall, and return'd the way he came, leaving all these Lords Amaz'd at his Presumption, so that several design'd to abate it, especially the Duke of Calabria, and Clorius of Spain, who so fer∣vently Lov'd Luciana, Daughter to Esplandian, that he could not rest for her. Then came Birmartes into the Meadow, and caus'd two Rich Pa∣vilions to be set up on the Sea shoe, in which he Lodg'd. But he had Leisure enough to rest there, for none Presented himself that Day, no, the next till after Dinner, when several entred into the Field; and Birmartes behav'd himself so Valiantly, that before Night he Vanquisht Twelve, and Fifteen the Day following; so that many had said, they never seen so good a Knight. Now the Duke of Calabria was not yet come, but he Presented himself soon after, Arm'd in Green Armor, and bearing on his Helmet, in∣stead of a Feather, his Mistresses Portraiture. Then Birmartes, knowing that he had a Valiant Adversary, chose a great Lance, and Marching leisurely, before he began his Carrier, the Duke call'd out to him from afar; saying, By my Head, Sir Knight, I will now make you know, that the Princess Iufaliana, whose Effigies I bear, surpasses in all Beauties her, whom you have so much prais'd. I know not, answer'd Birmartes how you can verify it: As for me, every one knows, that I should extreamly forget my self, if I should follow this Opinion; and since the Proof lies in the Combat, not in Words, let us see how it will go. Then they couch'd their Lances, one against the other, and their Meet∣ing was such, that the Duke broke his Spear, even to the Gantlet: Ne∣vertheless, Birmartes Struck him so to the purpose, that he Threw him out of his Saddle to the Ground. And forasmuch as the Duke was astony'd, stiring neither Foot nor Hand, the other alighted from his Horse at the End of the Carrier, and Feigning, that he would Cut off his Head, said to him aloud: Knight, confess the Beauty of your Mistress to be nothing in Comparison of Onorias, else you shall Dye presently. But to these Threats the Duke, tho' he was come to himself, Answer'd him not a Word, but was so Disconted, that he wisht himself already Dead; which some Lord knowing, Requested Birmartes to leave him in Patience, and content himself with his Victory, and the Portraiture of Jufaliana, which he took, and carry'd into his Pavilion, to Accompany the others. In the mean time the Duke got up again, and Return'd Asham'd to his House.
Then there came into the Field a lusty Knight, sitting so gracefully on his Horse, that 'twas a wonder to see, who addressing himself to Birmartes, thus spake to him: If you do not willingly confess my Mistress to be fairer than yours, I will make you do it by force. How? answered Birmartes: He, who is just now parted with disgrace, said as much to me not long since, and tho' he should have serv'd you for an Example, you speak as presumptuously, as he did: take heed, fair Sir, lest as much befal you. At this word they ran so directly one against the other, that their Lances flew into shivers, and they met so violently with Shilds and Bodies, that Birmartes lost a stirrup, and, if he had not caught hold of his Horses Neck, had been thrown to the ground: Nevertheless the other had worse, he and his Hose falling one upon the other. However he got up again, and taking his Sword in his hand, said to Birmartes, who had already turn'd his Bri∣dle: Knight, alight, and GOD forbid, that I should twice, thro' my hor∣ses fault, lose the Right of my Enterprise. Then Birmartes sat foot to ground, and embracing his Shield, there be∣gan between them so fierce a Fight, that for the space of an hour or more, it could hardly be judged, who would have the better or the worse. But at the end the Vnknown Knight was so out of breath, that he was forc't to retreat a little back. Which Birmartes seeing, said to him: Indeed, Sir Knight, you take an ill way to make me confess so great a Lye, as you ere-while bragg'd, you would: Are you already so tired? The other, very much vext at this mockery, thus answered him: Sir Knight, you shall know presently. And lifting up his Arm, gave Birmar∣tes such a blow with his Sword that his eyes sparkled, and their fight be∣gan again so fierce, that sometimes Fortune was judg'd to be for the Vn∣known Knight, and sometimes for Birmartes. Nevertheless the end was such, that Birmartes gain'd the Victory, and the other fell upon the field, so tired, that he was quite spent. Wherefore Birmartes cast himself lightly upon him, and plucking off his Helmet, perceived that 'twas his Brother Olorius: at which much discon∣tented, as fearing him to be worse than he was, he said to him: Sir Knight, 'tis probable that the Fault of your Mistresses Beauty, and not your want of Prowess, is the cause, of what has befallen you: for otherwise (seeing what I have found in you) 'tis certain, that I should not so lightly have parted out of your hands, as I have done. Olorius, hearing him speak with so much humility, altho' he was extream∣ly discontented, thus answered him: As GOD help me, Knight, I can give you no very good Account of my Mistresses Beauty: for I never saw her:
But I should have considered, what is in you, before my undertaking any thing, at least to avoid the shame, I undergo. Then he got up, and gave Birmartes his hand to help him: for he was very much wounded: nor was Birmartes much less. Wherefore retiring, the one into the Town, and the other into his Pailion, they kept their beds fifteen days, before their Wounds were cur'd. CHAP. LX. How a strange Knight came to fight with Birmartes; and what befel them. BIrmartes then being cured, and resolving to begin again his En∣terprise, there entered into his Pavilion a Damsel, accompany'd by an Esquire, who carried a Casket, closely wrapt up This Damsel Saluted Birmartes with great Courtesy, and untying the Packet, presented him with a Suit of Armor, as red as blood, and a Shield, having an Elm in a Field, Or, saying to him: Knight us'd to overcome, He, who loves you, and esteems you, for the Prowess that is in you, sends you this Present: And sends you word by me, that at this time you shall not know who he is: But so it is, that this Armor, which he has kept for you, will do you more Service than you think for. Damsel, my Friend, answered he, I humbly thank the person, who has had so good a Remembrance of me, and estem this Harness the more, be∣cause mine was quite broken. You will be plas'd to tell him, that, where∣ever I am, he has in me a Knight very much at his Command. Then without continuing this Discourse any longer, the Damsel depar∣ted from him, leaving him in a deep study, from whom so geat a Favour should proceed. And that very day he acquainted the Kings, and the other Lords, that he should be in a readiness, if any one will defend the Honour of his Mistresses Beauty. Wherefore going forth of the Town, they went to the Place appointed, with a great Number of People, whither they were no sooner come, but they perceived a Knight of great Stature, riding towards them, mounted on a Roan Horse, his Armor being Azure, covered with ma∣ny
Stars, and his Shield of the same. In his hand he held a great Lance, which he rested on his Thigh with such a Grace, that nothing could exceed it. And to the top of his Helmet was fastned the Portraiture of a Dam∣sel, fair in all Perfection. In this Equipage did he pass before the Scaffold, on which the Kings were sitting, whom he saluted wthout discovering himself; and approach∣ing Birmartes, said to him loud enough: Knight, you must grant me, that she, whom you love, no way equals the Lady, whose Figure I bear; else your Head shall do me reason, as a Punishment of your audacious folly in compairing her to a Lady, to whom she deserves not to be so much as a servant. Birmartes, much displeas'd to hear himself threatned, and his Lady inju∣red, thus answered: Truly, good Sir, you speak very gloriously, and my stay in this place would have been too much in vain, if I should, for your Threats, confess so great a lye: But I hope, before you get from me, to chastise you in such a manner, that you shall be an Example to those, that may come hereafter. And as to my head, I shall keep it better, than you will do yours, as will be seen by the Event. Then they parted to fetch their Carreer, and ran against each other with such Fury, that they both fell to the Ground, where they lay some time with∣out stirring either hand or foot. And every one began to think them dead, when they got up again, embracing their Shields, and taking their Swords in their hands. Then they began so fierce a Fight, that the sound of their Blows would have made one think, there had been above twenty Knights in Battle, and the Sparks of fire flew in such quantity from their Armor, that the Iron, taken out of the Furnace, and beaten on the Anvil, yields no greater Lustre. But what need is there to number their Blows for the Embellishment of our History? They charg'd each other with so much vi∣olence, that, had it not been for the Goodness of their Armor, they had soon made an End of the Combat, with the loss of both their Lives. But seeing that their Swords could not enter, they clos'd body to body, doing their ut∣most to bring each other to the Ground. In which they profited as little as before tho' they contnu'd in this Estate above two long hours, so that every one thought them faint and out of breath. Nevertheless they soon after knew the contrary: For the two Combatants return'd again to take their Swords, and as if they had done nothing all the day, began again their fight more sharp and dangerous than before. And nevertheless, either for the temper of their Armor, or the thickness and goodness of them, neither of them could draw the least drop of blood from his Adversary. At which they both wondred, and principally the Knight of the Stars,
who said to the other: As far as I see, Knight, we toil all day without gai∣ning any Advantage, one over the other, since our Swords cut no better: therefore, pray, let us disarm our selves, and to put a more speedy end to this beginning, let us take only Sword and Cloak: for had I thought of what is fallen out, I should have entered otherwise into Fight against you. When Birmartes heard this Discourse, he very much wondred at his Enemies great Courage, and immediatly doubted, that 'twas he, with whom he had to do upon the Sea, when they were partd. And neverthe∣less the Arms, e wore, were others, so that he knew him not, and there∣fo made him this Answer: Knight, since we have began our Fight, we must be fain to end it, and therefore do the best you may: for it cannot he, but that one of us must faint at last. Well then, said the Knight of the Stars, I thought to have done you a Pleasure. If then they had before been very careful to do their Duties, they retur∣ned to shew themselves yet more earnest, altho' they apparently grew hea∣vier, having already continu'd above five hours without any rest: And moreover the Heat of the day was to extreme, that he, who was lightest cloath'd, did perpetually sweat. Which mov'd King Amadis to such com∣passion, seeing them suffer and endure so much, that he could not forbear saying to the others: On my conscience 'tis great Pity to let two of the best Knights in the world dye, who are so animated one against the other, that the Conqueror will never pardon the Weaker, Nevertheless he of the Stars gain'd ground by little and little; whence with gayety of heart, shaking his Sword, he cry'd out: Ha! Knight, now I have thee in such a place, that neither by putting out the Torches, nor by force, we can be separated: and thou shalt pay for the foolish words, thou wouldst have maintain'd. Having said this, he pess'd him closer, than he had yet done. Then Birmartes knew by his threats, that he had indeed suspected aright, it being the Knight of the Burning Sword, to whom the Damsel, that he met near Rome, presented the Harness, he now were when he was within a days journey of Naples, without declaring from whom; and left him to go to Birmartes with the Vermilion Arms, as you have been told. Now the Sage Alquif foresaw, that these good Knights were to fight the one against the other, and for the Preservation of them both, sent them, what secur'd thm: for 'tis certain, that, had it not been for the goodness of their Har∣ness they had been oth slain. But they could not draw any blood, but on∣ly bruise one another by te Blows, they mutually interchang'd.
To return then to our Knights, Birmartes hearing, with whom he had to do, his heart so swell'd, that he thus answer'd the Knight of the Burn∣ing Sword: by my head 'tis a great Pleasure to me to know, who thou art, that I may have more occasion to abate thy Arrogance, nor do thou think, that thou hast any Advantage over me: For before the Game is en∣ded, thou shalt find, that I am better able to revenge my self, than thou to threaten. Having said this word, he rusht upon the other, and struck him so fierce∣ly on the top of his Helmet, that he constrain'd him to put his knee to the ground: but he soon got up again, and in revenge gave his Adversary such a blow in the same place, that his two hands serv'd him for a support on the Grass, tho' he made there no long stay, but resettling his Helmet, they be∣gan again better than before: not but there was always discern'd some lit∣tle Advantage on the side of the Knight of the burning sword. And indeed he was descended of the most illustrious and glorious blood at that day on the Earth, having to his great Grand father King Amadis, who considering that, if he let them Fight any longer, the Death of the other was near, said to the three Kings, which were sitting by him, that 'twas better to go and pray them to part, seeing the great Loss, there would be in losing them. Which they approv'd, and going down from their Scaffolds, went to the two Knights, who at their coming drew back, and King Amadis, and the King of Sicily address'd themselves to the Knight of the burning sword, to whom they said: Knight, be pleas'd to do so much for our sakes, as to pro∣ceed no farther in this Combat: for 'tis not reasonable, that two such gal∣lant men, as you are, should dye on so small an occasion. He, who presently thought, that by refusing so courteous a Request, made him by such Persons, as they were, particularly by the Father of her, whom he lov'd better than his own soul, he might be blam'd, thus answered them: For certain, my Lords, 'tis grievous for me to retire thus, nevertheless de∣siring to obey you in all things, let us know, what mine Enemy thinks of it, against whom I am the most unfortunate Knight, that ever was: for this is now the second time, that he has escap'd from me, with more ho∣nour, than I desire. I assure you, said King Amadis, that he will do, what he shall be reque∣sted to by the Kings of Naples and Sardinia: Who in the mean time was perswading Birmartes to consent to the same. To which he willingly gave ear, knowing he had the worst, altho' he bravely conceal'd, what he thought of it. And for this Cause he said to them: My Lords, the Quarrel beween this Knight and me is such, that I should rather choose to lose my Life, than leave this Combat: but for
your sake, whom I desire to please, I will obey your Command. So they led him into his Pavilion, leaving the King of great Britain, and Alpatracy with the other, whom Amadis indeed thought to be the Knight of the Burning Sword, and had already acquainted the King of Si∣cily with his Suspicion, of which, that he might know the Truth, he made Alpatracy a sign with his Eye to ask him, who therefore thus spake to the Knight: I desire you Sir of Courtesy to tell me your Name: For I sus∣pect you to be a Gentleman, whom I greatly love and esteem: And if you are the same, you would be to ame to conceal your self, especially from King Amadis, who has done that in Saba for him, whom I take you to be, that he will be for ever oblig'd to him. This he said, to draw the sooner from the Knight of the burning Sword, what he desir'd: who was at first so astonisht at this News, that he was a long time without answering, and would willingly have discover'd him∣self, had it not been for the Desire, he had to be reveng'd of Birmartes, whereever he could find him, thinking that he lov'd Lucella. Wherefore he thus answered the King: Sir I know not, what Love you bear me, nor whom you think me to be; but if you wish me any Good, 'tis not altogether without Reason; since I have all my Life desired to do Ser∣vice to You, and such as You are. You will therefore be pleas'd to name to me him, for whom you take me, that I may better know who he is. In good faith, said the King, he is nam'd the Knight of the burning Sword, and I well believe, that you are none of he: For he would never concel himself from me. Certainly, Sir answer'd he, 'tis not long, since I left him, and I am so much his Friend, that I desire you for his sake to tell me, what it is, that King Amadis has done for him in Saba, to the end, that, if I find him again, he may have News of it. Then Alpatracy related to him at large, how Queen Buruca had been accus'd, and what became of it. Ah! said the Knight of the burning Sword, in the mean time within himself; Traytor Maudan! the Gods have had too much pity of you! for without toiling such a Prince, you deserv'd an Halter. Nevertheless he gave no knowledge of this Fault, and less of his Per∣son, but thus answer'd King Alpatracy: Sir I am very glad, for the sake of the Knight of the burning Sword, of such good News, with which I will assuredly acquaint him, and that, before it is long: Wherefore your Majesty will be pleas'd to give me leave, assuring you, if I can meet him, that we will bear you Company in the VVar, you undertake, whe∣ther
against the Emperor, or the King of Metz. In the mean time be pleas'd to pardon me, if I conceal from you at present, who I am: For I resolve not to discover my self, before I have put an End to an Affair, which highly concerns my Honor. In this manner did he stop the Mouths of these two Princes, who af∣terward importun'd him no farther, tho' they had still a Fancy, that 'twas he himself. Nevertheless not willing to constrain him any farther, they thank'd him however for the Succor, he promis'd them. And forasmuch as it began apace to grow dark, and Night was driving away the Day, they see∣ing the Kings of Sadinia and Naples return from Birmartes's Pavilion, gave him the good night, to go and join themselves with the two others. And they four together took their Way to the Town, and the Knight of the burning Sword went to the Place, whence he parted in the Morn∣ing. CHAP. LXI. How the Knight of the Burning Sword arriv'd in his Tent, where he had left Alquif's Damsel, by whom he sent a Letter to Ma∣gadan, King of Saba, excusing himself from what he had been charg'd with. SVCH was the Issue of this perillous Combat, as you have heard, at the Return from which the Knight of the Burning Sword, thinking sometimes on his Misfortune in not having been able to Vanquish his Ene∣my, sometimes on his News of the King of Saba, and the Obligation, in which he found himself indebted to King Amadis, being now sad, then all of a sudden joyful, Rode on to the Place, where he had left Alquif's Dam∣sel. And they two together, that they might not be follow'd went to the Place, where he expected to find his Mariners, who waited for him. But when the Damsel saw him to pensive, she could not forbear asking him, whence that Melancholly proceeded. Ah! my great Friend, answer'd he: I was thinking to leave this Coun∣trey, for to go into Saba to find the King, for some News, I have this day heard, which touches me very near. And on the other side, I am forc'd to break this Enterprise, being call'd this way to an Affair, on
which my Honor depends: Thus I see my self between two Extremities and know not which I should choose for the best. If you think good, said she, that I should carry any Message for you to the East, be pleas'd to give me your Bark, and I will go, where you shall command me, and will carry any Letter for you to King Magadan, whom I very well know. I request it of you, answer'd he, assuring you Damsel, that I will never forget this Courtesy: I will Write then to the King, and to morrow you shall set Sail, if we find our People at the Port. Discoursing in this manner, they came, where the Bark was, and that very night, the Knight in the Starry Armor Writ a Letter to King Maga∣dan, the Tenno whereof follo. Most High, most Mighty, and most Excellent Prince, if future things were as present to men, as they are unknown to them, there would be few Persons deceiv'd, and fewer Wicked, that could deceive them by giving them false Intelligence: But such a secret being out of our Power, we should (certainly) more fear this malice of men, than Death it self, which can deceive us but once. For that, to which these Traitors and Vil∣lains lead us, takes not only away the Life, but the immortal Honour, which every Person of Virtue may acquire, blacking his Reputation and Honour by shameful and lying Stories, with which they feed the ears of those, who hear them. And of this (victorious King) your Majesty can better judge, than any other, having been upon the Point of being reputed an unjust King, by your intending to put the Queen to Death, for the false Accusation, made of her and your loyal subject and servant, the Knight of the Burning Sword. Not, Sir, that I will excuse my self of the Fault, I committed, in absenting my self from your Court according to the Coun∣sel given me by Maudan: for where my Innocence was, Punishment could have no place. And moreover, instead of leaving my honour doubtful by my Flight, I should rather (knowing your Vertue and my Justice) submit my self to your Chastisement, than fearing your Fury, and shunning death, which I deserv'd not, render my self thus suspected of Guilt. Now the Gods, as far, as I understand, have permitted, that the Truth has since been discover'd by the same Person, who had conceal'd it, and the Queens honour and mine restor'd by the invincible Prowess of Amadis, King of Great Britain, who, sustaining my Right, has in your Majesty's Presence slain the Traitor in the plain Field of Battle. And nevertheless, Sir, if there remains in you any spark of Displeasure against your humble servant, I beseeech you to forget it, and give me part in your good grace, till such time as I have opportunity to return to your Majesty, which I should have
already done, had it not been for the Promise, I have made these Kings, here assembled, not to leave them, till the War, they have undertaken a∣gainst two other Traitors, is at an end. Wherefore you will be pleased to excuse me, who in all humility kiss your Majesties hands. This Letter being thus written, made up, and well seal'd, he delivered it to the Damsel, whom he took aside, and said to her: Damsel my Friend, since you will do me the favour, to go for me to King Magadan, I beseech you, in presenting to him this Letter, to tell him the occasion of my stay in these Parts: and that, as soon as I shall have an Opportunity, I will not fail to repair to him, and present him with my service, as I am bound. You will see also the Queen and Prince Fulurtin, to whom also I desire you to give my most humble Respects. Sir, answerd she, I will not fail to do, what you command me; but be∣fore my Departure I will acquaint you, that the arms I presented you was sent you by the Sage Alquif, who loves you, and honours you more, than any Knight he knows. He has charged me to tell you, that your father is a Greek by Nation, and that you are the Issue of a most Illustrious Blood, and herewith content your self: for I can tell you no more, except it be that he sends you word, that before your Departure from Italy, you shall recover one of the things, you held most for lost. The Knight of the burning Sword was much amaz'd, & more rejoyc'd when he understood, that he was a Gentleman of Great Parentage, and imbracing her, who brought him this good News, said to her: Alas! my great Friend, for Gods sake tell me then my Fathers Name, if you know it: For 'tis the greatest Desire, I have in this world. Assure your self, answer'd she, if I knew it, it should not be conceal'd from you. This said, she took leave of him, and embarkt; the Knight intreating her, that she would find Means to bring him back an Answer with all possible Speed. And immediatly the Wind blowing the Sails, the Vessel lancht forth into the Deep. And at the same time the Knight of the burning Sword took his way towards Salerm, intending as soon as he had recovered his strength, to find out Birmartes, and fight him to the utmost, whatever should become of it. Whilst he staid there, musing from time to time on what the Damsel had said to him, that his Father was a Native of Greece, he resolved to take this surname from that Country, and also his name from King Amadis, to whom he thought himself more oblig'd, than to all other Men in the World, as having made him recover his Honor. There∣fore he will henceforward be in several placs called Amadis of Greece.
CHAP. LXII. How News came to the Kings, being at Naples, of the great Preparation, made by the Usurper of the Empire, to come and give them Battle at Friuli: And of the Rancounter, they had with the King of Metz. THE King of Sicily, pretending, as you have heard, to the Kingdom of Metz, had ordinarily spies in the Parts of Gaul, by whom (eight or ten dayes after the Fight, between the two good Knights Birmartes and Amadis of Greece, surnamed formerly the Knight of the burning Sword) he was advertiz'd that the Vsurper of the Empire, with his Forces, was, to come and joyn the King of Metz in the plain of Verona, and there to ex∣pect King Amadis and his Army. Now the Duke of Lorrain was ally'd to King Amadis, and with all his might supported the Party of the Empress his Daughter, so that with six thousand fighting Men he hindred, as much as possibly he could, the King of Metz, who intended to pass thro' the Mar∣ches of Suitzerland, from executing his Designs: For he always coasted him, often constraining him to stay longer in a place, than he desired. This was in part the Cause, that the Army of these Kings, assembled at Naples, went to look for them in Germany, and there to give them Battle: For which purpose 'twas proclaim'd in their Camp, that every one should make himself ready to remove the eighth day following. During this Time there arriv'd from Spain seven thousand good Soul∣diers and Knights, which King Brian sent by the Duke of Merida to their Assistance, of whom Olorius had the Command. They then being assem∣bled, Amadis, seeing he had no News of the Army, he had sent to raise in Great Britain, resolved notwithstanding to march with his Forces strait to Aquileja, and thence to Marcadi Ancona, coasting always the Venetian, Sea, for the greater Convenience in having Provisions, till he came to Verona, where he had Advice, that the King of Metz was marching, into Germany for to get into Lombardy, and would there entrench himself, expecting the Emperors Forces. Then these Lords assembled in Counsel, and resolved to go and meet him, before the Emperor was got to him: Wherefore they remov'd on the morrow by break of day, and made such hast, that they got into the Mountains, before the King of Metz was aware of it, and surpriz'd him so short, that they presented him the Battle, as it were on the sudden.
Now he had with him a good Body of Horse, and a great Number of Foot, which the Count of Armignac, and the Dukes of Normandy and Brabant had brought thither, with some Germans out of Order. The Skirmish was on both sides very fair, and the Fight at last so fierce, that by the help of Birmartes, Florelus, and Amadis of Greece, who came thither unknown, the King of Metz was discomfited, himself and the Ea l Ar∣mignac slain, together with the Duke of Savona, and his Son: So that had it not been for the favor of the Night, which separated them, the Duke of Normandy, and the rest flying into the thickest part of a great Forest, there had not a Man of them escap'd. Then were Amadis's People constrain'd to retire for the Darkness, and lodg'd in their Enemies Camp, keeping a good Watch; for they were told that the Duke of Normandy was rallying to come and find them again the next day. Neverthelss it hapned otherwise: For the Duke, who was a discreet and prudent rince, considering the Wrong, which the deceased King had done the King of Sicily in Vsurping the Countrey, that belong'd to Queen Miramynia his Wife; call'd the other Princes and Captains, who were retir'd with him, and remonstrated to them, that 'twould be best for them to send to Alpatracy, and beseech him, that forgetting the Injury, they had done him, he would be pleas'd to receive them into his Favor: And do∣ing this, those of the Kingdom of Metz would take an Oath of Fidelity to him, remaining for ever his humble and obedient Subjects and Vassals: And I, said he, and my Companions will be Friends, Allies, and Confede∣rates, serving, and favoring him against all, especially against the Empe∣ror, who seeing the Treason, he has committed against his rightful Prince and Lord, cannot continue long without falling to ruine. There was not any one in the Company, who did not willingly give Ear to this Counsel, and the Duke himself was chosen by all to go to the King of Sicilies Camp, and carry him this Message. By Means where∣of, assoon as the Dawning of the Day began to appear, he took Horse, and accompany'd by the Principal Persons of the Kingdom of Metz, came to the Kings Tent, whither they were conducted by those of the Watch, who found him, as he was arming himself. And already were the Souldiers putting themselves in Battalla to go and prosecute their foregoing Victo∣ry: But all was stay'd vy the coming of this new Ambassy, which being heard by Alpatracy, and the other Princes and Lords of the Army, the Offers, they presented, were accepted, the Accord concluded, and Peace secur'd: And before Dinner Alpatracy was thro' all the Army proclaim'd King of Metz and Sicily. The Emperor, who was that day come to the City of Constance with his Army, was soon advertiz'd of this, wherefore he made hast to hinder the E∣nemy
from passing any farther. But they met the eighth day after in the Evening, and the Skirmish began in a Village, where each of the two Armies design'd to take up their Quarters. There many good Knights on both sides ended their dayes, and had not the Night at that time favor'd the King of Sicilies Party, the Germans had gotten the Victory. But for∣tune turn'd the next day: For Birmartes, Amadis of Greece, Olorious, Don Florelus, Orizenes and Bravatus, Sons to the Queens Calafia, and Pintequinestra, drew up, and being accompany'd with many good Knights and Souldiers, assoon as they could see, whom to strike, fiercely set upon their Enemies. Now whilst they were in the Head of the Fight, there came an Express to the Emperour, which brought him News, that the City of Mentz was taken by assault, the Garrison put to the Sword, and the Widow of the deceas'd Emperor taken out of the Prison, to which she had been confin'd. And believe it, Sir said the Messenger, that all this has been done by the Earl of Flanders: For I saw him there, accompany'd by above two thousand Knights. This News indeed did not much please the Emperor, nor those, that heard it: and the Rumor of it ran so thro' all the Camp, that many (even the most part) lot their hearts, and without being pursu'd, fled strait to the Ci∣ty of Constance. Nevertheless the Emperor ceas'd not to make head a∣gainst King Amadis, and the Fight on both sides was so fierce, that the Emperor himself was slain on the Place, together with the Duke of Saxony, the Earl of Merida, his Son, and several Lords and Princes, with so ma∣ny other People of all sorts, that the Horses were in blood above the Pasters. But the Emperors Death struck such a Terror into his Army, that they were immediatly discomfited, and turning their backs, fled with all speed towards Constance, where they inclos'd themselves, leaving behind them above ten thousand dead in the Field. And that very night was the City besieg'd, which, being briskly assaulted the next day, and as well defended, could not be taken till the fourth Assault, when it was Seal'd, and Amadis's Troops got into it by force, putting all they found in it to the Sword, without sparing any living soul. These Germans being thus vanquisht and defeated, King Amadis return'd to the Field, where the Battle had been the day befoe, and there caus'd the Bodies of the Vsurper and his Kinsmen to be sought for, and being found, to be hangd by the necks, and then burnt by a gentle Fire in punishment of the Treason he had com∣mitted on the Person of the Emperor, his Brother-in-law, and his Son in law Dinerpius. Which he immediatly wit to Queen Oriana, assuring her, that he would return to her, as soon as he had restor'd the Empress to her Liberty, and setled her in the full Possessions of her Estate.
CHAP. LXIII. How the City of Mentz was taken by Assault, and by whom. YOV have been told, if you remember, how Guillan, Duke of Bristow, and Angriote d' Estravaux, great Master of the Realm of Great Bri∣tain, accompany'd by the Duke of Cornwal, and a great Number of War∣riers, Knights, Esquires, and Soldiers, embarkt near London, and follow∣ing the Command of the King their Master, made strait towards Naples, where he was getting together a great Army, for to recover the State of the Empire, and revenge the Death of the murther'd Emperor, and his Son-in-law Dinerpius. They had a very fair wind for four days together: but on the fifth there arose such a Tempest, that there was left them neither Mast, Sail, nor Rope, they could make use of: So that, whether they would or no, they were driven on the Coast of Flanders, where they took Port, as well for the repairing of their Vessels, as to rest themselves a little after the Toil, they had suffer'd. Of which the Earl of Flanders having notice, and having a Desire to shew himself the Friend and good Ally of King Amadis, came to receive them, and so perswaded them to enter into Germany, that they resolv'd to go strait to the City of Mentz, and take it by Assault, whilst the Emperor was busied in getting ready his Army to go against the Princes, assembled at Naples. So well did they execute their Resolution, and kept themselves so secret and conceal'd, that they were as soon at the Gates of the Town as they within had News of their Design. Nevertheless the Alarm grew hot, and those within found means to let down their Port-cullices, so that the Resistanc was strong, and dangerous. But if the Defence was vigorous, the Assault was no less so: for the second time the Knights of great Bri∣tain, bowing down their Heads, break into their Enemies, of whom they made such a furious Slaughter, that few or none escap'd. Then they went to the Tower, where the Bodies of the Empero and Dinerpius were hang∣ing, which they carry'd ceremoniously into the principal Church, and there burry'd them with great Magnificence. Then they set the Empress at li∣berty, and brought her very honourably to the Palace, where she was acquain∣ted with the Execution and Slaughter, made of the Traitors, at which she was a little comforted, incessently regretting the Deat of her Husband and Children, and the loss of her other Friends. But they assur'd her
the Princess, her Sons Wife, and her Daughter, were with her Brother-in-law King Amadis: besides that GOD would not forsake her, seeing the good beginning of Victory, they had obtain'd. And because they were advertis'd, that the Emperor was marching in great hast to meet King A∣madis, and his Forces, they would not stay above two days at Mentz, where they left a good Garrison. And going strait towards Constance, they had News of the Emperors Defeat the night before their coming, which gave them such a Desire to visit their Friend, that they got to them early the next day. Now the most part of the Princes kept their Beds for some Wounds, they had receiv'd: but the coming of these Lords from Great Britain gave them such Ioy, that they were in a short time cur'd. The Empress also came thither, and was receiv'd by them all, as the Greatness of her Majesty requir'd, not without many tears shed, and several Regrets of the Loss, she had suffer'd, which increas'd much more, when she saw her Daughter in-law Brifenna, whom Amadis and Candalin had recover'd out of the Pirates Hands, as you have been told. Thus some days pass'd, du∣ring which the Kings provided for the most necessary Affairs of the Em∣pire, and Birmartes took leave of them, to finish his Enterprise, according to the Promise, he had sworn to Onoria, Daughter to the King of Apolonia. Wherefore we will in this place put an End to our Discourse, leaing the Remainder to a Second Part, which we shall soon bring to light, if we re∣ceive Encouragement by your favourable Acceptance of this. THE END.
