m933 e851_6 99866469 118744
THE PROUD PHARISEE Reproved: OR, The lying Orator laid open. IN AN EXAMINATION OF Some Passages in a Book, Entitu∣led, Precepts for Christian Practice, Or, The Rule of the New Creature New Model'd. Written by one Edw. Reyner, who calles himself a Minister of the Gospel in Lincoln; But is found a Lyar by a Child of the Light, who is known to the World by the Name of Martin Mason. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1655.
To my Friends and Acquain∣tance in the Flesh in Lincoln, who yet love the Garlick and Onions of Egypt, better than the Milk and Hony of Canaan. I Am not ignorant what Aspersions will be cast upon me for writing this ensuing Treatise; But I have learnt to passe through evil Report and good Report, as a Deceiver, and yet true: 1 Cor. 6.8.All the Reproaches and persecutions of the World cannot rob me of my Jewel, of my comfort, of my Crown: And so truth be but exalted, I matter not for all the poysoned Arrowes which Men of Envy shoot against my Person. I can as freely expose my naked Breast to receive them chearfully, as they are forward to dart them spightfully; and when they have done, forgive them freely. All this I can do through Christ that strengthens me.Phil. 4.13. But come poor hearts, You who lie stretching your selves upon the Bed of Ease, and delight in the broad way you are in, because it gives ease and liberty to the flesh; Tarry there no longer I beseech you; for though the way seem right unto you, yet let me tell you, the End thereof are the wayes of Death. And if you will not take my word, Loe I bring you no lesse than a King for my Surety, even Solomon himself. Prov. 14.12. Rev. 15.3.And if that will not do, here's a greater than He, Christ himself (the King of Saints) Math. 7.13. How many years have you been feeding upon the bare Com∣mons, your Shepherds having no better Pasture for you than their formal Prayers, and Houre-glasse Sermons, studied and hammered upon the Anvil of thir own Imaginations, paint∣ing them over with the pleasant Title of Christs Ordinances; but had their Prayers and preaching proceeded from that pure Fountain of living water, the Trees would have born better fruit: But their connterfeit Coyn can now no longer passe for pure Gold; for the light hath discovered them.1 John 5.1. He that is be∣gotten of God keepeth himself, and that wicked One toucheth him not: He that can witness this condition, that Man hath his Divine within him; The light is his Guide, and he needs not
Jer. 27.9. Jude 8. Jer. 23.21. Jer: 27:10:the dark Lanthorn of an eight and twentie years Dreamer. While you rest (poor souls) where you do, you dwell in darkness: come therefore out of Babylon, seek the good of your own souls, and forsake the Priests, grope no longer in the dark, loe now its day dote no more upon your filthy Dreamers, who run be∣fore they were sent, and prophesie lies unto the people: 'tis they who draw you into delusions, and your souls unto destruction, if you draw not back from them; for while you go from the pure (the light in your Consciences) you run into the puddle of mens humane inventions, the streams of the Sea of Rome: Own therefore the pure teachings of that pure principle of God within you, the light which convinces you of sin and evil, when no eye sees you. Heb: 12:14:Take councel there, and do not fear to be delu∣ded by it; for it will draw you (if you are willing to be led by it) from impurity unto Holiness, without which no man can see God. 'Tis but a Romish mist your Teachers cast before your eyes, when they render the light a delusion, least it should discover to you their Mystery of Iniquity; But the Lord hath a Controversie with them, and is throwing their Diana down; do not you therefore set to your shoulders to hold it up any lon∣ger, least you be found fighting against God. 2 Pet: 1:19:But know, we have a more sure word of Prophecie, whereunto ye do well, that ye take heed, as unto a light shining in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day Starre arise in your hearts. Remember you have warning in your life, prise it. Martin Mason.
THE Proud Pharisee Reproved. OR, The Lying Orator laid open. WHat means the Man to give his Book such a Boasting Title, as, The Rule of the New Creature new modeld? Were he himself in that happy condition a new Creature is, he would have manifested more Modesty and Moderation, and have been cloathed with that sweet smelling Garment of Humility, without which Iewel, no man shall ever weare the never fading Crown of Christianity. 1 Pet. 1.5.For God resisteth the Proud, and giveth Grace to the Humble. O the difference betwixt Truth and Deceit, betwixt the Ministers of Christ and Antichrist! Paul boasted not of things without his mea∣sure, but according to the measure of the Rule which God had disributed to him, Paul said,2 Cor. 10.13. Let us walk by the same Rule. Was this Rule the writings of the Prophets or Evangelists?Gal. 6.16. Was this Rule any Epistle written by some of the Apostles? Was not Paul a new Creature when he writ to the Galathians?Acts 13.9. was not Paul filled with the Holy Ghost? was not the Holy Ghost his Rule? Can the Holy Ghost be new model'd? Rom. 8.9.Again, Paul sayes,
If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Is that Man a new Creature that hath not the Spirit of Christ li∣ving in him? Hath that Man the Spirit of Christ living in him, or is he a new Creature, that so undervalues that holy soul-satisfying Spirit, by preferring his own Inventi∣ons before it, by giving that Honour to lifeless leaves, that is due to the infinite God of life and love? whether the Spirit of Christ be the Rule of a new Creature, yea, or nay, let that soul judge in whom the Spirit of Christ lives: and whether that Rule can be new model'd by man or not. But what must become then of Edward Reyners Rule? Let it return from whence it rose. This is his first lie. The world hath a Proverb, 'Tis ill stumbling at the Threshold. He that begins his Book with a lie, is likely to have more of the same stamp, before he comes to his end. Here I charge him with blasphemy, let him clear himself as he can. In his Title Page he stiles himself a Minister of the Go∣spel: but a lyer, and a blasphemer is not to be trusted. I shall therefore with the Lords leave, examine him a little further. His first Ordination sprang from the Romish Root, That foundation being built upon the Sand. The Man grew ashamed thereof, and relinquished it, and now de∣rives his Ministry from those of his fellowship, so now he presumes hee's built upon the Rock: but let him that thinketh he stands, take heed least he fall. 1 Cor. 10.12.When he proves his Call to be from God, And that those People had pow∣er to make him a Minister of the Gospel, He may then be believed. Paul was an Apostle not of Men, neither by Man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father; Gal. 1.1.but Ea∣ward Reyner is a Minister of Men, and by Man, for he a∣bides not in the Doctrine of Christ Jesus, not by Jesus Christ and God the Father: Mat. 12.33.The Tree is known by its fruit. Paul was filled with the Holy Ghost: is this Man so, that makes lies his refuge?Isa. 28.15. Paul sayes, Ye remember Brethren our Labour and Travel, labouring night and day, because we would not be chargeable to any of you.1 Thes.
2.9. And, even to this present houre we both hunger and thirst, are naked and buffetted, and have no certain dwel∣ling place, and labour working with our own hands, be∣ing reviled, persecuted, made as the filth of the World, and the off-scouring of all things to this day.1 Cor. 4.11.12 Canst thou Ed∣ward Reyner, or any of thy Generation, who preach for Rewards, witness such a condition? How often have ye laboured with your own hands night and day, that you might not be chargeable to your Hearers? Have you not certain dwelling places? Instead of suffering hunger and thirst, being naked and persecuted: do you not live in plenty and pomp, never yet tasting of such persecution as the Apostles suffered? What contrariety between you and Christs Ministers? The Ministers of Christ Jesus have the spirit of Christ: Canst thou and thy fellow Priests witness that holy Spirit living within you? James 2.9.Nay, for then you would not pamper your selves, and satisfie your lusts with the lofty and unrighteous wages ye receive, nor live in respect of persons, and so commit sin, complementing the rich with hat and knee, Sir & Forsooth, but not doing so to the poor; are not such partial? Hadst thou the spirit of Christ living in thee, (and he that hath not, is none of his) thou wouldest not have sent thy Sonne to the old Popish Plantation in Cambridge, there to be trained up in the Serpentine subtlety of Romish Sophistry. Rom. 8.9.Would not that expences thy Son there puts thee to, have been bet∣ter bestowed in putting forth some poor fatherless Chil∣dren to honest Trades? 2 John 9.Hadst thou the Spirit of Christ living in thee, thou wouldest abide in his Doctrine, and not instead thereof teach the Traditions of Men, nor suf∣fer Drunkards, swearers, lyers, proud persons, and such like, to sing Davids Psalms in thy Assembly, as they do, and thou never reprove that sinful practice, which is not to the prayse and glory of God. Didst thou speak from that pure Spirit, thou wouldest not use such long vain glorious Prayers as thou dost, nor limit that holy One to thy Houre-glasse.2 Tim. 1.1. I deny not the Relation of Master and Servant; but that in Men, which would be called Ma∣ster by those that ve them not, is of the Serpent and accursed. Nor call sprinkling Infants the Baptisme of Christ, or a peece of bread and a little wine, Sacra∣ments: where is the precept or precedent in all the Bible for that practice of sprinkling Children? where dost thou read that unsavory word Sacrament in all the Scriptures? Art thou a Minister of Christ, who holdest not fast the form of sound words, who calles men Masters, whom thou servest not, and art so called by others, contrary to the Commands of Christ: if thou art one of Christ Dis∣ciples, that of Math. 23.10. is a Command to thee. When did Christ repeal that precept after he comman∣ded
it? and when didst thou refuse that word? Now whether thou art a Minister of the Gospel, yea or nay, let all who love and live in the Gospel, judge. I cannot passe by another peece of notable Policy of this painted Preacher: he hath playd the Thief, and rob∣bed Paul very smoothly, who in Gal. 6.16. sayes, As ma∣ny as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on them, and Mercy, and upon the Israel of God: This Proof the Man pts into the Title Page of his Book, As who should say, His Book was as perfect a Rule for people to walk by, as Pauls was: A presumptuous Pharisee verily he is, yet let him take this along with him, Mat. 5.20.Except his Righteousness ex∣ceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, He shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. Pauls Rule was no Book or Writing with Pen and Inck, but the Holy Ghost. Till thou ownest the light.Post thou compare thy Babel Bundle, thy Babylonish Book, to the Spirit of Christ, which was Pauls Rule. Neither thou, nor any of thy Hearers, while they give such prehemi∣nence to thy Papers, and believe thy lies, shall ever wir∣ness, nor shall ever finde, that peace and mercy which Paul pronounced in that Epistle. And now I come to thy Epistle Dedicatory, wherein thy Language discovers thee what Nation thou art of. Is not bend∣ing and bow∣ing of the bo∣dy a worship∣ping with the body. Joh. 5.41, 42. Psal. 4.4. All Authori∣ty that is of God I own: & him that does Justice, my heart loves, ugh I give him not the Worlds flat∣tering Lan∣guage.A Roman thou art, though an
Englishman born; for thou writes thus, To the right Worshipful, the Mayor and Al∣dermen, &c. He that runs may read thee a Babylonian. Is not all Honour, Glory, and Worship due to God alone? what Worship is then left for thy Mayor and Aldermen? Is not God only to be worshipped? where is thy warrant in the Scriptures for giving them or any one such a Title? Did ever any of the Prophets or Apostles, give that Title unto any person? Did not Christ himself (a true pattern for all the pure in heart) say I receive not Honour from men: and, How can ye believe that receive Honour one of an∣other, and seek not the Honour that is of God onely? But thy heart is corrupted with flattery, and therefore canst not follow Christ. Commune with thy own Heart, and see the end of thy giving that Title to that People; Is it not to flatter and please proud flesh that delights therein? I know it is; and that thou knowes, it would cross proud flesh to want such proud titles, and thou dares not take up the cross therein; and the Principle of God within thee is my witness in this particular. Solomon saies tis not good to have respect of persons, for, for a peece of bread that man will transgress. Prov. 28, 21. Iames. 2.9. Rom. 2.11. I honour him in my heart whose love is to the Lord, be he rich or poore, in Authority or not, though my hand move not my hat, Iob 32.21.22.And Iames saies It ye have respect to persons ye commit sin: and Paul saies, There is no respect of persons with God. Yet I honour all men in the Lord, and out of him I honour no man. Doth true honour consist in such hollow, deceitfull, unwarrantable titles, inventions of the beast as are given by the world one to another? Is not your Lordship, your Honour, your Worship, and the like; a flattering Title Ester 3.2.How contrary art thou to Elihu who said Let me not accept of any mans person, neither let me give flattering titles unto man. for I may not give flattering titles unto man, in so doing my Maker would soone take me away: And Mordecai he would not bow unto Haman though the Darling of a King.Mind that, you idolatrous and dissembling complementers who are bow∣ing to and saw∣ning on one a∣nother when in your hearts you are fit to mur∣dr one another Psal. 2. But while thou feeds thy Magistrates with such food as their crazie, carnall, sto∣macks gape after; while thou feasts them with such fare, I say thou fattens the enemie, and pines the pure, but read thy reward and take it with thee. The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaketh proud things, Psal. 123. Thou tells them: Full 28 years are run out since thou was called to this City by the general vote of all the godly in it. It seems this was all the call thou had'st: the vote of men. Thy confession makes it manifest thou had'st no call from God: How hast thou proved thy generall vote of all the godly in this Citty? Must thy bare word be taken when thou hast already been proved a lier? Was there not one whose heart was towards the Lord? not one Child of God in all the Citty but those that gave their vote to thee? The Baptized people will not credit thee in this thing, but look upon it as an uncharitable censure, a presumptuous Boast, and will ranck it amongst the rest of thy Lies.
Full 28 yeares are run out, &c. all which time toge∣ther with my spirits and strength I have pent amongst you, and upon you, but for about 2 yeares in the heat of the late unhappy broyles, when the good hand of provi∣dence removed me to a Citty of Refuge to wit Norwich. Thou art Master of thy Trade. A smooth tongue, oylie words thou wantest not. But this will not doe, thy var∣nish must be washt off, under this painted stufflies Poy∣son. Hast thou spent 26 yeares upon those to whom thy book is dedicated, with thy Spirits and strength? whats that which speaks so lustily in the Pulpit, and walks so lively in the streets? Is it not Edward Reyner his own self? Hath the Mayor and divers more to whom thou dedi∣cates thy book lived 26 yeares in Lincolne? If they have not (and I am sure tis so) how hast thou spent thy spirits and strength amongst them, and upon them all that time? Besides hast thou had no journeys out of the Citty in all these 26 yeares? Hast thou spent none of that time in bow∣ling, musick, feasting at home or abroad? If thou confessest, then that time was not spent upon thy freinds, for the good of their Souls, whilst thou was Pampering thy own body Dives like with dainty fare and carnall pastimes not becoming a Minister of the Gospell. But if thou denies this, many in Lincoln can witness against thee. So that, turne which way thou wilt, the hand of the Lord is against thee, thou art found out a lyer in this particular also. Wee to the I∣doll Shepheard that leaves the Flock &c. 11 Zecha. 17. verse.Then thou talks of the good hand of providence, &c. Deale honestly with thy own heart: was it the good hand of Providence, or the left hand of slavish feare and self ends that made the Hireling leave his Flock when the Wolf came? What an unkind requitall did'st thou make them for their generall vote to preach amongst them? Was thou so honest or so hardy, to stay and desire their generall vote to leave them? Was there not many a Soul in that Citty who thought well of thee, yet knew not of thy flight till the Bird was flowne. Hee's blind, that sees not this to be Blas∣phemy.Thou goes on calling an Abridgment of thy Doctrine, heart renewing, life reforming, soule saving truths. Here's three lies in a little roome: canst thou prove that the Bi∣ble much less thy Babell book can renew the heart, re∣forme the life, and save the soule of any sinner: Is it not the living God alone can do these things? The leaest Child
in the Schoole of Christ that reads this stuff of thine, sees thy sottish error, but 'tis just that thy lying spirit should be laid open. O that ever such a lying man as thou art should take upon him the name of a Minister of the Gos∣pel! What a Saviour is it which thou trustest in? cannot he renew the heart, reforme the life, and save the soule? Then surely thou art in a sad condition, being so great a sinner, and hast so lame a Saviour. But if he can, then see what wrong hast thou done him to make a meere useless Cypher of him, and place salvation in printed leaves, and abominable lies. But this makes it manifest, thy heart is not renewed, nor thy life reformed, nor thy soule saved, were it so, thou would'st not have printed such dark Po∣pish stuff in such a time as this, when light breaks forth in aboundance. Soone after thou begs leave of them, to leave that little Peice of thine, in their hands as a light to guide them, &c. John 8.12. John. 19.Christ Jesus is the light of the world: does not he in∣lighten every one that comes into the world? is he a per∣fect light or not? wilt thou say there is imperfection in Christ Jesus? Luke 1. 79. John. 16.13. 2 Pet. 1.19.What need is there of thy dark Lanthorne, when the glorious Sun it self shines so comfortably? doth not Christ give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and guide their feet into the way of Peace: And John saith, when the spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth, and Peter saies we have a more sure word of Prophecy whereunto ye do well that ye take heed as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, untill the day dawne, and the day star arise in your hearts. Away thou blind guide! that book which thou begs leave to leave with them as a light to guide them, will lead all such as are guided by it, into the ditch: theres a multitude of lies, contradictions, false doctrine and blas∣phemies in it, of the Serpents invention, mixt and inter∣woven with severall places of Scripture, which thou wrests and pervertest, explicating of them according to that de∣ceitfull principle that is predominant within thee, there∣by hoping more plausibly to put off thy counterfeit ware and false doctrine for current truth, but the light hath
discovered thy delusions, and thou art seene and judged. Is thy book able to preserve from errors in opinion, and looseness in conversation as thou hintest? does not that which guides into all truth, preserve from all errors in o∣pinion and loosness in conversation?John 16.13. and is it not the spirit of Christ that guides into all truth? O the impu∣dency of this Antichristian Minister,Would be not fain be counted infallible? that dares thus ar∣rogate and assume that to him and his lying Legend, which is onely due to the infinite God of life and love! does not this clearly demonstrate that the Papall honour is eagerly pursued by this purblind Preist?Children of the night may be misled, but the Children of the day do discern them. But this doting Dreamer is through the goodness of God, discovered to be a twig sprung from the root of old Antichrist, and there's none but Bats▪ and Owles will beleive the lies and blasphemies which he hath written in his book. At last he concludes his Epistle with a lying comple∣ment, I am your servant, (Hypocrisy is spun with a fine thred) and yet thou suffers them to call thee Master: thou paintest thy self with Pauls language, as if thou had'st been and still wert desirous to seek them not theirs; and willing to spend, and to be spent for them: blush and be a∣shamed of thy deceitfull mystery; art thou guided by that pure principle, that unerring spirit which Paul was?That of God in thee knowes thou lyest. hast thou that pure love to thy Auditory which he had to his Corinthians? be ashamed thou Hypocriticall lying blas∣phemous man, & repent, repent: Hints that.Now I am come to Edm: Calamies Epistle, or approbation & commendation of this mans doctrine, who hints that Edw: Reyner is excellent in picking out choyce subjects to write upon (are lies, con∣tradictions & blasphemies, such choyce subjects to write on?) & to write much in a little; the man indeed hath writ three grosse lies in three lines in his Epistle Dedicatory, where he calls an abridgment of his doctrine, Heart-re∣newing, life-reforming, soule saving truths: there is much Antichristian deceit discovered in that little Letter.
He goes on saying, The subjects he (viz: Edward Reyner) treats on, are very usefull, seasonable and spirituall, (but tis in advancing of Antichrist and his Kingdom): And his manner of handling them very solid, substantiall, accurate and succinct and calls it much plaineness and much satis∣faction to the godly learned. But babes and sucklings in Christianity, discerne this Orator to be a lying wretch; He saies, I have read it, considered it, and approved it, (more shame for thee! but Simeon and Levi will take part one with another) and so he hopes will every juditious and pious Reader. But the hope of an hypocrite shall perish. See how one Preist paints another with flattering com∣mendations, he saies Edward Reyner will appeare like Bezaliell and Aholiab who were fill'd with wisdom of heart to work all manner of work of the cunning work∣man, &c. Were they fil'd with more wisdom of heart, than this Fox is with deceitfullness? A cunning workman he is seene to be, but the Mystery of his iniquity is laying open: Read it, saith Edmond Calamy, and it will make thee very holy here, and perfectly happy hereafter. Is not this a Chicken of the Serpents hatching? can lies, con∣tradictions, and blasphemous Doctrine make very holy here, and perfectly happy hereafter. And now he con∣cludes with an old Sacerdotal Complement, Your Servant in the work of the Ministry. Your Teacher, thou mightest more truly have said, in the Mystery of Iniquity: His Let∣ter is short, but I cannot say sweet, yet he hath a notable faculty of writing much in a little, many filthy lies are laid down in his little letter. Babylon he loves, Babylon he lives in, and in Babylon I leave him. The God of life and love be merciful unto him. The next thing I meet with, is, Edward Reyners Preface to the Reader, where he sayes: After serious considera∣tion and consultation with flesh and blood: what, con∣sult with flesh and blood about the things of God? Did Paul so? Gal. 1.16.Nay, he conferred not with flesh and blood, but it seems thou didst, whether Paul or thee bet∣ter deserves the Name of a Minister of the Gospel in this particular, let the wise man judge. Yet thou sayes thou found thy heart inclined, thou hopes, by the good hand of God, to take those ten Rules into second thoughts, upon two grounds especially; That in the review of them, they appeared to thee too short and defective: The other was
that notwithstanding the tenuity, and imperfection of them, God hath as thou was informed (its likely by such flatterers as Calamy) made them instrumental for the good of others. But it is the good hand of God to make it clear; thy hope was the hope of an Hypocrite, desiring to seem what thou wert not, a Minister of the Gospel. Hadst thou been a true Minister of the Gospel, thou wouldest not have consulted with flesh and blood. Thou couldest not have preached that which was defective, and imperfect; did ever any of the Apostles deliver such Doctrine as thou hast done? How wert thou guided? by what Rule? not by that Rule which Paul was. Could the Holy Ghost give out that which was defective and imperfect? Wilt thou make that pure spirit the Authour of that filthy Book? He that is so weak as to believe thee, or thy Dreams, is not guided by wisdom; so I pitty him. Thou beseeches the Reader, to take thy ten Rules out of thy Book into his bosom. Thy meaning is, to believe and practise them. What? believe lies, contradictions, and blas∣phemies, live and die in ignorance? They have little rea∣son to answer thy request otherwise, than, Get thee behind me Satan. John 16.13. 1 John 3.9.What if a man could repeat all the Bible, thats larger, and better then thy Book, yet if the Vnction within, the spirit of Christ live not in him, all will avail him nothing. If that seed remain not in him, how can he be guided into all truth, how can he keep himself, and not sin? Pen and Inck shall never make a sinner become a Saint: Calling it a Delusion, and they that are guided by it, thou countest deluded.The true Rule (but not thy ten Rules) will, (if observed) keep from wandring, stumbling, falling, and halting: But thou art not yet in the way to Heaven; for Christ is the way, He is the light, and him thou lovest not, but to thy pow∣er dost persecute him, both in print and Pulpit: He is the Guide into all truth, and him thou followest not, but fly∣est from. He is the Rule, and him thou walks not by, but delightest in the dark Dungeon of self-inventions;
Luke 13.24.The way seems to thee so narrow and strait, thou dares not Amos 1.6.strive to enter in, but takes pleasure in the broad way, be∣cause its easie to the flesh. But woe be to them that are at ease in the flesh. Thou art not come to the brideling of the Tongue, witness the many lies in thy Book:James 1.26. therefore thy Religion is vain. After Edmond Calamies Approbation, and thy Preface, follows a beg'd letter of commendation from one Thomas Manton, witness his own words towards the latter end of that Epistle, which are these, Having thus signified, and that upon Request, the pleasure I took in this undertaking, I take my leave, &c. Is it the property of a Minister of the Gospel to use such left-handed courses for a commendation? Did ever any of the Apostles use such a practice? But if thou hadst ten thousand such hands to thy Book, as his, they might dazle the eyes of the weak; but not adde one grain of true worth to thy Book, when it comes to be weighed in the ballance. The Flatterer begins in a soothing strain, Good Reader, and tells of intimations in Scripture, of a libertine spirit, that shall prevail in the latter dayes: That's true. And how this is accomplished by thee, Manton, and thy Gene∣tation, all honest hearts do see to their sorrow. Who takes more licentious liberty to live in pride, oppression, and satisfying the lusts of the flesh, then the Ministers of Eng∣land and their Favorites that maintain them? He talks of a Note found in Luthers study after his death, wherein was written, That within a small space of time, the tem∣per of the world should be for breaking yoaks, (what does that trouble thee? thou shews what thou art) insomuch, that they should not only cast off the Canons and Tradi∣tions of men, but the very Lawes and Ordinances of God, And that a sort of men should arise, that would be under no other Law and Rule, but their own lusts and inte∣rests. It seems Manton and Edward Reyner are sory
Luthers words prove so true, concerning the casting off the Ca∣nons and Traditions of men. And no marvel-great is your Diana, the Tithes of England, or other set maintenance instead thereof. But it must down; for its not a Plant of my Heavenly Fathers planting, and therefore shall be rooted up. Heb. 8.10.Now who is it that casts off the Law of God written in the Heart, that slights the pure Counsel of the living God, the light in the Conscience; but the Mini∣sters of the World, and Men of that Generation? preten∣ding to walk by the Scriptures, calling them their rule: yet walk clear contrary to them, and live under no other Law, so far as they dare, but their own lusts and interests? I know they that are Libertines in opinion, are in the road way to turn Libertines in practice, if there be not something to restrain them; But 'tis seen who they are, that be Libertines, both in Opinions and practice, an un∣toward Generation of deluding Priests, and their flatte∣rers, countenanced at present by some great Ones in the world, who throwe the Odium upon the Innocent, But this is no new thing; for Christ himself was counted Bel∣zebub.Mat. 12.24. Order and Rule I own, and all such who walk contra∣ry to the Law of God, or any just Law made by man, such I utterly disown, be they Priest or People. Dan. 4.30.31. Rev. 18.2. Isa. 1.20.Thus having past the Porch, I am entred into the Pa∣lace, Babylon or building, which this Nebuchadnezer hath built by the might of his Power, for the honour of his Majesty, as he vain gloriously hath conceited. But this mans Kingdom is departed from him, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, The mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. His first Rule is, Be sensible of Original corruption, whereby you are deprived of the Image of God, and of Communion with him, and wholly defiled, and depraved in all the powers and parts of soul & body, with a prone∣ness to all evil, and averseness to all good continually, and made subject to the wrath of God, to bondage unto sin and Satan, and to all Gods judgements here and hereaf∣ter.
A sad sentence, if it were as thou sayes: but he that runs in the dark may stumble. Dost thou teach another man not to steal, and wilt thou play the Thief? Dost thou preach, and perswade others to walk by Rule, and wilt thou walk without? where hast thou brought one proof out of Scripture, for any one of thy expressions above mentioned? Is there such a word as Original Corrupti∣on, in all the Bible? How dares thou thus impudently blaspheme the infinite goodness of the living God, as to set him forth, so severe a God, as to make man subject to his wrath, to bondage, to sin, and Satan, and to all Gods judgements here and hereafter, before he actually com∣mit sin. How many millions of sweet innocent Children would this mans Doctrine damn to all eternity? O thou bloody minded, blasphemous man, blush and be ashamed of this detestable Tenet! Ezek. 33.11.Is it not written, As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil wayes; for why will ye die, O house of Israel. Is there one syllable of original sin men∣tioned in this place? Wilt thou make God a lier like thy self, and forsworn too? Ezek. 13.20.O the height of blasphemy! Is it not elsewhere said, the Son shall not bear the Iniquity of his Father; And again, the soul that sinneth it shall die: Rom. 4.15:And where there is no Law, there is no transgression: Do not these places throwe down the Babel of thy soul-de∣stroying, God-blaspheming Doctrine of original sin? Is not that place fulfilled in thee,Prov. 10.19. In the multitude of words there wants not sin; who but a foolish man like thy self, would have brought in that, Ephes.
2.12.13. for the proof of original sin. Paul in that Chapter sayes thus, You hath he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein, in time past ye walked according to the Prince of the power of the Aire, the spirit that now worketh in the Children of disobedience. Amongst whom also we had our conersation in times past, in the lusts of our flesh. Does not he all this time speak of actual sin? is there one word of original corruption? verse 11. Remember saith he, That ye being in times past Gentiles in the flesh, &c. at that time ye were without Christ, being Aliens from the Common-wealth of Israel, having no hope, and without God in the World: But does Paul say, this was because of Original sin? does not the Chapter make it ma∣nifest, it was their sinful lives? Thou sayes, Paul calles this corruption of Nature (which thou countest Original sin) the old man, and body of sin, Rom. 6.6. Is the corruption of Nature named in that verse? why dost thou adde to the Scriptures? He sayes indeed thus, Knowing this that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. This place speaks of a body of sin, but does it not imply a living in, and a serving sin? Does it once mention Original sin? for shame man be silent, thou brings in Pauls war∣fare, A Law in the Members, &c. Rom. 7. A state or con∣dition of sin it does hold forth. A Combate between flesh and Spirit, betwixt the seed of the Woman, and the Ser∣pent; but does it mention that, Original sin does deprive of the Image of God, and of Communion with him? That original sin makes subject to the wrath of God, and to all his judgements here, and hereafter? Thou brings in (Psal. 51.5.) David saying, Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. He makes a deep confession of his sins, and acknowledges the weakness of his Parent. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother con∣ceive me: she was a sinner when I was shapen & conceived in her wombe.1 Cor. 2.14. Gen. 40.8. Isa. 29.11. But that spirit by which thou art guided, cannot give the interpretation of Scripture: The same that gave it forth must open it. To thee and thy Generation it is sealed, but to the Saints it is given to understand: Thou asks, Who could sleep in the night, that carrieth a Toad in his breast to bed with him, and sin is as full of poyson as a Toad. O minde thy own condition, see how many Toads thou bearest-about thee in thy own breast. Page 4.How full of poyson is the Doctrine thou delivers Of Ori∣ginall sin, and such like stuffe! page
5. Thou sayes, Every beloved sin or Master lust is a Belzebub, or Prince of Devils. Ah how many Belzebubs dost thou harbour in thy bosom, as pride, applause, desires of silver and gold, and a great e∣state. See if these, and a Nest of such like Serpents be not within thee; if these be not the Dalilahs thou delightest in. Thou sayes, God joyns pardon of sin, and power over sin together, &c.Page 18. Page 21. That sin makes ugly in Gods sight, That it kisseth and stabbeth, putteth out your eyes, cuts your throats, &c.
Art not thou and thy Generation of Pulpit-talkers, the Devils seeds-men, that sowes his tares among the wheat? his Servants to put off his cheats and false counterfeit ware of original sin, sprinkling Infants, taking a bit of bread and a sup of wine, roaring and singing in your Sy∣nagogues; Pharisaical Prayers, Hour-glasse Oratory, and the like. Do you not with such as these kisse, and stab the people, and with the hony fine names of Christs Ordi∣nances, Gospel-duties, coming to Church, the Baptism of Christ, and the supper of the Lord, which you put upon them, sting the people to death? for which of them can witness the life of a Christian? Do you not by these, put out the eyes of the peoples understanding, that they see not the sun of righteousness, the light? so they live in E∣gyptian darkness, under the Priests their Taskmasters; Do you not set them to grinde at your Mills (as the Philistins did Sampson) puts them upon Pharisaical duties at set times, coming to your Steeple-houses, using hypocritical prayers, promising them liberty, but brings them into snares; suffering lusts and sins to lie in their bosom unre∣proved, and cut their throats? do they not draw the people backward from Christ, the light of the world in every mans Conscience? and so hales them to Hell, while they think they are going to Heaven. See the end (O friends) of this praying and preaching if it be not to preach up the Priests, to make them your Masters, and you their Ser∣vants, that they may live upon other mens labours. Come but to them on their Market dayes, do as they do, eat, drink and be merry with them in their Idols Temple, and pay them Tithes for their Heathenish Oratory, Then they'l account you good Christians; But if you withhold your hand, and draw back, feed them not with Tithes or other allowance; The Priests will (Laban-like) cry out Gen. 31.30.wherefore have you stolen our Gods? and sue you at the Law, till by their Ordinance for troble dammages they have drawn blood: But surely the eyes of those Gentiles shall over long be opened, The dead shall hear the voice of the Sonne of God, and live, and no longer be deluded by those doting Babylonish Dreamers.Acts 26.19. But the City of Lin∣coln hath a paire of proud Pharisees, two subtle Antichri∣stian Foxes, who pretend they minister not for money, yet either of them can dispence and dispose of one hun∣dred and fifty pounds a year for their vain babling.John 5.25. They seem as if they mattered not Tythes: what need they when they have so much mony a year duly payd them without any cost or care of theirs? Do they not preach the same Doctrine, and tread in the same steps which the tyranni∣zing blood-sucking Tithemongers do? Do they not ac∣count them their Brethren in the Ministery? when do they publiquely preach against Tithes, or disown them in print or Pulpit? Is it enough to mutter out a word or two sneaking in holes and corners, as if they could not digest their unrighteous Mammon? If they are convinced of the unjustness of the thing; Why do they not proclaim it on the house top? In so doing they should offend their ungodly Brethren & bar themselves for the time to come in case their present pay should be taken from them. Page 23.The man writes thus; Hare sin perfectly, & perpetually, then you will not spare it but kill it presently, till sin be hated, it cannot be mortified. Do they so with Tithes and yearly maintenance: hate them perfectly, and thou wilt preach against them presently: O thou teacher of others, first cast out the beam in thy own eye, away with thy Pha∣risaicall righteousness, begin at Christs Crosse, and prac∣tise that unpleasant Sermon of self-denyal: what sin soever thou lovest, though it be thy Absolon, either the mainte∣nance of thy Son at the seminary of Satan, or thy repute of a godly Minister, thy lofty wages of unrighteousness, thy deluding the ignorant, and proyhesying lies unto the people, the pampering of thy body with superfluous dain∣ties; what ever it be that is thy Dalilah, deal not gently with it, but hate it perfectly and perpetually; for till it be hated, it cannot be mortified.
Page 28.Now thou art got to thy old trade againe, talking of holy duties, or ordinances, improved as weapons edge∣wise to cut and kill your lusts. How these unholy duties, and ordinances of thine have cut and killed lusts in thee, or the people, your lives make it manifest. Have these as Antidotes (for so thou hintest) expeld the Poyson of sin? The impurity of your lives (your lusts being still living) speaks the contrary.Pag. 302. But self-love as thou saies in another place of thy book is a false glass, which you commonly look your selves in, that makes all seeme good, you either have or doe. But thy painted language can deceive non but the silly: Nahū. 3.4.The vi∣zard of the welfavoured harlot must be puld off, that her ugliness may be seene and abominated. Thou saies, A Scriptum est,Thou begins with that which thou calls the word of God, viz. the Scriptures. Thou bids, heare it, read it, As it is written will put sin and Satan to flight. and hide it in your hearts. There are words many, but the Word is but one. Iohn 1.1.The Scriptures I own more truely than thou does, or a∣ny tithe taking Preist in England, yet I deny it to be that which thou callest it, but protest not. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. Are the Scriptures God? Were they in the beginning? Was not Moses the first Man that writ Scripture? Is it not Christ thats cloth∣ed with a vesture dipt in blood, is not his name called the Word of God? Are the Scriptures Christ?Rev. 19 13. 2 Pet. 3.5. Doth not Paul say, the Word of God is quick, and powerfull, sharp∣er than any two edged sword? peircing even to the di∣viding a sunder of Soule, and Spirit, and of the joynts, and Marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and intents of the heart? Can the dead doe all this? Is the letter quick and powerfull? Hath it the vertue force and opera∣tion written in that verse? Or is it the work of a God? Is any printed book a discerner of the thoughts, and in∣tents of the heart? Peter saies by the Word of God the Heavens were of Old, and the earth standing out of the water, and in the water. Were the Heavens and the earth made by the Scriptures, or by God? Paul saies every crea∣ture
of God is good, and nothing is to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the Word of God. Luke. 1.1.Can any thing sanctify a creature, but the Omnipotent God, and Creator of all things? 2 Iet. 1.2. Whether does he owne the Scripture who calls it his rule and lives con∣trary to it, or he that calls it not soe, yet lives according to it?Yet I own the Scriptures as they are, a declaration, a record, the writ∣ings of the holy Men of God, who spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. But I dare not Deifie, or equall them with God, nor pretend to make them my rule, and walk contrary to them, as thou and all thy generation doe. Thy second Antidote, thou calls the Sacraments. A word of an old stamp coyned by thy Fore-Fathers at the Romish-Mint, which it seems thou reservest as a holy Re∣lique for its Antiquity, not for any Sanctity that is in it, I am sure: Art thou not ashamed to use such rusty dark language at this time of the day? P. 28.29.Thou saies, Sacraments are instituted to be instruments for conveyance of vertue from Christs death into your Soules to mortifie your sins. (How many sins can the people truely say are mortified in them, by thy Sacraments? If thou wilt not answer for them, say for thy self, speak and lye not) Channels through which streams of blood flow from the sides, and heart of Christ, into your hearts to carry away your sins.
Name what sins thou canst witness either of thy owne, or the peoples that are carried away by those pretended streams flowing through the Sacraments. Then thou bids make use of Sacraments against sins as men doe of Assizes against Malefactors, get them condemned and cut off: He that drinks at the pure Fountaine, savours thy muddy language to streame from the corrupted Sea of Rome. But all this while thou hast been talking of Sacraments, thou hast lost thy Scriptum est. What old Authors hast thou been ransaking up for this Sacrament all stuff. Dares thou come into the feild thus to fight against the Lamb, and his Saints, and not bring one weapon out of thy Scripture Magazin to defend thee? How canst thou hope to return a live to thy Camp? Is the name of a Minister, Armour of Proof to secure thee? Dost thou not say, the Word is a sheild to defend you against all the assaults of Sin, and Sa∣tan, or Batteries of Yentations? The heart fenced with it, thou saies, is Cannon Proof. I know thy meaning is the Scriptures. Thou counts it the Word. Ah silly blind Soul, that art thus groping in the dark, when the Sun of righteousness shines so gloriously. Art not thou and the people provided of Bibles? How are you defended a∣gainst the assaults of Sin, and Satan? tis seene how open you are to the Batteries of tentation. And for all thy flou∣rishes thy heart is not fenced with one Scripture for all this folly thy tongue hath uttered, concerning thy second An∣tidote. Therefore thou art neither sword nor pistoll-proofe, much less Cannon-proofe by thy owne con∣fession. Prov. 12.22. Pro. 28.9.Thy third Antidore is, Prayer to God. of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me saith the Lord when ye come to appeare before me? who hath required this at your hand, the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with: * It is iniquity even the solemne meet∣ing, when ye spread your hands, I will hide my eyes from you: yea when you make many Prayers I will not heare:Isaiah 1. and what's the reason of this? your uncleaneness: Wash ye, make ye cleane, put away the evill of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evill, learne to do well, seeke judgement: Releive the oppressed, judge the Fatherless, Plead for the Widdow. Loe heres work for thee and thy Mayor and Aldermen! O that you would set your hearts to doe it! till then, all your Prayers are but vaine babling, till then there is no reasoning with God. If ye be willing and obedient yee shall eate the Fat of the Land, but if ye rebell ye shall be devoured with the sword, for the Mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.
page 30.Speaking of the spirituall combat, thou saies, The life or exercise of grace puts sin to death, in the duell betweene Flesh and Spirit, as humility doth Pride, and sincerity doth hypocrisy, (Ah poore Soul that it were so with thee) and where there is no opposition, there is no re∣straint where there is no contrary Principle of grace to cross and curb sin, there sin overflows like a River without Bancks. Grace thou saies will drive out sin as one pin doth another, yet for all this, page 28 thou calls Duties and Or∣dinances, Weapons, edgewise to cut and kill lusts, Antidotes to expell the Poyson of sin, especially the Word that is, saies thou, Scriptures (Sacraments and Prayer) for dost thou not say a Scriptum est, As it is written, will put sin and Satan to flight? Here thou laies all the weight and power of killing sin upon duties, ordinances and the letter, and page 30. thou saies, 'Tis the life of grace puts sin to death, and grace will drive out sin, but what that grace is thou hast not menti∣oned. 1 Cer. 12.9.The Lord saies to Paul, my grace is sufficient for thee. And Paul said when Iames, Cephas, and Iohn who seemed to be Pillars, perceived the grace that was given unto me, they gave unto me, and Barnabas, the right hand of fellowship.2 Gala. 2.9, And, by the grace of God I am what I am. And his grace which was bestowed upon me was not in vaine, but I laboured more abundantly than they all, yet not I but the grace of God which was with me.2 Titus 12. And the same Apostle saith, that the grace of God that bringeth sal∣vation hath appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts we should live soberly righ∣teously and godly in this present World. a Scriptum est. 2 Cor. 13.3. You seek a proof of Christ speaking in me. 1 Iohn 9. Know ye not that Christ is in you? If not, you are Repro∣bates. Hebr. 13.5. 1 Tim. 6.9. The seed of singularity isIs this grace a∣ny duties, or ordinances, Scripture, or a Scriptum est, as thou calls it, or Sacraments? Is not this grace Christ Iesus himself? The light that inlightens every one that comes into the world? even the Mystery which hath beene hid from ages and generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints? Thou goes on using many good expressions in the Scriptures. I should rejoyce to see thee live the life of those that writ them, then would thy conversation be without covetousness. Thou wouldst see, he that will be rich falls into temptati∣on and a snare and into many hurtfull and foolish lusts which drown men in perdition, and that the love of mony is the root of all evill. Ah friend love thy own soul, and
set thy heart no longer upon silver and gold, that lofty Sa∣lary thou receivest for thy lying Oratory. Do not (for the love of money) delude the souls of so many as thou dost, any longer. If thou does, it will be bitterness unto thee at the latter end. Thou art discovered by the light of God, and condemned by that pure principle of himself within thee. As yet thou art rich in thy own conceit, thou hast built thy nest high in the Airy wisdom of the world, which is foolishness with God, therefore art thou sent empty a∣way, Luke 1.53. Read James 4.6. Psal. 138.6. Page 34.As for Verbosity, whether that be not a weed in thy own Garden, an error thy self art deeply guilty of, the ve∣ry babes and sucklings in Christ can witness against thee. In the multitude of words there wanteth not sin. Thy vain glorious Prayers and Houre-glasse Oratory do con∣firm it: but he that refraineth his lips is wise.Prov. 10.19. Page 35.Thou bids, Furnish and fortifie your selves with spiritu∣all weapons out of Gods Armory against your speciall corruptions every morning. Dost thou not here set up the Scriptures to be Gods Armory and spiritual Weapons? Where are they called so in the Bible? Thou would seem to be religious, but how short thou comes of brideling the tongue, thy Verbosity in thy Book, and thy Tautologies in thy Pulpit exercises, clearly manifest. And therefore is thy Religion vain.James 1.26. Let the tender spirits feare with me here∣in. I must deal with him a lit∣tle in his own Weapon.In the 41. page thou playes the Critick with the Greek word  1 John 3.9. where John sayes, He that's born of God doth not commit sin, that is, sayes Thou, He does not work sin, as a man on his Trade, &c. What's thy meaning to carp at the Translators ren∣dering of that word. Scapula's lexicon, approves the word  committere peccatum. He shews it to be a word of a various signification as Servare legem, and divers others: But thy end is seen, and thou art judged herein to be under-propping that which the pure and powerful God of Heaven and Earth is throwing down. So thou canst not prosper. Read Ephes. 4.32. The English runs, As God for Christs sake: but see if it be not in the Greek, As God in Christ
. Is The Sophister would not ca∣vill at this place, it was not for his pur∣pose.this truly translated: But this blind Guid strains at a gnat and swallows a Camel, Mat. 23.24. Page 49. Thou directs them to receive Christ as held forth in an Ordinance, to wit, in the Ministry of the word, and in the Sacraments. Thou mightest have done well to have shewne who are the true Ministers, and what the word is. But I know thy meaning, and do deny thee and thy Generation, (who run before you be sent, Jer. 23.21.) to be Ministers of Christ. John 2.9.All his Ministers abide in his Doctrine, but so do not you, and therefore the Mi∣nisters of Antichrist you all are. Where dost thou finde the word Sacrament in the Scriptures? Thou holdest not fast the form of sound words.2 Tim. 1.13. Prove thy Traditions to be the Ordinances of Christ if thou canst, and that they are appointed as means to convey Christ as thou affirmest, Or else thou art so well known, thou mayst not be trusted. Thou hast an itching desire to be counted and received as an Apostle, and be esteemed amongst thy unbelieving Jews, as Peter was amongst the faithful, and as Paul was amongst the Colossians.For thou abi∣dest not in his Doctrine. 2 John 9.10. witness thy preaching of Original sin, &c. For thou sayes, He that receives Christs Ministers, receiveth him. But then they must not receive thee; for thou art no Minister of Christ. Thou wouldest fain weare the Crown, but cannot carry the Crosse, yet thou sayes, They must take Christ, as Wives do their Husbands, for better or worse; for richer or poorer. Does not this expression favour of the Popish Service-Book? P. 50.Does it not argue, thou still hast an affection to the Traditions of thy Romish Fore-Fathers; but secretly, for fear of thy Jews? Mat. 19.27.Dost thou deserve to be received as a Minister of Christ like Peter and Paul for this? Canst thou witness thy willingness to lose for Christ, as well as to gain; to suffer with him, as well as to reign with him? Peter could say▪ Loe we have left all and followed thee, Canst thou say so? Thy Norwich journey will rise up in judgement against thee. Peter was imprisoned with two Chains.Acts 12.6. Pauls sufferings was foreshewed him, and when some heard those things, they wept and besought him not to go up to Jerusalem. But Paul answered, what mean ye to weep, and to break my heart; for I am ready not to
be bound onely, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus: O valiant Champion for Christ and his Cause! Hadst thou been, with Paul, not ready onely to be bound, but to die for the Doctrine thou hadst delivered, thou wouldst have had more colour to have pleaded for Pauls Reception; but instead of being ready to be bound, thou runs away; instead of being willing to die for thy Saviour, thou chusedst to live in thy sins, shall such a cow∣ardly Priest, claim the priviledge of a Paul. Thou talks of erecting Christ a Throne, and giving him a Crown and Scepter in your hearts.Priviledge. Was it Christ or Antichrist that had a Throne erected, and a Crown and Scepter in thy heart, when thou fled from thy flock?P. 51. Does not Anti∣christ reign in the Kingdom of thy heart, while thou pins thy sheep on thy poor Commons, and poysons them with thy corrupt Doctrine both in Pulpit and print? P. 61.Thou sayes, You dwell in Christ, and Christ in you, as a man in his house, and p. 65. Christ toucheth the soul by his spirit; Is not his spirit of the essence of the Deity? Dost thou not say, p. 72. The substance of the Deity is incom∣municable? P. 67.Thou queries what kind of union is this between Christ and a believer, and thou answers, it is a reall or substantial, total, and spiritual union, and that it is a uni∣on of substances, essences, and persons: Can this be true, and yet the substance of the Deity be incommunicable? P. 69.Thou sayes, Christ is in a believer, and a believer is in Christ, and in-being is mutual and conformable between them, and Christ and a believer are in one another really. And yet thou sayes, the substance of the Deity is incom∣municable. 2 Cor. 13.5. Col. 1.27.Thou goes on, saying, Christ himself is in a Believer, not his graces onely, so is the spirit it self in a Believer dwells in him, not his fruits or operations onely, yet thou sayes, the substance of the Deity is incommunicable, is not this to make the spirit not to be of the substance of the Deity?
Thou runs on, saying, This union of Christ and a Be∣liever is a totall Vnion; the whole person of a believer is united to the whole person of Christ, both Soul and Body with his Deity. And that whole Christ both his God-head & Manhood is united to the whole Christian, both his soul and body: And yet for all this, thou shames not to say, The substance of the Deity is incommunicable.Page 70. Then thou brings in Rom. 8.11. saying, That the spirit of Christs unities, the body of a Believer to Christ, as well sa his soul, and inhabites or dwells in his body as well as in his soul, and that the Saints bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost. And yet thou blushes not to say, the substance of the Deity is communicable. An infallible signe, thy body was never yet the Temple, wherein that pure Spirit hath lived in. Certainly some of thy Hearers will not credit thee in this particular, and if they will a∣ny longer be led by such a filthy Lyer and Blasphemer, if they will still dote upon thee, and thy Dreams, I shall pitty their sad condition, that they are thus given up to believe such strong delusions.P. 79. A fourth obstruction in receiving Christ, thou sayes, is fear of suffering for Christ, of bearing his Crosse, that Christ may prove costly, or his wayes and cause cumber∣some, that you may leave or lose Father, Mother, Wife, Children, House, Lands, Goods, &c. And Selfeness stands (thou sayes) in Diametrall opposition to Christ, and must be receded from, and renounced before Christ can be approached or received. Deal honestly with thy own soul, was not fear of suffer∣ing for Christ, of bearing his Crosse, the cause that made thee leave Lincoln and go to Norwich? is not fear of lo∣sing House, Lands, Goods, Gratuities, yearly Revenue; re∣proach of the world, the losse of the name of a Minister of the Gospel, the cause that hinders thee from taking up the Crosse of Christ? Canst thou not say from thy own expe∣rience (as in p. 80.) O the difficulty of self-deniall, and mans naturall aversness to it, it is next to ceasing to be himself: especially thou sayes, when a man hath a great Self to deny, as great parts, power and wealth.
But what's thy meaning to call the Idolls Temple a Church, and breed and wine a Sacrament, as thou dost in thy 80. page? How many rest, sayes thou, in comming to the Church, and not to Christ? in receiving the Sacra∣ment, but not Christ? Fond man, how should they finde him where he is not? Away with this Popery, thou paint∣ed Priest, thy Tongue is tipt with Romish poyson. Thou tells of Peters prohibiting Cornelius, p. 82. when he worshipped him: but when dost thou forbid thy flatte∣rers, when they come bending and bowing before thee, curtesing unto thee? Thou wants that true humility Pe∣ter had, thy counterfeit stuffe shall yield no contentment. That self-pleasing Mantle, called the Custom of the Nation, shall contribute no comfort to thee in the time of thy Tri∣bulatiō, when the book of Conscience coms to be opened. Thou often hintest to the people, they should readily receive Christs Ministers, and counts thy self, and the Tithe-taking Priests for Christs Embassadors, I am sure. But that covetous griping Generation, who are alwayes crying, give, give, who love the flock meerly for the fleece, are none of the Ministers of Christ Jesus. Read Isa. 56.10.11. and see if that place be not a pretty Representative of the Priests of our time.Isa. 56.10.11. worth reading. Page 56.Thou tells of Christs Proclamation of himself and his Commodities free access to all commers, and of all plen∣tifull supply to all hungerers and thirsters after him, and his good things, wine and milk, &c. to come and buy of him without mony, and without price. Page 80.Why dost not thou and thy fellow false Ministers make Christ your pattern? O the difficulty of self-denial, and mens naturall aversenes to it! Yea even such men who would be counted the Ministers of Christ Jesus, These are so farre from calling people to take their counterfeit ware without mony or price, that they think they can never get money nor price enough. Are such the Ministers of Christ? Priest;Thou Queries whether it be not the great condemning sin that Men will not receive Jesus Christ, seeing that is the great command of the Gospel, and Christ (sayes thou) will come in flaming fire to take vengeance on them that obey not the Gospel: This is the great salvation tender∣ed to you in the Gospel, which if you refuse, how can you escape great damnation?
Joh. 3.19.This is the condemnation that light is come into the world and men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evill. What will become of thee, and thy generation of teachers, who doe not receive the light, but reject it? Who instead of yeilding up your selves to it, you set your selves to preach against it. Ye will neither obey it, your selves, nor are willing that others should. Math. 23.13.Wo and misery will be the portion of such men who in∣stead of opening shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, and neither goe in themselves, nor suffer them that are entring, to go in: how can such escape the damnation of Hell?Prov. 28.13. John 8.12. Not without confessing, and forsaking their sins and receiving the light of the world Christ Jesus. P. pa. 89.In te 89 page thou tells of a fulness of force and effica∣cy in the death of Christ to crucify the Old Man, and de∣stroy the whole body of sin: and page 90, Thou brings in this Scripture,5 Iohn 18. He that is begotten of God keeps himself, and that wicked one, that is Satan, who is the worst of all bad ones, toucheth him not. This keeping of Satan, and his temptations out of the Soul (thou saies) conforms a Christian unto Christ, who said the Prince of this world that is Satan comes and hath nothing in mee: he cannot tempt me to sin, I have no dry tinder of corruption with∣in me to kindle with the sparks of his tentations: all this is thy owne language, thou hast here said enough to shake thy own Kingdom; and confound all the Preists in Eng∣land who preach against perfection. Prov. 25.13
Jer. 2.13.Be your selves, O people; darken not your understand∣ings by doating any longer upon these dreaming Preists, who are Clouds and Winds without raine, Cisterns that hold no water. Judge, O ye wise in heart, whether he that is begotten of God that keeps himself and that wicked one the Devill cannot tempt or overcome him to commit sin, whether that man be not perfect, and free from sin yea or nay.Was not Christ perfect and without sin? Whether he that is conformed unto Christ be not perfect yea or nay and without sin? whether he that hath no dry tinder of corruption within him to kindle with the sparks of Satans temptations, be not perfect and free from sin yea or nay? whether such a Soul I say hath not attained to that perfection which Christ commanded and Paul perswaded the Hebrews to press after.Math. 5.48. 6 Hebr. 1. Hebr. 12.23. 4. Ephes. 13. Is not the spirit of that just man made perfect? Is not he then come unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ? Read this without prejudice, and consider that as the tree falls so it lies. And 1 Iohn 4.17. As he is, so are we in this world. Was not Christ Jesus perfect? Was not he with∣out sin? In the 91 page thou bids others not set their affection on things below, nor to love the world or the things of it. Learne this lesson thy self, then preach it to others. page. 93.Thou talks of patient suffering the evills of the world, to overcome them, as persecution, famine, Nakedness, Perill, sword, &c. Is not he a cowardly Captaine that bids his Souldiers adventure, further than he dares goe himself? should not such a commander be Cashierd? p. 94. 95.Thou bids them goe to Christ for his spirit to dwell in them to lead them as a guide in all their waies, and into all truth, To teach you all things, as a Master, & bring al things as a Monitor into your remembrance. What need is there then for thy defective, and imper∣fect rules? Why didst thou beg leave of thy Mayor, and Aldermen, and freinds to leave thy book with them, as a light to guide them, as a staff to stay and strengthen them. If thou wouldst have them goe to Christ for his spirit to dwell in them, to lead them as a guide in all their waies, and into all truth, to teach them all things as a Master, and bring all things as a Monitor into their remembrance. Is not this confused stuff? But Babylons Brats can work no better. Thou talks of self emptying, and sense of emptiness makes Souls hungry and thirsty after the spirit. Why then dost thou fill them with so many filthy-lies, and contradictions as be in thy book?
The bottle that is full of bad liquor thou saies must be emptied to the bottom, before it can be filled with the good. Is not thy bottell full of the airy windy stuff of Popular applause, of the filthy muddy waters of pride, covertousness, and self conceit of thy humane parts: empty it soone that thy bottle may be fill'd with the sweet water of life, for (as thou saies) if Laodicea do not know she is poore, blind and naked, her vessell is neither empty nor open but full and stopt or corkt up. Now thou presses people to the conduit-pipes of the ordinances as thou calls them. Especially word, Sacra∣ments, and communion of Saints: Thou maiest blush and be ashamed to call thy self-invented lifeless performances the ordinances of Christ Jesus: where dost thou read in the Scriptures that the two Testaments, as thou calls them, are the two breasts of Christian consolation?Are not the Saints bodys the Temples of the Holy Ghost. Tell me, does not a man draw and receive his consolation from the in-dwelling and living of the holy Ghost within his Body? Is not this to rob God of his honour, to attribute that to the letter which is due to the living God? Thou saies Christ is a well of living Water, didst thou live upon that living water, thou couldst not delight in these dirty pu∣dles of false doctrine; and deceitfull devices of mans Braine, as thou does. Then thou comes to the Word which thou calls the Scriptures, and bids them waite on God therein for the blessing of regeneration, and growth in grace. Both Priest and people have the Scriptures, yet which of you can witness in your selves the blessing of regenera∣tion, and growth in grace? He that's borne of God doth not commit sin, for his seed remaineth in him, and he can∣not commit sin, because he is borne of God. And dost thou not acknowledge that he that is begotten of God keeps himself and that wicked one toucheth him not.1
Joh. 3.9. Dost thou not goe on saying, This keeping out of Satan and his tentations out of the Soul conforms a Chri∣stian unto Christ? Art thou or any of thy hearers able to witness the new birth, that you commit not sin, that the wicked one toucheth you not, that his tentations are kept out of your Soul, and that you are conformed unto Christ? Then thou goes to thy Sacraments, and brings a peece of Scripture for thy sprinckling infants, which plainly con∣founds the practice of thee and all thy generation of Preists. He that believeth is and is baptized, shall be saved. Does not beleiving goe before baptizing? Can a new borne Child beleive? Produce either precept or pre∣sident in the Scriptures for thy practice of sprinkling In∣fants, or be ashamed: Did the primitive Church when they brake bread, receive a bit of Bread and a sup of Wine (as the people in fellow-ship with thee, and all those who live in formes do from the Preists: Is not this a Popish invention?), they brake bread from house to house eating their meet with singleness of heart; Was not this a full meale? Did ever Christs Apostles use Prayer with preaching as you doe? The Jews indeed had certaine houses of Prayer that Church being nationall, and so there was a certaine place appointed for that purpose, but were they not un∣converted? do not you by imitating them therein, and by your lives, make it manifest, you are the Jews now who are unconverted? Doe you not hold up the letter,In opposition to the Spirit, calling the let∣ter your Rule. and persecute Christ in spirit? Have you any other than com∣mon or formal prayers before and after Sermon, (a meer Popish Custom) And when that is done, then comes a formal benediction or blessing the people, a meer cheat wherewith you delude the ignorant; but the light hath discovered that, and all the rest or your deceits. What the people are better for that blessing, their lives make it manifest:
Acts 3.2.Did not Christ that High Priest cease this Ceremony when he blest his Disciples, and after∣wards came in spirit to blesse his people? were not Christs and his Apostles prayers very short, plain, and to the pur∣pose: are not yours long, vain glorious, without the spirit and understanding? Does that pure spirit live in you, when you perform such lifeless exercises, and deliver such deceitful Doctrine? and is not your singing, a confused noyse of lying? Thou tells of Christs invitation of all poor souls to him, who feele a need of him: then see from henceforth thou hinder none, keep none back, let all that will go free∣ly. Does Christ call them, and wilt thou by the ringing of a Bell call them to thy self? Art thou Christ? art thou the way, the truth and the life? Thou sayes, Christ stood and cryed (so does he still) if any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink: so let him that is a thirst come. But canst thou and thy fellow Priests satisfie the thirsty souls of poor sinners with the water of eternal life? if thee canst not, call them no longer to thee; but send them to Christ, the light of the world, that pure Fountain; and delude them no longer by letting them drink of the long stan∣ding, corrupted, putrified pool of mens traditions. Christ sayes, Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy la∣den, and I will ease you. Can thee and thy Generation give ease to that soul, that labours under the heavy load and burthen of his sins? Do ye not instead of taking off the burthen lay more weight on? Christ he gives ease, and you sell whats a Burthen.Page 117. Thou talks of Christs cheapness of all soul Commodities, as Grace, Peace, Spirit, joy, you may buy them without money or mony worth. Hoe eve∣ry one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money: for coming is buying, and thirsting is the price. I will give to him that is a thirst of the Fountain of water of life freely. Now see the difference between Christ and Antichrist:
Christ he gives grace, peace, spirit, and joy freely. Anti∣christ he sells his graceless inventions, deluding, deceitful Doctrines and Traditions, the enioyment whereof brings no peace, his dead performances wherein is neither spi∣rit nor life, his loud singing, wherein is no joy nor com∣fort: These he sells at as great rates as he can, either by payment of Tithes, or so much a year, be it one hundred and fifty pound a year more or lesse, what he can get. Yet he tells you, that your not comming to Christ for what ever you want, is your condemnation, and he bids you Take it out of Christs own mouth, Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life; but the Serpent is so subtle, He would have you take Him in your way, make him your Guide; but while you do so, ye shall never see your Saviour. Well friends, the Priest hath told you plainly, your not going to Christ is your condemna∣tion. Luke 1.21.Now unlesse ye be Reprobates, past reproof, you may know that Christ is within you. The Kingdom of God is within you: therefore turn aside from your worldly Teachers, and turn to the pure light of God in every one of your Consciences. Take counsel of that trusly, faith∣full, and most wise Counseller, yield obedience unto him. Behold, to obey, is better then sacrifice, and to hearken better then the fat of Rams: You shall never witness the life of a Saint, never truly loath all manner of sin, till you be in perfect love with the pure light of God within you. And that will give you power over your corruptions, abiding in it, being obedient to it. The least measure thereof, if you be faithful to it, shall make you experience this for truth: if you say to this, or that Mountain, or hill of sin, Be removed, it shall be removed and leei'd. Christs precept is (thou sayes) when thou prayest enter into thy Closet, and shut thy door. This thou calles his Rule for private prayer. Shew then his Rule for thy long vain glorious publick prayers, before and after Sermon: where do the Scriptures mention any Rule for private & publick prayer, such as thine? then thou talks of praying with others, &c.
1 Cor. 14.15.'Tis an easie matter to patter out many words, but which of you prayes with the spirit and understanding? Thou confesses before, They that have not the spirit of Christ are none of his: And they who have that spirit living in them, need none of thy Rules or direction, how, when, or with whom, to pray. The spirit he helpeth our Rom. .26.infirmities; for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the spirit it self maketh intercession for us, with groans which cannot be uttered. P. 124.Thou plainly shewes thy self a Son of the Church of Rome: Houses thou sayes (as well as Temples) were and are to be dedicated to God: Thou sayes the Jewes were commanded to do it: Hee's as blind as thy self, who knowes not that; but what of this: After the Destruction of the Temple, was there ever any other commanded to be set up?Acts 7.47.48. Acts 17.24.25 John 4.23.24. Prove this if thou canst. God dwells not in Temples made with mens hands: And ye that worship in the Idols Temple, ye worship ye know not what; for God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit, and in truth. 1 Kings 18.27.29.Should I say to you concerning your worshipping in your Steeple-houses, as Elijah did, would you not be angry? Cry aloud, for he is a God either he is talking, or he is pursuing, Or he is in a journey, or peradventure, he sleepeth, and must be awakened. But is there any voice? any to answer? or any that regardeth? Anos 6.1. Rom. 12.2.Where is the man or woman amongst you, that turneth from the evil of his wayes? that ceaseth to do evil, and learns to do well? that lives not at ease (and woe be to them that live at ease) that fashions not himself according to the World? that can truly witness self-deniall, that takes up his daily Crosse, and follows Christ? P. 130. can the Spirit of God be limited to set times?Does the Scriptures limit the Saints to pray morning and evening. He that prayes without the Spirits help, his prayers are an abhomination to the Lord. The Apostle bids, pray continually. Away thou Legalist, thou painted Pharisee, blush and be ashamed.
P. 134.Thou calles the word (meaning the letter I know assu∣redly) food for the soul, Manna from Heaven: but where is thy Scriptum est for this? can any thing but the living God satisfie the soul? Had not the Scribes and Pharisees the writings of the Prophets, the presence of Christs per∣son, and his Apostles, and their preaching too? yet Christ complains, that they would not come to him, that they might have life. They had the letter, yet wanted life they Page 134.had the Husk, yet wanted the Kernel. Whether is the Husk, or Shell, or the Kernel, Meat? Is it not said, He satisfies the hungry with good things, does he call the Scri∣ptures those good things? where is it said that they sa∣tisfie? But the rich he sends empty away: Is this the do∣ctrine of Christ, to say reading of Scripture is that to the Soul, which Dinner and Supper is to the body? How ma∣ny poor pined starved soules in this City will witnesse against thee herein, when the book of Conscience comes to be opened? Thou goes on calling the Scripture (under the name of Gods Word) the Christians Armory, or Magazine, saying, Reading of Gods Word is a Means of putting on the whole Armour of God, of girding the sword of the Spirit upon the Thigh of the soul: And that it's like an Apothecary shop, wherein are healing Medi∣cines for all sorts of Spirituall Diseases. Thou pretends one thing and does another: thou seems to make the Scripture The Rule for men to walk by, but not, it seems, for thee to talk and prate by, who preaches and prints such stuffe as neither thee nor all the Priests in England can prove by plain Scripture. P. 140.He that brings any other Doctrine then what was delivered by Christ and his Apo∣stles, Is he not accursed? Thou calls Conscience a good Monitor, and so it is, but thou dares not serve so good a Master. Pag. 143. Thou calls it a Principle of Joy. O that thou wouldst make it thy joy to obey that pure Prin∣ciple, thy joy would be then unspeakable, and full of glory; but thou treads it under foot, and dares not give it the uppermost Room, nor let it Rule in the Kingdom of thy Heart. It is my witnesse, I speak the Truth and lye not.
P. 145.Thou makes confession against thy self, but forsakest not. Family-Duries superficially performed cannot kill disorders in thy house. Are the best of Your performan∣ces any better? What means then the reigning of your Headstrong Lusts, as Pride, Passion, Envy, Covetousnesse, &c? Art thou not ashamed still to limit Prayer to Morn∣ing and Evening? The 5. Psal. 3. verse which thou brings 1 Thess. 5.17.for thy proof, mentions Davids exercise in the Morning onely. Does thou bring in His practice against a Gospel-precept, Pray continually or without ceasing. Thy calling that day of the Week thou Worships on, the Sabbath, shews thy ignorance of the True Sabbath. Is this the language of A true Minister of the Gospel? Thou sayes all Relations Domestical, Ecclesiastical, and Political are founded and established in the Law of God, and Gospel of Christ; But shouldst thou never have pen∣ny for thy preaching till thou proves this, in that sense thou takest Ecclesiastical Relations, The Fox would soon say, his Spirits, and strength were spent, Take the Pulpit who would, the Priest would be gone either to Norwich or some such other Place, or City of Pecuniary Re∣fuge. Thou brings in for a Proof of thy Bold assertion, Thou shalt not covet thy Neighbours Wife, nor his Man-servant, nor his Maid-servant, &c. But what's this, to Ecclesiasticall Relation as thou calls it? Is it not like a Spiders Webb finely spun? yet so weak that a feather will fell it down? Is not this to cast an Odium upon the late Parliament, and present Authority for abolishing Bishops, Dean and Chapters? were not they counted Ecclesiastical Relations? Art not thou and thy Generation of Priests built upon the same foundation they were? Is not your life in the letter as theirs was? Their Doctrine, and yours the same? Do you not plead for the same maintenance of Tithes they did?Did not thee and thy Presby∣terian Genera∣tion preach against Prelacy because you would be the Prelates your selves? Art not thou, and thy fellow Priest, paid for your preaching, out of that yearly Revetiue, which was formerly paid to your Elder Brethren the Bishop, Dean and Chapter of Lincoln, Three hundred pounds a year be∣tween you? If these Relations had been grounded upon the Law of God, and the Gospel of Christ, Was it well done of them who abolished them? But that Man's blind who sees not thee to be a Minister of Antichrist, quarrel∣ling so far as thou dares, and shewing thy discontent at what the Lord hath done in hastening the Downfall of the Devils Kingdome.
P. 156.Thou presses the people with their duty to their Mini∣sters: Due respect and love to their persons: and thou brings in 1 Thess. 5.12, 13. We beseech you, Brethren, to know them that labour among you, and are over you in the Lord. Now prove thy self and the Priests of England if thou canst, to be such as Paul was, to be in the Lord, and fill'd with the Holy Ghost, Did ever Paul or any of the Primitive Saints preach such Doctrine as thou and thy Fellow Priests do? and live in such pride, pomp, idle∣nesse, and oppression as you do? Thy next proof is, 1 Tim. 5, 17, 18. Let the Elders that Rule well be counted worthy of double Honour. Name me those Elders among you who rule well: Old in folly, deceit, and filthinesse there are many; but young and green to any thing that is good. Who are they that labour in the Word? Thee and thy Ge∣neration are not true Labourers in the Lords Vineyard, but lazie idle loyterers, Greedy shepherds: None of you abide in his Doctrine nor hold fast the form of sound words. The next is, due Maintenance for their pains, Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the Word Communicate. First prove your selves True Teachers such as Paul, and the Apostles were. Produce your Commissions from Christ Jesus, Prove your Call, That you ran not before you were sent: That you abide in his Doctrine. Till that be done, there is nothing due unto you, but Judgment. And should thy self, and the Priests of this Nation, who preach for Re∣ward, be forced to make but bare restitution of all that they have received and robb'd the people of, under the Notion of Christs Ministers, they would be the most beggerly contemptible People in the World. But observe the word, Communicate, a voluntary Con∣tribution, or free Cift. Is this the best prop you have for compulsive Tithes, or other set maintenance? Thy next place is, 1 Cor. 9.11. But what spiritual things have ye sowne unto the people? unlesse spiritual Delusions, Tea∣ching for Christs doctrine the Traditions of Men: calling Sprinckling Infants the Baptisme of Christ: and roaring
out Lyes in the Idols Temple, spiritual melody: and eating a bit of bread, and drinking a sup of wine, feeding on the Body and Blood of Christ. Is Original Sin the Doctrine of Christ? Is Denying the Deity to be Com∣municable, the Doctrine of Christ or Antichrist? Is not he that denyes Jelus to be come in the flesh an Antichrist? Then Edward Reyner hath no wrong done him to be cal∣led Antichrist: for He denyes the Substance of the Deity to be communicable. Is not Christ Jesus of the Substance of the Deity? Is it not said, Christ in you the Hope of Glory? Paul tells us he used not this power, but suffered all things lest he should hinder the Gospel of Christ. If the Ministers of England were such as Paul was, they would be content with Paul's Reward; and what was that, Ve∣rily, saith he,1 Cor. 9.18. That when I preach the Gospel, I may make the Gospel of Christ without charge. Paul he kept under his Body, and brought it into subjection, lest that, saith he, when I have preached to others,I my self should be a Cast-away.1 Cor. 9.27. O that when thou preachest Self-Denyal to others, thou wouldest make Paul thy President, and practise it thy self, and not cry out of the difficulty thereof as thou dost, page 80. and so be discouraged and never take up the Crosse, but live in such pomp and pride as thou does, nor call for respect to thy person as thou does; like a Proud Pharisee as thou art. Do either of the places in Scripture thou produces, prove that the Apostles called for that re∣spect to their persons which thou receivest? Or does ei∣ther of the places mention respect to their persons? The Pride of thy Heart is seen in thy third proof, I saiah 52.7. The words are these; How beautiful upon the Mountaines are the feet of Him, that bringeth good tydings, that publisheth peace, that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation, that saith unto Sion, Thy God reigneth. Come down thou proud Son of Ambition, that aspiring spirit in three shall be level'd with the Dust. 1 Pet. 5.5.For God refuteth the proud, and gives his grace to the Humble.
Page 174.Thou counsels Masters and Mistreffes to Make their Servants read Scriptures, and Bring them to the Publique Ordinances. He that dares use such lofty language now, when Li∣berty to tender Consciences through the infinite love of the living God is allowed, how would he thunder would he not prove another bloody Bonner, if ever power should be put into his hands? Art thou a Minister of the Gospel and thus seeks to dethrone him, by taking his Golden Scepter of Loe from him, and wouldst rule thy self over his Saints with thy rod of iron, thy persecuting spirit? Is not Christ alone King of the Conscience? Away thou Traitor to the King of Saints! Thy Treason is discovered against him, and his Tender Lambs; but it shall not pro∣sper. Page 217.Thou talks of Contempt of the World, of all the Wealth, Pomp, and Glory in it, and sayes it is Christian Magnanimity to contemn silver and gold. 'Tis such Magnanimity, as neither thee, not the Priests of England who preach for Rewards are indued with. What people lives in more pomp and glory of the World than your selves, according to your outward estates? who coret silver and gold more then your selves? Page. 219.Paul thou sayes was singular in Self-Denyal. 1 Cor. 9.27.O that Edward Reyner could truly say so of himself; but while he preaches this to others, he himself becomes a Cast-away: for he like a Coward cryes out of the diffi∣culty thereof, and never yet durst deal with it. Page 80. P. 225.Ah that thou hadst eyes to see who it is that rests in the Name without the thing; who it is that Sardis-like hath a Name to live, but is dead, and who they be that are the Syna∣gogue of Satan: But this is hid from thy eyes, for thou delightest in darknesse, and loves not, but loathes the light, an infallible sign thy Deeds are evil.Revelat. 3. 1—9. Page 227. Priest.Thou sayes, Neither is that Baptisme sufficient to Sal∣vation which is outward only of the flesh. Ans. Why dost thou use it then & sprinckle Infants? being thou hast neither precept nor president for that practice.
Priest.Baptisme is that of the Spirit (thou sayes) in the Heart. Ephs. 4.5.If this onely be Christs Baptisme, Whose is the other? Paul owned but one Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme. Page 244.Thou talks of that thou never tasted of from God in (thy own not) his Ordinances (the Letter not) the World; Hebr. 4.12.(for the Word is quick and powerful) Sacraments, (Away with that Romish Word, it shewes what thou art and Wouldst be) Prayer:Prov. 12.2. Prov. 28.9. The prayers of the Wicked are an abomination to the Lord: All thy babling is but a Pharisaical Vain-glorious Boasting, a meer flourishing of a Formalist. Ephe. 4.12, 13.Thou sayes in Heaven is perfection of grace, & obedience; Paul is speaking of perfecting the Saints, for the work of the Ministery, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in the Ʋnity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the Measure of the Sta∣ture of the fulnesse of Christ, That we henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro, carried about with every wind of Doctrine by the sleight of men, &c. Paul writes to such who had not yet attained to such a Measure; But does Paul say, that perfection of Grace and obedience is in Heaven, as thou wouldst have it understood? Does he not plainly signifie that the coming unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ, is to be while we are on Earth? Else what mean the follow∣ing words, That we Henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro, &c. Can the Saints in Heaven be tossed to and fro? What wind of false Doctrine is there in Heaven? What cunning craftinesse there? Are there any in Hea∣ven who lye in wait to deceive?
Heb. 12.23.Then thou tells them, That in Heaven the spirits of just men are made perfect. The Apostle speaking of the Administration of Moses, &c. Tells them, that they are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable Company of Angels, to the Assembly and Church of the first-born which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect. If the man were not blind he might see the Apostle sayes, That they are come, &c. But he that's in the Dark may stumble. And the language of Babylon is Confu∣sion. In thy 46 page thou Queries, why they fetch not joy from Heaven to comfort their Hearts against all their sor∣rowes on Earth, &c. What is the joy of the Holy Ghost so weak, so little, that it cannot comfort the heart against Sorrowes on Earth, but thou must be thus posting them to fetch joy from Heaven? Hadst thou ever tasted the joy and com∣fort of the Holy Ghost, surely thou wouldst never thus have undervalued it. But however, if thou wilt needs be sending them to heaven, it would not be amisse for thee to direct them the way if thou knowes it so well. Page 252.Speaking of the glory of heaven, Thou sayes it is Great, Yea an exceeding, excessive, eternall, weight of Glory: and usest them words as Scripture, 2 Cor. 4.17. But, is the Word excessive set down in that place? why dost thou adde to the Scripture? Who ever reads the verse, may read thee a lyar. Then thou calls these words, the high∣est Hyperbole that can be exprest; and when thou hast done, thou contradicts thy self, saying, Nec Christus nec coelnm patitur Hyperbolen, Neither Christ nor Heaven can be Hyperbolized.
Thou presses People to that which thou hast as much need as they to practise, Obedience, and Patience, which thou calls the shooes of the Gospel. I wish thee so well that thou wert so shod: Thou bids them be content with such things as they have, though they have but from hand to mouth; with food and rayment, though they have no more. The poor it seems must be preached unto pa∣tience and contentednesse without dainties and Orna∣ments; but the Priests and the proud Ones, who live in pomp and plenty, may purchase Lands and possessions 1 Cor. 9.27.without any check, as the proud Priests of Lincoln do. Do not these men, preaching that which they themselves practise not, make themselves become Cast-awayes? P. 27.Thou sayes, [If I had More of the world] what hast thou not enough yet? One hundred and fifty pounds a yeare for preaching, besides a pretty Land thou hast purchased [it might make me worse] that needs not, thou art bad e∣nough already, Is it not pitty thou should have more, to make thee worse?And yet woul∣dest be counted a Minister of the Gospel, O blush and be a∣shamed. More worldly, vain, unsavory in my spirit. Here thou confessest thy self, worldly, vain, unsa∣vory in thy spirit; * but confession without forsaking will not obtain remission. And while thou art worldly, vain, unsavory in thy spi∣rit, thou art no true Minister of the Gospel. Thou goes on, saying, If I had as much as others (what still gaping after more gold and silver? what never satis∣fied? Thou hast yearly coming in as much, as would maintain severall Families, precious Sons and Daughters of the living God.) Its like I might be as sinful, and sen∣suall, as proud, covetous, and vain glorious as others. Answ. Thou art as sinful, as sensuall, as proud, as co∣vetous, and vain glorious as many of the world, who pre∣tend not to that height and growth in Christianity as thou does. P. 272.Thou sayes a man may have much of the world, much wealth, honour, pleasure, and much trouble, sorrow, and vexation with it: both Scripture and experience attest the same. Answ. Thou mightest have spoken more plainly, and have said thy own experience attests it: For much honour, wealth, and pleasure, thou hast, and I know sometimes, the witness for God arises in thee, preaching self-deniall to thee.
P. 72.The light lets thee see thou lives not like a Mi∣nister of Christ Jesus, but art a Minister of Antichrist; for thou denies Christ Jesus to be come in the flesh, by de∣nying the substance of the Deity to be communicable (unless thou wilt say Christ Jesus is not of the substance of the Deity, and thats plain blasphemy) and thou preach∣est for gifts and Rewards, living in pomp, pride, and ful∣ness of the world, that thou abidest not in the Doctrine of Christ: And art one with the world in its wayes, fash∣ions and Customs. And then the earthly man, the rebel∣lious part, which would live at ease, is tormented, trou∣bled, and disquieted: That this is true, the witness for God within thee, is my faithful Record. Then thou goes on, saying, A man may have a little in, and of the world, yet enjoy much quiet, and content of minde, and comfort: but thou does not say, thy own ex∣perience can attest this. No, thou goes farre to fetch an example; but to give thee thy due, thou brings a good One with thee, no lesse than the Apostle Paul himself, Phil. 4.10, 11, 12, 16.17.(If seems thou couldst not finde one in all thy own flock) Paul knew how to be abased, and how to abound, both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and suffer need. In the 18th verse, Thou sayes, Paul triumphs, as if all the world was his own, and this was for one gift he received of Epaphroditus: How many gifts hast thou re∣ceived without witnessing such a true Triumphing? Nay, how many considerable gifts art thou able to send for the supply of the Saints necessities, who suffer for the testimo∣ny of a good Conscience? How many testimonies of thy love can thy Conscience bear thee witness, thou hast sent to such, out of the abun∣dance of thy Treasury? P. 246.Thou was asking, why you do not fetch joy from Hea∣ven to comfort your hearts against all your sorrows on earth: and now page 274. Page 274.Thou sayes, if Gods presence make Heaven above for joy, glory and plenty, sure Gods presence with you on earth is sufficient to make any con∣dition even the meanest, comfortable to you, what can be wanting while God is with you?
Answ. Then what needed thee to have hasted the people to fetch joy from Heaven, since thou confessest his presence on earth is sufficient? And how this expression agrees with that place of thine, where thou sayes, The joyes of Heaven exceeds, and swallows up the joy of the Holy Ghost, as the Sea doth a handful of earth. Let the wise in heart judge. P. 278.Thou sayes, those will be found the happiest men of all at last, who have had the most affliction. Answ. Then thou and thy Generation will be found very miserable. P. 281.Speaking of Christs poverty: Thou sayes, when he wanted mony to pay Tribute. He was glad to work a miracle for it. How many hundred pounds hast thou received for thy preaching, and never payd penny of the same towards assesments. O the difference between Christ and Anti∣christ! P. 291.Thy Counsel to such as walk in darkness, and see no light, is, let them indeavour to fear God, and obey the voice of his Servants, that is, sayes thou, they should ap∣ply themselves to their duties, to believe and fear, and o∣bey God, and to use the means God hath appointed for their souls, as to hear the word preached, that is the voice of his Servants, to wait on God in the Eye of his Ordi∣nances:  O subtle Antichrist, under this paint of thine, lies deadly poyson! when was the preaching of the letter [for thou calles that the word] appointed by God for the souls of the people? and prove thy self appointed by God to be a Preacher. If thou canst.Clear this bold assertion of thine, and that thy empty lifeless Ordinances, the Traditions of men are the eye of God, on which the people are to wait. Do this and live, without ever being contradicted by my tongue or pen. In the mean time, it will not be amiss for the Reader to search the place or foundation whereon the man seems to build his Babel, Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that fear∣eth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his Servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.
He that hath any understanding in the things of God, will say this seeming Saint is wresting and twining the Scripture out of joynt, to maintain his tottering Trade of talking in the Pulpit; but Dagon cannot stand before the Ark. His Diana must down, The mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. 302.Self-ignorance thou sayes, made Laodicea think her self rich. And self-love is a false glasse, thou sayes, men commonly look themselves in, which makes all seem good, that they are, have, or do. Answ. Art not thou and thy flock, a Laodicean Assem∣bly, that thinks her self rich, and hath need of nothing that sits as a Queen, and sayes she can never be moved? Is not self-love, and self-righteousness the fruits of thy Ministry? Canst thou, and thy Hearers witness in the presence of God, a love to, and delight in him, a fear to offend him, or to grieve his holy spirit? what means then the loosness of your lives, your conformity to the world in your conversations? your frowardness, pride, envy, and passion? Do you not even in your best performances, draw neer him with your lips, when your hearts are far from him? which of you forsakes the evil of your doings, your deceit, and dissimulation? Every man search and examine his own Conscience, and let the witness for God give your answer to me. P. 309.Assurance thou sayes, does not fear or fly Tryall, whe∣ther it be sound or no; but presumption shuns examina∣tion, and cannot endure to be searched. Is not this your own condition. Are you not like him that hath counter∣feit Coine, which will not abide the Touchstone? Or him that puts off bad Ware, loves the dark, and loaths the light? Didst not thee use these words when a Woman came into the Mini∣ster, and would have-testified against thy de∣ceit.If any Saint of God be moved to come into your Assemblies, to testifie against your deceitful Doctrine: Do you not bid presently take them away. Is not advantage taken by the outward Law against them? Or do you not rage, revile, beat and persecute them. Have not some been persecuted in thy Assembly, by some of thy own fellowship or hearers. If thou hast the impudency to de∣ny it, or canst by Plain Scriptures vindicate the Action, do it?
Art thou not ashamed to compare Calvins care with the Apostle Pauls? Canst thou boast of Calvins sufferings for the Gospel, and equall them with Pauls? Did Calvin work with his own hands day and night, as Paul did? Did he live in such outward want as Paul did? Was he filled with the Holy Ghost, as Paul was? Did not Calvin live in pomp and state at Geneva, as thou does at Lincoln? But thou matters not it seems what thou sayes, so thou mayst advance the Reputation of Calvin, because he was of thy own Brother-hood? Thy third signe (shews thy subtlety) contempt of Gods Ordinances, of Magistracy, Ministry, Scriptures, Sabbaths. When Authority is trampled upon, and men sleight & hate him that rebuketh or judgeth justly. If thou knowes any that do so, charge them with it. Name that Magistrate that judgeth justly in the Gate, and is for so doing hated by that People against whom thy heart in secret shoots the Arrows of its poyson. That true Magistrate that would judge justly upon the wicked One, is by thee and thy Generation trampled upon and persecuted. Then thou tells, when Israel mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, Then the wrath of the Lord arose against them. Thou and thy Generation have an itching desire to be counted the Messengers of God. But what is the Message you deliver? Is it not false Doctrine, lies, and blasphe∣mies, witness thy Book, and your Pulpit exercises, such as the Prophets, Christ, nor his Apostles never preached, nor practised, but cryed woe against:Isa. 56.11. Jer. 5.31. Jer. 14.14.
Isa. 48.22. Mat. 10.34. Do you not seek for gain from your Quarter, prophesie lies unto the people? run before you be sent? speaking peace to them to whom the Sword is due; for there is no peace to the wicked. And Christ he came not to bring peace to such, but a Sword: What are the mockings and misusings thou com∣plainest of? who live at more ease in worldly credit, and take lesse care and labour for an outward livelihood, than the Priests who live upon other mens labours? Acts 13.32. Luke 9.3. Acts 20.33.But the true Messengers of God, who declare of his word in sin∣cerity, preaching the glad tydings of the Gospel without bagg or scrip, who covet no mans silver or gold, nor make the Gospel chargeable to the world: These precious Saints, and Sons of the living God are reproached, and persecuted by this sinful Generation. Who are they that contemn the Scriptures, but those who in words seem to make them their Rule but in their life and practice tramples them under foot? even thy self, and all those that preach for Rewards, and they that prize them for Apollo's: Thou, and the world shalt finde, that the contempt of The Word, (not the Letter, though we contemn not that, but own it) and His Ministers (but not the Priests of England) is a provoking sin, and a pre∣saging Symptom of Ruine to a People. P. 322.Thou talks of a Spirit of error and delusion, and contra∣diction. Is not error, Delusion, and Contradiction the poyson poor people suck from the paps of their Pastors, instead of Wine, Milk and Honey? Eccles. 2.14.Thou and thy fellow Priests are seen by every one, whose eye is in his head, to be pos∣sessed with that spirit of error, delusion, and contradicti∣on, which thou wouldest cast upon the Saints of God. Do you not teach for Christs Doctrine the Traditions of men? Mat. 15.3. Mark 7.7.Are you not Antichrists, denying Christ to be come in the flesh, when you deny the substance of the De∣ity to be communicable? Do you not call sprinkling of Infants, the Baptisme of Christ? Are you not called of men Masters, contrary to Christs Command? if you be Christs Disciples, that's a Command to you.Mat. 23.10. Isa.
56.11. Mat. 23.14 Do you not seek for gain from your Quarters? and use long vain glo∣rious prayers in your Synagogues, fashioning your selves Rom. 12.2. 2 Tim. 1.13.according to the world, not holding fast the form o sound words suffering poor souls to commit sin in the best of their sacrifices, by telling lies when they sing Da∣vids Psalms? Do they not preach against pride, yet who more proud then the Priests? Matth. 7.3.Do they not talk much against cove∣tousness, yet who more covetous than themselves? Are not these the Pharisees of our age, that can spy a mote in their Brothers eye, but cannot see to pull out the beam in their own?Jer. 23.21. These run and never were sent. And for divi∣sion and Contradiction, let twenty speak all from one place of Scripture, and you shall have so many men, so many mindes, and meanings, opinions, imaginations, and contradictions: Then, for a spirit of giddiness, who more giddy, unsolid, and more unstable then themselves? Twenty or thirty pound a year more, and some other con∣veniencies is a Call sufficient with most of them from one place to another. To leave a poor flock for a richer fleece is an ordinary thing. And as for bitterness and perversness, let them preach where they will, if their Tithes be not payd, or their Doctrine be publiquely opposed, let them shew pa∣tience, and moderation that can, The Priests have not such pleasant flowers growing up in their Gardens. And as for falshood and deceit, 'tis too well known by some, that they live in that Mystery of Iniquity, and delight therein: but this will be bitterness in the latter end, when Conscience-Book comes to be opened. Page 329. Phil. 2.16.Thou bids, Be willing and ready to suffer for the Churches of Christ, and Children of God, as Paul was for the Philippians (Not as Edward Rayner was for the Lincoln∣ers.) If I be offered upon the Sacrifice, and service of your faith, That is, sayes thou, if I seal my Doctrine with my blood, and confirm your faith by my death, I count it matter of joy both to you and me.
Page. 330.But thou never hadst yet such Christian courage, nor never wilt while thy heart dwells where it does: Have not those Heathens thou tells of, who suffered, and dyed for the prosperity of the Publick, shewed themselves bet∣ter State-Martyrs, as thou calles them, then thou hast been a Gospel-Minister? P. 333. Priest.Thou complaines what a poor Account can rich men give of their goods, who have done little or no good to others with them? Can learned men give of their gifts? Can Magistrates give of their power, who have born the sword in vain, who have taken to themselves the ho∣nour, but not performed to others the duty of their place? Should any of the Saints have spoken this language, Thou wouldst presently have branded them with the Name of Busie-bodies; and Contempt of Authority should have been cast upon them. P. 318.A little before thou was muttering out, and hinting, That Authority was trampled upon, that men sleight and hate him that rebuketh or judgeth justly in the Gate: and here thou complaines of his bearing the sword in vain. But no better can be expected from thee, than thy bottles be fill'd with. P. 335.Thou sayes it's a Mark of dishonour, and a Brand of infamy to be a Self-seeker, to be like a Hogg that does no good till he dyes, and scarce then with his good∣will. Search, and see how many such Hogs thou hast in thy Herd, and thou shalt find more such Cattle, than thou canst truly call Christians. P. 339.Thou tells of Dorcas dying full of good Works, and Paul full of Ministeriall Labours, (not full of filthy lyes, Blasphemies and contradictions as thou art) and of good successe, or Gospel-fruits full of the Seales of his Mini∣stery.
How many such Dorcasses hast thou in this City? Wert thou now on thy Death-bed, instead of good suc∣cesse of thy Ministry, mightst thou not justly complain as thou did a little before, What a poor Account can rich men give of their goods? learned men of their gifts? and Magistrates of their power? A vast difference be∣tween Paul's successe, and thine. And indeed it must Needs be so. Paul was fill'd with the Holy Ghost, and thou with the spirit of Deceit and Delusion. Pag. 350.Speaking of the Return of Gods presence and his fa∣vour, thou usest those words, In giving you the Liberties of his House. Acts 7.47, 48. Act. 17.24, 25. 1 Cor. 6.19.Thy end is seen in the use of that Language. But the Lord dwells not in Temples made with hands. The Saints Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost. Then thou talks of tasting the sweetnesse, (A fine ex∣pression if there were Truth in it) and feel the power and efficacy, (rather the Flatness, deadness, and dulness,) the Beauty, and Glory, (the uncomeliness, and raggedness) of all his holy Ordinances, (thy filthy Dreams and Tra∣ditions, Rags of the Romish Whore) and of the Assem∣blies of his people; (a mixed multitude of Presbyte∣rians, Independents, and Cavaleers so called) O that I could truly call you an Assembly of Gods people: O that your hearts were upright before the Lord: My soul pities all such who are thus led, and nuzzled up in ignorance by a painted Pharisee, who will neither enter into the Kingdome of God himself, nor suffer them that would. Matth. 23.13.And I hope ere long, their Eyes shall be opened, and they shall see his deceits discovered, and escape them. P. 356.Thou tells, thou hast heard some say, God hath used to resolve their doubts by the Ministry of the Word, thy meaning is, by such Priests as thy self. And then thou Pre∣sumptuously and Blasphemously boastest, saying, Thus God fulfills this promise, Isaiah 20.21. Thine Eares shall
hear a voice behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk in it, when thou turnest to the right hand or to the left hand. P. 399.Observing the Soul, the affaires of it, and Gods deal∣ings with it, will make a man, thou sayes, A Divine to Himself; and observing a mans course well, and how God hath led him, will make a man, under God, a Guide to himself. Ah Friends! Be your selves, and dote no longer upon this filthy Dreamer, when every one of you (by his own Doctrine) may be a Divine to Himself, and a Guide to Himself. Will you be so foolish to be led any longer by such a false Prophet? Exod. 21.5, 6.Will you have your Eares bored through with an Awle in token of perpetual bondage? Do not inslave your soules for ever. Mind that Divine Principle of God within you; and if you be willing to obey that faithful Counsellor, it will be a True Guide to you, it will be whispering the pure Counsel and Will of God unto you. Ah yield up your selves to the light of Christ in all your Consciences; Love it I beseech you. Ezek. 21.26, 27.This is the Right Heir, give him the Kingdom of your Hearts. Keep the possession thereof no longer from him. Will you not Reverence this Son? O kisse him lest he be angry! Blessed is the man that heareth This Welbeloved Son in whom Alone the Lord is well plea∣sed: Blessed, Prov. 8.34, 35.I say, is the man that heareth Him (not the false Prophets who preach for Reward) watching daily at his gates, waiting at the posts of his doores. (not at the gates of the Idols Temples, or the Posts of their doores.) For who so findeth him findeth life, and shall obtain-favour of the Lord; Seek him and you shall find him; but then seek right, look within, for there He is in every one of your Consciences, bearing witnesse against all unrighteous∣nesse. He that sinneth against it, wrongeth his own soul; All they that hate it, love Death, Prov. 8.36.
Page 408.Thou sayes, Aged persons are fittest to give Counsell: having lived many years they have gained much expe∣rience; and thou brings in Job 32.6, 7. Dayes should speak, and multitude of years should Teach Wisdom. Its true, They should do so. But is it so with thee? Thou hast lived many years: Thou shouldst teach Wis∣dome, but O the abundance of folly and filthinesse aboun∣ding in thy book, the grosse darknesse, and doating dreams thou delivers instead of sound Doctrine. My soul pities thee, and all that are deluded by thee. Wert thou not blind, thou wouldst not have brought this proof for thy Assertion: for this makes against thee. Job in his former Chapter spoke much of his Integrity: Elihu not well pleased at Jobs Justification of himself, ra∣ther than God. And against his three friends was his wrath kindled because they had found no Answer, yet condemned Job: Now Elihu had waited till Job had spo∣ken, because they were elder then he, when Elihu saw there was no Answer in the Mouth of these Three Men, Then his Wrath was kindled, and said, I am young and ye are very old, wherefore I was afraid and durst not shew my opinion. I said, Daies should speak and multitude of years should teach wisdome. But there is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understand∣ing. Great men are not alwayes wise, neither do the Aged understand judgment. Therefore I said, Hearken unto me. Titus 2.2, 3.See thee here! Elihu green in yeares was made to reprove gray haires. And
Titus must teach the aged Men and Women. I know thy end is, to make peo∣ple believe Wisdome is lockt up in the lips of old men; Long standing Teachers in the Pulpit] but such, Are Ancient in Deceit.] Multitude of years should teach Wis∣dome; but the multitude of thy Eight and Twenty years Ministry hath brought forth a multitude of filthy lyes bound up in thy Babylonish Book of Doating Dreams instead of the Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles. Priest. pag. 409.Once more thou tells the people, That experience of God, and his Dealings, will make men become Pro∣phets to themselves, and able to be Teachers of others. This is true, but thou darest not abide here;  for if they separate from thee, thou cryes out of Faction, and Delusion. Ah how my soul thirsts after the Salvation of your soules who are thus drawn into the Chambers of Darknesse, and Delusion by this Mans Doctrine, and de∣luding Tongue. O that I may see you withdraw from this filthy Dreamer, and set forward towards the True Land of Canaan. The light of Christ in your Conscien∣ces; it will lead you to the Heavenly Jerusalem, where∣in there is no need of the dimme Candle-light of this Egyptian Priest. Come out of Egypt, dear Hearts, do not delight to live and dye in the wild Wildernesse you at present are in: The generation of Priests are the Hard-hearted, proud, oppressing Pharaohs, that will not let the Children of Israel go free; but fear them not, onely be valiant and Turn to the Light: And it love with all your hearts, and your soules shall see Deliverance shortly, and Pharaoh and his Host shall be drowned in the Red-Sea.Exod. 13.27, 28. Priest. Page 249.In that part of thy Book, called the Government of the thoughts, Thou sayes, Thoughts of the Vanities of the world with delight in them, as fashions, sports, (thou mightest have named Bowling and Musick) Comple∣ments, entertainments, news, jests, the very froth and scum of wit and discourse, these thou sayes are not worth thinking of.
Answ. Are they then worth thy living in them? Thou dost conform thy self to the fashions of the world, Thou usest Bowling and Musick, and livest in Complements, and respect of persons, Art thou not also one that givest entertainments, listens after news, and loves jests, the very froth and scum of wit and discourse? The living Principle of God within thee is my true witness, and faithful Record in these particulars, and shall rise up in judgement against thee for these things, if thou repentest not. The light will be thy condemnation, if thou lovest it not. P. 255.Thou sayes, While you are thinking what gain you have got by such a Commodity you have fold; of bargain of Land, or Wares you have bought, or at such a Faire or Market, Think withall, how little spiritual profit you have gotten for your souls, at the many soul-fairs, or Mar∣kets you have had, as the Sabbaths, Ordinances, and Sa∣craments. Let me answer for them herein: Thou and thy Gene∣ration of Priests have gotten more temporall gains, more Lands, mony and goods by the bad Commodities, and Wares, and false Doctrine which you deliver at such Priest-Faires or Markets, as thou calls Sabbaths, and paintest over with the name of Christ Ordinances, than ever their poor souls found comfort by them that bought them of you, and traded with you. Isa. 55.2.Woe and misery will be the Portion of such Priests, if they repent not, who take money for that which is not bread, and delude the ignorant with your insinuating Tongues, calling light darkness, and darkness light. You are worse then Simon Magus; for he would have bought the Spirit, and ye sell the Letter, adding thereto many lies of your own:
P. 375.Thou tells of the undaunted and insuperable courage of Paul, whom neither bonds nor afflictions, nor death, could move or appale: but the very thoughts of bonds im∣prisonment and afflictions made thee fly from thy flock in Lincoln to Norwich. See what difference there is, friends, between Paul and your Priest. Then thou brings in that of Nehemiah, chap. 6. vers. 11. shall such a man as I, flee? Hadst thou been as true a Mini∣ster of Christ, as Paul was, thou wouldest not have want∣ted Pauls insuperable courage; but, when the slavish fear was arising in thee, Thou wouldest have said as Nehemiah did, shall such a man as I flee? But the Tree was known by its fruit: shame cover thee, thou cowardly Priest.Mat. 12.33. Heb. 11.What dost thou talking of those Worthies in that little Book of Martyrs (as thou calls it) of whom the world was not worthy, who subdued Kingdoms, stopped the mouths of Lyons, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword? Thou wouldst fain be ranked amongst those conquer∣ing Christians: but it must be then in some unknown Land; for here thy Cowardise is so well discovered, thou canst not be counted such a Champion as those were. P. 384.Thou bids the people, As they have frequented Ordi∣nances, &c. so do it still: and hold on even till death, and if these and the like things make you vile, he would have you be more vile still. P. 339.Is it not this mans design to keep you in darkness? does he not deal deceitfully with you? one while telling you, That observing the soul, and the affairs of it, and Gods dealings with it, will make a man a Divine to himself;
P. 409.and observing a mans course well, and how God hath led him, will make a man under God, a guid to himself. But he dares not centre here, This Doc∣trine he sees would un∣roost him and all his Ro∣mish Generation; Root & Branch: And though they may keep aloft for a little season, yet they are not of the Lords planting, and therefore shall be rooted up: and so shall all other Formalists, who stumble at the light: E∣very knee shall bow unto my Jesus.Here the man speaks plain English. That unless you wilfully hood-wink your understan∣dings, you may easily disco∣ver, The man is convinced, That if you will but be so wise, and wary, as to watch over your own souls, minding that principle of God within you, which checks and convinces you of sin, when no eye sees you, nor eare heares you, this will be a Divine, a Teacher, a true Prophet to eve∣ry one of you. This will speak truth when the false Prophet flatters you. The light of Christ in your Consciences is the pure Divine, The true Prophet, the never erring Guid unto all goodness, if you will yield obedience thereunto. 'Tis the desire of my soul, you may no longer make this Dreamer, nor any of this stamp your Darling: Draw back from him; for he is but a painted Sepulchre, what good soever he promises you; shall never be performed: so long as his life is in the Letter, he feeds on death: De∣light in that which draws out of sin unto holiness, with∣out which no man shall ever see God. Feed no longer upon the Husks, like Swine. The Pearl of great price is set before you. Christ Jesus the light of the world, He is the way, the truth and the life: He is that bread from Heaven, which who so feeds on, shall ne∣ver hunger: He is that pure water of life, which who so drinks of, shall never thirst. The light in your Consciences, if you love it, will pre∣serve you pure and spotless, and stablish you in that pure
Religion, which is undefiled. But if you love Babylon, and loath the light, my Soul shall weep for you in secret. Yet remember you have warning in your life-time, prize it. Much more of his filthy Rubbish might be gathered up; but here is enough presented to the ignorant; for whose sake this work was undertaken, which may suffici∣ently render this Romish Orator an Antichristian Mi∣nister. M. M. An end.
