N712 99895900 153461
A NEVV POEM ON THE DREADFUL DEATH OF THE EARL of ESSEX, WHO Cut his own Throat in the TOWER. By the Embroyan-Fancy of Anti-Jack Presbyter. COme, with a nimble thrust of Rapier'd wit, (My Muse) now Stab all Traitors, point at, hit The Throat of a Self-murtherer, whose fall Doth manifest his Crimson Guilt to all. Led by the Halter to the Stygian Lake. Many there be, he to prevent the Stake, Or Hemp or Hatchet, took a shorter Cut, (As if to die were but to crack a nut,) To let his Soul fly from its Prison, Body, To stept to—ask his Chronies, How d'ye? O pity 'tis that such a Branch as he, Should thus deserve so sad an Elegy. Whose Loyal Father pawn'd his life to those, Who wee the grand Promoters of the Cause. So excellent his Father, that t'express His Excellencies, seemes to make them less. "Should I presume to tell his worth, I fear "(My Muse) I should subscribe a Murtherer. "To do't by halves were fair, but 'twould be sed, "'Twere only then but Drawn and Quartered. My Lord (like Tully's Son) Degenerates. A Worm, within his breast most sadly prates, Consc'ence (The Kings Atturney) stings his heart So mortally, that now he dares depart. "A wounded soul close coupled with the sence "of Sin, payes home its proper Recompence. "Could not your active hands had fairly staid "The leasure of a Psalm? Judas has pray'd, "But later Crimes cannot admit the Pause, "They run upon effects more than the Cause. Hangman will curse your Feates, 'tis most severe To be ones proper Executioner. Some do affirm, that 'twixt such Acts and Death, One may repent, even at his last breath. I fear, there is, (after so foul a Sin,) Too narow a gap to let Repentance in. His Death to th' Saints this Doctrine will afford, Impatient of being with the Lord He was good man: Dearly-Beloved, praise His Policy, in shortening his Days. "But if the Saints thus give's the slip, 'tis need "We look about us, to preserve the Breed. "Hence sweep the Almanack: Lilly make room, "And Blanks enough, for the New Saints to come "All in Red Letters: As their Faults have been "Scarlet; so limb, their Anniverse of sin. Jack Presbyter, I tell the Whorson, Lyar, Encomiums that do amount much higher. 'Tis height of Valour, Fortitude, to kill (Not our strong foes, but) a mans self at will. Brave active Roman Spirit! Purgatory Shall be to thee, for a new Inventory. Scylla, Cbaribdis, Python, Acheron, Medea's Bull, the Tails of the Dragon, Sea-monsters, Serpents, Gorgons, Centaurs all Medusa's, Bugbear-Harpies these I call Mormos and Bugs, (as our stout Earl did see,) To fright poor Idiots to Morality. Cowards do dread the grim pale face of Death, Who foil'd b'it, are but squeezed out of Breath. Give me an Hector greedy of's own blood Makes Death to tremble, bids Damnation, slud, Fears not the Gods, 'tis sin, if they be good, If bad, why 'ere in aw of them men stood? Death, Hell, Damnation and if thou not fearest, Jack Presbyter, dy thou thus if thou darest. Or else learn hence not to aspire too nigh The high Perogatives of Majesty. Vive le Roy, let Rebells meet the end, If their Repentance may not it prevent. FINIS. London, Printed for E. Cart, 1683.
