O761 E658_12 99863187 115373
The Humble PROPOSALS OF Mr. Owen, Mr. Tho. Goodwin, Mr. Nye, Mr. Sympson, and other Ministers, who presented the Petition to the Parliament, and other Persons, Febr. 11. under debate by a Com∣mittee this 31. of March, 1652. for the fur∣therance and Propagation of the Gospel in this Nation. Wherein they having had equall respects to all Persons fearing God, though of differing judgements, doe hope also that they will tend to union and peace. WITH Additionall Propositions humbly tendred to the Committee for propagating the Gospel, as easie and speedy means for supply of all Parishes in England with able, godly, and Orthodox Ministers. FOR, Setling of right constituted Churches, and for preven∣ting persons of corrupt judgements, from publishing dangerous Errours, and Blasphemies in Assemblies and Meetings, by other godly Persons, Ministers, and others. Printed at London for Robert Ibbitson. 1652.
Propositions humbly tendred to the Committee for propagating the Gospel, as easie and speedy meanes for supply of all parishes in Eng∣land, with able, godly, and orthodox Ministers; For setling of right Constituted Churches, and for preventing persons of corrupt judge∣ments, from publishing dangerous Errours and Blasphemies in Assemblies and meetings by other godly persons, Ministers, and others. I. FOr supply of all Parishes in England with able, godly, and or∣thodox Ministers, it is humbly propounded: 1. That the Sheriffe of each County, do speedily give ac∣count to this, or some other Committee of every respective Parish within the said County that hath no Minister, and what maintenance each of the said vacant Parishes have belonging to them. 2. That each of the said Sheriffes doe also certifie to the Commitee the names of such Ministers as have no Livings, that, reside in each County, and that so many of them as shall bee found able, godly, and Orthodox, be placed in such vacant Pa∣rishes as by the said Committee shall be thought fit. 3. That for the further supply of those Parishes who shall yet want Ministers, The Propositions from Mr. Owen, and the rest of those Reverend Ministers be proceeded in. II. For setling of right Constituted Churches, it is humbly propounded: 1. That all present Churches that are gathered, and others, so soon as they shall be gathered, do signifie to the Committee of the Universities, or elsewhere, whom they have chosen, or shall choose for their Pastor; And that such, and only such, be declared right Constituted Churches, whose Pastor shall be
approved by the said Committee to be able, godly, and or∣thodox. 2. That when any of the said Pastors dye, or leave them to take up some other call or imployment, they choose and present another Pastor within six months, and to have one setled with them within twelve months, by approbation from the said Com∣mittee, or to dissolve or disperse themselves into other Churches. 3. That the Committee for the Universities, or where shall be appointed, keep a Catalogue of all right Constituted Chur∣ches in all parts of England, and the Pastors names. III. For preventing persons of corrupt judgements, from publishing dangerous Errours and Blasphemies in Assemblies and meetings, it is humbly propounded: 1. That every Pastor of each right Constituted Church, give under his hand a testimony to every individuall member in fellowship with him, that shall be approved by the Church to be orthodox, and himselfe judged to be able to speake in Assem∣bles and meetings. 2. That none presume under a penalty to speake in any As∣sembly, or meetings, but Ministers of the Word, Members of Churches, with such approbation as aforesaid, or which shall freely be permitted by those whose proper place it is to speake in the said Assemblies and meetings, except onely upon liberty granted to propound, or desire their opinions, and acquiesse without replies, or disturbance by disputes except it be mee∣tings purposely for disputes. 3. That where Assemblies or meetings of people be kept up, some person or persons, undertake to speak and mannage the same, who are either Ministers of the word, have e∣mission from some right Constituted Church, or Cer∣tificate from two or more, able, godly, and orthodox Mi∣nisters of their sufficiency to speake, and soundnesse in the faith, except Masters to their families, or School-masters to
their Schollers, or others, to such as by their Callings fall un∣der their Government and charge. The humble Proposals of Mr. Owen, Mr. Tho. Goodwin, Mr. Nye, Mr. Simpson, and other Ministers, who presented the Pe∣tition to the Parliament, and other Persons, Febr. 11. for the fur∣therance and propagation of the Gospel in this Nation; wherein they having had equall respect to all Persons fearing God, though of differing judgements, doe hope also that they will tend to Union and Peace. 1. THat Persons of Godlinesse and Gifts, in the Universities and elsewhere, though not Ordained, may be admitted to preach the Gospell, being approved when they are called thereunto. 2 That no Person shall be admitted to Trial and Approbation, unlesse he bring a Testimoniall of his Piety, and soundnesse in the Faith, under the hands of six godly Ministers and Christi∣ans, gathered together for that end and purpose, unto whom he is personally knowne; of which number two at the least to be Ministers. 3 That a certaine number of Persons, Ministers, and others of eminency, and known ability and godlinesse, be appointed to sit in every County, to examine, judge, and approve all such per∣sons, as being to preach the Gospel, have received Testimony as above. And in case there shall not be found a competent num∣ber of such persons in the same County, that others of one or more neighbour Counties be adjoyned to them. 4 That care be taken for the removing the residue of the Ministers who are Ignorant, Scandalous, Non-resident, or di∣sturbers of the publick peace; and of all School-masters who
shall be found Popish, scandalous, or dis-affected to the Govern∣ment of the Common-wealth. 5 That to this end a number of Persons, Ministers and others of eminent piety, zeale, faithfulnesse, ability and prudence, be appointed by Authority of Parliament to goe through the Na∣tion, to enquire after, examine, judge of, and eject all such per∣sons as shall be found unfit for the Ministery, or teaching of Schooles, being such as above described. 6 That for the expediting this work, these persons may be as∣signed in severall Companies, or Committees, to the six Circu∣its of the Nation, to reside in each of the Counties for such a convenient space of time as shall be requisite, untill the worke be done; and alling to their Assistance in their respective Cir∣cuits, such godly and able Ministers, and others, in each of the Counties where they shall reside, to assist them in this worke, as they shall thinke fit. 7 That these Persons so sent and Commissioned, may be im∣power'd, before they shall depart out of each County, to re∣turne, and to represent unto the Parliament the Names of fit and sufficient persons, Ministers, and others to be appointed and approved of, such as shall be called to preach the Gospel in such Counties, and in the meane time, the Persons so Commissioned as aforesaid, shall have power while they reside in each Coun∣ty, to examine, judge, and approve of such persons, as having a Call to preach the Gospell in such Counties, shall upon such Testimoniall as aforesaid, offer themselves to such Examination. 8 That it be proposed, that the Parliament be pleased to take some speedy and effectuall course, either by impowering the per∣sons in the severall Counties to be appointed for Triall and Ap∣probation of such persons as shall be called to preach the Gospel there, or in such other way as they shall think fit, for the uni∣ting and dividing of Parishes in the severall Counties and Cities within this Common-wealth, in reference to the Preaching of
the Gospel there; saving the Civill rights and priviledges of each Parish. 9 That all Ministers so sent forth and established, be enjoy∣ned and required to attend the solemne Worship of God, in Prayer, Reading, and Preaching t the Word, Catechizing, and Expounding the Scriptures, as occasion shall require, visiting the sicke, and instructing from house to house, residing amongst the people to whom they are sent, and using all care and diligence by all wayes and meanes to win soules unto Christ. 10. That it is desired, that no persous be required to receive the Sacrament, further then their Light shall lead them unto. Nor no person sent forth to preach, and already placed, or which shall be placed in any Parish within this Nation, be compelled to administer the Sacrament to any, but such as he shall approve of, as fit for the same. 11. That a Law may be provided, that all persons whatso∣ever within this Nation be required to attend the publike Preaching of the Gospel every Lords day, in places commonly allowed, and usually called Churches, except such persons as through scruple of Conscience do abstain from those As∣semblies. 12. That whereas divers persons are unsatisfied to come to the publike places of hearing the Word, upon this Account, that those places were Dedicated and Consecrated: That the Par∣liament will be pleased to declare, that such places are made use of, and continued, only for the better conveniency of persons meeting for the publike Worship of God, and upon no other consideration. 13. That all persons dissenting from the Doctrine and Way of Worship owned by the State, or consenting thereunto, and yet not having advantage or opportunity of some of the publike meeting-places commonly called Churches, be required to meet (if they have any constant meetings) in places publikely known,
and to give notice to some Magistrate of such their place of ordinary meetings. 14. That this Honourable Committee be desired to propose to the Parliament, That such who do not receive, but oppose those Principles of Christian Religion, without acknowledge∣ment whereof the Scriptures do clearly and plainly affirm that Salvation is not to be obtained, as those formerly com∣plained of by the Ministers; may not be suffered to preach or promulgate any thing in opposition unto such Principles. 15. And further, That the Parliament be humbly desired to take some speedy and effectuall course for the utter suppressing of that abominable Cheat of Judiciall Astrology, whereby the minds of multitudes are corrupted, and turned aside from de∣pending upon the Providence of God, to put their trust in the lyes of Men, and delusions of Sathan. FINIS.
THE DUTCH SPY. Faithfully communicating, The most remarkable and choice Intelli∣gence from the States-General of the United Provinces; with their Design now on foot, both by Sea and Land; and the proceedings of their great Navie, commanded by the Lord High-Admiral Vantrump. As also, the Warlike preparations of forein Princes, in relation to the Par∣liament, Army, and Common∣wealth of England. Containing these ensuing Occurrences, viz. A great Victory obtained by Prince Rupert, at Sea, against the Spaniards; the taking of his golden Fleet; his advance to the Southern Islands, the rich Present sent to the King of Scots, being a ship Iuden with Gold and silver; and his design to joyn with the Hollanders. The Declaration of the said States to maintain their power by the sword. Their Proclamation to forreign Countries; and divers great Armies raising in Denmark, and other places. The breaking off the Treaty in Scotland; And joyful Newes from Ireland. From Wednesday March 24, to Wednesday March 31, 1652. BY an extrordinary Messenger from the English Agent at Amsterdam, it is certified, That his Excellency the Lord High Admiral Van Tromp hath brought down his Fleet into the Texel, where they seem to be a great Wood, plan∣ted upon the Seas: Their Running-Gallies lye at An∣chor about a league from the Navy: Their Fire-ships one league and a half distance: And their Frigats half a league: The rest of the
Fleet lie in th figure of a Half-Moon: The whole Navy consists of about 130 Sayl; besides 50 gallant ships are in readinesse at Am∣sterdam; and a Fleet of Danes are expected suddenly to come in. And although they seem to agitate for peace; yet the preperations for war go on in most of the United Provinces: so inraged are the Bores against the English, that they do nothing but grin and shew their Tusks in the open streets; and indeed as dangerous it is for the English to be amongst them, s it was when our Ambassadors were with them about this time twelve moneth. The States have set forth a Proclamation for all the Dutch ships to return to Holland; yet we hear that it is to be abortive after the 5 of May. For confirma∣tion whereof, be pleased to peruse the ensuing Letter. SIR, THe States of Holland have declared, that their late Im∣bargo shall continue no longer then the 5 of May; their Ad∣miral Tromp hath received Instructions to randezvouz the whole Fleet before Scheveling, from whence they are to be brought into Texel. In Zealand, Flushing, Middleburgh, and other places, the people are extreamly mad against England, insomuch that it is dangerous for an English-man to pass the streets. We hear that Prince Rupert is once more designed for Portugal, but he hath not above 4 ships to attend him. He hath richly laden a Flemin with prize goods, and Col. Carteret is dispatched to the Scotch King for a Judgment, to make sale thereof. There are divers ships set forth against the English, who carry the Dutchess of Savoys Flag, and we hear that they have taken divers English ships; a∣mongst the rest, they have seized on the Welcome of London, bound from Lisbone to Genoa laden with sugars, and another ship with cloth bound for Barbary: Having seized on these two prizes, and made sure of them, a while after they met with ano∣ther English-man, and having given her several broad sides, made up to her, and immediatly came to grapling; but the English seemed at the first to be irresistable, and gave them 22 broad sides one after another, playing their Granadaes, and casting over balls of wild-fire; yet notwithstanding, by reason of their being over∣powred by the Touloners, at last they were overpowred, and soon
after boarded; but to the honour of English-men be it spoken, they fought it out by inches, and disputed both Deck and Hold with great gallantry, even to the last man. Brill 20 March, 1652. An Expresse is sent from the States to the King of Denmarke, who are joyned with him in a League, offensive and defensive, desiring him not to let any shipping (meaning English) to passe the Sound, unlesse they bring a Certificate first to have paid the Toll here in Tessel: the Danes have 30 men of Warin a readinesse, and are to as∣sist the Hollander with 6000 men at demand; 50 gallant men of war are in readinesse at Amsterdam. But there is great likelyhood that a bone will be cast between the Swedes & the Dutch, (which will be pure picking meat for the English) by reason of the last Treaty of peace with the States of Holland made with the King of Denmarke, to the great prejudice and dishonour of the Crown of Sweden. Col. Liburn hath affixd a Declaration up at the Exchange in Amsterdam, seting forth the Grounds and Reasons of his Exilement: many thousands have been published in print. He preaches constantly, and is much followed: The Levellers cry him up for a Saint; pray God he proves so. And have unanimously declared their Resolutions to live and die with him. From St Edmonds Bury in Suffolk (the 27 instant) it is certi∣fied, That on the 12 of this instant March there was one Giles Fen∣derlyn executed at Nailon, for murthering of his wife, who confessed, That by the instigation of a Jesuit, he had made a Covenant with the Devil for 14 years; and that two nights before his execution, there appeared very fearful and horrid apparitions to him in prison, to the great astonishment of those that watcht with him: But the perfect relation hereof, and his full examination and confession being to be printed at large, I shall re∣fer the Reader to the perusal of that for his further satisfaction. 4 Lawyers, Committee-men, and Treasurers have hang'd themselves neer Grays-Inn; that's the way to stop both pleading and bribing. Two women have lately been beheaded by their husbands; for which bloudy act, both of them soon hang'd themselves. Since which time another sad president happened, being acted by one James Thiston et Wigsn, in Cornwal, against his wife, who cast her into an Oven, heat∣ed exceeding hot, and burnt her to ashes: But of this, more in my next. Another sad example happen'd in the County of Essex, upon one Mary Adams, who named her self the Virgin Mary, saying, That
she was conceived with child by the Holy Ghost; that from her should spring forth the Savior of the world; and that all those that did not believe in him were damn'd, &c. With the manner how she was delivered of the uglest ill∣shapen Monsher that ever eyes beheld, and afterwards rotted away in prison. But the perfect Relation being likewise printed (and this day ex∣tant, entituled, The Ranters Monster) by special authority, I shall re∣fer the Reader to the perusal thereof for his further satisfaction. On the 30 of this instant March came to my hands a Let∣ter, bearing date from Amsterdam the 26 stylo novo; wherein is contained many remarkable things of notable concern∣ment, in relation to the English and Dutch; and to the end, that the Reader may not be left unsatisfied, in perusal thereof, be pleased to take the Letter at large. SIR, THe Hollander goes on with his preparations for War, and intends to be very numerous upon the Seas: di∣vers are already gone forth with Letters of Mart; and we hear, that they have either taken, or sunk, one of the Parla∣ments Frigats: if true, it will much exasperate the spirits of the English, who scorn to give an inch of ground either by Sea or Land; as was lately made evident by one of the Parliaments Frigats (carrying 40 pieces of Ordnance) a∣gainst three stout Men of War belonging to the Dutch, who denying to lore their Topsales, the English immediatly gave them a broad side; but they denied to yield obedience thereunto; and instead of being submissive, answer'd them again with three broad sides: Whereupon the English made up close to them, resolving to dispute it by inches, rather then the Dutch should have had the least preheminency o∣ver them: The Dutch-men perceiving their gallant Re∣solution, immediatly hung forth a white flag, and soon did obeysance; the which produced a parley, whose effects and consultations were, That the Dutch-men should have free leave to passe to the Texel, and for the future (upon what Coast soever) to strike sayl to all ships in general, set
forth by the power and authority of the Parliament of the Common-wealth of England; otherwise, the English were resolved to have fought it out to the last man, and to have sunk by their sides. The Dutch ships were exceedingly torn and batter'd; but at last got off (upon composition) with the loss of about 30 men; and indeed the English did pretty well equalize them in number, being shot, quite through the stern, and her main yard clean taken off. The States have set forth a Declaration, shewing the grounds and rea∣sons of their present Design; protesting, That it is for no other ends, then the preservation of their just rights and priviledges, purchased with the expence of the bloud of Thousands; and after a long and tedious War, gloriously obtained by the Sword; which (according to their solemn Vow and Covenant) they are resolved to preserve and de∣fend, against all foreign power and force whatsoever, with the hazard of all that is near and dear unto them. Amsterdam 26 March, 1652. From Scotland they write, That the Treaty with the Marq. of Argyle at Dunbarton is brake off: They had onely two meetings; the first at the English quarters; and the second at his own: there were none present, but Maj. Gen. Dean, and Major Salloway; the Marquess, and one Col. Cam∣phel his kinsman. Amongst these four the Treath hath been carryed on with so much privacy, that it was not known to any, till after their dissolving: since which time we hear, that the Marquess hath cendescended; That both Nations be again united into one; which reciprocal expressions of respect and love, deserves to bear this motto in Letters of Gold, Cogam eos in gentem unam. From Ireland thus: The enemy doth both ebb and flow in several parts; and still we are much annoy'd by the To∣ries: Galloway holds out stoutly; the truth on't is, they are a gallant enemy: but Time bringeth all things to perfecti∣on:
On the 25 instant, came an Expresse from Scotland, signifying, That the Treaty is begun at Dumbarton between the Parliaments Commissioners, and the Marq of Argyle, but what the event will be, few days will produce. But its feared to little purpose; for he hath sent a Message to the Presbyterian Ministers, assuring them, That he will make no agreement without comprehending the Covenants in∣terest. The Royal party talk much of a Prophetesse, which tels str¦ange stories of bloudy fights in the Air, of a Virgin coming to help the King; but the Kirkists prophesie of great persecution upon them, and that for 70 years they must suffer, and then have a glo∣rious deliverence. The 27 day presents us further with singular and choice intelli∣gence from Scotland, intimating, That there are Summons come from the Dutch Merchants, to remand back and call home all their Merchants and Factors, both in Edenburgh, and other places, in order wherunto, divers are already gone, having not the patience to stay, till they could procure lading for their ships. Its said, that many of the Dutch Captains have put up the King of Scots Colours on their Topsales, and Vice-Admiral Carew (the Prince of Pyrats) hath ad∣vanced his Standard aboard his Fleet at Sea. His little Majesty re∣mains still at Paris, where the Marq. of Ormond, and the L. Inchiquin are arrived, and have delivered an answer to the Embassie, from fo∣reign Princes: which subject, consists of great promises, and war∣like provisions; but no time prefixed for the performances. Gen. Harcourt hath raised the Prince of Conde from the siege of Mi∣radeux, and relieved the Town: he made good his passage over the two great Rivers of Dordonne and Geronne, where forces had been left by Conde under Col. Balthasar, to impede him, but they were forced to retire. From thence his Excellency marcht to Xaintes, and im∣mediatly stormed it. Since which, his Resolutions are to streighten Tailleburg, it being the onely strength that Conde hath in all Xan∣togne. His Excellency is resolved forthwith to give battel to the Spa∣nish Auxiliaries, and the rest under the Dukes of Neumors and Beaufort; whose condition is dangerous, by reason they have lost their pas∣sage over the Seine, in losing the Town of Mante, where the Lord Digby hath slipt into possession for the King: His Lordship hath fallen upon the Maiden-Regiment, raised by Madaimoselle Barbonetta (daughter to the D of Orleans) and after many desperate Onsets, charging in person in his half shirt, routed them, killed many, took
divers prisoners, and orced the rest into a great Hall, which he fired over their heads. He hath given the Government of the Castle of Mante to his brother Sir Lewis Dives. His Royal Majesty the King of Frane is removed from Orlean o Paris, where he was Ryaly entertained by the Citizens, who pro∣mise to raie four Armies, for their dread Soveraign, in case the Duke of Orleans should advance with his orces, to ipede or obstruct their present proceedings. The Duke of Longueville raiseth generally from 16 to 60, all the Inhabitants of the Dukdom of Normandie, for the security of the Kingdom, as he es against the Enish, whose invasion is much feared by the French. The Dukes of Nmurs, and Beaufort, makes all the expedition they possibly can, to hinder the conjunction of the three Royal Armies, (viz.) the Army with the King, commanded by Marshal de Hocquincourt, the second by Marshal Tureine, and the third by the knowing victorious Souldier Count Harcourt. The Duke de Lbeufe, the Duke de Bovil∣lon, and the Marquis St. Luc, are with their Royall Forces to at∣tend the motion of the Prince of Condy and Conty, whose forces hath been partly shattered, partly routed, and discomfited lately. Sever∣all English Vessels being discried upon the Coasts of France by those of Calie and St. Maloes, it hath caused the Parisians to look about them; and somt have upbraided the Duke of Orleans, saying, that he hath a designe on foot to bring in the English, as well as he did the Spaniards. By the last Intelligence from France it is certified, That his Excel∣lency the Lord Gen. Harcourt hath given a great overthrow to the Prince of Conies Army; and after a bloudy fight (continuing for the space of 7 hours) totally routed him, killed about 5000 upon the place) amongst the rest, Lieu. Gen. Maein was slain, took 3000 prisoners, all their Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, Bag and Bagage, the Princes Standard, his Royal Cabinet, 14 Sumptures, and seven charging horses; but not without great losse; for the field being disputed with so great gallantry on both sides, that Victory seemed dubious, untill such time, that Gen. Harcourt flanked the enemies right Wing with 1500 gallant horsemen, who charged so close, as if they had been linkt together knee to knee; and his Excellency most heroickly charged in person in a white Sattin doublet (half way un∣brac't) with his Rapier in one hand, and a pistol in the other, dis∣mounting many (as if he had been a second Alexander) and at last
wounded the valiant prince of Conde, and divers others. Letters from the Navy advertize, That Vice-Admiral Pen is re∣turned from the Streights (with the Parliaments Fleet) to the Downs, and hath brought in five French prizes, richly laden. Prince Rupert is coasting the Southern Islands, with the Swallow, and three other gallant ships, being turned an excellent and notable experienc'd Navigator about those Continents; for he rides very safe in those parts with his ships, and takes many rich prizes; espe∣cially from the Spaniard, who hath suffered neer upon four hundred thousand pounds losse; part whereof he hath sent to the King of Scots at Paris, haved sent a Frigat, laden with gold and silver, to him for a present; but withall desires, That He will be pleased to be in∣strumental for the recruiting of him with men and ships, and then he doubts not but in a short time to purchase him his three crowns, and to joyn with the Hollander for the scouring of the Seas. The Duke of Buckingham is gone Ambassador for Italy: The Mar. of Ormond for Germany; The Lord Wilmot for Poland; The Lord In∣chiquin for Sweden; and the Lord Carew for Denmark: imploring aid and assistance, for the restoring of him to his Crown and Dignities; But of this more hereafter. The Emperors Ambassadour hath concluded upon a peace with foreign Prince, assuring them that his Royal Master will be instru∣mental for the restoring of the true Owners to their Rights; so that upon this account Frankendale will be surrendred. There hath been proclamation made at Hamburgh, for the raising of ten Regiments of Horse and foot; and many great Officers have been very active for accomplishing the same for the Scotch King; but the States have now level'd their design. The King of Denmark makes great preparations for war▪ and is re∣solved to fortifie Shoonen, the Castle of Conenburgh, and divers other frontier Towns; yet notwithstanding he hath made proclamation for the increase of Trading with the English. The Spanish Ambassadour at the Hague hath demanded of the States general restitution of the ship called the Saint Philip with the goods that were in her, which was taken some moneths since by a man of war belonging to the East-India Company, which hitherto they have refused to do; and declareth, That in case of denial, the K. his master will soon give satisfaction to the parties grieved, out of he estates of the Hollanders that will be found in his Dnminions. London, Printed by Robert Wood, 1652.
