O851 E274_32 R209884 99868735 121091
The Oxford Character Of the London Diurnall Examined and Answered. CErtainly all is not well with the Gentlemen at Oxford, for an∣other Court Rabshekah railes, raves, bites his tongue, teares his haire, rends his clothes, and discovers his owne nakednesse. Much of what is uttered by him is like the unshapen whelp of a beare not licke, requiring paines to forme it into an intel∣ligible shape: it being much easier to translate Rablais his French into English, then to interpret a sense of some part thereof. It is called, The Character of a London Diurnall, and beginneth thus; A Diurnall is a puny Chronicle scarce pen fethered with the wings of Time, It is an History in Sippits, The English Iliads in a nut-shell, The Apocryphall Parliaments book of Macca∣bees in single sheets. Inconsiderate man, have you at Oxford any Chronicle pen∣feathered with the wings of Time, which is as ancient as the world it selfe? I never heard of nor saw such an History, one onely excepted, The holy Scripture, and that I much doubt whether you suffer to be among you; I am very sure you seldom look into it. And yet our Journall is elder brother unto Aulicus by much, who I beleeve was begotten at Oxford (though illegitimately) in envy of ours at London of honest parentage. By the expression of a History in Sippets, I sup∣pose who the Author is, A very Iack-sauce, who loves eating better then fight∣ing; and because he hath not a heart fit for his stomack, and dares not fight, knowes that this trade of lying, slandering▪ and blaspheming, is counted a ver∣tue parallel to valour among the Cavaliers. This is he that was Praefectus Ale in
Trumpington street, I will abae him not an Ace of it. To the next I answer, that it is no dishonour to comprehend an Iliad in a Nut-shell, a great matter in little space. You have forgotten your selfe: If you had said, There had been a shell wito a kernell, a little City running out of huge gates, a Pigmy in the Ar∣mour of Hrcus, it had ben somewhat to your purpose. But what could more have been d for us, then to call ours by such a name, in so small a volume where lay so much worth. Your Iournall, I confesse, takes extreme paines all the week, and beginneth the journey upon Sundayes, and for want of truth and honesty in stead of a History presents to the Reader a Legend of lies, an Ilis medacirm; even their skind lies at the best, hiding from us chaste and na∣ked truth. A book that is a vessell full of lies, where if there be by chance any letter of truth▪ it maketh it stinke s) abominably, that the Malignans of late begin to stop their ses, and call Aul A stinking lier. The Aporyphall Par∣liament, &c. How dares this man give his Majestie the lye, or call him Dissem∣bler, who hath sundry times in Letters and Treaties and in a reaty very late∣ly, acknowledged a Parliament at Westminster. And f Antiquity will dscerne betwixt what is authentick and that which is counterfeit, we at Westminster may claime priority to the sitting of xfrd, beside Royall Text, and that even from the very beginning of the prsnt Parliament: A Parliament to be holden at Westminster the 2. of November, with the subsription of Carolus Rex. An Act against the High Commission. Votes of Bishops in the Parliament, &c. with Carolus Rex. Letters to the Lods and Commons assembled togeher in the Parliament at Westminster, with Carolus Rx. All this is Canonicall, and in your phrase we have not only the consent, but the Law of Jupiter▪ therefore is there at Westminster no Apo∣crypall Palament. It is an open Parliament where Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen sit together in the accustomed place, the Houss well known by that name many ages, You scarce dare declare where you sit, is it not in a Dining Room, I pray? Your Apocryphall Parliament was conveened by the counsell of the King of Spaine, and his slaves the Jsuits and directed by their Instruments Francis Cottington, sometime Spanish Ambassadour, Endymion Por∣ter of Spanish bood, and the Spanish Conclave of English Scotish, and Irish Priests and Isuits and the Doctrine thereof confirmed by the blood of despe∣rate Villains, Papists of the three Kingdoms, most eagerly by inhumane and barbarous Irish. Neither was the Parliament to be dissolved Adjourned or Prorogued without the cosent of them that never ye gav cosent to the ad∣journing it to Oxford. And if Apocryphall be hidden, who need doubt that the Dnng Rome Guests at Oxford are of that Parliament for the greatest part of the yeer they are run away, alias, have adjourned. Lastly, it s no great matter to be Apocryphall at Oxford, there Apocryphall Sufanna is currant Scripture, if not better then any part of Gods Word. For Maccabees, Iudas Cottington, Porter, three Digbies, &c. are more orthodox with you then King, and Idges. That you have no cause to be offended with an Apocrphall Parliament, who ove Apo∣crypha so well, that you teare in pieces thos Bibles which are wihout it. It wuld tire a wlsh Pedigree to reckon how many Ap ti remove from an Annall &c. Something the braine of this Jupiter hath conceived, but cannot bring it forth.
Surely he meaneth our Journall is a little Annall▪ or such like: If he had La∣tine enough, he would call the childe with which he laboureth, f he could speak, Ephemeris, or A Diary; and such a body is big enough for a conception of six dayes. But you see (Reader) the mountaine of his head hath not brought forth a mouse, although the Asse hath delivered himselfe of Are. It may be the legislative Lady is of that Image, &c. Oh now I see how the world goes, this Lady Beligia will perhaps send no more Armes to shed the blood of Britains, that pluckt her out of the mouth of the Spanish Lion. Was it any dishonour to be of her race that hath opposed Tyranny, and maintaineth Li∣bertie. In the Frontispiece of the old Beldame Diurnall sits the House of Commons iudging the twelve Tribes of Israel. How cometh it to passe that those at Oxford are offended with pictures? Are the painted Papisticall Windows of Christ-Church and Magdalen Colledge broken in pieces? Are the Crucifixes and Images defaced? What is the matter? It may be, and perhaps it is so (for by the savage depor∣ment of Greenvile, and Hopton, one may easily conjecture so much) that the Ca∣valiers are by accustoming themselves turned Turkes, and they allow no Ima∣ges; and sure I am these hate the Image of God in any man. Now I have found it out, they cannot endure the Parliament should sit as Judge, they have such guilty Consciences. Be contented, it must be so: Not all the Tribes, but the idolatrous scattered Tribes; those which are honest need not be afraid, but such as are bloody Papists of England and Scotland, Rebels who have armed themselves against their Protectors, Kindle-Coles of civill Warre, and among and above the rest the Barbarous Bloody, Our good subjects of Ireland. And thse grave Rabbes, though in Divinity, trade in no larger Authors. If the lear∣ning of the Members of our Assembly were parallel to Heylings; Stewards, Pcklington, Cozens, &c. whose Scripture is Aquinas, Lombard, Durand, &c. and their Devotion the Matins and Even-song, and the Common-prayer booke, and their various reading not beyond the hounds of a Common-place book, I might be sooner induced to beleeve you speak the truth. But since, for all such as shall be admitted into Colledges and Benefices, a sweeter examination is enjoyned then ever was expected in Colledges or Bishops Houses. What name soever you give to our Assembly, slander not their learning. The next ingredient of a Diurnall i Plots, terrible Plots, &c. Nothing grieves your Masters more, then that there are here Gunpowder makers, who cansmell a plot before the powder stinkes. Tell me, was not Master Waller in a plot, and a great Complottor? beleeve not me▪ beleeve his confession. Did not Challner confesse, and repent of a plot? Indeed some of yours were guilty of that folly, as to deny their Conspirators, whe the Authors that set them on work could not help them. No wonder that such persons, who have beene notorious in their lives, and have not voluntarily confessed their Treasons, but have been taken in them, should die confessors. And yet we can shew the Letters of Hthams owne hand-writing, witnesses of his plots to betray Hull: The hand of Digby
for the betraying of Abingdon to Colonell Browne, and setting the snare to betray him also, The onely Play-house is at Westminster. You say very true, it is the great Barne in Witehall, since the State hath pulled downe the Globe, Blackfryers, the Fortune, and I make no question that wooden Babell shall be no eye-sore to you; there shall be no more playing or dancing there beleeve it. A zealous Botcher in Morefields, whiles he was contriving some Quirpocut of Church government by the helpe of his out-lying eares, &c. I pray thee tell me, Who now informeth His Majestie? Is it not the Councell at Brussels afarre off, the Jesu∣its, Cottington, and Porter. betwixt Hide, Culpepper, and Nicholas, or some of their Clerks? And who cuts out the Church-government for you, if not the whore of Rome? And who fashioneth it, but your Spanish English Taylors? Besides the opportunity of reforming those Beasts of the Prerogative, and changing their prophaner names of Harry and Charles into Nehemiah and Eleazar. Fie, doe not mis∣take, there are no Beasts in the Tower of that Sex. I know that the Beast with seven heads and ten hornes is become a Beast of prerogative; the beastly French and barbarous Irish are beasts of prerogative. Into Nehemiah and Eleazar, you would say Ezra in stead of Eltazar. But it an easie thing to mistake the wrong who never heard of the right; He who never nameth the Scripture but to belie or prophane it. But although there are no Lions that are Masculine now in the Tower, there are divers sitting and couching secure at Westminster, that most worthily deserve the names of Nehemiah and Ezra. Touching him you are pleased to call Little Isaac, and mis-call by a dishonourable description, it appeareth you are extremely straitned for matter of disgrace wherewith to upbraid us, when you lay it upon a worthy and eminent person, whom im∣pudent Aulicus could not finde cause enough in that kinde to cast suspition up∣on. Certainly, as before when you named Eleazar you meant Ezra, so now you name Isaac and meane some other person at Oxford. Thus the Quixots of this age fight with the Windmils of their owne braines. My friend, the Sots of this age and Kingdome, yea the greatest (I thinke) of all ages are such who beleeve that papists will fight for the Protestant Religion, for the overthrow whereof they conspired the death divers times of Queene Elizabeth and King Iames; and that Irish Villains, who have ravished our Wives and Daughters, have mangled and murthered our English Men and Women, no way more hurtfull unto them then those that now in England joyne with them, nor of any other opinion then what at Oxford is pretended to be fought for, should out of zeale to the English Nation a protestant Religion, fight for King Charles against His Parliament. Ile present them in their order; and first as a Whifler before a shew: enter Stamford, one that trod the stage with the first, traversed his ground, made a leg, and exit. You are out againe, Henry Earle of Stamford could not be spared from Westminster, I saw him in London yesterday: wherefore your exit belongeth not to him. But the Earle of Newcastle, the brave Marquesse of Newcastle, which made the fine
playes, he danced so quaintly, played his part a while in the North, was sound∣ly beaten, shew'd a paire of heels, and exit Newcastle. Cum Widdrington, Bram∣halt, & Caeteris to Derhurst faire. Here was a crue exit. Tell me, which of ours hath done the like? There was a Vote passing to translate him, and all his equipage, into menumentall Ginger∣bread, &c. His Lordships honour is engraven in firmer stuffe then this, of which all your new Lords and Knights, and many your old ones are made. This new made honour at Oxford, moulded and baked there, is crumbled away at Westminster, and this is the very thing that makes them bite their tongues, and say, It is Gingerbread. Roome for the prodigy of valour, Madam Atropos in breeches, Wallers Knight errandry. Aske Hopton if Sir William Waller be not valiant, he will confesse that Sir William put him into an extreme fit of an ague at Cheriton hill, where the Rowlands, Tristrams, and Olivers, made the Parliament sorces run and ride after them, and in that Hopton quietted the minds of some of his Malignant Country friends, who wondered to see their bragging Champions make such speed, by saying, They came to try whether of the two Armies horses were swiest, and to beate them with riding, not with fighting. Sadly, neither the presence of the great Generall Ruthen, nor the false rumour published thorow their Army, of the ut∣ter overthrow of the Scots, could restraine them from flight, before they had lost one hundred men. Neither will I forget Sir Arthur Hasterig, canst thou have the face to say he will not fight? he, who brought honourable testimonies of his va∣lour from Landsdowne, more honourable then Hoptons scalded face, which was no embleme of honour. As Hopkins and Sternhold murder the Psalmes, with another to the same. This Libel∣ler defileth the sacred ashes of our most memorable English Psalmists, when he had cast filth upon the honour and innocence of the living, living and dead, friend and foe; he spares none, but beates all, even now he called Aulicus Witch, and white Devill. Tell mee, how doe Hopkins and Sternchold murder the Psalmes? thou obedient Sonne of the Church, reade, does not the Common-Prayer booke for which you fight, tell thee that the Psalmes were translated by Hopkins and Sternhold, conferred with the Hebrew, and allowed to be sung in Churches? Heare you great Fathers, Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, &c. now your Common-prayer booke is not guilty of Felony but of Murder, by the confession of your owne; you allow to be sung in Churches the murders of the psalmes, and for the truth of the Translation this Gentleman findeth them differing from their originall, although he understand none of the Language. No, no, you hate the psalmes, but pretend it to be onely for the Translators sake, and yet none of your holy men have brought these psalmes to life againe. There Haslerigs Lobsters were turned into Crabs, and crawled backward. Crawling backward is an exceeding moderate retreate; it seems they never ran for it, as you did at Cheriton hill; I dare sweare, that speed which was then used, was
beyond the motion of a crawling, I think we had best call it Hoptons Jigge; certainly, they were either very cruell, or very fearfull, that freed a Town in their flight. These Crabs were those that bit some of their followers by the fingers at Landsdowne, that made them come bleeding into Oxford: and no wonder that these Crabs should crawle upon Cheriton hill again, for Crabs will crawle forward and backward and every way. This is the Will, whose Lady is the Conquerour, She is so indeed, she outgoes all your Oxford Ladies in vertue, and yet is no Lady Errant; why should it grieve you, that this noble Lady is a Conqueresse? is it not an honour to conquer? Fie upon your und one errant Ladies, the Trophees of your Oxford victories, sent in Letters and close Coaches to London, to make tryall if the mercy of the Round∣heads be not greater then the honesty of the Cavaliers. He hath beat up his Drums clean thorough the old Testament, &c. Nor Rupert, nor Hop∣ton, nor Newcastle, could ever boast so much: Rupert beat up his Drums among the beggars for his foot, Hopton among the Heathen Cornish for his, Newcastle among the infernall Colliers, and transtrentish Papists for his; and for their horse, a man may well suspect them to be cozen Iermanes to the first, they ride so fast to the Devill. For can there be a cleanes or better place to beat a Drum in then the old Testament, to raise an Army for the wars of the Lord? there where he is most honoured. In Cromwels Regiments there is no God-dam-me named, no Sink-me, no Confound-me, no Devil nip me by the back, no Rot me alive, named among them, no Devil sucke me thorough a Tobacco-pipe. And no wonder those who hate the Son of God, should grieve to heare the name of any of his kinred. The Muster-Masters Roll (he saith) is the first of Matthew, he hath no other List. Indeed, neither in the Genealogie, or in the Parliaments Army, are many wo∣mens names; but how many Languages must he have that can muster Ruperts Regiments? English, Irish, Welch, Scotch, French, Walloons, &c. double Regiments all, men and women. There is the Launce Knight and his Uroe, the Tinker and his Trull, the Dell and his Doxy, the Knave and his Whore. With what face can they object to the King, the bringing in of Forraigners, when them∣selves entertaine such an Army of Hebrewes? But with what face can any defend the Kings arming of Papists, and shipping over to his assistance most cruel murder∣ers to defend his Protestant Subjects of England, who at the very first renounced the arming of any such with serious Protestations; and afterwards did arme and invite such a people to his war, as not only hate the Protestant Religion but the Nation of the English? And whereas this man is much troubled with an Army of Hebrewes, repining at the very names of Hebrewes, (though our Savi∣our had an Hebrew name) and Hebrew studies; they indure nothing but the vulgar Roman, the smooth Brittish, and pleasant Irish. Thus they hae the Scripture so much, that as good bring over an Army of Irish and Turks, as have one Hebrew name among us. Beleeve him as he whistles to his Cambridge Teame of Committee-men, and he does wonders. Believe it, you may be sure of it; the Committee-men of Cambridge
have done wonders themselves, they need no whistlers there, keep you whistler at Oxford to be your Recorder. Now for the wonders they have done, is, that a few Gentlemen in number have more prevailed with reason, in the place where they sit, then the whole Apocryphall Parliament at Oxford, with all their whist∣lers, to contribute freely men and money, to the supportation of the Kingdome and themselves. They riste Collidges to support learning. It is a usuall thing at Oxford so to do; five hundred weight of plate from one Colledge, foure hundred from another, one thousand from another, very few have escaped their hands; if this be not to rifle Colledges, what is? what else hath the University to be rifled of? This is he that hath put out one of the Kingdomes eyes, &c. But if one of the eyes be evill, it is better to pluck it out then doe worse; but heare that noble Peers ora∣tion, (the sum of it I meane) and let the indifferent judge, who spake to this pur∣pose when he came to Cambridge? Master Vice-Chanceller, yea, the Doctors, Masters, and other Students of this University: By the Authority of both Hou∣ses of Parliament I am come hither, neither to deface the beauty, or spoile the treasure or indowments of this place, either in the whole, or any part thereof: although some part of this hath been done by others, it is not the purpose and intent of the Parliament to do, or suffer to be done any such thing; nor is it, or shall it ever be mine, who am sent hither to reforme what is amisle here, only a pious tendernesse, as being sensible above others, of the good and evill of this my Mother, having been a Student here not long agoe. Let it not trouble you if the ranke weede of Superstition shall be plucked up, as if learning must be rooted up withall. Look upon the University of Leyden in the Low-Countries, then where no Nation or University, considering the time it hath continued, and the smallnesse of the place, hath more abounded with learning and learned men; which is constituted under such a Government Ecclesiasticall, as our Kingdome and this famous place (if God permit) is to be reformed into: Nay, when un∣godly persons are plucked up, the good and wholsome herbes will have more roome, and grow the better: but be ashamed to call such as Cozens, Beale, Sterne, &c. eyes of the University; if such as these be eyes, Cambridge hath more then Argus had, and can spare as many to put into the tayle of the Romish Peacock. I confesse Cozens was put out to grasse againe. Beale put out into a narrower room, for fear of leaping, others put out of their Fellowships, because they could not, keep in their tongues, but the religious have been incouraged, the sober, and our moder∣ate adversaries have not been moved farther then to the Covenant, nor removed upon denyall thereof, unlesse there were some other Delinquency. Many of you now at Oxford, if yee are eyes, have not only vountariy put out your selves, but have put out the eyes of Hart and Iames the Cambridge Carriers, who never could see their horses you borrowed of them, but rid quite away to Oxford, you rd from one eye to the other, and so these men were deceived the breadth of the nose. Brereton and Gell, two of Mars his petty toes; such sniveling cowardr &c. Impu∣dence,
call to minde the fight at Nantwich, Montgomery, and now think of Shrews∣bury, and by whose valour and prudence your friends were quite beaten out of Darbyshire, and if thou have not a Tinkers face thou wilt change thy colour. I wonder how Sir Thomas Fairfax came to be a babe of grace, &c. Saving your blasphemy, Sir Thomas, his valour, integrity, and constancy, brought him into grace: But I wonder how Oneale, Braddie, Muskerrie, Dilton, came into grace; Gentlemen of Ireland take heed; will you trust them that caused forty Proclama∣tions to be printed, (wherein you and your Confederates were called Rebels) to keep their promises with you, touching the freedome of your consciences? be as∣sured, when in publique Declarations it shall be declared, That Religion shall be reformed according to the purest times of Queen Elizabeth; And that A dispensa∣tion shall be only for tender consciences, you cannot be accounted within the line of that Manifesto, that have shed the blood of so many thousands of King Charles his Subjects without any Warrant. And I wonder as much how Prince Rupert comes to be a babe of grace, when not many years since he was quite out of grace, and was sent away into Germa∣ny with a flea in his eare, by them, with whom he is now raised so high in grace, and some of the chiefe of that Electorall family, (in whom (I doubt not) is true grace) for separating from those evill Councels, are (by them) accounted not to be worthy of favour or grace. He calleth Colonell Browne a Woodmonger, and a feeble Crutch. Belye him not, this gallant Colonel hath cudgelled you most valiantly, and by being a feeble crutch, upon which Digby leaning, slipt, hath raised unto himself an eternall pile of ho∣nour for his worth and integrity. Vouz avez Fox the Tinker, the liveliest embleme of it that may be; for what did this Parliament ever go about to reforme, but Tinkerwise, in mending one hole they made three. Nos avons, Fox the Stout; abate his name only of Fox, and he is an embleme of valour; he, whose Kettle Drum hath made your Masters run for it often times. This Fox will not suffer your Dogs to Kennell in his earth, if you could win him to that, then your honour at every word, and let me kisse your honoured hand, and presently metamorphise him into a beast of the Prerogative. Now for the holes the Parliament hath made in Cambridge, I assure you, they stop them apace. Your hole (Sir) is stopt in your Colledge and that other hole of your mouth, (I believe) by this time; if not, pray let me heare from you. Printed according to Order. Printed, by . 1645.
