p1293a 36272981 150156
Frindly and Faithful ADMONITIONS BEING Some quickning motives to raise sinking Sinners, From the sleep of sun that every man may be made Perfect in Jesus Christ. Being a Farewel SERMON Preached by Mr. WILLIAM PEN To his Congregation on Sunday being the 6th of August at the Quakers Meeting-hous in VVestminster. London Printed and Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster,
A Farewel SERMON Preached by Mr. William Pen. On Sunday being the 6th. instant at the QƲAKERS MEETING-HOƲSE at Westminster. Friends: Take hèed that ye observe good Counsel, and let not the Light depart from ye: Yea, Let the Wonderful Counsellour be your Guide. Licensed According to Order. T was the Blessed Encouragement that our Lord Jesus Christ gave to s Disciples, and all his Followers when he took on him the Nature of
Man, and was made Flesh, and dwelt amongst us  and therein to all the Sons and Daughters of men, who should follow him thro' the many and great Tribulations and give up their Names and Hearts to him, to be Wit∣nesses of his Truth, and of that Holy Testimony which he should commu∣nicate to them near his Farewel, and a little before his being offered up, Let not your Hearts be Troubled, t beleive in God, beleive also in me: In my Fathers House are many Mansions, if it were not so, I would have told you; I g to prepare a place for you, and I will com again and Receive you unto my self, tha where I am, there you may be also. Now my Friends, These Mansion they are the Recompences of Rewa that are set in the View of the Righ∣teous, and promised of God b Christ Jesus. These many Mansions are the manifold Rewards, Diversities of
Rewards that Refer to the Diversity of States and Conditions, and Per∣sons, unto whom these many Man∣sions do belong, As all are not of the same statute and groweth neither are all these Mansions of the same degree of Glory and Felicity. There is one Glory of the Son, another Glory of the Moon, anothe, Glory of the Stars; for one Star Differs from another Star in Glory, yet all these Stars shine with a lusture and Glory, and the least Sr hath a Beauty and Excellency i it and so the least of these many Mansions have a Marvellous light and Glory in it. This refers to the state of every Man and Woman here below. All Mem∣bers are not the Hand, all are not the Head, but every member of the Body hath its Service,) and will have its Reward.
This is that which did Spring in my Soul this Evening, as I sat here among you. O that all here present: may▪ become the living Members of Christ Jesus our Blessed Head, and live the Life they live in the Body, By the Faith of the Son of God. —He that made us, knows our Frame; He that created us and formed and fashioned us after his own Image, and gave us Powers and Faculties to glory∣fie and serve him, that we may come to enjoy him for ever he requires of to man or VVoman more then he hath given them power and Abiliy to perform. It concerneth us all therefore to live in the Excercise of that Divine Gift, and Grace, and Ability, which our Lord Jes s Christ hath Distribued and Communicated to every Mem∣ber of his body, that we may come
to shine as Stars in the Firmament of Glory.—VVe should do good in several Places and stations, according to our Differnt Powers and Capacities▪ And as every mem∣ber is by the Circulation of Blood, made useful and Beneficial in the Natural Body, so the Divine Life and Blood of the son of God Circulates through his whole Mystical Body, and teaches Life to every living mem∣ber. Here is no Obstruction through Unfaithfulness, or Inordinate love of the VVorld, or any Temptation from without us, or Corruption from with∣in us. Here is a free Channel, here is an open Passage for Life and quick∣ening influences from Christ our Glori∣ous Head, to all his Members. There is in Christ (in whom the Fulness of the God-head dwells bodily A River, whose Streams make glad the City of God: A Fountain to
Supply and refresh the whole Gene∣ration of the Righteous, that desire to be found in him as the Apostles speaks not having their own Righteousness; but Cloathed with the Robe of his Righteousness, which is the Garment of SALVATION Therefore VVait this Day, My Dear Friends, to have your hearts filld with the Love and Life of the Son of God that you may appear with Joy at his Tribunal, mankind must appear; and every one give an Account of what he hath done in the body, whether it be good or evil. Let every one of you be careful to live according to what you know and improve the TALLENTS that God hath given you, and you shall find that in keeping his Com∣mandments there is a great Reward, and that God is good to Israel to them that are of a Clean Heart Had not the Lord been on our side may Israel, say had not the Lord been on our side when Men rose up against us,
may we say, they had swallowed us up and the Temptations of the Devil would have prevailed over us, and we had fallen long ago; It is not we that have stood firm in times of tryal and trouble, but it is the Lord that hath stood by us and made us to stand: And the love of God to his People now, is as great as ever it was: His Arm is not short∣ned that it cannot save, nor his Ear heavy that it cannot hear; Therefore Travel on and Faint not, and you shall come with Joy to the end of your JOURNEY, and you shall be satisfied with the Fatness of God's HOUSE, and say with the Psalmist, Blessed are they that dwell i thy HOƲSE, they shall be still praising thee. It is the Faithful and sincere that shall dwell in the HOUSE of the LORD for eve and enter into his everlasting King∣dom. O My Friends, Live as
a People bowed down in the presenc the of Great and Holy GOD and wal Humbly with him; Be humble under his mighty Hand, and you shall be exalted in due time. The God of Heaven hath Visited your Souls with his Di∣vine Power and Grace and given you a refreshing Sense, of his Love, that you may per∣ceive and feel a Dayly Renew∣ing of your strength. O Wai upon the Lord for his Divine Power to enable you to Conquer the Power of Satan, that you may go on Conquering and to Conquer. till you come to the New JERUSALEM the CITY of GOD and Land of Peace and Rest.
Beware of IDOLATRY! Bow not down to the work of your own Hands: For tho' you may not be Guilty of Grose IDOLATRY, yet there is a secret, and more hidden IDOLATRY, that too, many are Guillty of. Who set their Hearts and Affections on low and Earthly things: This sticks but too near to many. Let the Word of Exhor∣tation of the Apostle enter into your Hearts: Little Children keep your Selves from IDOLS Let thi be the Cry of your SOULS, Lord Preserve and keep me this Day very Day and to the end of my Days, that I may be not only Convinced of the Truth, but really Converted to it, and Walk in thy Truth, and Perserve therein to the end, that I may be saved. re∣member Lots WIFE; Look not back to SODOM; Wall in
in Lights as Children of Light wi your Faces Sion-ward; and rejoyc in hope of Glory of God. Ye were some time in Darkness, but now saith the Apostle Ye are Light in the Lord O Shine as Stars in the midst of a Crooked Perverse generation, Shin in the Beauties of holiness, and Walk in the Light of Christ, the Sun of righteousness, who was given for  light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of his People Israel he shall be the Desire of all Nations; the mighty Saviour upon whom God hath laid help: Believe in him, cleave to him, and follow him, and you shall be Saved both from your Sins, and from the Wrath to come. God is Light (saith the Apostle JOHN in him is no Darkness at all; If we Walk in the Light as he is in the Light then we shall have Fellowship one with another, and th Blood of Jesus Christ his son Cleanseth us from all sin, We know him to be the
true rock and Foundation of God, which andeth Sure, and which will stand re in stormy and Tempesteous times Blessed are they that Build upon this Foundation which God hath laid. Blessed be God, who hath Opened your Eyes and given you to see this sure Foundation; which we must build all our hopes of salvation upon and not upon any other Foundation whatsoever We that are made Living Witnesses of the Power, and Wisdom, and Good∣ness of God let us sink down into Self-Abasement and humility and we shall feel the Living openings of the Spirit of Truth in our hearts, and receive with Meekness that ingrafted Word, in which is light, and life, that is able to save our Souls, and submit to the Au∣thority of God therein; That the word of Christ may dwell richly in us, and become the Power of God to our Salva∣tion.
Now the God of Peace which brou again from the Dead our lord Jesus Chr the Great Shepherd of Sheep through  Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, m you perfect in every Good Work, to do  Will, Working in you that which is  pleasing in his sight to whom be Glory prais and Thanksgiving, who alone is Worthy who is God over all, Blessed for ever an ever, Amen. FINIS.
