P2435 R230095 99899443 153487
DELICIAE MUSICAE: BEING, A Collection of the newest and best SONGS, With the Dialogues in the last New Play call'd (Love's a Jest) Sett by Mr. John Eccles. Sung at His Majesties Theatres. Most of the Songs within the Compass of the Flute. WITH A Thorow-Bass, for the Theorbo-Lute, Bass-Viol, Harpsichord, or Organ. Composed by several of the Best Masters. The Second Book of the Second Volume. two musicians F. H. van. Hove. Sculp LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for Henry Playford at his Shop in the Temple-Change, Fleetstreet, where the first Volume is to be had; also a New Book for the Flute, being the Best and Easiest Instructions yet Publish'd. And Sold at Oxford by Francis Dollife Book-binder, who Sells all other Musick-Books. 1696. Price One Shilling six Pence.
A Table of the SONGS contain'd in this Book. C Come Hodge, come Robin, come John, Page. 11 F Fly from my sight fly far away, 7 From Aberdeen to Edinbrough, 25 H Hark you Madam can't I move you, 2 M Mortals learn you Lives to measure, 1 P Pretty, pretty Miss let's talk together, Page. 21 S Shou'd I not lead a happy life, (hick) 16 W What differing forms does Love obtrude, 26 Vocal and Instrumental Musick lately Printed and Reprinted with large Additions, for Henry Playford at his Shop in the Temple-Change, Fleetstreet. HArmonia Sacra, in 2 Books, containing Divine Hymns and Dialogues lately set to Musick by Dr. John Blow, and Mr. Henry Purcell, and other Eminent Masters. Price Bound of both Books 15 Shillings, the Second Book Sticht 4 s. Deliciae Musicae, in 4 Books, with Three Elegies on our late Queen, being the first Volume, Contains most of the Newest and Best Songs, by the late Famous Mr. Henry Purcell. The Price of the Volume Sticht, 5 s. The whole Book of Psalms in 3 Parts, by John Playford, as they are Sung in Churches: Printed for the use of several Masters in most Countries, who teach the same. The 2d. Edition in 8o. Price Bound 5 s. The Introduction to Musick, with Mr. Purcell's Addition, being the best Rules for Composition, Price bound 2 s. The New Treasury of Musick, in Fol. being the best Collection of Song-Books for this 20 Years last past. Price Bound 25 s. The 2d. Book of the Pleasant Musical Companion, being a Choice Collection of Catches in 3 and 4 Parts, to which is added several Songs for Two Voices, by Mr. Henry Purcell, and other Eminent Masters. Price Stitcht 2 s. INSTRUMENTAL. Apollo's Banquet, the First and Second Parts containing above 300 of the Choichest Tunes, with the plainest In∣structions for beginners. The First and Second parts of the Division Violin. The First and Second Consorts of Mr. Tho. Farmers, in 4 Parts. The Dancing Master, with the Tunes to each Dance, and Directions for each Coun∣try Dance, the 9th. Edition. The Sprightly Companion, for the French Hautboy being all the Foreign Marches. Price 6 d. ADVERTISEMENTS. The Second Part of the Dancing Master, containing 24 New Country Dances never before Printed and sold by themselves Sticht 1 s. or Bound with the first Part 3 s. A New Book for the Flute, being the plainest and easiest Instructions for beginners with the newest and pro∣perest Tunes yet Printed. By reason of the small Incouragement, and for the more Compleat Printing of that Excellent Master, Mr. Henry Purcell's Vocal Musick in 2 and 3 Parts, a longer time is given to Subscribers, hoping between this time and the 12th. of October next, to meet with great Incouragement; Subscriptions will be taken till then, and the Book may be delivered to all Ladies and Gentlemen at Michaelmass Term next. Proposals also by Madam Purcell for Printing the Instrumental Musick by her late Husband Mr. Henry Purcell, are to be had by Henry Playford at his Shop in the Temple-Change, Fleetstreet. A General Catalogue of all the Musick-Books sold at the said place will be speedi∣ly published in print. A Pastorall on Mr. Purcell, by J. G. M. A. Price Sticht 6 d. The Parallel, an Essay on Friendship, Love and Mariage, by Sir H. S. Price Sticht 6 d.
A Song in (Love's a Jest). Sett by Mr. John Eccles. MORTALS learn your Lives to measure, not by length of time but pleasure; Now the hours in╌vite com╌ply, whilst you I'd╌ly pause they fly; b'est whilst a nim╌ble pace they keep, but in torment, in torment when they creep. Mortals learn your lives to measure, not by length of time but pleasure; soon your Spring must have a fall, loosing Youth is loosing all, then you'l ask but none will give, and may linger but not live. End with the first Strain.
A Dialogue in (Love's a Jest) between Mr. Bowman and Mrs. Bracegirdle. Sett to Musick by Mr. John Eccles. HArk you Madam, ca'nt I move you, why the Devil, why the Devil doe you run, han't I told you twice I Love you, han't I told you twice I Love you, come, come, come then, Kiss, Kiss, Kiss me, Kiss, Kiss, Kiss me or I'me gone. Go, go, go, nay pish, prithee go I hate a Rakish Lover; nay do not, do not discom╌pose my Dress, good, good fa╌miliar Spark give over, give over, pray give over, how on quality you press, how on quali╌ty you press, nay prithee, prithee go, nay
prithee, prithee go, I hate a Rakeish Lover, nay Lover. He. From the Countess to the Citt, ev'ry Beauty for me dyes, Damme why shou'd I submit to doat up╌on this Womans Eyes, Damme why shou'd I submit to doat upon this Wamans Eyes; to Womans Eyes. She. Fifty Beaux expire for me, fifty Beaux, fifty Beaux ex╌pire for me, O╌gling, O╌gling, sigh╌ing; all, all, all, all the day; yet
yet not one, no, no, no, no not one dares be so free, tho' they let me win at play, tho' they let me win at play. He. Sure we Rakes can bet╌ter move you, sure we Rakes can better move you, see this Shape, and Leg my Dear, in one Minute more, I'll Love you than those Fops can in a year, than those Fops can in a year. She. But your Love will soon be over, He. Then you'll get a fresher Lover, come, come to Bed,
She. Leave, leave my hand, come, come, come to Bed, to Bed, to Bed, to Bed, I long t'embrace; then lends your Face, first the Hand, and then the Face, then the Brest, & then the rest, & then, then, then, then, then, Strikes him. The Face, He. s'death I've a good mind to beat you, no to vex you more I'le leave you, thus I puff you,
She. then I'll say, how I did treat you. I'll go say I refus'd your Love to day. CHORUS. All will believe, all will be╌lieve I us'd you so, all will be╌lieve, all will be╌lieve, all will believe, all will believe I us'd you so; all, all, all, all, all, all, all, all, all will believe I us'd you so, all, all, all, all will believe I us'd you so. None will believe, none will believe you cou'd, you cou'd do so; none will believe, none will believe, none will believe you cou'd, you cou'd do so; none, none, none, none, none, none, none, none will believe I us'd you so, none, none, none, none will believe I us'd you so.
A Dialogue suppos'd to be between a Eunuch Boy, and a Virgin. Sung by Bowen and Mrs. Cross in a New Play call'd Ibrahim. Sett to Musick by Mr. Daniel Purcell. She. FLy, fly from my sight, fly far a╌way, my scorn, my scorn thou'lt on╌ly Purchase by thy stay; a╌way, away, a╌way fond Fool, a╌way, a╌way, away, a╌way, fond Fool, a╌way. He. Dear, dear Angel, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, here on this place I'le root╌ted grow; those pretty, pretty, pretty, pretty Eyes have Charm'd me so, I cannot, cannot stir, I cannot, cannot, cannot, cannot goe; I cannot, cannot, cannot
cannot stir, I cannot, cannot, cannot, cannot goe, I cannot, cannot, cannot, cannot goe. She. Thou silly, silly Creature be advis'd, and do not, do not stay to be despis'd; by all, all, all my actions thou may'st see, my heart can spare no room for thee: He. why, why dost thou hate me? ah! confess, thou sweet dis╌poser of my Joys? She. The Reason is, I on╌ly guess, by something in thy Face and Voice, that thou, that thou art not made like o╌ther Boys; He. Why I can Kiss, and I can Play, and tell a thousand
pret╌ty Tales, and I can Sing the live╌long Day, if a╌ny other Talent fails, can Sing, can Sing the live╌long Day, if a╌ny other Talent fails, can Sing, can Sing the live╌long Day, if a╌ny other Talent fails. She. Boast not thy Musick, for I fear, that Sing╌ing gift has cost thee dear, each war╌bling Lin╌net on the Tree, has far a better, better, better Fate, a better Fate than thee; for thy life hap╌py pleasures prove, as they can Sing so they can Love.
CHORUS. She. No, no, no poor Boy, No, no, no poor Boy; No, no, no not I; (Pish) (Pish) Oh fye; no, no not I; (Pish) (Pish) Oh fye; no, no not I; You know, you know, you know you lye. CHORUS. He. Why so can I, why, why cannot I, why cannot I, pray do but try, pray do but try, do but try, do but try, pray, pray do but try, do but try, do but try, do but try, pray, pray do but try, I know no reason, no rea╌son why, I know no reason, no rea╌son why.
A Dialogue Sung on Hob's Wedding, at a Country Wake. Sett to Musick by Mr. John Eccles. Mr. Wiltshire. COme Hodge, come Robin, come Robin, come John, come Katy, come Katy, come Jenny, come Joan, make hast all and don, your best Clothes on, for Hob must be Married, be Married a non; Hob. For I must be Married, for I must be Married, be Married, be Married, be Married a╌non. Cho. For Hob, Hob must be Married, for Hob must be Married, for Hob must be Married, for Hob must be Married, be Married, be Married a non. Cho. For Hob must be Married, for Hob must be Married, for Hob must be Married, for Hob must be Married, be Married, be Married, be Married a non. Wiltshire. Let the Plough to day stand still, and Maids go not to the Mill; but hast to the
Wedding, but hast to the Wedding, no matter for bidding, no matter for bidding, Hob. you may all come, you may all come, you may all come that will. Cho. You may all come, you may all come, you may all come, you may all come, you may all, all, all, all, all, all, all, you may all come that will. Cho. You may all, you may all, come, you may all come, you may all come you may all, all, all all, all, all all, all, all, all may come that will. Wiltshire. There's Pudding and such good Cheer, and a Barrel of good strong Beer, and the Fidler shall play, and we'll trip it all day; But at Night gadsookers stand Clear, stand Clear, but at Night gadsookers stand Clear. Cho.
But at Night gadsookers stand Clear, gadsookers stand Clear, gadsookers stand Clear, gad╌sookers stand Clear, at Night stand Clear, stand Clear, at Night gad╌sookers stand Clear. Cho. But at Night, at Night gad╌sookers stand Clear, gad╌sookers stand Clear, gadsookers stand Clear, at Night, at Night stand Clear, stand Clear, at Night gadsookers stand Clear. Mrs. Hudson. Here's I, and Katy and Sue, we're all as ready as you; but Mary does say she'l not Marry to day; Mary. By my troth I wonot, I wonot, I wonot, by my troth I wonnot come too. Cho. She wonot come too, she wonot come too, she wonot come too, she wonot come too, by my troth she wonot come too. Cho. She wonot come too, she wonont come too, she wonot come too, she wonot come too, she wonot come too.
Mrs. Hudson. Come Mary, come, come, come, come, come, come, come, come Mary, come, come, come, come, come, come, come, come Mary you must be rul'd; then give him your Hand, then give him your Hand, and say you'r well mov'd, and say you'r well mov'd. Mr. Wiltshire. Come Mary, come, come, come Mary, come, come, come Mary, come, come, come Mary, come Mary you must be rul'd; then give him your Hand, and say you'r well mov'd, and say you'r well mov'd, well mov'd. Hob. Don't think, don't think, don't think that Hob will be fool'd. Cho. don't think, don't think, don't think, don't think, that Hob that Hob will be fool'd. Cho. don't think, don't think, don't think, don't think, that Hob, that Hob will be fool'd. Mary. Come, come then, come, come then Come, come then to Church; come, come then to Church, and let's Wedd. Hob. And af╌ter
that we'll to Bed, to Bed, and after that we'll to Bed. Yet I cannot, I cannot, but Cry, to think I shall dye, when I part with my Maiden╌head; I cannot but cannot but Cry, to think I shall dye when I part with my Mai╌den╌head. CHORUS. She cannot but cry to think she shall dye, she cannot but cry to think she shall dye, she cannot but cry to think she shall dye, when she parts with her Mai╌den╌head; she cannot but cry to think she shall dye, she cannot but cry to think she shall dye, she
cannot but cry to think she shall dye, to think she shall dye when she parts, when she dye she cannot but cry to think she shall dye, to think she shall dye when she parts with her Maiden╌head. She cannot, she cannot but cry to think she shall dye, she cannot but cry. to think she shall dye, she cannot but cry, but cry, when she parts with her Maiden╌head; she cannot, she cannot but cry to think she shall dye, she cannot but cry to think she shall
dye she cannot but cry to think she shall dye, to think she shall dye when she parts with her Maiden╌head. A Drunken Dialogue in (Love's a Jest) between Mr. Reading and M. Lee, in the Second Act. Sett to Musick by Mr. John Eccles. He. SHou'd I not lead a happy life, (hick) shou'd I not, shou'd I not, shou'd I not lead a happy life, (hick) were but my Bottle like my Wife, were but my Bottle like my Wife; (hick) my Bottle empties when I Swill, my Bottle empties when I Swill; (hick)
But my Wife swells up, but my Wife swells up, but my Wife, my Wife swells up when we Bill; (hick) wou'd when I Drink, wou'd when I Drink my Bottle fill; and when I Kiss, and when I Kiss my Wife not swell, all wou'd be well; I wou'd so (hick) so swill, I wou'd so, (hick) so fill, I wou'd so, (hick) so Bill, that dai╌ly, dai╌ly I wou'd spend my life; Drinking, Filling, Hugging, Billing, my merry, merry, merry, merry, merry, merry, merry, merry Bottle and my Wife.
She. Still at your Pot you drunken Sot, you drunken, drunken, drunken Sott; you till I come will never go home, and when you're there, you Curse and Swear, you Curse, you Ban, you Damm and Swear, then prove a Bed a lump of lead; will you never leave your beastly Pott, you odious filthy drunken Sott. He. Do you think you Scold I'le be controul'd, (hick) do you think you Scold I'le be con╌troul'd; no more be said, no more be said, or at your head as I'me a Sott, (hick)
souce flyes the Pott; but first I think I'le save the Drink, but first I think I'le save the Drink; Drinks. She. Hold leave a sup, don't, don't drink all, all up; He. Here taste, taste, and know why, why, why I'le not go. Gives her the Pott. She Drinks. She. How sweet, how sweet oh! how it Cheers and warms my Heart; oh! dear methinks, me╌thinks I suck my Mother, here's to you my Love, have 'tother Quart and then, He. what then, She. and then a╌nother. She Drinks again.
CHORUS. Come now we're friends, come now we're friends, and all, all, all is right, and all, all, all is right; drink, drink, drink, drink all day, but love, love, love at night, drink, drink, drink, drink all day, drink, drink, drink, drink all day, drink, drink, drink, drink all day but love, love, love at night, drink. Love, love, love at night, but love, love, love at night. Come now we're friends, come now we're friends and all, all, all is right, drink, drink, drink, drink all day, drink, drink, drink, drink all day but love at night, drink, drink, drink, drink all day, drink, drink, drink, drink all day, drink, drink, drink, drink all day but love at night. day but love at night, but love, love, love at night.
A Dialogue in (Love's a Jest) between a Boy and a Girl in the Fourth Act. Sett to Musick by Mr. John Eccles. He. PRetty, pretty Miss, pretty, pretty, pretty, pretty, pretty, pretty Miss let us talk, let us talk to╌gether; I play truant, I play truant, I play truant, to come hither, to go with you up and down, I'de leave all the Boys in town, I'de leave all, all, all, all, I'de leave all, all, all, all, I'de leave all, I'de leave all the Boys in town. Boys in town. She. My deary, deary, deary Jemmy, Jemmy how d'ye do, how d'ye do, how d'ye do; I'de leave all our Girles for you, nay my fi╌nest, fi╌nest Ba╌by,
nay my fi╌nest Ba╌by too. She flings her Baby away. He. Come let us play, let us play at Man and Wife, come come let us play, let us play at Man and Wife. She. Fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, fye you know, that's full of strife, you know that's full of strife, fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, fye that's full of strife. He. Come then let us Kiss, let us Kiss and hug, let's Kiss and hug, let's Kiss and hug each other, let's Kiss and hug each other, like my Father and my Mother, like my Father and my Mother. She. Ay that's better, that's better, that's better,
come be╌gin, come begin, when you'r out I'le put you in, when you'r out I'le put you in. He. Pray, pray be not so shy, be not so shy my deary. She. Stand off, stand off, keep your distance, keep your distance or I vow, I vow I'le tear ye. He. Are thy Bubbies a coming, thy Bubbies, thy Bubbies, thy Bubbies a coming, Child; Let me see, let me see, let me see, I must Kiss, I must Kiss. Oh! no, no, oh! pray, pray, fye, fye, fye, no, no, no, no, no,
no you shan't. He. There's no body sees us then why do you fear, now a lit╌tle more good Betty. She. Fye, fye, you make me Blush I swear, yet me╌thinks 'tis very Pretty, well, we'll Marry e're 'tis long, She. You'r too little, He. You'r too young. CHORUS. Oh! I cannot, I cannot, I cannot tarry long; Oh! I cannot, I cannot tarry long; quickly, then quickly, then quickly, then quickly, then quickly,
then let us Mar╌ry; oh! I cannot, I wonnot, I cannot, I wonnot, I cannot tarry long, I cannot, I wonnot, I cannot, I wonnot, I cannot, I wonnot tarry long. Oh! I cannot, I cannot, I cannot, I cannot, I cannot tarry long; oh! I cannot, I cannot, I cannot, I cannot tarry long; quickly, then quickly, then quickly,
then let us Mar╌ry; oh! I cannot, I wonnot, I cannot tarry long, I cannot, I wonnot, I cannot, I wonnot, I cannot, I wonnot tarry long. A Song in (Love's a Jest). Set by Mr. Ackeroyd. Sung by Mrs. Hudson. FRom Aberdeen to Edinbrough I trudg'd it with my Bearn; And thence to London Town did goe, some News of my Love to learn; And thence to Lon╌don Town did goe, some News of my Love to learn, some News of my Love to learn. But now the Bonny Lad is come, With Royal Willy here; So I'se e'en gang contented home, Sin I have got my Dear.
III. I for my Sawny Wove a Plad, No Laird can better wear; I'se Knit a Bonnet for the Lad, And other goodly Geer. IV. Our canny Loons and Lasses now Mun all be bly the and dance; For Sawny says, we'se force to bow The mickle De'el of France. A Song Sett by Mr. Moses Snow, B. M. WHat diff'ring forms does Love obtrude, to vex an Am'rous mind; to be fa╌miliar's to be Rude, to be reserv'd unkind: Women, like Victors, do pro╌ceed, who o╌thers Rights in╌vade, and in vain Tryumph proud╌ly lead the cap╌tives they have made. II. Thus Lovers in uncertainty, Like Mariners are tost; Who tho' they scape a Storm at Sea, Are Wrackt upon the Coast: Then since their Treacherous Arts I see, In vain are all their Charms; My Native freedom ne'er shall be Subdu'd to forraign Arms. FINIS.
