P93 E449_18 99864456 161861
The Copy of a LETTER Sent from an unknowne hand to that reverend man, now with God, Mr. Herbert Palmer, a Member of the Assem∣bly concerning the great abuse of OATHES. The substance whereof was pub∣lished to the Parliament by the said Mr. P. the 30. of September, 1646. viz. Concerning those oaths which are used in Corporations, and many other So∣cieties. The customary irreligious taking of them making it become a Nationall sin, & call's aloud for Redresse, specially at this time now that the Parliament is upon a gene∣rall REFORMATION. Published for a generall good, that men may take notice of this common abuse of Oaths as of a NATIONALL SINNE. Because of swearing the Land mournes, Jer. 13.10. June 23.  LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, 1648.
A copy of a Letter sent to Mr. Pal∣mer concerning the abuse of Oaths for forme, custome, &c. in most Societies in this KINGDOME. Reverend Sir, I Beseech you be pleased to take notice, (from the pen of a stranger to you,) of a way wher∣in you may do a good service, as is conceived, to Christ and his Church in this Kingdome, by being a means to represent unto Authority a burthen which lyeth sadly and heavily upon many men of tender consciences in this King∣dome. And for that the Parliament is now upon a generall Reformation, it is not to be doubted but that they wil hearken to them that shall shew them what particulars according to the word of God do need it. Therefore you being so near them and so often among them, and having many opportunities put into your hands by preaching before them, and otherwise, to promote it. Accept I beseech you this information, and take it as it is intended for the publique good and benefit of the faithfull, especially of the weaker. Sir, This pressure complained of is the great multitude of needless oaths commanded and enjoyned, some by custome, and some by the lawes of the Land, upon most sort of men in this Kingdome. There is scarce any society that any man can be admitted into in this Kingdome, but presently an oath is tendred him. 1. Boys that are admitted into the University many times before they know what an oath is. There is tendred the oath of matriculati∣on, they swear at their admittance to keepe Statutes which it is que∣stionable whether or no they have seene before the oath taken. And whether then they swear in judgment, righteousnesse and truth, is no hard matter to determine.
2. As soon as a young man hath served out his Apprent ship in almost any Crporation; when he commeth to be made free, pre∣sently an oath is tendred him to maintain customes and priviledges of that Corporation (and enwraps him in a snare the same day that he enters into the world to set up for himself) which customs how well they can be observed, the practice many times sheweth. So that the taking of an oath which is so solemn a part of Gods wor∣ship, is made a meer formality, a ceremony, a toy, to remember such a day of admittance by. In these kind of people the abuse of on oath may be called a snare. Then there are others, to whom it is a great burthen, a stum∣bling block, as to all that enter into Offices, in the ordering the Common-wealth, as Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Parish-officers. There is scrce any way for a man to be never so little publique, but presently this snare is thrown over his neck. If I should enter upon particulars they would swell above the dimensions of a letter, for they are very many, I shall therefore on∣ly touch some of them. 1. The Church-wardens oath is removed (blessed be God) with the Canons: But still the Constables oath is continued. Every year at the entrance into his office he taketh an oath, which he is as like∣ly to observe as the young lads at Cambridge are to keep their ma∣triculation-oath, or as the former oath was kept by Church-war∣dens. If the conscience scruple at it, presently they are in danger of the Law for refusing, or else in danger of a troubled conscience for acting against that scruple, by taking an oath with a doubting conscience. For examples hereof, take one for all, in a County wherein you have been a Pastor▪ viz. in Hartfordshire, at a Towne called Huns∣den, where the Constable chosen for this year 1646. being tender of taking the oath at his entrance on that office; was therefore upon his refusall bound over to answer it at the County Sessions. And how he escaped, I have not yet heard; for I know not whither they have had a Sessions since. If it be objected that it is usefull that all which enter into office should have some Ty upon them to mind them of their office. I an∣swer. 1. Can their be no tye found out but what must ensnare the conscience? I doubt not but that there may be many wayes found out to engage them which are in office to a care of the performance far better and freer from this ensnaring the conscience.
2. Those that are conscientious will be carefull without this ty; those which are not, have only so much the more sin bound upon their shoulders; for it is not like that an oath will do it, when con∣science of their duty moves them not. Yet I pray conceive not that with the Anabaptists I speak against all oaths, (for I know that an oath for testimony of a truth in questi∣on is so usefull that a Christian Common-wealth cannot well be without it.) But the remedy which we desire, is, First, and principally against those oaths which are promissory, and contain so large promises, and so many, that they are very sel∣dome performed, and scarce indeed possible to observe. 2. Against those which are tendered to those of so young years, that they are ready to sweare to any thing, not heeding. 3. Against oaths given to them that understand not the nature of an oath. 4. Against oaths pressed on those that scruple at matter or words n an oath. I need not mention to you (who understand these things so wel) the great dishonour done to the name of God by this manifold abuse of an oath, only I shall mind you that this sin is conceived to be in the number of them that are called Nationall sins, (and therefore most-proper at this time of a generall Reformation to be conside∣red of) which is clear, if the observation of some be true who make that a Nationall sin, not which is most frequent in a Nation, but which hath most authority and countenance from the laws and go∣vernment of the Nation. And I humbly submit to your considera∣tion whither that Scripture, Because of Oaths the Land mourns, may not as well (if not more prperly) be understood of these kind of oaths, as of those that are rashly uttered by prophane ones in their ordinary discurse. Sure I am, some of these oaths being prested upon some good Christians, have been unto them a ground of mourng, while they durst not sweare through tendernesse of cocnce: and by refusall, have been debar'd of those comforts they have sought, which they have been judged uncapable of, and unfit for, becaus of their rfusall. I acknowledge that there are many these licentious times which cry our for libery of conscience in matters not fit to be allowed them, when as it is indeed liberty to the flesh and licentiousnesse, which is intended and desired by thm. Yet Sir, there are againe
that are indeed tender consciences, that out of such tendernesse fear an oath: & to whom these ways of imposing an oath, are a burthen, a snare, specially in a promissory oath, wherein (in regard of the multiplicity of particulars promised) the performance is of such transcendent d fficulty, that it cometh near an impossibility. And these upon my knowledge (upon their refusall) have beene made mourners, and that even in these times, which have promised o∣therwise rejoycing to the hearts of the Saints, Ever since the beginning of our troubles, both sides have ac∣knowledged that a speciall regard ought to be had to tender con∣sciences; such as are truly so indeed, and not pretended, I wish it were as much considered when it comes to practice, as it hath in words beene freely acknowledged. I am sure those that have nee∣ded a respect to their tendernesse, have not found it so. But I shall not hold you any longer upon this subject. In the last place to add something concerning my self who have moved you to endeavor a redresse this way. The searcher of hearts knoweth that my conscience hath urged me hereto, as having no rest in my selfe if I should not endeavour so far as I lawfully may a Reformation of a Nationall sin, and to be silent in Gods cause may enwrap in the guilt of the crime; whereas by labouring the remo∣vall I shall at least deliver my owne soule, which I beseech you Sir, as God shall give you opportunity seriously to consider and apply to your selfe: And though you prevaile not, yet you need not question but your very endeavour is acceptable with God. And that no other end hath moved me to write unto you, saving only the glory of God, and the good of his Church. I beseech him to judge (and reward me accordingly if it be otherwise) before whose judgment-seat we must one day all stand; wherein also I have con∣cealed my name, and intreat you not to enquire it. And secondly, why I have made so bold with your selfe in par∣ticular, of all the Assembly to addresse my selfe unto, I shall give you this reason, that I had strong encouragements to perswade me that I should prevaile with you to be the man to breake the ice in this businesse by promoting it to the consideration of Authority, for that I find you have laid to heart matters of farre lsse concerne∣ment than this, in your booke of making Religion ones businesse, Part 1. sect. 5. As in our ordinary discourse to say [with all my heart] or to use such a word as Infinite, because it is proper only to
God, which is a fault so ordinary in our speech, that had not you hinted it, had beene I suppose by sew observed. How much more in a solemn Ordinance to call upon the name of God, and ipso facto to prophane it, by making it a meer formality. That solid judicious man Mr. Reynolds of the Assembly, in his Sermons on Hosea 14.1. Serm. 1. Sect. 10. hath this observation, That one sin generally unreformed, unrepented of, may undoe a Kingdome. The Lord put it into the hearts of them in Authority to consider of it now, in this generall Reformation which they are about, that they may not leave that one unreformed to the blasting of their other endeavours. And though I might have beene taxed of too much boldnesse if I had written to some other, thus to put them upon such a work; yet I have good hope of you, that that humble Spirit wherewith the Lord hath endued you, will not take amisse what is done by your weake brother. The Lord blesse your pains in the Ministery, and make you instru∣mentall of much good to his Church, which is the prayer of Your unknown friend, a servant of the same Mr. P. P. Christian Reader, THis Letteer being sent, & delivered to that godly man Mr. Palmer, he was very sensible of the great dishonour daily done the name of God by this abuse of an Oath: and therefore the very next time that he prea∣ched before the Parliament (which was at the Fast, Sept. 30. 1646.) he earnestly urged the removall of these oaths, and that specially on these grounds. 1. Because Gods name is hereby from time to time fearefully ta∣ken in vaine. 2. The parties conscience often wounded. 3. Men are hereby inured to wretched prophanenesse, and not to feare an oath at any time in the most serious matters of Justice▪ Truth, or Righteousnesse. 4. Because it is no hard matter to find out other wayes to effect that good, for which these oaths were first introduced, as you may see at large in his Sermon upon Isa. 58 12. at pag. 37. Printed for T. Underhill. The Lord put it in the heart of our Parliament seriously to thinke of the removall of these oaths. I were to be wished that men truly conscientious, would, before they take an oath, first seriously weigh and consider the parti∣culars
of what they sweare uno. There are many godly young men every year made free in the City of London, who I dare say if they were aware of the danger in taking that oath which is given them with their freedome, would rather abide the penally than take it. Let them but get a copy of their oath, and then see if it have these qualifications which ought to be in every Oath. 1. Whether or no it be made in Judgment, that is, Doe they well and throughly understand all the particulars which they then swear to perform. They swear to mintain the Franchises and Customes of the City, those are the words. Doth every young man that comes out of his time well under∣stand how many these be, and what. 2. Every oath ought to be made in Righteousnesse. Let him be sure all the customes of the City which he swears to maintaine, be righteous. 3. An oath ought to be made in truth, that is, of such things as we will perform: and then let him also looke that they be such things as he can per∣forme; besides, an oath should not be of things frivolus or impertinent, or not belonging to his place and calling who takes the Oath: and let every Free-man consider whether the oath hath these qualifications. Lastly, there are other things in that oath that imply a difficulty in kee∣ping, as contribution to all charges; the word [all] is of large extent, and will quickely stumble a man of tender conscience. Let us pray to God to guide us so that we may vse religious ordinances▪ with that solempnity which is due to them, and not perform them for a fashion, custome, forma∣lity or the like, as is the manner of the prophane world. FINIS.
