P917 E171_7 R9442 99873551 157042
Peace againe in Sion, OR, HEAVEN APPEASED, man to God Reconciled, England and Scotland united. Shewing how the Sword was drawne, the Battel was pitched, desolation and destruction threatned on both sides, but thanks be to God, the Angell hath sheathed up his sword, the Parlia∣ment hath made us friends, and the Ar∣mies are quite disbanded. With the manner of the Scots departure from New-Castle into Scotland. LONDON, Printed for Richard Burton, and are to be sold at the Signe of the Horse-shooe in Smith-field 1641.
Peace againe in Sion, or heaven appeased. ARise thou (long since deceased) Prince of Orators, and let thy unparalleld eloquence a while assist me, that I may not want expression, to sound forth great Bri∣taines happinesse, by the reason of their late pacificati∣on. Doth not Don Phoebus shine more gloriously than here∣tofore! are not his uncontrowled steeds growne gentle, and yet triumphantly beare the burthen of a Sun burnt Chariot, having Garlands on their heads, composed of victorious Palme, which they doe as it were tender to England and Scotland, both being Conquerours, by a happy (at length concluded) peace; for joy of which, horned Phoebe scornes an obscure eclipse; but being ac∣companyed (with her innumerous hand-maids) the starres, seemes to enflame the sky, with a (heretofore ne∣ver seene) translucent lustre. Dame Tellus upon the sudden is growne fruitfull, being bedewed with Celestiall showres; the woods inspite of (approaching) Icy winter, seeme to be cloathed in their spring Garments, to incourage the transformed Philomel, that she would not be timorous of a second ravishing, but joyfully to Caroll forth her most delightfull notes. What doe mine eyes behold? me thinkes Dame Flora
hath newly crowned the Fields againe, usurping weeds are extirped, and in their places, spring up most sweet and Fragrant flowers, and all for joy that Mars exiled is from forth great Britaines borders. Neptune which beares the tripple Mace, hath lately played the Barber, and shaved the curled Ocea pate, which now lokes smooth and gentile, like to the little rivolet or gliding spring, in which the chaste Diana is not fearefull for to bath her selfe. The Sea Nymphs upon the silent waves Caranto's dance, whose musitian Orpheus is, being newly raised from his female grave. The distracted winds are all chayned up, except gen∣tile Zephyrus, who serves in steed of a Fan to coole those bodyes, which by the warmth which Phoebus lends doe sweaty seeme, and onely for joy, that England with Scot∣land shakes hands againe. Doth the Sun, Moone, Starres, Earth and Sea rejoyce at our felicity? and shall our hearts have still their mourning Garments on? shall the woods be clad in their greene Liveries, and shall we be covered with fable? in so doing wee shew our selves ingratefull and unworthy, to receive the least of benefits. But me thinkes I heare some soule being hard opprest with griefe for the losse, either of a Father, Mother, Bro∣ther, sister, wife, or child occasioned by the contagious pestilence, which now is carryed about, not onely Lon∣don, but also in divers other places of England, upon the back of unpartiall death. I speake to such a one to be joyfull, but his answer is thus. How can I be glad, so long as the pestilence hath po∣wer
to destroy my friends? if it had pleased God to have kept back the plague, I could have beene contented to be joyfull as well as any one. As if God should hire us to give him praise for the benefits, which he bestowes upon us. That the pesti∣lence is now amongst us is most certaine, but what was the cause which brought it? was it not our sinne? O sure∣ly yes, for God will not, nay (with reverence be it spo∣ken) cannot afflict, except hee bee provoked unto it by sinne, and the wages of sinne we all know is death. But yet wee see that in the midst of his judgement hee sheweth mercy, for with the plague he hath sent a bles∣sing, peace, which is of all terrestriall blessings the chiefe. A most joyfull peace is concluded betweene England and Scotland. Marke O man, whosoever thou art, which being vexed with griefe a while cannot rejoyce, in thy Saviour, thy deliverer, thy peace-maker; marke I say, what of late thy God hath don for thee, consider how that when two Parliaments were dissolved, yet was there a happy third called, which wisely to manage, God put it into the peoples heart to choose renowned, loyall and faithfull worthies, to the terror of those which were bad, but joy to them which were not blotted nor stained with treachery: then was the pride of the Papists abated, nor were bad Priests affected, but utterly disal∣lowed of; the foule Cannons, and oath in the Synod are by this most happy Parliament damned, and the first fra∣mers of them in danger. Godly Priests are restored, Tray∣tors executed. Blessed Union doth continue in both houses of Parliament. A Trienniall Parliament enacted: Ship▪ money and Pattents put downe, Universities refor∣med. Sabbaths better Sanctified, sporting upon those ho∣ly
dayes, being quite suppressed, Popish Ceremonies sen∣tenced, persecuted Pastors recalled; no High Commis∣sion Court, or Star-chamber admitted. These and many more benefits, by the providence of God, and wisedome of the Parliament, have beene conferred upon us, and shall one punishment ecclipse the splendour of so many blessings? God forbid; wherefore let us sing unto the Lord a new song. Let us all with one accord both pray, and praise our God: pray him that the pestilence may cease, and praise him for the good, which hee hath done for Is∣rael; but especially for that of uniting England and Scotland together; againe for joy of which, once more I say, let us triumph and rejoyce, some one may aske the question, how he should triumph and rejoyce? I answer, not by going to a Taverne or an Ale-house, and be drunk there, or by following vaine sports, to please the fansie: but by going to Church, the house of God, where He hath promised, (two or three being gathered in his name there,) to grant their requests. There let us gather our selves together, as it is required of us, upon the seventh day of September now comming, by his Majesties proclamation, to heare Prayers, and preaching: so must we triumph and re∣joyce, singing Psalmes, and Hymnes, and spirituall songs, Halelujahs and Hosanna's to him, that sitteth upon the Throne, judging of the twelve Tribes of Israell; in him let us rejoyce, in him let us be glad, in him let us triumph; for it is He and onely He, which can, and will preserve us, so as wee put our trust in him: To whom be all Glory, Honour, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now and for ever.
The manner of the Scots departure from New-Castle into Scotland. THe Generall of the Scots made Proclamati∣on, That every man should bring in their Bills of charge, what every Souldier had run in arrearages, and every man bringing in their bills, were paid to the uttermost farthing: & further he gave Command, that none should wrong man, nor woman, nor Child, neither meddle nor make with any mans goods there marching a∣way, but what they paid for, to the uttermost: and whosoever did offend; the Generall made the party that did offend, give double restitution. FINIS.
