R1036 36282328 150222
Renewed Advice To the Respective Monthly and Quarterly MEETINGS In England and Wales For Preserving and Spreading Friends Books for Truths Service. From the Meeting of Sufferings in London. DEAR FRIENDS, WIth our dear Love in the Truth unto you all, These are to let you under∣stand, That our Friends have at several Yearly Meetings had under their serious Consideration, how all those Books that are Printed for the Service of Truth, and in the Unity of Friends, might most effectually be spread for a General Service to Truth, and Information unto Friends and others: And at the last Yearly Meeting it was left unto this Meeting, who accordingly have taken Care and Pains therein, and settled as followeth. That those that Print Friends Books, shall the first Opportunity after Printed with∣in one Month at most, send to one of the Correspondents in the several Counties, viz. For your County, two Books of a sort if under Six Pence for each Monthly Meeting in your County, and but one of a sort if above Six Pence per Book for these Reasons, 1st. For Friends to have General Notice of what Books are Printed. 2dly. That they may send for what other Quantities they may see a Service for. And 3dly. That the Printer may be incouraged in Printing for Friends. 4thly. That one Book at least of a sort that shall be Printed [except Collections] may be kept in each Monthly or Quarterly Meeting, for the Service of Friends and Truth, as there shall be occasion for the future. And was agreed at the yearly Meeting 1692. To be Recommended to the Quarterly or Monthly Meetings, and desired by the said Meeting 1692. in the Printed Epistle. 5thly. Its agreed, that for Incouragement the Printer will allow two pence in the Shil∣ling for all such Books. 6thly. Its agreed that some here shall be appointed that two or three Weeks before each Quarter Day to Examine the Printer, to see that they send no Books but such as are approved by Friends, and no more than two of a sort as aforesaid; except the Friends in the Country shall write for more, which its hoped they will not fail in, as they see a Service for them. 7thly. Its Agreed or Advised, that the Printers Account be fully cleared once a Year at the least by those Friends the Country shall send up to the Yearly Meeting. 8thly. Its Agreed that the Name of the Printer Imployed by Friends should be sent, with Directions how to write to him. And Dear Friends and Brethren. Its tenderly and in Brotherly Love Advised and Recommended unto you, That ye be careful and diligent in the spreading of all such Books that are Printed for the Srvice of Truth, and are Written either in defence of it, or Christian Doctrine, or Holy Profes∣sion, or by way of Epistle, VVarning, Caution, Exhortation or Prophesie. That so we may not be any way or in any wise Remiss or Negligent in promoting that Holy and Eter∣nal Truth it hath pleased Almighty God to bless us with the Knowledge of, and hath Raised us up to stand Witness for, in our Age and Generation, nor nothing may be wan∣ting
on our Parts to promote it, and the spreading of it, in order that the Nations may be Informed and brought into the Knowledge of it, and therein come to know Peace and Acceptance with the Lord, and injoy his Blessing. For one End of the Lords Vi∣siting us, and bringing us to the Knowledge thereof is, that we therein might be Instru∣mental for the good of others, and Faithfully serve him therein with our whole Hearts, and also with that Substance he hath Blessed us with, and made us Stewards of, that in the End we may give an account to him with joy, and may Receive the Reward of Eter∣nal Life. Signed on behalf of the Meeting for Sufferings in London the 18th. of the 6th. Month. 1693. By Benj. Bealing. Our Ancient Friend, The Printer's Name is as followeth, to whom direct thus, For ANDREW SOWLE at the Crooked-Billet in Holy-well-Lane in Shoreditch London. Who hath long Served Truth and Friends, and suffered very great Losses, and gone through many Hazards and Difficulties, with sore Prosecutions for the same; is now Ancient and Dark-Sighted, but his Daughter TACE SOWLE, who understands the Business very well, Carries on his Imploy. Or, To Tho. Northcott at his Shop in George-Yard in Lumbard-Street London; One that served his Apprentice-ship with one that Bound, and sometimes procured Books for Friends, and hath now for some Years past, in like manner been Imployed. Postscript. And this Agreement and Account herein sent, we think it needful you should Record it in your Quarterly Meeting Books, and sometimes Read it for Remembrance and General Notice. LONDON, Printed for Friends, by T. Sowle, at the Crooked-Billet in Holy-well-Lane in Shoreditch. 1693.
