R1143 E405_22 R201894 99862380 160479
THE RESOLVTION of the AGITATORS of the ARMY, Concerning the prosecution of their late Remonstrance and Protestation against the sitting of the late Usurpers of Parliametary power in the Parliament. With the Reasons constraining them so resolutely to adhere to that their Protestation. As they presented to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax 7ber 4th Septemb. 2. 1647. London, Printed for John Harris, 1647.
THE RESOLVTION of the AGITATORS of the ARMY. WHereas by the insolency of the City and the treacherous complot∣ments of many persons formerly Members of Parliament, was after an unheard of horrid man∣ner forced, and for security of their own lives constrained to fly for refuge to their Army; and for as much as your Excellency with your Ar∣my have ingaged both to the Parliament and Kingdom to use their utmost endeavours to re∣instate them in their just power and freedome,
and have been necessitated to declare and protest against the sitting of all those in Parliament, who lately usur∣ped the Parliamentary power for the better prosecuti∣on f their bloody intentions, and by their present in∣trusion obstruct the freedom of al votes, notwithstan∣ding contrary to the Armies Remonstrance and pro∣test, and the Kingdoms expectation of its pursuance, those Intruders are stil permitted to vote as Members; we therefore humbly conceiving that the policy of those intruders stil prevails to the danger of the Parlia∣ment and Army, as appears by their late Ordinance on friday last, wherein they not only declard against the Army, by acknowledging those usurpers to be the two Houses of Parliament, but also have laid the founda∣tion of a dangerous deltaory way of proceeding against all the fomentors of a new war, and likewise conceiving that the Armies faithfulness to God and the Kingdom, before whom they have protested, and their honor and Reputation engageth them not to permit those usurpers any longer to sit in Parliament, we thought our selves obliged to represent unto your Excellency our appre∣hensions of this engagement of the whole Army, to re∣strain all those persons from sitting any longer in Parli∣ament, as Judges of those things wherein they have made themselves parties, and we do humbly submit un∣to your Excellencies Consideration these ensuing Reasons for the Armies immediate fulfilling their pro∣testation to that purpose. First, the Army being engaged to remain near Lon∣don until the Parliament be settled in its ful freedom,
and all disturbers of their just proceedings removed, wil by their long continuance in these quarters, if any de∣lays in the expulsion of those intruders very much im∣poverish the Adjacent parts to London, which wil con∣sequently straighten the City in its provisions to the hazard of dangerous discontents. 2. Much time is already lost, to the great damage of all the Kingdom, through the continuance of those In∣cendiarys in the Houses. 3. Those usurpers having already contracted the guilt of fomenting a new war, are necessarily engaged to obstruct all proceedings which tend to the settlement of the Kingdoms peace, whereby the service and relief of Ireland also retarded. 4. The permission of those Incendiaries to sit in the Houses, may possibly give them opportunity to find a time to over vote the Parliament, and thereby stamp the image of Parliamentary Authority upon their own bloody desigs. 5. The doting of those in the Houses, who are decla∣red to be under an incapassity of sitting there, may possi∣bly make the validity of all Votes, Orders and Ordinan∣ces doubtful, that either are or shal be past during their sitting.
A second Paper delivered by the AGITATORS of the ARMY to his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX. May it please your Excellency, WHereas upon the 23 of August last, the Conscience of our duty to God and the Kingdom to prosecute our Pro∣testation constrained us to declare our sence of the inviolable Ingagement of the Army, im∣mediately to restrain those late usurpers of Par∣liamentary power from sitting in Parliament, to obstruct all proceedings tending to the Kingdomes peace: and notwithstanding we have waited with much patience, expecting that the Parliaments zeal to the publick good would have made those Intruders & Designers of mischief a burden so intollerable to their spirits, that they would rather have called for for the Armies assistance to eject them, then to have permitted them to sit there; yet all our
expectations are hitherto frustrate, and no en∣deavours to that end are visible, we therefore in faithfulness to our principles and in a deep sense of the blood and confusion that threatens the Nation by reason of the delays of remo∣ving ehe peoples burdens, and clearing and se∣curing their Rights and Freedoms, which pro∣ceeds from those Incendiaries sitting in Parlia∣ment, cannot but humbly represent once more to your Excellency. That we are weary of waiting and that the peoples growing miseries and distresses presseth us not to forbear any longer to use the utmost of our endeavours to make our Protestation real and effectual in restraining all those Usur∣pers and Incendiaries from sitting in Parliament in case they should not before Saturday next be removed, that then those retarders & obstructors of the Freedom of all Parliamentary actings, being expell'd from the House; that wicked design of our enemies to make the Army bur∣densome to the Nation by inforcing them to take free-quarter through want of pay might
be crushed, and the Parliament might pr speedily to settle the Kingdoms Peace. SEPT. 2. Which is the continued  of us whose names are subsc Jo. Renolds Fran. Allen Wil. Rainsborow Jo. Willoughby Geo. Joyce Fran. White Edw. Vaughan Nath. Foxgill Jo. Dober John Wells John Wilson J. Blackmore Tobias Bridge Wil. Ioans Tho. Sheapard Nat. Vnderwood Io. Wood Steven Combe Nich. Rawlins Rich. Nixon Tho. Robinson Edw. Sexby Timo. Thornbrough Rich. Johnson Henry Githings Rich. Grant Wil. Pryor Edw. Twigg Edw. Orpin Wil. Knolles Jo. Tayler Wil. Wilkinson Geo. Stenson Rich. Flower Rich. Thomas Edm. Garne Rich. Creed Tho. Michel. Io. Radman Iacob Summers Bart. Willock.
