R916 E132_38 R19761 99860735 112860
THE REMARKABLE FVNERAL OF CHEAPSIDE-CROSSE IN LONDON: WITH The Reason why the Bishops, Jesuits, Papists, Cavaliers, and Arminians, refused to bee there. ALSO, The Order and Manner of the Fu∣nerall, and the severall Songs for that purpose appointed. LONDON. Printed for Robert Hodgekinsonne. 1642.
THE REMARKABLE FUNERALL, OF CHEAPSIDE-CROSSE IN London. THe golden Crosse in Cheapside in Lon∣don, receiving a mortall wound, on mun∣day night, Ian. 24. and being past care, and become as dead as old Charin Crosse in the strand, it is but desent that it should now have a comely buriall: though Charin-Crosse rot a∣bove ground, without all doubt the City is more charitable, S. Ʋolentines day thought best to have the Funerall on: and therefore the guests to bee invited in order, as followeth.
2 The Bishops were sent for to their lodgings, but answer was made that the decoy had carried them all away, and they were all caughtwith him in the snare, and therfore could not come, but they would enter the day upon record. 2 The Jesuits were sent for to Common-gar∣den, but answer was made, that they were gone a Pilgrimage to S. Tyburn, to pray for the soules of the two Saints departed, to whom they pray that themselves may be kept from the Saints purgatory. 3 The Papists were invited to attend the corps, but answer was made, that they were so deeply engaged to wait upon the Popish Prelats designs, that they had too little time to performe what they have protested. 4 The Cavaliers were desired to come, but they had rather see Charin Crosse revived, then Cheapside Crosse buried, applauding their owne honour better to make more Crosses in the king∣dome, rather then to have those we lye under re∣moved. Therefore they had rather see the rest in the city rot under the Crosse, then the Crosse and supporters thereof removed, and buried in obli∣vion. 5 The Arminians were sent for, but answer was brought, that if they would but stay till Pauls Church was finished, they would pray that Cheapside Crosse might be revived again: which they doubted not to obtain by the Saints depar∣ture, that have bin great benefactors to that fa∣mous building.
5 The Nuterals were sent for, but answer was brought, that it is true they could find in their hearts to come, but they were afraid that they should be jeer'd for their labour; therfore desi∣red to be accused. Those that are to come to the Funerall, are first Citi∣sens, aad their Apprentices, then Countrey-men, who follow thus in order before this Course. 1 The 12 companies with broken crosses in their hands, and their Apprentices after them with printed Notes in their hands, singing as followeth, The stately adorned Crosse of Cheap-side, Accounted so high of, glistering in gold. So rich a brave Idoll through all this whole Land Cannot be now found our eyes to behold. Must thou go to lye low, must thou be buried: O Valentine, such a shrine thou never married. The Corps are a comming, give the word there before, Gallants march on your procrastinate time: If the Divell come after, and steale out the Corps We then shall commit a most terrible Crime. Must thou go to lye low, must thou be buried, O Valentine such a shrine thou never married, It then should be scattered our City throughout, Where ever vve go of the Crosse vve should find, Crosse Papists, and Iesuits, Fryers crosse all, Crosse Masters and Mistresses, novv vvould be kind. But thou must go to ly low, thou must be buried: O Valentine such a shrine thou never married. 2 Then followeth the next 12. companies with guild bay-leaves in their hats, swords by their sides, and black staves in their hands, and after them their Apprentices, with these verses sing∣ing, as followeth.
The great Idoll is down, down, down a, The great Idoll in Cheap-side is dovvn a, And now it must be buried, buried, bured a, It must be taken and buried in the ground a: And in the ground it low must ly, And therefore we vveep, but cannot cry a: Wee vveep but cannot cry a, 3. Then came after the Carpenters, Plummers, Stone-Cutters, Guilders, and all the rest of the 6. Companies, after the 24. with wreaths of bays, and hathorn twisted together about their heads, betoakning partly joy, that so great a superstiti∣ous Idoll was removed, and partly sorrow, that they were not employed to erect a new one, and after their Apprentices with verses in their hands, and singing thus: The Glory of Cheap-side was a Crosse, But the Standard be es a Crown, And may be made more famous now Then London that brave Town: To'th Honour of King Charles erected let it be, Not with a Crosse, but Crovvn, more famous for to see 4. The Countrey-men came after, some on horseback, then the rest on foot, crying awaywith the Idoll, down with Popery, Popish Prelats, Cere∣monies, and all Idolatry: let us only serve the God of heaven, in Spirit, and in Truth, and then our grounds will be fruitfull, our barns will be full, and the Land will be filled with plenty.
5. Then in the next place marched a Cardi∣nall, with some Jesuits, Fryers, and Queristers, singing before the Course thus: Audi memento St. Valentine, To thee we do bequeath this shrine, That another may be erected intime, Lest it be forgotten, Quite forgotten, Leave us not without a Crosse, Whil'st Hereticks and filthy drosse In  do our State so tosse, the Catholicks, Poore Catholicks. 6. Then followed the Popish Heralds, with red Crosses in their hands, and golden Copes on their backs, to advance the glory of the dead Crosse. 7. Then followed the Crosse born away by 8. men. 1. An Anabaptist. 2. A Familist. 3. A Brownist. 4. An Adamite. 5. A Separatist. 6. A Rechabite. 7. A Precisian. 8. A Puritan. All of them rejoycing to see the work done. 8. In the last place follow the women, and
the rest of the guests, with money in their poc∣kets to buy wine and rost-meat to be merry after the buriall, who seeing the work done, perfor∣med accordingly with great joy, every one ha∣ving it common in their mouths. Cheap-side Crosse is carried away, Therefore we will make a holy day. FINIS.
