S1161A R42637 38875506 152357
THE ACTS & ORDERS Of the MEETING of the ESTATES OF THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND, Holden and Begun at Edinburgh, the 14th Day of March 1689. Called by Circular Letters from His Highness the PRINCE of ORANGE, under his Hand and Seal. Collected and Extracted out of the Records of the Meeting of Estates, by John Lord Beilhaven, Robert Master of Burligh, Sir Thomas Burnet of Leyes, Sir Duncan Campbel of Auchinbreck, and John Hay of Park; Commissioners ap∣pointed by Their Majesties for Exercing the Office of Clerk Register to Their Majesties Council, Registers and Rolls, &c. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most Excellent Majesties, Anno DOM. 1690. CƲM PRIVILEGIO.
portrait
ACTS & ORDERS Of the MEETING of the ESTATES OF THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND, Holden and begun at Edinburgh, the 14th day of March, 1689. Called by Cir∣cular Letters from his Highness the Prince of ORANGE, under His Hand and Seal. His Grace William Duke of Hamilton Elected President by the Estates, to the said Meeting. I. A Letter from William King of England, (Directed thus, For the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, at their Meeting at Edinburgh) presented by the Earl of Leven, was read, (March 16. 1689.) whereof the Tenor follows; My Lords and Gentlemen, WE are very sensible of the Kindness and Concern that many of your Nation have Evidenced towards Us, and Our Undertaking for the Preservation of Religion and Liberty, which were in such eminent Danger; Neither can We in the least doubt of your Con∣fidence in Us, after having seen how far so many of your Nobili∣ty, and Gentry, have owned our Declaration, Countenancing and Concurring with Us in Our Endeavours, and desiring that We should take up∣on Us the Administration of Affairs, Civil and Military; and to Call a Meeting of the Estates, for securing the Protestant Religion, the antient Laws and Liber∣ties of that Kingdom, which accordingly We have done. Now it lyes on you to enter upon such Consultations as are most probable to settle you on sure and lasting Foundations, which We hope you will set about with all convenient speed, with regard to the publick Good, and to the general Interest and Inclinations of the People, that after so much Trouble, and great Suf∣fering, they may live happily and in Peace; and that you may lay aside all Ani∣mosities and Factions, that may impede so good a Work. We were glad to find that so many of the Nobility and Gentry, when here at London, were so much inclined to an Union of both Kingdoms, and that they did look upon it as one of the best Means for procuring the Happiness of these Na∣tions, and setling of a lasting Peace amongst them, which would be advantagi∣ous to both, they living in the same Island, having the same Language, and the same Common Interest of Religion and Liberty, especially at this Juncture, when the Enemies of both are so restless, endeavouring to make, and increase Jealou∣sies and Divisions, which they will be ready to improve to their own advantage, and the ruine of Britain; We being of the same Opinion, as to the usefulness of this Union, and having nothing so much before Our Eyes, as the Glory of GOD, the Establishment of the Reformed Religion, and the Peace and Happiness of
these Nations, are Resolved to use Our outmost Endeavours in advancing every thing which may conduce to the Effectuating the same. So We bid you heartily Farewell. From Our Court at Hamptoun, the seventh day of March, 168/. WILLIAM R. II. ACT Declaring the Meeting of the Estates to be a free and lawful Meeting. March 16. 1689. FORASMUCH, as there is a Letter from King James the Seventh, presented to the Meeting of the Estates, they before opening thereof, Declare and Enact, that notwithstanding of any thing that may be con∣tained in that Letter, for Dissolving them, or Impeding their Proce∣dure; yet that they are a Free and Lawful-Meeting of the Estates, and will con∣tinue undissolved, until they Settle and Secure the Protestant Religion▪ the Go∣vernment, Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom. The Clergy and Nobility Subscribed thus, JO. Glasgow, John Dunkelden, Will. Moravien, Jo. Rossen, Robert Dumbla∣nen, Arch. Sodoren, And▪ Orcaden. Hamilton, Douglass, Athol, Crafurd, Lothian, Mortoun, Linlithgow, Eglingtoun, Forfar, Lovit, Bellanden, Lindores, Newark, Blantyre, Argil, Southerland, Glencairn, Airly, Levin, Annandale, Tweddale, Panmure, Tarras, Dundonnald, Belcarras, Stormont, Kenmure, Ar∣buthnet, Tarbat, Dundie, Carmichael, Cardross Belhaven, Rutherfoord, Barga∣ny, Ross, Torphichen, Forrester, Rollo, Elphingstoun, Duffus, Ruthven. The Barons Subscribed thus, J. Maitland Robert Sinclair, Ad. Cockhurn, Andrew Agnew, Da. Arnot, Wm. Elliot, Pat. Scot, Thomas Drummond, Pt. Ogilvie, W. Anstruther, Will▪ Mcdougal, Patick Murray, D. Carmichael, W. Baillie of Lamingtoun, David Boyl, H. Mcguffock, James Foulis, James Montgomery, Blair of that Ilk, Da. Erskine Dun, Jo. Maxwel, Ar. Cockburn, Jo. Dempster, J. Houstoun, Willi∣am Colquhoun, Charles Erskine, Pat. Hume of Polwarth, S. D. Ca. Auchinbreck, Ar. Murray. Geo. Pringle, Ad. Gordon, Jo. Dalzell, Ja. Johnstoun, Tho. Dum∣bar, T. Burnet, Da. Bruce C. Hamilton, Jo. Haldan, William Scot, Lodovick Grant, Ja. Ramsay, Alexander Arbuthnet, William Cunninghame, Al. Duff, D. Forbes, Jo. Gordon, Ja. Moire, A. Brodie, John Campbel Carrick. The Burgesses Subscribed thus, JOhn Hall, Geo. Stirline, Robert Smith, Ja. Fletcher, Jo. Anderson, J. Mur∣ray, Ja. Ogilvie, Jo. Dalrymple, Hugh Kennedy, James Smith, John Moor, Ar. Ged, Alexander Spitle, Alexander Cunninghame, J. Mudie, Jo. Ewart, Ro∣bert Melvill, J. Cuthber, Ja. Kennan, Ja. Smollet, Will. Coltrain. Charles Halket, Geo. Smith, T. Hamilton, Jo. Boswall, Pat. Steven, Ja. Stuart, Jo. Muir, Hugh Wallace, Pat. Murdoch, J. Carnegie, Ja. Smith, Jo. Scot, Robert Cleland, Will. Ross, G. Gordon, Jo. Ross, Hugh Brown, John Anderson, Wa. Stuart, Will. Hamilton, Tho. Tulloch, David Spence, Will. Heggins, Jo. Bos∣well, A. Gordon, Will. Erskin, Will. Cochran, Patrick Wallace, Alexander Gordon. III. Proclamation for bringing in the bygone Arrears of the Publick Revenue. March 18. 1689. THE Meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom, for defraying the Charge and Expense of Securing the Protestant Religion, their own Safety, and the Publick Peace of the Kingdom in this Juncture; Do Or∣dain all Persons lyable in payment of the Supply, to make payment of what was due at Martinmass last to the Collectors in the respective Shires and Burghs; And these lyable in payment of the In-land Excise in the said Shires and Burghs, and Imposition granted to the Town of Edinburgh preceeding
Candlemass last, to make payment of the same to the Tacks-men in the several Shires; which Collectors and Tack-men are hereby Required, upon Receipt thereof, to pay in the same to James Oswald of Fingletoun; And likewise Or∣dains all Arrears of the Customs, Forraign-Excise and the Crown-Rents, to be payed to Sir Patrick Murray, present Receiver thereof, and the foresaid pay∣ments to be made within Ten Days after the Publication hereof at the respective Mercat Crosses; And grants Warrand to Use all Execution Competent by the Law of the Kingdom, against Persons lyable in Payment of the said Publick Dues; and in the mean time Discharges the Payment of any Precepts; And the Meeting of the Estates do Nominat and Appoint George Hamilton of Binnie to be general Surveyer, and to see that there be no Embazlements of the Customs. And they Command and Require Heraulds or Macers to pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edin∣burgh, and Sheriffs in that part, to pass to the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the respective Shires, and to make Publication of these Presents, and Ordains the same to be Printed, that none may pretend Ignorance thereof. IV. ACT for putting the Kingdom in a Posture of Defence. March 19. 1689. THE Meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom, have thought fit to Certifie and Advertise the Leidges, that after an Act and Vote of the Estates Subscribed by the Members, Declaring and Enacting, that the Estates would continue their Meeting undissolved, until they should Settle and Secure the Protestant Religion, the Go∣vernment, Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom: Nevertheless, several Persons who did Concur with them in that Vote, and Subscribed the same, have deserted the Meeting of the Estates, and some of them have presumed open∣ly to Correspond with the Duke of Gordon, since the Proclamation of Intercom∣muning against him, and to Retire from this place in Form of Weir; Therefore the Estates do Require all such of their Members as have Deserted the Meeting, without acquainting the Estates or their President, to return with all Conveni∣ency to the Meeting of Estates: And likways the Estates do Advertise and Re∣quire the whole Protestants of the Kingdom, betwixt sixty and sixteen, to be in Readiness with their best Horses and Arms, upon Advertisement from the Meeting of Estates, and likwie to have their Militia in readiness to receive such Orders as shall be direct to them from the saids Estates, for securing the Protestant Religion, the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed, and Published at the Mercat-Crosses of the several Head-Burghs of the Kingdom, that none may pretend Ignorance thereof. V. An Order anent an Oath to be taken by Persons in Military Imployments. March 19. 1689. THe Meeting of the Estates do Ordain the Oath underwritten, to be taken by all Persons in Military Imployments. Whereas I  have accepted of a Commission from the Estates of Scotland, or am continued in Command by them, I   Faithfully Promit, in presence of the Almighty God, and Swear that I shall Demean my self faithfully to the Estates, now presently met, so long as I continue in that Station.
VI. ACT Approving the Address, made to His Highness the Prince of Orange. March 19. 1689. THE Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland Conveened at Edinburgh, on the 14th of March 1689 years, Taking to their conside∣ration the good Services done by the Noble-men and Gentlemen of this Nation, who lately at London, did make and sign a Timous and Dutiful Address, to His Higness the Prince of Orange, Containing just & thankful Acknowledgments of the great Be∣nefits done to the Nation, in delivering them from the imminent Encroachments on our Laws, and Fundamental Constitutions, and from the near Dangers, which threatned an Overturning of the Protestant Religion, and the humble profer of their Lives and Fortunes to His Highness, for sustaining him in prosecution of so good a Cause: As also, desiring His Highness to accept on him the Administration of the Government of this Kingdom, until the Meet∣ing of the Estates thereof were called to Consult on a further Settlement. They do Ratifie, Approve, and Homologat the said Address, in all its Tenor and Con∣tents: And Declares the same to have been an Act of Duty, tending to the good of the Protestant Religion in General, and of this Nation in Particular, in all its Concerns: And Ordains this Ratification, and Approbation to be forthwith Prin∣ted, and Published, and to be a full Security in most ample form to every person who did so Address, as if their Names were herein exprest. VII. A Proclamation against Papists. March 20. 1689. THe Meeting of Estates of this Kingdom, Considering the Danger and Hazard the Religion, Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom is in, by the Growth, and Increase of Popery, and Papists of late, occasioned by the Imploying them in Places of greatest Trust within the King∣dom; and continuing them in Places, and Offices, Civil and Mili∣tary, and allowing them to Exercise the same als freely in all respects, as Prote∣stants, against the standing Laws of the Kingdom. Have thought fit to Dis∣charge, and hereby Discharges, all Papists from exercising any Civil or Military Offices within this Kingdom, and from exercising as Sheriffs of Shires, Stewarts of Stewartries, Baillies of Regalities, Magistrats of Burghs, Justices of Peace, Col∣lonels, Lieutennant-Collonels, Captains of Horse, and all other Officers in the Militia, or carrying Arms therein, under the Pains and Penalties contained in the Acts of Parliament. And for the further Security of the Publick Peace and Quiet, They Require and Command all Papists within the Kingdom, of whatsoever Rank or Condition, to deliver up their Arms (excepting Gentlemen, their or∣dinary wearing Swords) to the Sheriffs, Stewarts, Lords, or Baillies of Regali∣ties, and Magistrats of Burghs, within whose Jurisdiction they live, viz. Those on the south-side of the Water of Esk, within six days after publication hereof, at the Mercat-Cross of the Head-burgh of the Shire: And these on the North-side of the said Water, within ten days after the same; Certifying such as shall be found to have any Arms, after the days foresaid respectivè, they shall be proceeded a∣gainst with all rigor, for their Contempt and Disobedience: And Ordains and Requires the saids Sheriffs, and other Magistrats foresaids, or in case of their ne∣gligence, the Collonels, or Lieutennant-Collonels of the Militia Foot, or Captains of Horse, to search for, and seize upon any Arms, which they shall be informed to be kept up undelivered, belonging to Papists, in any Houses or Places suspect∣ed, and to secure the same, and to return an exact account of their diligence, betwixt and the days following, viz. These on this side of Esk, betwixt and the tenth day of April next, and these benorth the same, betwixt and the twentieth
day of the same Month of April, as they will be answerable on their highest peril. And the saids Estates do Command and Charge, all Papists, not being Inhabi∣tants of the Town of Edinburgh, or any place adjacent thereto, to remove ten miles from the said Town, or at least, to their respective Dwelling-houses, with∣in fourty eight hours after publication hereof, under all highest pains. And Grants Order and Warrant to Heraulds, Macers, or Messengers at Arms, Sheriffs in that part, to pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the several Head-burghs of the Shires, and make publication hereof in the usual manner. And Ordains thir presents to be Printed, that none may pre∣tend ignorance. VIII. ACT for Securing suspect Persons. March 23. 1689. THE Meeting of the Estates taking to their Consideration, That se∣veral persons have been in Arms coming from England, or going to, or coming from Ireland; and the danger that may thereby arise to the Peace of the Nation in this Juncture, Do therefore Authorize and Require, all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies of Bailliaries and Rega∣lities, and their Deputs, Magistrats of Burghs, Justices of the Peace, and Offi∣cers of the Militia throughout the Kingdom, to observe and take care of the High∣ways, Ports, Ferries, and other Passes, and places of Resort, within their respe∣ctive Bounds, and to seize and secure any suspected persons who shall be found in Arms, and can give no reasonable account of themselves and their Affairs, to the saids Magistrats or Officers; and Ordains the Collectors of Customs, and Wait∣ers at the respective Ports, Ferries and Havens, to give timous notice, and de∣late such persons to the saids respective Magistrats and Officers, for that effect; and for the encouragement of the saids Magistrats and Officers, the Estates Declare, that where any such persons in Arms are apprehended, and can give no reasonable account of themselves and their Affairs, the respective Magistrats and Officers of Militia, who shall happen to apprehend them, shall after they are Tryed, and Convicted of any evil Design against the publick Peace, have the Horses and Arms of such persons for their Reward. And Ordains these Presents to be intimat at the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-burghs of the several Shires of the Kingdom, that none pretend ignorance. And that the same be Printed. IX. A letter from the Meeting of the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, to the King of England, in Answer to His Majesties Letter directed to them; whereof the Tenor follows. March 23. 1689. May it please Your Majesty, AS Religion, Liberty and Law are the dearest Concerns of Mankind, of the deep sense of the extream Hazards these were exposed to, must produce suitable returns from the Kingdom of Scotland to Your Majesty, whom in all sincerity and gratitude, we acknowledge to be under GOD, our great and seasonable Deliverer; and we hear∣tily Congratulat, that as God has honoured your Majesty to be an eminent In∣strument for the preservation of his Truth; So he hath rewarded your Underta∣kings with Success in the considerable Progress which you have made in Delive∣ring us, and in preserving to us the Protestant Religion. We return our most dutiful Thanks to your Majesty for Your accepting the Administration of publick Affairs, and Conveening the Estates of this Kingdom; and we shall with all convenient diligence, take your Gracious Letter into our Consideration▪ hoping shortly, by the blessing of God, to fall upon such Reso∣lutions, as may be acceptable to Your Majesty, secure the Protestant Religion, and Establish the Government, Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, upon solid
Foundations, most agreeable to the general Good and Inclination of the People. As to the proposal of the Union, we doubt not Your Majesty will so Dispose that Matter, that there may be an equal readiness in the Kingdom of England to accomplish it, as one of the best means for securing the Happiness of these Nati∣ons, and settling a lasting Peace. We have hitherto, and still shall endeavour to avoid Animosities or Preju∣dice, which might disturb our Councils, that as we design the publick Good, so it may be done with the general Concurrence and Approbation of the Nation: In the mean time, we desire the continuance of your Majesties Care and protecti∣on towards us in all our Concerns, whereof the kind Expressions in Your graci∣ous Letter, have given us full assurance. Signed in Name of us the Estates of the Kigdom of Scotland, by our President, May it please Your Majesty, Your Majesties most humble, most Faithful and Obedient Servant, HAMILTON P. X. The Nomination of the Committee Elected for Settling the Government. March 27. 1689. THE Meeting of the Estates, by plurality of Votes, did Elect the Persons after-named, to be the Committee for Settling the Go∣vernment, viz. For the Nobility, The Marquess of Athole, the Earls of Argile, Craufurd, Sutherland, and Lothian, the Viscount of Tarbat, the Lords Cardross and Melvil; For the Barons, the Laird of Ormistoun, Sir Patrick Hume of Polwart, Sir William Scot of Har∣den, the Laird of Blair, Sir James Montgomery of Skelmorlie, the Laird of Grant, the Laird of Pitliver, and Thomas Dumbar of Grange; and for the Burrows, Sir John Hall, Sir John Dalrymple, Sir Charles Halket, Mr. William Hamilton, James Fletcher, John Anderson for Glasgow, Robert Smith, and John Muir for Air; and agreed that the Lord President be Supernumerary. XI. A Proclamation for calling together the Militia on this side of Tay, and the Fencible Men in some Shires. March 30. 1689. THE Meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom taking to their Con∣sideration, that the Protestant Religion, and the publick Peace of the Kingdom, are at this time in imminent danger; the Pa∣pists being in Arms in great numbers in the Kingdom of Ire∣land, and that there is just ground to apprehend and fear, in case they prevail, that they in conjunction with other Enemies to our Religion and Peace, may attempt to Invade this King∣dom; and it being indispensably necessary, that in this time of common dan∣ger, the Subjects of this Nation be put in a posture of Defense, for resisting any Forraign Invasion, and suppressing any Intestine Commotion that may arise: Therefore the Estates do Command and Require the Militia Horse and Foot in the several Shires after-mentioned, according to the present Establishment by Law, to repair to the places following, sufficiently Armed and Provided, and there to Rendezvouz under the Command of the respective Collonels of Foot, and Captains of Horse after-named; viz. The Militia Regiment of the Town of Edinburgh, at the Links of Leith, upon the fifteenth day of April next. The Militia Regiment of the Shire of Edinburgh, at Currie-moor; and the Militia Troop of Horse of the said Shire, at the Links of Leith the said day. The Militia Regiment and Troop of the Shire of Haddingtoun, at Beinstoun-moor the said day. The Militia Regiment and Troop of the Shire of Berwick, at Creas-moor the said day. The two Regiments and Troops of the Shires of Roxburgh and Selkirk, at Lantoun-edge or Moor the
said day. The Regiment and Troop of the Shire of Dumfreis, at Lockhar-bridge, near the Town of Dumfreis the said day. The Militia Troop of the Shire of Wig∣toun, at Glenluce; and the Troop of the Stewartry of Kirkudbright, at Car∣linwork the said day. The three Militia Troops of the Shire of Air, as follows, viz. The Troop for Carrick, at Mayboll, the Troop for Kyle, at the Town of Air, and the Troop for Cunninghame, at Irwine the said day. The three Mili∣tia Troops of the Shire of Lanerk, as follows, viz. The Troop under the Com∣mand of the Duke of Hamilton, at the Town of Hamiltoun; the Troop under the Command of the Marquess of Douglass, at the Town of Lanerk, and the Troop under the Command of the Lord Carmichael, at Glasgow the said day. The Troop of the Shire of Renfrew, at Renfrew Moor the said day. The Militia Regiment of the Shires of Argile, Dumbarton and Bute, as follows, viz. These Compa∣nies Out-reiked by the Shire of Argile, at Innerrary, and the rest of the Compa∣nies of that Regiment Out-reiked by the Shires of Dumbarton and Bute, at the Town of Dumbarton, the said day. The Militia Regiment and Troop of the Shires of Striviling and Clackmannan, at Broeks-brae, the said day. The Mi∣litia Regiment and Troop of the Shires of Linlithgow and Peebles, as follows, viz. The Troop of Horse, and these Companies of the Regiment Out-reiked by the Shire of Linlithgow, at the Town of Linlithgow; and the Companies Out-reiked by the Shire of Peebles, at the Town of Peebles the said day. The Western Regiment of the Shires of Fife and Kinross, and the Western Troop thereof, at Dumfermling; and the Eastern Regiment and Eastern Troop, at Cowper-Moor, the said day. The two Regiments of Foot, and two Troops of Horse of the Shire of Perth, at the Town of Perth, the said fifteenth day of April next. And the Meeting of the Estates do Nominat and Appoint the Persons af∣ter-named to be Officers of the said Militia Regiments of Foot, and Troops of Horse, viz. Of the Militia Regiment of the Town of Edinburgh, the Provost of Edinburgh for the time Collonel, Baillie Thomas Hamilton Lieutenant-Col∣lonel,  Lumsden of Innergellie Major, Archibald Dumbar Merchant, James Hart Merchant, Robert Wright, William Mitchel Baxter for the Cannon∣gate, and the Baron-Baillie of Leith for Leith, Captains. In the Shire of Edin∣burgh, Sir John Maitland Collonel of the Militia Regiment, Sir John Clerk of Pennicook, Lieutenant-Collonel,  Burnet of Carlops Major, Alexan∣der Gilmor of Craig-miller, Sir John Ramsay of Whitehill, the Laid of Leny younger, the Laird of Deuchar, the Laird of Long-sachtoun, the Laird of Her∣misheills, the Laird of Murehouse younger, Captains. The Earl of Lothian Cap∣tain of the Militia Troop, the Lord Forrester Lieutennant, and the Laird of Wolmet Cornet. In the Shire of Hadingtoun, Sir James Hay of Linplum Col∣lonel of the Regiment, Sir William Baird Lieutenant-Collonel,  Hali∣burton of Inchcairnie Major,  Hepburn of Bearford,  Durham of Lufness,  Dowgal of Nunland,  Brown of New-hall, the Laird of Gilmertoun younger, and  of Whitlaw, Captains: Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun Captain of the Troop of Horse. In the Shire of Berwick, Sir Archibald Cockburn of Langton, Collonel of the Militia Regiment; John Hume of Ninewalls Lieutenent-Collonel; the Laird of Kimerghame,  Brown of Thorne-dykes, George Hume of St. Leo∣nards;  Belshes younger of Tofts,  Brown of Black∣burn, Alexander Trotter of Kettlesheil younger, and  Hume of Hundwood, Captains; Sir Patrick Hume of Polwarth, Captain of the Troop of Horse,  Hume of Westreston Lieutenant,  Mowat of Falside Cornet. In the Shire of Roxburgh and Selkirk, Sir William Ker of Green-head, Collonel of the Eastern Regiment;  Bennet young∣er of Grubit, Captain of the Eastern Troop; Charles Ker of Redding Lieute∣nant, and Andrew Ker younger of Chatto Cornet; The Lord Newbottle Collo∣nel of the Western Regiment, Sir William Dowglass of Cavers Lieutenant-Col∣lonel;
George Pringle younger of Torwoodlie Major; John Scot of Gilmers∣cleugh younger, Walter Riddel of New-house;  Turnbul of Stain∣hall, James Murray of Soundhope,  Veitch  Ker of Abbotrule, and the Laird of Torsonce, Captains; Sir Francis Scot of Thirl∣stone Captain of the Western Troop. In the Shire of Dumfries, the Earl of An∣nandale Collonel of the Militia Regiment, Sir Patrick Maxwel Lieutenant Col∣lonel, John Johnston younger of Wester-hall Major; the Laird of Howmains, the Laird of Closburn younger, the Laird of Core-head elder, the Laird of Bra∣kinside, the Laird of Capinoch, the Laird of Garnsalloch younger, and the Laird of Craufordston, Captains. The Duke of Queensberry Captain of the Troop. In the Shire of Wigtoun, the Laird of Logan Captain of the Troop, James Agnew younger of Lochnaw Lieutenant,  Gordon of Craich-law Cornet. In the Stwartrie of Kirkcudbright, the Viscount of Kenmure Captain of the Troop, the Laird of Rusco Lieutenant, and  Murray of Kelvens Cornet. In the Shire of Air, and Bailliary of Carrick therein, the Lord Barganie Captain of the Troop, the Laird of Dunduff Lieutenant, and  Montgomery of Borland Cornet. In the Bailliary of Kyle, the Earl of Dundonald Captain of the Troop, the Master of Cathcart Lieutenant, and  Cornet. In the Bailliary of Cunninghame, the Earl of Eglington Captain of the Troop, the Lord Montgomery Lieutenant, and  Mongomery of Colsfield Cornet. In the Shire of Lanerk, the Duke of Hamilton Captain of the Troop of the Middle∣ward, the Laird of Raploch younger Lieutenant, and  Stuart of Torrence younger Cornet. The Marques of Douglass Captain of the Troop of the Upper-ward, Alexander Menzies of Culteraws younger Lieutenant, and John Bannatyne of Craigmure Cornet. The Lord Carmichael Captain of the Troop of the Nether-ward, the Laird of Cleghorn Lieutenant, and  Hay of Craignethan younger Cornet. In the Shire of Renfrew, the Earl of Glen∣cairn Captain of the Troop,  Pollock of that Ilk Lieutenant,  of Glanderston Cornet. In the Shire of Dumbartoun, Argile, and Bute, the Earl of Argile, Collonel of the Militia Reginent,  Colquhoun of Luss, Lieu∣tenant Collonel, Black Alexander Campbel Major, Archibald Campbel younger of Barbeck, Duncan Campbel, Brother to Mconachie, Duncan Campbel, Bro∣ther to Kilberrie,  Buntin younger of Airdoch, and  Ban∣natine younger of Kaymes, Captains. In the Shires of Striviling and Clackman∣nan; The Lord Elphingston Collonel of the Militia Regiment, the Laird of Pol∣mais Lieutenant Collonel,  Cunninghame of Boquhen younger, Ma∣jor,  of Herbert-Shire, Henry Rollo of Woodside, Sir Alex. Living∣ston of Glentirran, and  Nicolson of Tillicultry, Captains, and Baillie Ja. Brown, Captain of the Town of Stirlings Company; the Laird of Alva Captain of the Troop, Sir Alexander Hope of Carss Lieutenant, and  Glass of Sauchie Cornet. In the Shires of Linlithgow and Peebles, the Lord Cardross Collonel of the Militia Regiment, the Laird of Riccarton-Drummond, Lieutenant Collonel, the Laird of Livingston Major, Thomas Ha∣milton of Boghead,  Lawson of Carinmure,  Russel of Slipperfield, and  Veitch of Glen, Captains; The Lord Torphichen Captain of the Troop,  Dickson of Hartree Lieutenant, James Ha∣milton of Bangour Cornet. In the Shires of Fife and Kinross, the Earl of Morton Collonel of the West-Regiment of Foot,  Douglass of Strachenry, Lieutenant Collonel; Alexander Spittle of Lewchat Major, James Skeen of Grange,  Aiton of Inch-dairnie,  of Spen∣ser-field,  of Lassoddie younger, and  Orrack of Baltrain, Captains. Sir Charles Halket Captain of the Western Troop of Horse,  Monteith of Randifoord Lieutenant,  Cornet. The Master of Burghlie Collonel of the Eastern Regiment, Sir David Arnot Lieu∣tenant Collonel, Robert Douglass of Kirkness Major,  Watson of
Athernie Elder,  of Balbirnie younger,  Hay of Naugh∣ton younger,  of Banikie younger, and  Aiton of Kinnadie, Captains; the Master of Melvil Captain of the Eastern Troop of Horse,  of Auchter-marnie Lieutenant,  Cornet. In the Shire of Perth, the Marques of Athol, Collonel of the Eastern Regiment of Foot, formerly commanded by him, the Earl of Breadalbine, Lieutenant Collonel, James Ramsay of Bamff Major. The Lord Rollo Captain of the Eastern Troop, the Lord Ruthven Collonel of the Western Regiment, formerly commanded by the Earl of Perth, the Laird of Weyme younger Lieutenant Collonel, Robert Stuart of Arvordlich Major,  Drummond of Comrie,  Lindsay of Evelick, the Laird of Leys,  Oliphant of Condie, and  Ʋre of Shirgartoun, Captains; the Laird of Glenegies, Captain of the Troop in the Western part of the Shire,  Hume of Argitie Lieutenant,  Cornet. And Ordains the saids Collonels of Foot and Captains of Horse, to take upon them the Command of the saids Regiments and Troops respective; with Power to the Collonels to name their own Majors where they are not named by this Act, or being named shall not Accept: And that both Collonels, and Captains of Horse, have the same Power of Nominating their inferior Officers, not named by this Act, which was granted to them by Acts and Instructions of the Privy Council. And it is hereby Declared, that all these Persons who are hereby Nominate Officers of the Militia, albeit they should Decline to Accept, yet they shall be holden to bring together to the foresaid places of Rendezvouz these appointed to be under their Command, and that they shall also be lyable to the Penalties ap∣pointed by Law for their refusing to Accept. And the Estates do Ordain the Collonels of Foot and Captains of Horse respectivè, or in their Absence the next Commanding Officers, to keep together the space of six Days the saids Regiments and Troops, when they shall Rendezvouz at the foresaid places, and during that time to Exercise them, and then to dismiss them, they being always in readiness upon advertisement from the Collonel o Foot or Captain of Horse, or the next Commanding Officer, to come together again to the saids respective places of Ren∣dezvouz with twenty days Provision, and either to continue there for the space of twenty Days, or to March elsewhere within the Kingdom, as they shall recieve Orders from the said Officers. And it is hereby Declared, that the Absents from the Rendezvouz in this Jucture, shall be holden as Absents from the Host, and Proceeded against accordingly. And to the end that the Militia may be made the more effectual, the Estates do Nominat and Appoint the persons afternamed to be Commissioners, for Ordering the Militia in the several Shires, with the Collonels, Lieutenant Collonels, Majors and Captains of Foot, and the Cap∣tains, Lieutenants and Cornets of Horse, viz. For the Shire of Edinburgh, The Viscount of Tarbat, Sir John Baird of Newbyth, Sir James Foulis of Col∣lingtoun, Sir James Richardson of Smeitoun, Sr William Murray, Sir Mark Carss, Sir Robert Baird, the Laird of Arnistoun, the Laird of Riccartoun Craig, the Laird of Pumpherstoun, Mr. David Dunmure of Curriehill, and Mr. Wil∣liam Dowgls of Baads, the Dutchess of Buckcleughs Baillie of the Regality of Dalkeith for the time, and the Dutches of Lauderdale her Baillie for Duding∣stoun for the time. For the Shire of Haddingtoun, the Lord Yester, the Lord Belhaven, the Laird of Stevinstoun, the Laird of Ormistoun, the Laird of La∣mingtoun, the Laird of Prestongrange,  Hepburn of Bein∣stoun, Robert Hamiltoun of Presmennan, David Hepburn of Humbie, Sir John Lawder of Fountain-hall,  Hamiltoun of Nynwar, Sir John Hall of Dun∣glass,  Hepburn of Smeiton, Sir Patrick Hepburn of Blackcastle,  Sydserf of that Ilk, and the Dutchess of Lauderdale her Baillie for Leidingtoun, Sir John Baird of Newbyh, Sir John Sinclar of Lochend, the Laird of Gosford, the Laird of Dirltoun, the Laird of Ruchlaw, Archibald Murray of Spot. For the Shire of Berwick, the Lord Harcars, the Lord Mesingtoun, Sir
James Don of Newtown, Sir Robert Stuart of Allanbank Sir Patrick Hume of Lumsden, the Laird of Lambertoun, the Laird of Moristoun, the Laird of Idingtoun, the Laird of Tofts, Patrick Wardlaw of Berriehaugh, James Hume of Flass, William Hume of Greenlaw-Castle, John Watson of Jerdinfield, Sir John Hall of Aldcambus,  Pringle of Greenknow, Mr. James Daes of Coldingknows, George Hume of Bassindene, and John Hume younger of Newtoun. For the Shires of Roxburgh and Selkirk, The Lord Jedburgh, Sir William Elliot of Stobbs, Sir John Scot of Ancrum, Sir William Scot younger of Harden, George Pringle of Torwoodlie, Sir Patrick Scot younger of Ancrum, Sir William Bennet of Grubet, the Laird of Chatto, the Laird of Clif∣toun, the Laird of Raeburn, the Laird of Smelholm,  Ker of Little∣dean, Alexander Don of Rutherford, the Laird of Hadden, the Laird of Gallow∣sheils, the Laird of Midlestead,  Elliot of Midlamiln, the Lairds of Mc∣kerstoun elder and younger, the Lairds of Stitchill elder and younger,  of Frogden,  of Horsehill,  of Black∣hill, the Dutchess of Buckcleugh her Chamberlain, and the Earl of Roxburgh his Chamberlain for the time. For the Shire of Dumfreis, the Lord Drumlan∣rig, the Laird of Craigdarroch, Sir Robert Lawrie os Maxweltoun, Sir James Johnstoun of Westerhall, the Laird of Carnselloch elder, the Laird of Eccles,  Johnstoun younger of Lockerbie,  Murray of Drum∣creiff younger, William Johnstoun of Crantoun, Andrew Johnston of Newtoun, the Laird of Kamerskails, the Laird of Dormount, William Dowglass of Dor∣nock. For the Shire of Wigtoun, Sir Andrew Agnew of Lochnaw, Sir John Dalrymple, William Mcdougal of Garthland, Sir William Maxwel of Monteith, John Vaus of Barnbaroth, the Laird of Mochrum▪ the Laird of Castle-stewart, Sir Charles Hay, the Laird of Seuchan, the Laird of Dunsky, James Dal∣rymple of Dunragat For the Stewartry of Kircudbright, Alexander Gor∣don of Earlstoun, Roger Gordon of Troquhen, Patrick Murdoch of Cumlo∣dan, Edward Maxwel of Hills, David Mcculloch of Ardwell, Robert Brown of Corslouth, Andrew Herran of Kinauchtree, William Gordon of Craig, John Stuart of Mullock, Samuel Maxwel of Newlay, John Mackie of Pal∣gown, John Neilson of Corsack, Alexander Brown of Kempletoun. For the Shire of Air, in the ailliarie of Carrick, the Laird of Carletoun, John Mack∣alexander younger of Drummochrie, Quintine Kennedy elder of Drumellan,  Boyd of Trochrig, Fergus Macgibbon of Knockdollian, Thomas Kennedy of Grange, Alexander Ferguson of Kilkerran, John Whiteford of Blairquhan, James Crawfurd of New-work, Quintine Macilrain of Grimmet, Mr. John Fer∣guson of Barclauchannan. For the Bailliarie of Kyle, the Lord Chrichton, the Laird of Cesnock, William Cochran of Ochiltrie,  Fairlie of Burntfield,  Fullerton of Corsbie,  of Adamtoun elder and younger,  Mcalexander of Boghall.  Farquhar of Gilmerscroft,  Logan of Logan,  Chalmers of Polquharn, Mungo Campbel younger of Nether-place, David Crawfurd of Drumsowie, David Crawfurd of Barquharrie, Charles Cun∣ninghame of Drongan,  Cathcart of Drumton, Mr. David Cunninghame of Milcraig, John Reid younger of Ballach-myle, David Crawfurd of Carss, David Boswel of Auchinleck, Mr. John Boswel, William Cunninghame of Brownhill, and William Campbel of Skelden. For the Bailliarie of Cunninghame, the Laird of Blair, Sir James Montgomery of Skelmorly,  Crawfurd of Kil∣birnie,  Muir of Rowallan,  Cunninghame of Cunninghame∣head,  Hamilton of Grange, Mr. Francis Montgomery, Major Hugh Bun∣tine,  Crawfurd of Ferguson, Sir Alexander Cunninghame of Corshil,  Cunninghame of Aiket,  Crawfurd of Crawfurd-land, and Hugh Stevinson of Montgreenan. For the Shire of Lanerk, the Earl of Forfar, the Laird of Lamingtoun, Sir Daniel Carmichael, the Laird of Westsheil,  Lock∣hart of Kirktoun,  Baillie of Jerviswood,  Hamilton of Aikenhead, Sir William Maxwel of Calderwood,  Muirhead of Bradisholm,
Stuart of Allantoun,  Hamilton of Barncluith,  Stu∣art of Cultness, Sir William Lockhart of Carstairs, Sir John Carmichael of Bonningtoun, Sir William Fleming of Fairm, Mr. John Kincaid of Crosbasket,  Hamilton of Westburn, the Laird of Dalzel, Alexander Cleland of Cle∣landtoun, George Muirhead of Stevinstoun, Sir John Harper of Cambushnethan, the Laird of Lee,  Stuart of Hartwood,  Cochran of Rochsols,  Hamilton of Airdrie,  Hamilton of Halcraig younger, William Baillie of Hardingtoun, James Lockhart of Annistoun,  Stark of Auchinvol, Wil∣liam Cleland of Hairshaw, William Hamilton of Wishaw, James Young of Netherfield, the Laird of Walstoun younger, and William Lawrie of Blaik∣wood. For the Shire of Renfrew, the Lord Ross, the Lord Blantyre,  Schaw younger of Greenock, Sir Archibald Stuart of Blackhall, Sir Patrick Houstoun of that Ilk,  Cunninghame younger of Craigens,  Maxwel of Pollock, Fleming of Borochen,  of Fulwood. For the Shire of Dum∣bartoun,  Cochran of Kilmaronock, Archibald  of Ardincaple, Alexander Gartshore of that Ilk,  Hamilton of Barns, William Colquhoun of Craigtoun, Andrew Colquhoun of Garscadden, John Carmichael Chamber∣lain to the Earl of Wigtoun, James Hamilton of Hutchestoun, Nicol Buntine of Airdoch, and William Stirling of Law. For the Shire of Bute,  Banna∣tine elder of Kaymes, Mr. John Stuart of Escog. For Arran, the Baillie of Arran. For the Shire of Argile, Sir Duncan Campbel of Auchinbreck,  Campbel of Barbreck,  of Craigneish, Lord Neil Campbel,  Campbel of Lochnel,  Campbel of Mcconachie, Sir Colin Campbel of Ard∣kinless,  of Strahur, the Laird of Lamond,  Campbel elder of Allengreg,  Campbel Captain of Carrick,  Campbel of Skip∣nage,  Campbel of Glencarradel, Dougal Campbel of Glensaddel, Colin Campbel of Blythswood. For the Shires of Striviling and Clackmannan, the Earl of Mar, the Viscount of Tarbat, the Lord Cardross, the Laird of Houstoun, the Laird of Woodhead, the Laird of Baldowie, the Laird of Culcreuch, the Laird of Ballendalloch, the Laird of Touch, Alexander Monro of Bearcrofts, the Laird of Powess, the Laird of Quarrel, the Laird of Gargunnock, the Laird of Clack∣mannan, John Keirie of Gogar, the Laird of Westquarter, the Laird of Tilli∣body, Francis Masterton of Park-miln. For the Shire of Linlithgow, the Laird of Dundass,  Dundass of Manner,  Dundass of Dudingstoun, Mr. William Dundass of Kincalve, John Hamilton of Dechmont, Walter Cornwall of Bonhard,  Sharp of Houstoun,  Monteith of Aldcathie, Sir William Hope,  Hammilton of Binnie,  Cochran of Barbachlaw,  of Balbairdy,  of Polkennet, the Laird of Craigiehall, Robert Anstruther of Wrae, Alexander Hamilton Baillie of Strabrock. For the Shire of Peebles, James Earl of Mortoun, Lieutenant-General Douglass of Skir∣ling, William Hay of Drumelzier, Sir Archibald Murray of Blackbarrony, Sir William Murray of Stenhope, David Murray younger of Stenhope, Richard Murray of Spittlehaugh, James Geddes of Kirkurd, William Morison of Pre∣stoungrange, John Hay of Haystoun,  Burnet of Barns, James Wil∣liamson of Cardrono, John Brown of Scotstoun, John Dickson of Whitslaid,  Hunter of Polmude, David Plenderleith of Blyth, William Burnet of Kailzie, Alexander Horsburgh younger of that Ilk, James Nasmith of Posso, Alexander Murray of Hall-mire, John Murray of Cringlety, John Balfour of Kailzie Sheriff deput, Robert Burnet of Little Ormistoun, Alexander Baillie of Callens, Alexander Hamilton of Cold-coat, James Chisholm of Hayhope,  Pennicoock of Romanno, William Younger elder, Portioner of Lintoun. For the Shires of Fife and Kinross, the Earl of Crafurd, the Earl of Levin, the Lord Melvil, Sir Philip Anstruther,  Hay of Naughtoun, Mr. Archibald Hope of Rankeillor,  of Reddie elder,  Auchmoutie of Lawhil, William Anstruther of that Ilk, John Dempster of Pitliver  of Lathallan, James Robertson of Newbigging, James Crafurd of Monwhannie.
For the Shire of Perth, the Lord Cardross, Mr. Francis Montgomery, Sir Patrick Murray, Patrick Smith of Methven, Patrick Stuart of Ballachan,  Stuart of Stentoun,  of Collonbellie,  Hume of Argattie, Colin Campbel of Formage, Thomas Hay of Balhousie, VValter Stuart of Kincarachie,  Blair of Inshyra,  Grahame of Balgoun,  Linton of Pan∣drich,  Colin Campbel of Monzie,  Drummond of Meggins, VVil∣liam Lindsay of Kilspindie, John Drummond of Blair, Colonel Meinzies, Pa∣trick Hay of Leys elder, Mungo Campbel of Burnbank,  Stuart of Annat, Mr. VVilliam Erskine, John Erskine of Balgoun, Laurance Craigie of Kilgri∣stoun, Mr. James Craigie younger of Dumbarnie,  Fleming of Moness, Sir Colin Campbel of Aberuqhal,  of Rind,  Naper of Balwhaple. Together with one of the Magistrats for the time of each Royal Burgh, and Burgh of Regality, who contribute to the Outreik of the Militia, in each Respective Shire. And the Estates do Autorize and Impower the saids Commissioners, to Nominat the Captains of Foot, and the Lieutenants and Cornets of Horse, with consent of the Collonels and Captains of Horse respecti∣vè, where they are not named by this Act, or being named, do not accept. With power to the saids Commissioners, to determine all differences and controversies which may arise, in relation to the Militia, and to do all other things requisite and necessary for ordering thereof, which the former Commissioners had power to do by the Acts of Parliament, and Acts of Privy Council. And it is hereby Declared, that two of the Commissioners, with one of these Officers, viz. The Collonel, Lieutenant-Collonel, Major, and Captain of Foot, or the Captain, Lieutenant, or Cornet of Horse, shall be a Quorum: And if a greater number meet, that the major part be Commissioners. And in respect of the present Exi∣gence, The Estates do Ordain all the Heretors, and oher Persons in each Shire, and Jurisdiction within the same, to come out with their best Horses and Arms, to the foresaid places of Rendezvouz of Horse, the second day of the Rendez∣vouz, under the pain of Confiscation of their Horses, for the Publick use; And where there are different places of Rendezvouzes appointed for Troops of Horse in one Shire, that the Heretors repair to the respective places of Rendezvouz appointed for the several Divisions of the Shires wherein they Reside; And in case the Commissioners of Militia, with one of the Field-Officers of the Foot, or the Captain, Lieutenant, or Cornet of Horse, shall find any Militia Horse to be insufficient, that they cause the Leader furnish another sufficient Horse; and if neither he, nor these of the Fraction who Contribute to him, have one, that they cause the Leader buy a Horse; and that any of the rest of the Heretors, or others having sufficient Horses, at the Rate contained in the Act of Parliament, or thereby, shall be holden to Sell one to him at a reasonable Price, to be appoin∣ted by the saids Commissioners, or their Quorum aforesaid, not exceeding the foresaid Rate, or thereby; And it is hereby Ordained, that these Persons, who are lyable in Fractions of Militia-Horse, shall at this time Contribute their Pro∣portions to the Leader, for a new Out-reik of Horse, and Furniture, where the Leader has Served the full space of seven years, since the last time that these of the Fraction did Contribute to him: But where the Leader has not Served ful∣ly the seven years, that he shall continue to serve until the expiring thereof, with∣out any new Contribution, by these of the Fraction: And the Officers and Commissioners of the Militia, are thereby impowered to call for the Standards, Colours, Trumpets, and Drums, which belong to each Shire, from these who had the trust thereof, or their Representatives, who are hereby required to eli∣ver the same to the saids Officers; And where they are not extant, that new ones be provided, at the Charge of the Shire. And the Meeting of the Estates considering, that there is no Militia Foot in the Shires of Lanerk, Air, Renfrew, Wigtoun, and Stewartry of Kirkcudbright; They grant Power and Warrand to the Commissioners of Militia, in the saids Shire & Stewartrie, to bring together all the
Fensible Men, in these respective Shires, and Stewartry, who are hereby requi∣red upon Intimation from the saids Commissioners, to come out sufficiently Ar∣med, and provided according to their Qualties, and Conditions, with Power to the Commissioners, with Advice of the rest of the Gentlemen when the Fen∣sible Men are met, to moddel them, or so many o them, as they shall think fit, into Companies, and to appoint Captains, and other Officers to the said Com∣panies, which Captains shall Rendezvouz them weekly, within their respective Paroches, to be in readiness thereafter, to come out as they shall be advertise by their Officers. And further, the Estates Commands and Requires the respective Sheriffs, and their Deputs, to cause prepare Beacons, upon the most eminent and conspicuous Places in the Shires of Wigton, Air and Bute, and to cause kindle these Beacons when they shall have notice, or appearance of any Invasion, upon the West-coast of this Kingdom: And in that case, the Leidges, who have their Horses, or Cattel near the said Coast, are Required to remove them Ten Miles from the Coast, that no Invaders from the Irish Coast may have any Supply, As∣sistance, or Advantage thereby; And Ordains the Fensible Men in the said Shires, and Stewartrie, upon their having Notice of the firing of these Beacons, to repair to the respective Places to be appointed for the Rendezvouzes, by their Officers. And Ordains thir presents to be Published, by Heraulds, Macers, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, or Sheriff-Officers, at the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and all the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the whole Shires above-exprest, and other Royal Burghs, and Burghs of Regality within the same. XII. Warrant to the Duke of Hmilton to secure suspect Persons, and bring in English Forces as he sees cause. April 8. 1689. THe Meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom, for securing the Publick Peace, as well against Dangers from abroad, as any Intestine Com∣motions, which may happen, Do Authorize and impower the Duke of Hamilton, Lord President, as he shall have Information, to give Warrant for securing any suspect Persons, until they find Caution for keeping the Peace; and recommends to the said Lord President, to desire General Ma∣jor Mackay to give Order for bringing in to this Kingdom such of the English For∣ces, which are near the Border, as they shall see cause for. XIII. The Declaration of the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, containing the Claim of Right, and the Offer of the Crown to Their Majesties King William and Queen Mary. April 11. 1689. WHereas King James the Seventh, being a Profest Papist, did assume the Regal Power, and acted as King, without ever taking the Oath requi∣red by Law, whereby the King at his Access to the Government, is obliged to Swear, to maintain the Protestant Religion, and to Rule the People according to the Laudable Laws; and did by the advice of wicked and evil Counsellers, invade the Fundamental Constitution of this Kingdom, and altered it from a Legal Limited Monarchy, to an Arbitrary Despotick Power; And in a publick Proclamation, asserted an Absolute Power, to cass, annul and dissable all the Laws, particularly arraigning the Laws, establishing the Prote∣stant Religion, and did exerce that Power, to the Subversion of the Protestant Religion, and to the Violation of the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom. By Erecting Publick Schools and Societies of the Jesuits; and not only allow∣ing Mass to be publickly said, but also inverting Protestant Chappels and Church∣es to publick Mass-houses, contrary to the express Laws against Saying and Hear∣ing of Mass. By allowing Popish-Books to be Printed and Dispersed by a Gift to a Popish
Printer; Designing him Printer to His Majesties Houshold, Colledge and Chap∣pel, contrary to the Laws. By taking the Children of Protestant Noblemen and Gentlemen, sending and keeping them abroad, to be bred Papists, making great Fonds and Dotations to Popish Schools and Colledges abroad; bestowing Pensions upon Priests, and perverting Protestants from their Religion, by offers of Places, Preferments and Pensions. By dis-arming Protestants, while at the same time he imployed Papists in the places of greatest Trust, Civil and Military, such as Chancellor, Secretaries, Privy Counsellers, and Lords of Session, thrusting out Protestants, to make Room for Papists, and entrusting the Forts and Magazins of the Kingdom in their Hands. By imposing Oaths contrary to Law. By giving Gifts and Grants for exacting Money, without consent of Parlia∣ment, or Convention of Estates. By Levying or keeping on Foot a standing Army in time of Peace, without consent of Parliament, which Army did exact Locality, free and dry Quarters. By imploying the Officers of the Army, as Judges through the Kingdom, and imposing them where there were Heretable Offices and Jurisdictions, by whom many of the Leidges were put to death summarly, without Legal Tryal, Jury or Record. By imposing exorbitant Fines, to the Value of the Parties Estates, Exacting ex∣travagant Bale; and disposing Fines and Forfaultures before any Process or Con∣viction. By Imprisoning Persons without expressing the Reason, and delaying to put them to Tryal. By causing Pursue and Forfault several persons upon stretches of old and obso∣lete Laws, upon frivolous and weak Pretences, upon Lame and Defective Pro∣bations; as particularly the late Earl of Argyle, to the Scandal and Reproach of the Justice of the Nation. By subverting the Right of the Royal Burghs, the third Estate of Parliament, Im∣posing upon them not only Magistrats, but also the whole Town-Council, and Clerks, contrair to their Liberties, and express Charters, without the pretence either of Sentence, Surrender, or Consent; So that the Commissioners to Parli∣aments being chosen by the Magistrats and Council, the King might in effect als well nominat that entire Estate of Parliament; and many of the saids Magistrats put in by hm, were avowed Papists, and the Burghs were forced to pay Money for the Letters, imposing these Illegal Magistrats and Councils upon them. By sending Letters to the chief Court of Justice, not only ordaining the Judges to stop and desist sine die to determine Causes; but also ordering and command∣ing them how to proceed, in Cases depending before them, contrary to the ex∣press Laws; and by changing the Nature of the Judges Gifts ad vitam aut cul∣pm, and giving them Commissions ad bene placitum, to dispose them to comply∣ance with Arbitrary Courses, and turning them out of their Offices, when they did not comply. By granting Personal Protections for Civil Debts, contrary to Law. All which are utterly and directly contrary to the known Laws, Statutes and Freedoms of this Realm. Therefore the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, Find and Declare, that King James the Seventh being a profest Papist, did assume the Regal Power, and Acted as King, without ever taking the Oath required by Law, and hath by the Advice of Evil and Wicked Counsellors, invaded the Fundamental Constituti∣on of the Kingdom, and altered it from a Legal Limited Monarchy, to an Arbi∣trary Despotick Power, and hath exercised the same, to the subversion of the Protestant Religion, and the Violation of the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom,
Inverting all the Ends of Government, whereby he hath Forefaulted the Right to the Crown, and the Throne is become Vacant. And whereas His Royal Highness, William then Prince of Orange, now King of England, whom it hath pleased the Almighty GOD to make the glorious In∣strument of delivering these Kingdoms from Popery and Arbitrary Power, Did, by the Advice of Several Lords and Gentlemen of this Nation, at London for the time, call the Estates of this Kingdom to meet the Fourteenth of March last, in Order to such an Establishment, as that their Religion, Laws and Liberties, might not be again in Danger of being subverted; And the saids Estates being now As∣sembled, in a Full and Free Representative of this Nation, Taking to their most serious Consideration, the best Means for attaining the Ends aforesaid, Do, in the first Place, as their Ancestors in the like cases have usually done, for the vin∣dicating and asserting their Antient Rights, and Liberties, Declare, That by the Law of this Kingdom, no Papist can be King or Queen of this Realm, nor bear any Office whatsoever therein; nor can any Protestant Successor exercise the Regal Power, until He or She Swear the Coronation Oath. That all Proclamations asserting an Absolute Power, to Cass, Annull, and Disable Laws, the Erecting Schools and Colledges for Jesuits, the inverting Pro∣testant Chappels and Churches to Publick Mass-houses, and the allowing Mass to be said, are contrary to Law. That the allowing Popish Books to be Printed and Dispersed, is contrary to Law. That the taking the Children of Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, sending and keeping them abroad to be bred Papists, the making Fonds and Dotations to Popish Schools and Colledges, the bestowing Pensions on Priests, and the per∣verting Protestants from their Religion, by offers of Places, Preferments, and Pensions, are contrary to Law. That the Disarming of Protestants, and Imploying Papists in the Places of greatest Trust, both Civil and Military, the thrusting out Protestants, to make room for Papists, and the intrusting Papists with the Forts and Magazines of the Kingdom are contrary to Law. That the imposing Oaths without Authority of Parliament, is contrary to Law. That the giving Gifts or Grants, for raising of Money, without the consent of Parliament, or Convention of Estates, is contrary to Law. That the imploying the Officers of the Army as Judges through the Kingdom, or imposing them where there were Heretable Officers and Jurisdictions, and the putting the Leidges to death summarly without Legal Tryal, Jury, or Record, are contrary to Law, That the imposing of extraordinary Fines, the exacting of exorbitant Bale, and the Disposing of Fines, and Forfeitures before Sentence, are contrary to Law. That the Imprisoning Persons, without expressing the Reason thereof, and delaying to put them to Tryal, is contrary to Law. That the causing Pursue and Forfeit Persons, upon stretches of old and obso∣lete Laws, upon frivolous and weak pretences, upon lame and defective Proba∣tion, as particularly the late Earl of Argyle, are contrary to Law. That the Nominating and imposing the Magistrats, Councils, and Clerks upon Burghs, contrary to their Liberties and express Charters, is contrary to Law. That the sending Letters to the Courts of Justice, Ordaining the Judges to stop or desist from Determining Causes, or Ordaining them how to proceed in Causes depending before them, and the changing the Nature of the Judges Gifts ad vitam aut culpam, into Commissions durante beneplacito, are contrary to Law. That the granting Personal Protections for Civil Debts, is contrary to Law. That the forcing the Leidges to Depone against themselves in Capital Crimes, however the punishment be restricted, is contrary to Law.
That the using Torture without Evidence, or in ordinary Crimes, is contrary to Law. That the sending of an Army in an Hostile manner, upon any part of the Kingdom, in a peaceable time, and exacting of Locality, and any manner of free Quarters, is contrary to Law. That the charging of the Leidges with Law-borrows at the Kings instance, and the Imposing of Bonds without the Authority of Parliament, and the suspending Advocats from their Imployment, for not Compearing when such Bonds were offered, were contrary to Law. That the putting of Garrisons in privat Mens Houses in time of Peace, without their consent, or the Authority of Parliament, is contrary to Law. That the Opinions of the Lords of Session in the two Cases following, were contrary to Law, viz. 1. That the concealing the Demand of a Supply for a Forefaulted Person, although not given, is Treason: 2. That persons refusing to discover what are their privat Thoughts and Judgements, in relation to points of Treason, or other mens Actions, are guilty of Treason. That the Fyning Husbands for their Wives withdrawing from the Church, was contrary to Law. That Prelacy and the Superority of any Office in the Church, above Presby∣ters, is and hath been a great and insupportable Grievance and Trouble to this Nation, and contrary to the Inclinations of the Generality of the People, ever since the Reformation (they having Reformed from Popery by Presbyters) and therefore ought to be abolished. That it is the Right and Priviledge of the Subjects, to protest for Remeed of Law to the King and Parliament, against Sentences pronounced by the Lords of Session, providing the same do not stop Execution of these Sentences. That it is the Right of the Subjects to Petition the King, and that all Imprison∣ments and Prosecutions for such Petitioning, are contrary to Law. That for Redress of all Grievances, and for the Amending, Strengthning and Preserving of the Laws, Parliaments, ought to be frequently called, and allowed to sit, and the freedom of Speech and Debate secured to the Members. And they do Claim, Demand, and Insist upon all and sundry the Premisses as their undoubted Right and Liberties, and that no Declarations, Doings, or Proceedings, to the prejudice of the People, in any of the said Premisses, ought in any ways to be drawn hereafter, in Consequence or Example, but that all For∣feitures, Fines, loss of Offices, Imprisonments, Banishments, Pursuits, Persecu∣tions, Tortures, and rigorous Executions be considered, and the Parties Lesed be Redressed. To which Demand of their Rights, and Redressing of their Grievances, they are particularly encouraged by His Majesty the King of England. His Declara∣tion for the Kingdom of Scotland, of the  day of October last, as being the only means for obtaining a full Redress and Remedy therein. Having therefore an entire Confidence, that His said Majesty, the King of England, will perfect the Deliverance so far advanced by Him, and will still pre∣serve them from the Violation of their Rights, which they have here asserted, and from all other Attempts upon their Religion, Laws and Liberties. The saids Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, Do resolve that WILLIAM and MARY, King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, Be, and Be Declared King and Queen of Scotland, to hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdom of Scotland, to them the said King and Queen, during Their Lives, and the longest Liver of Them, and that the Sole and full Exercise of the Regal Power, be only in, and Exercised by Him the said King, in the Names of the said King and Queen, during their joynt Lives, and after Their Decease, the said Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdom, to be to the Heirs of the Body of the said Queen; which failing, to the Princess Ann of Denmark, and the Heirs of
her Body; which also failing, to the Heirs of the Body of the said WILLIAM King of England. And they do Pray the said King and Queen of England to accept the same ac∣cordingly. And that the Oath hereafter mentioned, be taken by all Protestants, of whom the Oath of Allegiance, and any other Oaths and Declarations might be requi∣red by Law, in stead of them, and that the said Oath of Allegiance, and other Oaths and Declarations may be abrogated. I A. B. Do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be Faithful, and bear True Allegiance to Their Majesties King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. So help me GOD. XIV. A Proclamation, Declaring the King and Queen of England, to be King and Queen of Scotland. April 11. 1689. WHereas the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, by their Act, of the date of these presents, Have Resolved, that William and Mary, King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, Be, and be Declared King and Queen of Scotland, to Hold the Crown and Royal Dig∣nity of the said Kingdom of Scotland to Them, the said King and Queen, during Their Lives, and the longest Liver of Them▪ and that the Sole and Full Exercise of the Regal Power, be only in, and Exercised by the said King, in the Names of the said King and Queen, during their Joynt-Lives. As also, the Estates having Resolved, and Enacted an Instrument of Government, or Claim of Right, to be presented with the offer of the Crown, to the said King and Queen. They do Statute and Ordain, That William and Mary King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, be accordingly forthwith Proclaimed King and Queen of Scotland, at the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, by the Lyon King at Arms, or his Deputs, his Brethren Heraulds, Macers, and Pursevants, and at the Head-burghs of all the Shires, Stewartries, Bailliaries, and Regalities within the Kingdom, by Messengers at Arms. XV. ACT Declaring that the Estates are to continue in the Government, until the King and Queen of England accept the Crown. April 11. 1689. FOrasmuch as the Estates of this Kingdom by their former Act, Declared that they would continue Undissolved, until the Government, Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom should be settled and secured: And they having now proceeded to Resolve, That William and Mary, King and Queen of England, Be, and be Declared King and Queen of Scotland. And Considering that the Nation cannot be without Government, until the said King and Queen of England accept the Offer of the Crown, according to the Instru∣ment of Government, and take the Oath required before they Enter to the Ex∣ercise of the Regal Power: Therefore the saids Estates do hereby Declare and Enact, That they will continue in the Government as formerly, until Their Majesties acceptance of the Crown, and Their taking of the said Oath be made known to them XVI. A Proclamation against the owning of the late King James, and appointing publick Prayers for William and Mary, King and Queen of Scotland. April 13. 1689. THE Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland having Proclaimed and Declared William and Mary, King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, to be King and Queen of Scotland; They have thought fit by publick Pro∣clamation,
to Certifie the Leidges, that none presume to owne or acknowledge the late King James the Seventh, for their King, nor obey, accept, or assist any Com∣missions or Orders that may be Emitted by him, or any way to Correspond with him; and that none presume upon their highest peril, by Word, Writing, in Sermons, or any other manner of Way, to Impugn, or Disown the Royal Authority of William and Mary, King and Queen of Scotland, But that all the Leidges render their dutyful Obedience to their Majesties; And that none presume to Misconstrue the proceeding of the Estates, or to creat Jealousies, or Mis-apprehensions of the Actings of the Government; but that all the Ministers of the Gospel within the Kingdom, publickly pray for King William and Queen Mary, as King and Queen of this Realm: And the Estates Do require the Ministers within the City of Edinburgh, under the pain of being Deprived and losing their Benefices, to Read this Proclamation pub∣lickly from their Pulpits, upon Sunday next, being the 14th Instant, at the end of their Forenoon Sermon; and all the Ministers on this side of the River of Tay, to read the same upon Sunday therrafter, the 21st Instant; and those be-north Tay, upon the 28th Instant, under the pain foresaid: Discharging here∣by the Proclamation of the Council, Dated the 16th of September 1686. to be Read hereafter in Churches. And the Estates do Prohibite and Discharge, any Injury to be offered by any person whatsomever, to any Ministers of the Gospel, either in Churches or Meeting-houses, who are presently in the Possession and Exercise of their Ministry therein, they behaving themselvs as becomes, under the present Government; And Ordains this Proclamation to be published at the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, with all ordinary Solemnities, that none may pretend Ignorance. And that the same be Printed. XVII. Additional Warrant for publishing the Proclamation of William and Mary, the King and Queen of Scotland. April 13. 1689. THE Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, Do Order and Require, the Proclamation Declaring William and Mary, King and Queen of Scotland, to be published at all the Mercat-Crosses of the Roy∣al Burrows within this Kingdom, by Messengers at Arms, with the Concurrance of the respective Magistrats of these Burghs, where∣in the said Proclamation is appointed to be made, and to be performed by them, with all the Solemnities and Formalities usual in the like cases. And Ordains thir Presents to be Printed. XVIII. The Articles of Grievances Represented by the Estates of the Kingdom of SCOT∣LAND, to the KING'S most Excellent Majesty, to be Redressed in PAR∣LIAMENT, whereof rhe Tenor follows. April 13. 1689. THE Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, do Represent, That the Com∣mittee of Parliament, Called the Articles, is a great Grievance to the Nation, and that there ought to be no Committees of Parliament, but such as are freely chosen by the Estates, to prepare Motions and Overtures that are first made in the House. That the first Act of Parliament 1669. Is inconsistent with the Establishment of the Church Government, now desired, and ought to be Abrogated. That the Forefaultures in prejudice of Vassals, Creditors and Heirs of Entail, are a great Grievance. That the Obliging the Leidges to Depone upon Crimes against Delinquents, other∣ways than when they are Adduced in special Processes, as Witnesses, is a great Grievance.
That Assizes of Error are a Grievance, and that Juries be considered by Parliament. That the eighteenth Act of Parliament 1681, Declaring a Cumulative Juris∣diction, is a Grievance. That the Commissariot Courts, as they are now Constitute, are a Grievance. That the Twenty seventh Act of Parliament 1663. Giving to the King Power to Impose Custom at pleasure, upon Forraign Import and Trade, is a Grievance, and prejudicial to the Trade of the Nation. That the not taking an Effectual Course to Repress the Depredations and Robberies by the Higland Clans, is a Grievance. That the Banishment by the Council of the greatest part of the Advocats from Edinburgh, without a Process, was a Grievance. That most of the Laws Enacted in the Parliament Anno 1685. are Impious and Intollerable Grievances. That the Marriage of a King or Queen of this Realm to a Papist, is Dangerous to the Protestant Religion, and ought to be provided against. That the Levying, or Keeping on Foot a Standing Army in time of Peace, with∣out Consent of Parliament, is a Grievance. That all Grievances relating to the Manner and Measure of the Leidges, their Representation in Parliament be Considered and Redressed in the first Parliament. That the Grievances of the Burrows be Considered and Redressed in the Parlia∣ment. XIX. Warrant for an Embargo upon Ships and other Vessels on the Western Coast. April 16. 1689. THE Meeting of the Estates, taking to their Consideration the ha∣zard that may be, in allowing Ships and other Vessels liberty to pass from this Kingdom to Ireland, in regard they may be made use of in the case of an Invasion, for transporting Forces hither; Therefore the Estates do Ordain an Embargo or Restraint to be put upon all Ships, Berlings, Barks, and Boats, in any Ports or Harbours of the Western Coast of this Kingdom, that none of them offer to Sail to Ireland; And for that effect, They Grant full Power, Warrant and Commission to the Persons after-named, to secure any Ships, Berlings, Barks and Boats, that are in the respective Bounds after-mentioned, viz. To the Laird of Greenock upon both the sides of the River of Clyd, from Glasgow to the Cloch-stane; to the Lairds of Bishoptoun elder and younger, from the Cloch-stane to Irving, including the Canries, to Mr. John Stuart of Escog for Bute: The Duke of Hamilton's Baillie for Arran, the Earl of Argile, or such as he shall appoint, for the Shire of Argile; Sir Hugh Campbel of Calder for the Isles of Yla and Jura; the Laird of Corsbie for the Coast of Kyle, the Magistrats of Air for the time for the Town of Air, the Magistrats of Irving for the time for the Town of Irving, the Laird of Dunduff for the Coast of Car∣rick, the Laird of Lochnaw younger for the Coast of Wigtoun,  Brown of Carsluith,  Murray of Cavens, and Thomas Alexander, or any one of them, for the Stewartry of Kirkcudbright, the Magistrats of the Town of Kirkcudbright within themselves, and the Magistrats of Dumfreis, any Ships and other Vessels in the Water of Nith. With power to the saids Persons in the respective Bounds aforesaid, to take such course as is usual in such cases, for making this Order effectual. XX. ACT for a Levy of Horsemen out of the several Shires. April 18. 1689. THE Meeting of the Estates finding it necessary, that this Kingdom be put in a Posture of Defence, for Security thereof, alswel against the danger of Invasion from Abroad, as any Intestine Trouble that may fall out therein; And for that effect, that a competent num∣ber of Forces be raised, and kept up within the same; Therefore
they Ordain, the number of Horsemen after-mentioned, to be Levied and Raised from the Shires of this Kingdom, which are lyable, and have been in use to Out∣rek Horses, being the fourth part of their Proportions, contained in the 27 Act of the Parl. 1663. as follows, viz. From the Shires of Roxburgh and Selkirk thirty seven Horses; From the Shire of Berwick eighteen Horses and the half of an Horse; From the Shire of Haddingtoun eighteen Horses and an half; From the Shire of Edinburgh eighteen and an half; From the Shire of Peebles seven Horses and the fourth part of an Horse; From the Shire of Linlithgow ten Horses, and the half of an Horse; From the Shire of Dumfreis twenty two; From the Shire of Wigtoun and Stewartry of Kirkeudbright twenty two; From the Shires of Air and Renfrew fourty four; From the Shire of Lanerk thirty seven; From the Shires of Stirling and Clackmannan twenty two; From the Shires of Fife and Kinross fourty four; From the Shire of Perth fourty four; From the Shire of Forfar twenty five Horses, and three fourth parts of an Horse; From the Shire of Kincardin and Marischals part of Aberdene Shire, eighteen Horse and an half; From the Shire of Bamff, and Errols part of the Shire of Aberdene, fourty four; From the Shires of Elgin, Nairn, and this side of Ness, twenty two; From the Earl of Seaforth, and Lord Lovat their Divsion of Inverness, twenty two; From the Shires of Southerland and Caithness, and the rest of Inverness, twenty two Horses. And the Estates do Ordain and Require, the Commissi∣oners of the Militia, and the Leaders of the Militia Horses in the saids Shires, to meet at the Head-Burghs of the several Shires, viz. These on this side of the Northwater-bridge, upon the twenty fifth day of April instant; And these be-north the said Bridge, upon the second day of May next: And appoints the se∣veral Sheriff-Clerks to Conveen them to that effect: And Ordains the saids Commissioners and Leaders, being met, to Proportion, and cause to be Out∣reiked, the respective numbers of Horses above-exprest, according to the Rule of the Militia, with ten days Provision, and to appoint the Fractions to be pay∣ed in to the Leaders within fourty eight hours after the Cast shall be made, and in case of refual or delay, to appoint the Commanding-Officer to Quarter upon the Deficients; and to cause deliver the Horsemen Outreiked, to some of the Offi∣cers who shall be appointed to receive and Command them, at the Head-Burgh of the Shire, upon the days following, viz. For the Shires on this side of the said North-water bridge, upon the second day of May next; And these be-north the said Bridge upon the ninth day of May next: And the Estates do Nominat and Appoint Major Hugh Buntine, and such other persons as shall be Deputed by him to Muster the said Horsemen, and to see that the Horses be sufficient, each Horse worth at least ten-Pounds Sterling, and the Riders and Horses suffi∣ciently provided with Arms and Furniture, to the value of five Pounds Sterling. And it is hereby Declared, That the said Horsemen shall be taken into the King's Pay, according to the Establishment of this Kingdom, after expiring of the ten days, for which they are appointed to be provided by the Outreikers, as said is. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed, and to be Published at the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh; And likewise appoints the Sheriff-Clerks of the several Shires, to cause Publish the same at the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the respective Shires, that none may pretend Ignorance thereof. XXI. The Oath to be Administred to the King and Queen at Their Acceptance of the Crown. April 18. 1689. WE Faithfully Promise and Swear by this Our Solemn OATH, in Presence of the Eternal GOD, That during the whole Course of Our Life, We will Serve the same Eternal GOD, to the uttermost of Our Power, according as He has Required in His most Holy Word, Revealed and Contained in the Old
and New Testaments; and according o the same Word, shall Maintain the True Religion of Christ Jesus, the Preaching of His Holy Word, and the due and right Ministration of the Sacraments, now Received and Preached within the Realm of Scotland; and shall Abolish and Gainstand all False Religion, contrary to the same; and shall Rule the People committed to Our Charge, according to the Will and Command of GOD, Revealed in His aforesaid Word, and ac∣cording to the Loveable Laws and Consttutions Received in this Realm, no ways Repugnant to the said Word of the Eternal GOD, and shall procure to the uttermost of Our Power, to the Kirk of GOD and whole Christian People, true and perfect Peace, in all time coming; that We shall preserve and keep Inviolated the Rights and Rents, with all just Priviledges of the Crown of Scot∣land; Neither shall We Transfer nor Alienat the same; That We shall Forbid and Repress, in all Estates and Degrees, Reif, Oppression, and all kind of Wrong; And We shall Command and Procure, That Justice and Equity in all Judgments, be keeped to all persons without Exception, as the Lord and Father of all Mercies shall be merciful to Us: And We shall be Careful to Root out all Hereticks and Enemies to the true Worship of GOD, that shall be Convict by the True Kirk of GOD, of the foresaids Crimes, out of Our Lands and Empyre of Scotland: And We Faithfully Affirm the Things above-written by Our Solemn Oath. XXII. ACT for a new Election of Magistrats in the several Royal Burrows. April 18. 1689. THE Estates of this Kingdom having heard and Considered a Repre∣sentation made from the Commissioners of the Royal Burrows, for Regulating the Magistracy and Councils thereof, Bearing, That it was their Opinion, that the whole Burghs foresaid should have a new Election of Magistrats and Council, by the Poll of the Burgesses, bearing Burden in the respective Burghs, excluding Honora∣ry Burgesses, Town Servants, Pensioners and Beid-men; And also having Considered the Representations made by several Burghs, why they ought to continue their Magistracy and Council, as being freely Elected, conform to their Priviledges and Constitutions; The Estates do Find, that generally the foresaids whole Royal Burrows have suffered Encroachments on their Liberties and Priviledges, by Letters and Recommendations from the King, His Council, and others having power and influence, whereby these several years past many of the Burgesses, o∣therways qualified to Elect and be Elected, have been debarred; Therefore the Estates do hereby give Order and Warrant for new Elections to be made of or∣dinary Magistrats and Town Councils for the several Royal Burghs, to be Chosen by the Poll, and that on such times, and at the sight of such persons as the Estates shall appoint; and ordains the Town Clerks to conveen the Habile Burgesses to that effect; excluding Honorary Burgesses, Town-Servants, Pensioners and Beid∣men, and to proceed in the foresaid Election in the same manner, as was former∣ly ordered & appointed by the Estates, in the Elections of the Magistrats and Town Council of Edinburgh and Dundee; And appoints the Magistrats and Town Coun∣cils so Elected, to continue till the ordinary time of their Election, at or near Michaelmass next. XXIII. ACT for Levying some Regiments of Foot. April 19. 1689. THE Estates of this Kingdom taking to their Consideration, the present Danger of the Publick Peace, and the necessity there is of making e∣vies of Horse and Foot, for the Security of the Nation in the present Conjuncture, together with the Offer made to the Estates by the Lords and Gentlemen afternamed, viz. By the Earl of Argile, that he shall Levie a
Regiment of six hundred Foot-men for the publick Service; by the Earl of Mrr, that he shall Levie a Regiment of the like Number for the said Service; by the Earl of Glencairn, of a Regiment of the like number for the said Service; by the Lotd Cardross, in name of the Lord Angus, that the said Lord Angus shall Levie a Regiment of the number of Twelve hundred for the said Service; by the Lord Strathnaver, that he shall Levie a Regiment of six hundred for the said Service; by the Lord Blantyre, of a Regiment of the like number for the said Service; by the Lord Bargany of a Regiment of the like number for the said Service; and by the Laird of Grant, of a Regiment of the like number for the said Service. the said Regiment to be Levied by the Lord Angus to be divided in twenty Com∣panies; And ilk one of the Remainder of the saids Regiments to be divided in ten Companies, at sixty men in ilk Company. And also the Offer made by the Laird of Polwart of a Troop of fifty Horse for the said Service. The saids Regiments and Troop to be compleated and ready for the said Service, betwixt and the   day of  next. Providing that the said Regi∣ment to be Levied by the Earl of Glencairn; be commanded by John Howstoun younger of Howstoun as Lieutenant Collonel; and that the said Regiment to be Levied by the Lord Angus, be commanded by Captain William Cleland as Lieu∣tenant Collonel; And that the saids whole Regiments shall be commanded by the Persons who are to Levie the same, ilk one of them as Collonel of the Regiment so to be Levied by himself in manner foresaid: With Power to them, and ilk one of them as Collonels, to name Persons, whom they shall think most fit to imploy, as their Under-Officers in the Command of their respective Regiments, Excepting the two Lieutenant Collonels above-named. And that the said Troop shall be Commanded by the Laird of Polwart younger; with Power to him to name such Persons as he shall think most fit to imploy, as his Under-Officers in the com∣mand of the said Troop. Therefore the Estates have Accepted of the saids Lords and Gentlemen their said Offer in the terms above-mentioned; and do Approve of their good Intentions in the publick Service: And do by these presents Autho∣rize his Grace the Duke of Hamilton their President, to Subscribe particular Commissions to ilk one of the saids Persons, to the effect foresaid. And for the saids Persons, and the Under Officers to be named by them, as said is, their En∣couragement in the Prosecution of the said Service; The Estates Declare, that ilk Company in the several Regiments, after the samine is Mustered, and found to consist of sixty Men compleat; and the said Troop after the samine is compleat∣ly Levied and Mustered, and found to consist of fity Horse-men, shall be entered & received into the Publick Pay, conform to the present Establishment of this Kingdom; & that for both Officers and Soldiers, of ilk one of the saids Companies & Troop, to be Mustered and Compleated as said is. It being nevertheless the meaning of the Estates that the Collonels, Lieutenant Collonels, and Majors, shall not have the Pay of Collonels, Lieutenant-Collonels, and Majors, in the respective Regiments, until the respective compleating and Mustering of ilk Regiment, both Officers and Soldiers of the number and divisions above-exprest: But prejudice to the saids Collonels, Lieutenant Collonels and Majors of their Pay as Captains of the respective Companies, after the Compleating and Mustering of ilk Company in manner above-mentioned. XXIV. ACT for Modelling the Five hundred Horses in ten Troops. April 22. 1689. THE Estates of this Kingdom, Considering that by Their Act of the Eighteenth Instant, they have Ordained the number of Five hundred Horsemen, or thereby, to be Levied, and raised out of the Shires of this Kingdom, according to the proportions there∣in exprest: And it being Necessary, that these Horsemen be modelled in Troops, and Officers nominat to Command them; Therefore, the Estates do Ordain, that there shall be ten Troops of these Horse∣men,
each Troop consisting of Fifty, to be Commanded as follows, viz. These to be raised out of the Shires of Roxburgh and Selkirk by the Lord Newbottle, as their Captain; These of the Shires of Berwick and Haddingtoun, by the Lord Yester; These of the Shires of Edinburgh, Linlithgow and Peebles, by the Lord Ross; These of the Shires of Dumfreis and Wigtoun, and Stewartry of Kirkcud∣bright, by the Earl of Annandale; These of the Shires of Air and Renfrew, by the Earl of Eglingtoun; These of the Shire of Lanerk, with Thirteen out of the Shires of Stirling and Clackmannan, by the Lord Belhaven; These of Fife and Kinross, by Sir Charles Halket; These of the Shire of Perth, by the Laird of Blair; These of the Shires of Forfar, Kincardin and Marishals Part of Aberdene Shire, by the Lord Rollo; These of the Shire of Bamff, and Errols-part of Aber∣dene Shire, by the Mr. of Forbes: And Appoints Commissions to be granted to them to be Captains of the saids Horsemen, to be Signed in their Name by the Duke of Hamilton their President. And seing all the Proportions allocat to them for their Troops, (except one) are short of the number, whereof each Troop is to consist; Therefore the Estates do Ordin, that Nine of the Horses to be outreiked by the Shires of Stirling and Clackmannan, with these to be outreiked by the Shires of Elgin, Nairn and this side of Ness, the Earl of Seaforth, and the Lord Lovat their division of Inverness and Ross, the rest of the Shire of Ross, and the Shires of Southerland and Caithness, Extending in all to Seventy five Horses; be divided proportionally amongst the saids Captains, for making up their Troops, to consist each one of fifty Horses; And for that Effect that Major Hugh Buntine, Nominat Muster-master by the Estates, or such Persons as he shall appoint, shall receive these Horsemen at the Head-Burghs of the re∣spectve Shires, conform to the said Act, upon the days therein-mentioned, and bring the samine up to the respective Troops, according as the said Muster-mster shall divide the said Seventy five Horses, for making up the respective Troops in manner above-mentioned. XXV. Order for an Embargo to be laid on all Ships. April 23. 1689. THE Estates of the Kingdom do hereby order an Embargo to be laid on all Ships or Barks within this Kingdom, till furdet Order, and that no Ships or Barks aforesaid, be allowed to Sail abroad, till they first find Caution to the respective Collectors, that they shall not go to France, or Ireland. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed, and Published at the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to be directed to the respective Colleors of the Sea-Ports, who are hereby Orde∣red to be answerable for the Execution of this present Act. XXVI. ACT Nominating Commissioners to reat concerning the Ʋnion of the two Kingdoms. April 23. 1689. THe Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland do Nominat and Appoint the Persons following, being Eight of every State, viz. The Earl of Argile, Crafurd, Lothian, Annandale and Tweddale; The Lords Ross, Cardross and Melvil for the Nobility: Sir John Mait∣land, Adam Cockburn of Ormestun, Sir Patrick Hume of Polwart, Sir Archibald Murray of Blackbarony, William Blair of that Ilk Sir James Montgomery of Skelmorly, Thomas Drummond of Riccartoun, and the Laird of Grant, for the Barrons: Sir John Hall Provost of Edinburgh, Sir Charles Hal∣ket, Sir John Dalrymple, Mr. James Ogilvie, James Fletcher, Mr. William Hamil∣ton, Mr. John Murray, and John Muir Commissioner for the Town of Air, for the Burrows, with the Lord Duke of Hamilton their President, as supernumerary, to meet with such persons as shall be nominat Commissioners by the Parliament of England, and to Treat concerning the Union of the two Kingdoms.
XXVII. A Letter direct from the Estates to the King's Majesty, with the Offer of the Crown, whereof the Tenor follows. April 24. 1689. May it please your Majesty, THE Settling of the Monarchy and Antient Government of this Kingdom admitting no delay, We did upon the Eleventh in∣stant Proclaim Your Majesty, and Your Royal Consort, KING and QUEEN of Scotland, with so much Unanimity, that of the whole House, there was not one contrary Vote; We have Nominat the Earl of Argile, Sir James Montgomery of Skelmorly, and Sir John Dalrymple, in our Name to attend Your Majesty with the chear∣ful Offer of the Crown, and humbly to present the Petition or Claim of Right of the Subjects of this Kingdom; As also to represent some things found grie∣vous to this Nation, which we humbly intreat Your Majesty to Remeid by whol∣some Laws in Your first Parliament. And in Testimony of Your Majesty and the Queens Acceptance, We beseech your Majesties in presence of these sent by us, to Swear and Sign the Oath herewith presented, which our Law hath Ap∣pointed to be taken by our Kings and Queens, at the Entry to Their Government, till such time as Your great Affairs allow this Kingdom the Happiness of Your Presence, in order to the Coronation of Your Majesties. We are most sensible of Your Majesties Kindness, and Fatherly Care to both Your Kingdoms, in promoving their Union, which we hope hath been reserved to be Accomplished by you; that as both Kingdoms are united in one Head and Soveraign, so they may become one Body Politick, one Nation, to be Repre∣sented in one Parliament. And to testifie our Readiness to comply with Your Majesty in that matter; We have nominated Commissioners to treat the Terms of an intire and perpetual Union betwixt the two Kingdoms, with Reservation to us of our Church-Government, as it shall be established at the time of the Uni∣on. These Commissioners do wait Your Majesties Approbation and Call, that they may Meet and Treat with the Commissioners to be appointed for England, at what time and place Your Majesty shall appoint. And if any Difficulty shall arise in the Treaty, We do upon our part refer the Determination thereof to Your Majesty. And we do assure our selves from Your Majesties Prudence and Goodness of a happy Conclusion to that Important Affair, so as the same may be agreed to, and Ratified by Your Majesty in Your first Parliament. We do likewise render Your Majesty our most dutiful Thanks, for Your Gracious Let∣ter brought to us by the Lord Ross (a Person well affected to your Service) And for your Princely Care in sending down these Troops, which may in the mean time help to preserve us, and when the Season offers, may be imployed to∣wards the Recovery of Ireland, from that deplorable Condition and extream Danger, to which the Protestants there are exposed; The guarding our Coasts with a good Fleet, preserves England as well as us from an Invasion; And as it is the Interest of England to contribute to secure us from the first Impressions of the Common Danger; So we shall not be wanting on our part to give our Assistance, for Reducing of Ireland, that all Your Majesties Kingdoms may flourish in Peace and Truth, under the Auspicious influence of your happy Reigns. Signed at the desire of the Estates, and in our Name by our President, May it Please Your Majesty, Your Majesties most humble, most obedient, and faithful Subject and Servant; HAMILTON. P.
XXVIII. ACT Nominating Persons to attend Their Majesties with the Offer of the Crown. April. 24. 1689. THE Estates of this Kingdom do Nominat and Appoint, the Earl of Argile, Sir James Montgomery of Skelmorlie, and Sir John Dalrymple, Three of their Number, being one of every Estate, to repair to Lon∣don, and to deliver to the King's Majesty their Letter; and to present to the King and Queen, the Declaration of the Estates, and to take Their Oath, and to present to His Majesty the Grievances desired to be Redressed, with the Address for turning this Meeting into a Parliament. XXIX. Address for turning the Meeting of Estates into a Parliament. April 24. 1689. May it Please Your Majesty, IT is the humble desire of Your Estates of Scotland, that for the further settling and securing of the Protestant Religion, the Government, Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, and Redressing the Grievan∣ces represented by them, Your Majesty will be pleased, to turn this their Meeting into a Parliament. Signed at the desire of the Estates, and in our Name by our President, May it please Your Majesty, Your Majesties most humble, most obedient, and faithful Subject and Servant. HAMILTON P. XXX. Instructions by the Estates of Scotland, to the Earl of Argile, Sir James Montgome∣ry, and Sir John Dalrymple, Nominated and Appointed to attend the King and Queen, with the Offer of the Crown. April 25. 1689. YOU are to Repair with all Diligence to London, and so soon as you come there, you are to deliver the Letter from the Estates to the King's Majesty, and to present to Their Majesties, the King and Queen, the Declaration of the Estates of this Kingdom, and to Read, or see the same Read in Their Presence; And you are like∣wise to present to the King, the Grievances, desired to be Redressed; with the Address for turning this Meeting into a Parliament, and to Read, or see the same Read. You are to offer the Oath to the King and Queen, upon Their Acceptance to the Crown, and to see that the same be Sworn and Signed by Them. After the King and Queen have taken the OATH, you are to return as soon as is possible. You are to desire the King's Majesty to interpose with the Estates of Holland, that they may allow Ten thousand Stand of Arms, less or more, with Ammuni∣tion conform, to be Imported from Holland into this Kingdom, by James Dunlop Merchant in Rotterdam, James Bogle Merchant in Glasgow, and George Clerk Mer∣chant in Edinburgh, for the use of His Majesties Subjects in this Kingdom; and to desire, that His Majesty would Order these Arms to be free of Custom, and others His Majesties Dues, at their arrival here in Scotland. You are likeways to desire His Majesty to signifie His Pleasure concerning the Earls of Perth and Belcarras.
XXXI. A Proclamation for a Publick Thanksgiving. April 26. 1689. WHereas it hath pleased Almighty GOD, by the Endeavours of Wil∣liam King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland, to Rescue and Deliver this Nation from the great danger of Popery and Arbitra∣ry Power, to which it was exposed; The Estates of this Kingdom Do Ordain and Appoint; Like as it is hereby Enacted, that all the Subjects of this Kingdam, Do keep and observe a Day of solemn and publick Thanksgiving to Almighty GOD, for their great Deliverance aforesaid, and for Imploring the Blessing of GOD to the said King William, the glorious Instrument of their Delivery: And they hereby Appoint for the Shires on this side of the River of Tay the ninth day of May next; And for the Shires benorth Tay, the sixteenth day of May, for all the Leidges to meet in the Churches, or other places where they ordinarly attend Divine Service, that they may hear Sermon, and joyn together in the Solemn Thanksgiving aforesaid; And Ordains the Ministers to Intimat from their Pulpits, the Observation of the said Thanksgi∣ving, upon the Lords Day immediatly preceeding the saids respective Days. And appoints this Act to be Printed, and publickly Proclaimed at the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and at the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-burghs of all the Shires, and of the Royal-Burghs of this Kingdom And appoints Printed Copies thereof to be dispatched to the Sheriff Clerks of the respective Shires, that they may send the same to the Magistrats of the saids Burghs to be Published, and to the several Ministers in the Shires, that they may intimat the same, as said is. XXXII. ACT for raising Four Moneths Supply. April 27. 1689. FOrasmuch as the Estates of this Kingdom finding it necessary, as well for the Security of the Protestant Religion, as for the common Safety and Defence of the Kingdom, against Forraign Invasions, and intestine In∣surrections, that a competent number of Forces be raised and kept up within the same; They have Ordained certain Troops of Horse to be Levied from the seve∣ral Shires, and upon the voluntary offers of sundry Noblemen and Gentlemen, Have given Warrand for Levying some Regiments of Foot, and Troops of Horse and Dragoons; and seing these Forces cannot be kept up and maintained, with∣out a considerable Charge and Expense; And the Cess Imposed by all former Acts, being now extinct, and not due in time coming; Therefore the saids E∣states in this Juncture, Do Ordain the Sum of Two hundred and eighty eight Thousand Pounds Scots, to be Raised and Uplifted from the Shires and Burghs of this Kingdom, at the Term of Whitsunday next, according to the proportions Imposed upon each Shire and Burgh, by the Act of Convention of Estates in the Year 1667. And for the effectual and speedy Inbringing of the said Imposition, The Estates Do Nominat and Appoint, the Persons after-named, to be Commis∣sioners within the respective Shires, for Ordering and Uplifting of the same, viz. For the Shire of Edinburgh. The Earl of Lauderdail, the Earl of Lothian, the Viscount of Tarbat, the Lord Ross, the Lord Torphichen, the Master of Balmerino, Sir John Baird of Newbyth, John Wauchop of Edmistoun, Sir John Maitland of Ravelrig, Sir George Mcken∣zie of Shank, Sir John Foulis of Ravelstoun, Robert Dundass of Arnistoun, Sir Alexander Gibson of Pentland, Sir John Clerk of Pennycook, Sir William Drum∣mond of Halthornden, Sir Patrick Nisbet of Dean, Sir John Young of Leny, Sir William Murray of Newtoun, Hugh Wallace of Inglistoun, Sir John Ramsay of Whiehill, Sir Robert Baird of Sauchtoun-hall, Sir William Binning of Wallie∣foord, Sir James Dick of Priestfield, Thomas Craig of Riccartoun, Alexander Nisbet of Craigentinny, Sir Robert Miln of Barntoun, Patrick Hamilton of Falla,
John Cunninghame of Woodhall, Mr. Roderick Mckenzie of Prestounhall, John Foulis of Ratho, James Baird younger of Sauchtounhall, James Murray of Dew∣char, Charles Murray of Hadden, Mr. James Hunter of Murrays, John Scot of Malleny, Andrew Brown of Braid,  Burnet of Carlops, the eldest Baillie of Musselburgh for the time, and the eldest Baillie of Dalkeith for the time. For the Shire of Haddingtoun. The Earl of Wintoun, the Earl of Tweddale, the Lord Belhaven, Sir John Hall of Dunglass, Sir Patrick Hepburn of Black-castle, Sir John Sinclar of Lochend, Archibald Murray of Spot, Robert Hamilton of Presmennan, Mr. Robert Law∣der of Beilmouth, James Hamilton of Hetherwick, William Hepburn of Bein∣stoun, Patrick Hepburn of Smeitoun, Sir William Baird of Newbyth, Sir George Suity of Balgone, William Nisbet of Dirletoun, George Morison of Preston∣grange, Robert Hepburn of Bearford, Sir James Hay of Linplum, Andrew Flet∣cher of Saltoun, David Hepburn of Humbie, Sir John Lawder of Fountainhall, Sir Patrick Brown of Colstoun, Sir Robert Sinclar of Stevinson, the Laird of O∣mistoun, the Laird of Lamingtoun, James Oswald of Fingletoun, James Dur∣hame of Luffness. For the Shire of Berwick. The Marquess of Douglass, the Lord Ross, the Lord Harcarss, the Lord Mer∣singtoun, Sir John Sinclar of Longformacus, Sir John Hume of Blackader, Sir James Don of Newtoun, Sir James Cockburn of that Ilk, Sir Robert Stuart of Allan∣bank, Sir John Hall of Dunglass, Sir William Scot of Harden, Sir James Roched of Innerleith, Sir Patrick Hume of Lumsdean, George Hume of Wedderburn, John Swinton of that Ilk, Iohn Rentoun of Lambertoun, John Ker of Moristoun, John Ker of Cavers, George Ramsay of Edingtoun,  Edgar of Wedder∣lie, Mr. Alexander Brown of Thornidykes, Iohn Hume of Ninewalls, George Hume of Kimmerghame, Mr. Iohn Belses of Tofts, Robert Brown of Blackburn,  Hume of Hundwood, Patrick Wardlaw of Berry-haugh, Walter Pringle of Greenknow, George Hume of Bassindain, William Cockburn of Caldry, George Hume of St. Leonards, Mr. Iames Daes of Coldingknows, Mr. David Hume of Crossrig, Mr. Iames Douglass of Earnslaw, Alexander Hume of Abbay, Iohn Wat∣son of Iardenfield, Alexander Trotter of Kettlesheils, Thomas Rocheid of Whit∣somhill, Sir Archibald Cockburn of Langtoun, and Sir Patrick Hume of Polwart. For the Shire of Roxburgh. The Marquess of Douglass, the Earl of Lothian, the Lord Newbottle, the Lord Iedburgh, the Lord Rutherfoord, Sir William Ker of Greenhead, Sir William Scot of Hrden, Sir William Elliot of Stobs, Sir Francis Scot, Sir Iohn Scot of Ancrum, Sir Robert Pringle of Stitchel, the Lairds of Cliftoun, Chatto, and Frogden, Sir William Bennet of Grubet, Sir Patrick Scot, Sir Iohn Riddel of that Ilk, Sir Iames Don of Newtoun,  Pringle younger of Sitchel, Iames Don of Smelholm, the Laird of Rutherfoord, Patrick Don of Ottenburn, Sir William Douglass of Cavers, Robert Scot of Horsehill, the Dutches of Buc∣cleughs Chamberlain for the time, the Earl of Roxburghs Chamberlain for the time,  Ker of Littledean, William Ainslie of Black-hill, William Scot of Rea∣burn,  Rutherfoord of Teviotvail, Robert Elliot of Middle-miln, the Pro∣vost of Jedburgh for the time, Robert Faa Baillie of Melross,  Hallybur∣ton of Muirhouslaw younger,  Rutherfoord younger of Faringtoun, the Laird of Edgarstoun, and the Baillie of the Regality of Jedburgh-Forrest. For the Shire of Selkirk. The Earl of Tarras, the Laird of Drummelzier, Sir Francis Scot, George Pringle elder of Torwoodlie, the Laird of Torwoodlie younger, Hugh Scot of Gallow∣sheils, the Laird of Muslie younger, the Lairds of Gilmerscleugh and Middle∣stead elder and younger, Sir William Scot elder and younger, the Laird of Sin∣toun, the Laird of Broadmeadows elder, the Laird of Sundhope, the Laird of
Philiphaugh,  Baillie of Mitchel-hill, the Laird of Wall Baillie or Chamber∣lain to the Dutches of Buccleugh. For the Shire of Peebles. The Duke of Queensberrie, the Earl of Mortoun, Lord William Douglass, Lieu∣tenant-General Douglass, the Laird of Drummelzier, the Laird of Blackbarrony elder, the Lairds of Stenhops elder and younger, the Laird of Dawick, the Laird of Posso, the Laird of Haystoun, the Laird of Hartrie, the Laird of Whit∣slead, the Laird of Polmood; the Laird of Hackshay younger, the Laird of Cairnmuir, the Laird of Kirkoord, the Laird of Scotstoun, the Laird of Hal∣myre, the Laird of Spittlehaugh, the Laird of Cringlty, the Laird of Kingside,  Grahame of Slipperfield, Doctor Pennicook of Romano, the Laird of Mannerhall, John Balfour of Kailzea, the Laird of Horsburgh younger, the Laird of Little Ormistoun, the Laird of Blyth, the Laird of Cardronna, the Pro∣vost of Peebles for the time. For the Shire of Lanerk. The Duke of Hamiltoun, the Marquess of Douglass, John Lord Carmichael, Alexander Lord Blantire, Archibald Earl of Forfar, Sir Daniel Carmichael of Mauldslie, John Weir of Newtoun, VVilliam Baillie of Hardingtoun, Alexan∣der Menzies elder and younger of Culterallers, Alexander Bertoun of Nisbet, James Lockhart of Annistoun, James Somervel of Gladstains, John Baillie young∣er of VValstoun, William Denholm of Westsheil, Sir William Lockhart of Carstairs, Mr. Andrew Kennedy of Clowburn, Sir John Carmichael of Bony∣toun, William Baillie of Littlegil, Iames Lockhart of Cleghorn, George Bail∣lie of Ierviswood, the Laird of Lee, Iohn Hamilton younger of Halcraig, VVal∣ter Lockhart of Kirktoun, Samuel Douglass of Hassilside, Robert Kennedy of Auchterfardel,  Ballandine of Craigmuir, VVilliam Lawrie of Black∣wood, Andrew Hay of Craignethen, VVilliam Hamilton of Raploch, Iames Young of Netherfield, Mr. Hugh Dalrymple of  Iohn Hamilton of Barn∣cluith, the Baillies of Hamilton for the time, Mr. Iohn Kincaid of Corsbasket, Sir William Maxwel of Calderwood, the Laird of Torrence, Sir William Fleming of Ferm, Iames Hamilton of Aikenhead, Gabriel Hamilton of Westburn,  Corbet of Towcorse,  Robertoun of Bedlay, Iohn Walkinshaw of Borrow∣field, Mr. Henry Baillie of Carderoch, the Baillie of the Regality of Glasgow for the time, the Laird of Braidisholm, the Laird of Auchinvoul, and  Hamilton of Ardrie,  Muirhead of Stevinson, Mr. Archibald Nisbet of Carsin, the Laird of Cleilingtoun, the Laird of Dalzell, Sir Iohn Harper of Cam∣bushnethem, William Hamilton of Wishaw, Thomas Stuart of Cultness, VVilli∣am Stuart of Allantoun, Iames Stuart of Hartwood, and the Laird of Laming∣toun. For the Sheriffdom of Nithisdale and Dumfreis. The Duke of Queensberry, the Earl of Annandale, the Lord Drumlanrig, Sir Iames Douglass of Kelhead, Sir Thomas Kilpatrick of Closburn, Sir Robert Law∣rie of Maxweltoun, Sir Patrick Maxwel of Sprinkel, the Laird of Holmains, the Laird of Craigdarroch, the Laird of Dornock, the Laird of Capinoch, the Laird of Gernsalloch elder, Sir Iames Iohnston of Westerraw, the Laird of Lamer∣scails, Iames Iohnstoun of Corhead, Iohn Iohnston younger of Westerraw, the Laird of Craigs, the Laird of Stuartoun, Andrew Iohnston younger of Loc∣kerbie, the Laird of Brekinside, Archibald Murray younger of Duncrief, the Laird of Dormouth, the laird of Brydkirk, the laird of Crafordtoun, the laird of Enoch, the laird of Eccles, William Iohnston of Grantoun, and Mr. Hugh Max∣wel of Dalswintoun. For the Sheriffdom of Wigtoun. The lord Gairlies, Robert Mcdowgal younger of Logan, Iames Dalrymple of Dunragit, Patrick Herron of Little-park, Iames Vallange of Possils, Iohn Mcul∣loch
of Grange, Sir Andrew Agnew Sheriff of Wigtoun, Patrick Agnew of Sheu∣chan, John Stuart of Fisgil, Sir John Dalrymple of Stair, the laird of Logan el∣der, the laird of Donskey, the laird of Castlestuart, the laird of Craichlaw young∣er, the laird of Mochrum, the laird of Garthland, Sir William Maxwel of Mon∣reith, Sir Charles Hay of Park, James Agnew of Lochnaw, Iohn Vans of Barn∣barroch. For the Sheriffdom of Air. The Lord Montgomery, Sir Iames Montgomery of Skelmorly, William Blair of that Ilk, William Blair younger thereof, David Cunninghame younger of Ro∣bertland, the Lairds of Bishoptoun elder and younger, the Laird of Pearstoun younger, the Laird of Rowallan, the Laird of Crafordland, Mr. Alexander Craford of Fergushil, the Laird of Kilbirnie, the Laird of Corshil, the Laird of Kelburn, the Laird of Grange, Captain William Hamilton of Ladyland, Hugh Stevinson of Mountgreenand, Allan Lord Cathcart, Allan Mr. of Cathcart, Ma∣jor Hugh Buntine, Hugh Montgomery of Colts-field, the Magistrats of Air and Irving for the time being, the Earl of Eglingtoun, the Earl of Dundonnald, Sir William Cunninghame of Capringtoun, Sir William Cunninghame of Cunning∣hame-head, Mr. Francis Montgomery of Giffan, Mr. Thomas Cochran of Pol∣kellie,  Crafurd of Carse, Mr. David Cunninghame of Milcraig, Ronald Chalmers of Polwharne, Richard Cunninghame of Bedlane, the Laird of Dreg∣horn elder, Charles Lord Creightoun, David Blair of Adamtoun, John Blair younger of Adamtoun, David Boswel of Auchinleck, Mr. William Fullertoun of that ilk, the Laird of Logan of that Ilk, Robert Dickson of Sornbeg, Mungo Campbel younger of Nether-place, Sir George Campbel of Cesnock, Sir John Dalrymple younger of Stair, Mr. James Dalrymple of Killoch, William Cochran younger of Ochiltrie, Iohn Chalmers of Gathgirth, George Ross of Gstoun, Hugh Archibald of Dankeith, Iohn Alexander of Boghal, the Earl of Cassils, the Lord Bargany, the Mr. of Bargany, the Laird of Cairltoun, Qintin Mcilvain of Grimat, Iames Whitefoord of Dunduff, Iohn Muir of Auchindrain, Hugh Blair of Blairstoun, Allan Chalmer of Sanchrie, Mr. Iohn Ferguson of Barclonachan, Iames Cunninghame of Aicket,  Eccles of Kildonan, and  Boyd of Trochrig, Fergus Mccubin of Knockdollian, and Mr. Roderick Mckenzie of Dal∣vennan. For the Sheriffdom of Dumbartoun. The Earl of Argile, the Earl of Dundonald, the Lord Boyd, Sir Umphray Colquhoun of Luss, Mr. William Cochran of Kilmaronock, John Houstoun younger of that Ilk, Archibald Mccaulay of Ardincaple, John Naper of Kilma∣hew, John Hadden of Glenegies, John Douglas of Mayns, Claud Hamilton of Barns, Alexander Gartshore of that Ilk, William Stirling of Law, Nicol Buntine of Airdoch, William Colquhoun of Craigtoun, James Hamilton of Hutcheson, John Campbel Captain of Carrick, Andrew Colquhoun of Garscadden, Hugh Crafurd of Cloberhil, John Campbel of Ardintine, Mr. James Smollet of Pillenflet, William Noble of Fairnie, William Semple of Dulmoock, John Grahame of Galingadie, John Whitehill of Keppoch, John Spreul of Miln∣toun. For the Sheriffdom of Bute. The Duke of Hamilton his Grace, the Baillie of Arran for the time, the Earl of Argile, the Earl of Eglingtoun, Ninian Bannatyn of Kayms, and  Ban∣natyn younger of Kayms, Charles Stuart of Killcatton, David Boyle of Kel∣burn, Mr. John Stuart of Escog, Archibald Stuart of Kinwhinlick, Ninian Stu∣art of Largterian, Robert Stuart of Mcknach, John Stuart of Linhael, Cuthbert Stuart of Ardinho, Archibald Glass, Sheriff-Deput of Bute, Robert Bailenden of Leubass, Sir James Montgomery of Skelmorlie, the Magistrats of Rothesay for the time, and Sir James Stuart Sheriff of Bute.
For the Sheriffdom of Renfrew. The Earl of Glencairn, the Earl of Dundonald, the Lord Montgomery, the Lord Ross, the Lord Blantyre, the Lairds of Houstoun elder and younger, Sir John Maxwel of Pollock, Sir Archibald Stuart of Blackhall, thd Lairds of Gree∣nock elder and younger, the Lairds of Craigens elder and younger, John Porter∣field of Duchil, Patrick Fleming of Barochan, Alexander Porterfield of Full∣wood, Thomas Crafurd of Crafurdsburn elder and younger, Patrick Maxwel of New-wark, John Caldwell of that Ilk, James Hamilton of Aikenhead, George Houstoun of Johnstoun, Robert Pollock of that Ilk  Bannantyne of Kellie, George Hutchison of Scotstoun, William Muir of Glanderstoun, Law∣rance Crafurd of Jardenhill, Colin Campbel of Blythswood, Gavin Cochran of Craigmuir, James Walkenshaw of that Ilk, James Oswald of Fingletoun, John Shaw of Bargarran younger, Robert Hall of Fullbar, Mr. John Cochran of Fer∣gusly, John Maxwel younger of Dargavel,  Semple of Cathcart, Pol∣lock of Falside, the Provost and Baillies of Renfrew for the time, and the Bail∣lies of Paisly. For the Sheriffdom of Stirling. The Earl of Mar, the Earl of Callender, the Lord Elphinstoun, the Lord Car∣dross, the Lord Forrester, the Laird of Houstoun, the Laird of Woodhead, the Laird of Bardowie, the Laird of Kilcroych, the Laird of Ballendalloch, the Laird of Bearcrofts, the Laird of Powes, the Laird of Gargannock, the Laird of Goger,  Cunninghame of Boquhan, Sir Hugh Paterson of Ban∣nockburn, the Laird of Polmais, the Laird of Herbertshire, Sir Alexander Hope of Kerss,  Livingstoun of Glentirren, and  Erskine of Bal∣gowne, Mr. William Livingstoun of Kilsyth, the Laird of Wast-quarter,  Glass of Sauchie,  Hadden of Myrtoun. For the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow. The Duke of Hamilton, the Earl of Linlithgow, the Lord Livingstoun, the Lord Torphichen, the Lord Cardross, the Laird of Dundass, the Laird of Ric∣cartoun, the Laird of Bonhard, the Laird of Livingstoun, the Laird of Bar∣bachlay, Thomas Sharp of Houstoun, John Dundass of Dudingstoun, Mr. Wil∣liam Dundass of Kincavil, John Dundas of Maner, James Monteith of Auldca∣thie, Thomas Hamilton of Boghead, John Hamilton of Dechmount, Sir John Dalrymple, Mr. William Hamilton, Sir William Hope, John Fairholm of Craigie∣hall, George Hamilton of Binning, Robert Anstruther of Wrae,  Mar∣joribanks of Balbardie, Thomas Baillie of Pollkennet. For the Sheriffdom of Perth. John Marquess of Athol, David Viscount of Stormont, Andrew Lord Rollo, David Lord Ruthven, Sir Colin Campbel of Aberuchel, James Grahame of Orchel, John Hadden of Glenagues, Sir Robert Murray of Abercairnie, Sir Patrick Mur∣ray of Auchtertyre, Adam Drummond of Meginch, Alexander Spittel of Leu∣chat, Thomas Hay of Bal-housie, Sir John Stuart of Gairntullie, Mungo Camp∣bel of Burnbank, Sir Thomas Moncrief of that Ilk, the Laird of Weem younger, Mr. Patrick Ker of Kilmount, Colin Campbel of Monzie, James Peirson of Kippenross, Patrick Hay of Kirkland,  Moncrief of Tippermalloch, Mr. John Blair of Balmyl, Archibald Naper of Boquhaple, Mr. Francis Mont∣gomery of Inchlesslie, David Drummond of Cultmalindie, James Stuart young∣er of Ardvorlick, John Campbel of Clathick, John Drummond of Blair, Alex∣ander Duncan of Lundie,  Campbel of Bagersho, Mr. Robert An∣derson of Coless,  Oliphant of Clashbeny  Hay of Leyes elder, James Ogilvie of Cluny, William Stuart of Ballide, Thomas Stuart of Sten∣toun, Patrick Stuart of Ballechan, Sir James Campbel of Lawers, Sir John Murray of Drumcairn, Colin Campbel of Munzie, Thomas Stuart of Ladywell-David Haly burtoun of Pitcurr, John Gray of Crichie,  Halyburtoun of Fotherincie, James Blair of Ardblair, John Mitchel of Byres, James Grahame
of Garvoch, Patrick Smith of Methven, Walter Stuart of Kincarathie, John Murray of Pitcullan, Mr. James Elphingstoun of Comrie, John Buchannan of Arnpryer, Alexander Stuart of Annat, Mr. David Grahame Tutor of Gorthie, Iohn Murray of Stravan, William Paton of Panholes, John Williamson of Barnhil, John Murray of Arthurstoun, Mr. Patrick Murray of Dollorie, Charles Stuart of Rotmel, the Laird of Strowan Robertson, Sir William Stirling of Air∣doch, John Stuart of Fass,  Kinloch of Gourdie,  Murray of Keilor, Donald Robertson of Killachangie, James Stuart younger of Orart, Henry Murray of Lochlain. For the Sheriffdom of Kincardin. The Earl of Marishal, the Earl of Southesk, the Viscount of Arbuthnet, Sir Charles Ramsay of Balmain, Sir Alexander Falconer, of Glenfarquhar, Sir David Carnagie of Pittaro, the Laird of Lauristoun, the Laird of Leyes, the Laird of Balbigno, the Laird of Halgreen, the Laird of Elsick, the Laird of Pitgarvie, Al∣exander Arbuthnet of Knox, George Keith of Whiteriggs Sheriff-deput, Mr. Iames Falconer of Phesdo, John Douglas of Tilliwhitlie, William Barclay of Bal∣maqueen, William Ramsay of Woodstoun, and John Barclay of Johnstoun. For the Sheriffdom of Aberdene. John Earl of Errol, George Earl of Marishal, William Lord Keith, Charles Earl of Mar,  Earl of Panmuir, John Earl of Kintore, William Lord Innerury, William Lord Forbes, And the Master his Son, Alexander Lord Saltoun, and the Master of Saltoun, Alexander Lord Pitsligo, and the Master his son, the Lord Frazer, Sir Alexander Seton of Pitmedden, Sir Iohn Forbes of Craigivar, Sir Iames Baird of Auchmedden, Sir George Gordon of Edinglassy, John Gordon younger of Fechil, Alexander Gordon Tutor of Pitlurg, Sir Iames Gordon of Lesmore, the Laird of Udny younger, Robert Udney of Auchterellan, Sir George Skeen of Fintry, Patrick Dun of Tarty, Mr. Alexander Forbes of Foveran, Samuel Forbes younger of Foveran, Iohn Ross of Rosehill,  Frazer of Strichen, Sir Henry Guthrie of King-Edward, Iames Keith of Tilligo∣nie, Sir William Keith of Ludquharne, Iohn Forbes of Leslie, Sir Iohn Forbes of Monimusk elder, William Forbes of Monimusk younger,  Leith of White∣haugh, Alexander Cumming of Culter,  Elphingston of Glack young∣er, the Laird of Dice younger, Mr. Iames Gray of Balgouny, Alexander Skeen of that Ilk, Sir Thomas Burnet of Leyes, Robert Gordon of Cluny, Iames Innes of Drumgask, Adam Gordon of Achmachie, Francis Ross of Achlossin, Sir Ro∣bert Innes of Kinnermonie, Iohn Gordon of Braichlie,  Forbes younger of Echt, Mr. Thomas Gordon of Crimonmogate,  Gordon of Badin∣scoth, William Gray of Creichie, William Thoirs younger of Muiresk, John Gordon of Nethermuire, Thomas Forbes of Watertoun, Charles Gordon of Bre∣lack, Adam Gordon of Glenbuicket, John Gordon of Hallhead, Mr. Robert Ir∣wine of Cults,  Forbes of Fulloch, Jaes Gordon of Bodom,  Caddel of Aswanly, Sir Charles Mailand of Pittrich, Thomas Forbes of Eche, George Morison of Piour, Arthur Forbes of ruix, George Garrioch younger of Kinstarret, James More of Stony wood, Mr. James Elphingston of Logiedurno, Patrick Lesly of Kincraigie, Aleander Ross of Tillisnaught, William Forbes of Campbel, Mr. James Keith of Auquhorsk, Andrew Watson Baillie in Peterhead, Alexander Donaldson of Little Drumwhindle, James Gordon of Daach, Robert Burnet of Elrick, James Forbes of Savack, John Logie of Bodom,  Leith of Newlands,  Lesly of Ltle-warthe, the Laird of Craigivar younger, Robert Sympson of Thornstoun, the Laird of Balsluig younger, George Paton of Grandum, Thomas Menzies of Kinmundie, Henry Forbes of Boyndlie, John Udny of Cultercullen, Mr. Robert Innes of Blair∣toun, and Sir Alexander Forbes of Tolquhon. For the Sheriffdom of Inverness. The Lord Lovat, the Laird of Mcintosh, Sir Hugh Campbel of Calder, Lo∣dovick
Grant of that Ilk, George Cuthbert of Castlehill, Duncan Forbes of Col∣loden, William Mcintosh of Borland, Mr. William Robertson of Inshes, Donald Mcintosh of Keillochie, Thomas Cherise of Muirtoun, the Laird of Strichen, the Laird of Rillick, Mr. Hugh Frazer of Escogdel. Duncan Mcpherson of Cluny, the Laird of Calder younger, the Laird of Mcdonald, the Laird of Mcleod, the Laird of Glengarie, William Frazer of Foyl, Hugh Frazer of Belleskin, Hugh Frazer of Ballenain. For the Sheriffdom of Nairn. Sir Hugh Campbel of Calder, Hugh Ross of Kilrawick, John Hay of Lochloy, Alexander Cambel younger of Calder, David Broddie of Lethen, Alexander Ross of Clava; David Sutherland of Kinsterie, Archibald Campbel of Kaitcastle, Alexander Dumbar of Boath, and William Campbel of Delnice. For the Sheriffdom of Cromartie. George Viscount of Tarbat, Mr. Kenneth Mckenzie of Cromartie, Sir George Mckenzie of Rosehaugh, Alexander Urquhart of Newhall, and John Urquhart Fiar thereof his son, George Dallas of St. Martins, and Mr. James Dallas young∣er thereof his son, William Urquhart of Braelanguel, Alexander Clunes of Dun∣skeith, Andrew Frazer of Bennens, and James Frazer of Brae. For the Shire of Argile. The Earl of Argile, Sir Colin Campbel of Arkindlass, Archibald Lamont of that Ilk, Archibald Campbel of Strathure, John Campbel Captain of Carrick, John Campbel Captain of Dunoon, Colin Campbel of Ellengreg, Archibald Lamont of Silvercraigs, Sir Duncan Campbel of Auchinbreck, the Laird of Bar∣breck, the Captain of Craigneish, Alexander Campbel of Kilmartine, Archibald Mclauchlan of Craignitarrif, Colin Campbel of Testennen,  Campbel of Melfort, John Campbel Tutor of Innerliver, Angus Campbel of Kilberry, Ar∣chibald Campbel of Dunay, Lord Neil Campbel, Sir Hugh Campbel of Calder Donald Campbel Baillie of Muckarn, or the Baillie thereof for the time, the Laird of Lochnel, Archibald Campbel of Inverraw, the Tutor of Dunstaffnish, John Campbel of Aires, Alexander Campbel of Balcarten, Dowgal Campbel of Clan∣machrie, John Campbel of Ardchatten, Alexander Campbel younger of Caddel, Dowgal Campbel of Glenfadden, and the Baillie of Kintyre for the time, Walter Campbel of Skipinich, Duncan Campbel of Glencarradel, Duncan Campbel of Blarntibbert, John Campbel of Killadallage, the Laird of Lergie, the Laird of Loup, Archibald Campbel of Ouchtomor, and the Baillie of Ilay for the time, Donald Campbel of Ballinaly, Lauchlan Campbel of Dail, the Baillie of Jura, the Baillie of Collensy, and the Magistrats of Inverary.. For the Sheriffdom of Fife. The Earl of Morton, the Earl of Leven, the Lord Melvil, the Lord Colvil, the Master of Burghlie, Sir Alexander Bruce of Broomhal, Sir Charles Halket of Pitfirren, Sir Henry Wardlaw of Pitrevie,  Monteith of Rande∣foord,  Henderson of Fordel, Mr. Alexander Spittel of Lewchat, James Robertson of Newbigging, Mr. John Dempster of Pitliver,  of Spencerfield, Sir Philip Anstruther of that Ilk, James Watson of Athrnie,  Durhame of Largo Sir Alexander Erskine of Cambo,  Lindsay of Wormistoun, Mr. James Lumsdain of Stravithie,  Dudingstoun of Samfoord,  Fothringhame of Lawhil, David Scot of Scotstarbit, Mr. Robert Smith of Giblistoun, William Anstruther of that Ilk, Robert Hamilton of Kilbrankmont, John Skeen of Hal∣yards elder,  of Bogie,  Weyms of Kuttel. hill,  Dowglass of Strendry,  White of Bannochie, Robert Dowglass of Kirkness, David Beaton of Balfour, Sir David Arnot of that Ilk,  Moncrief of Reddie, Mr. Archibald Hope of Rankeilor, Sir John
Airon of that Ilk,  Hay of Naughtoun,  Nairn of Sam∣ford, George Moncreiff of Sachope, Mr. Robert Lermonth of Balcomie, John Aiton of Kinaldy,  Melvil of Cassingray, James Carmichael of Balinblea, Robert Gedd of Balridge, and James Lindsay of Cavele. For the Shire of Kinross. John Lord Burghlie, the Lord Colvil, the Master of Burghlie, Sir David Arnot of that Ilk, Robert Dowglass of Kirkness, Sir John Malcom of Innerteil, John Haliday of Tilleybole,  Lindsay of Dowhill, James Rankin of Colden, George Berril Portioner of Kinneswood, Patrick Robertson of Smid∣cihil, the Baillie of Kinross for the time, and Sir William Bruce of Kinross. For the Shire of Forfar. The Earl of Southesk, the Earl of Airlie, the Earl of Panmure, the Viscount of Arbuthnet, the Lord Glames, the Lord Ogilvie, Sir George Mckenzie of Rosehaugh, Sir Patrick Lyon of Carse, Mr. Henry Mauld of Kellie, Mr. James Carnagie of Phinhaven, David Lindsay of Edziel, James Carnagie of Balnamoon, David Halyburton of Pitcur, James Scot of Logie, David Fothringame of Pourie, Sir John Wood of Boningtoun,  Duncan of Lundie, William Dur∣hame sometime of Ardoun, now of Grange, James Crichtoun of Ruthven, Gil∣bert Auchinleck of that Ilk, John Guthrie of that Ilk, Alexander Carnagie Sheriff Deput of Forar, John Auchterlony of Guynd, Mr. John Wishart of Logie, Robert Young of Auldbar, John Oglvie of Pitmeves, David Grahame of Fintray,  Gray of Crichie, and David Erskine of Dun. For the Sheriffdom of Bamff. The Earl of Airly, the Earl of Finlator, Sir Patrick Ogilvie of Boyn, Sir James Baird of Auchmedden, Sir George Gordon of Edinglassie, the Laird of Troop, George Keith of Northfield,  Grant of Dengluglus, Walter Stuart of Boig, James Ogilvie of Puldavie, Thomas Ogilvie in Boigtoun, Alexander Hay of Arnbath, Mr. John and Alexander Abercrombies elder and younger of Glassach, John Ogilvie of Kempcairn,  Ogilvie younger of Kempcairn, Thomas Gordon of Granach,  Innes of Edingeith,  Stuart of Kilmach,  Anderson younger af Westertoun, the Laird of Park Gordon, Pro∣vost Stuart, Baillie John Gordon, the Laird of Grant, Patrick Grant of Elchies, Alexander Duff of Braco, Alexander Duff of Kethmore, Patrick Stuart of Tan∣nachy,  Hay of Raneis,  Ogilvie of Cantly, Alexander Gor∣don of Auchynachie, and John Gordon of Dallowchie. For the Stewartry of Kirkcudbright. The Viscount of Kenmure, Richard Murray of Burghtoun, Hugh Mcguffock of Rusco, Alexander Gordon of Earlstoun, William Gordon of Shiremure, Adam Newal of Barskeoch, Andrew Herron of Kirrochtree, Patrick Murdoch of Cum∣loaden, Robert Brown of Corsluith, David Mcculloch of Ardwel, Edward Max∣wel of Hills, Robert Grierson of Dalskeith, William Gordon of Craig, William Mcgie of Balmagie, Thomas Greirson of Bargaten,  Murray of Kevens, John Ewart of Mulloch, John Carson of Balmangan, Alexander Brown of Kempletoun, the Magistrats of Kirkcudbright, and Roger Gordon of Troquhen. For the Sheriffdom of Southerland. The Earl of Southerland, the Lord Strathnaver, the Lord Duffus, William Southerland of Invercaste, Sir Robert Gordon of Embo, Adam Gordon of Dal∣folly, Mr. John Gordon of Carrel, Alexander Southerland of Prousie, Robert Gray of Subo, Patrick Dumbar of Sidera, Robert Murray of Pulrossie, Angus Mckay of Melness, William Mckay of Borley, Angus Mckay of Bighouse, Hugh Monro of Eriball, John Monro of Invertan.
For the Sheriffdom of Caithness. Sir James Sinclar of May, Sir George Sinclar of Clyth, John Sinclar of Murtle, William Sinclar of Dunbeath,  Sinclar of Brimes, David Murray of Clerden, Mr. James Innes of Sand-side, Mr. Alexander Calder of Augin∣gail, Robert Campbel of Breneglies, John Sinclar of Freshwick, Lawrence Caddel of Lyneger, George Sutherland of Forse, John Sinclar of Ubster, Robert Sinclar of Duren, Robert Campbel of Dalgavoch, the Sheriff Deput of Caith∣ness for the time, Alexander Smart of Wester, the Baillies of Thurso for the time, William Dumbar of Hempris John Sinclar of Stircog, James Sutherland of Ausedale, Mr. Robert Dumbar of Orkingail, John Sinclar younger of Dumbeath, Patrick Sinclar of Southdun,  Sinclar of Brabster,  Sinclar of Hempster, James Sinclar of Lybster, and James Sinclar of Hoy. For the Sheriffdom of Elgin. The Lord Duffus, the Laird of Grant, the Sheriff of Murray, the Laird of Innes, Sir Robert Gordon, the Laird of Brody, the Laird of Grange, the Laird of Grangehill younger, the Laird of Altar, the Lairds of Dumphail elder or young∣er, Sir James Calder of Muirtoun, Charles Mckenzie of Ironside, the Laird of Cubine, Thomas Urquhart of Bunjardge, William Duff of Diple, William Brodie of Cantfield, John Dumbar of Bogs, and Thomas Tulloch of Taunachie. For the Sheriffdom of Orkney and Zetland. Sir Archibald Stuart of Borrow, Robert Stuart of New-wark, William Bel∣lenden of Stenhouse, John Stuart of Burgh, William Douglass of Egilshaw, James Backie of Tankerness, James Grahame of Grahames-hall, Henry Grahame of Brackness, David Craig of Over-sandy, William Craig of Gairsie, Lawrence Sinclar of Quendal, Lawrence Stuart of Bigtoun, Robert Bruce of Sounburgh, Andrew Bruce Tutor of Muness, Thomas Lesly of Usteness, John Giffart of Busta, and James Oliphant of Ure. For the Sheriffdom of Clackmannan. The Earl of Mar, George Viscount of Tarbat, the Laird of Alva, John Keiri of Gogar, Robert Miln of Tilliallan, George Abercrombie of  Bruce of Kennet, the Laird of Tillicoutrie, the Laird of Tillibody, Mr. Francis Mastertoun of Park-miln, George Stirling, the Baillie of Alloway for the time. For the Sheriffdom of Ross. The Viscount of Tarbat, the Laird of Balnagown, the Laird of Fowlis younger, the Laird of Mcintosh, Sir George Mono of Culrain, Sir Alexander Mckenzie of Coul, Sir Roderick Mckenzie of Findon Sheriff-Deput, Sir Donald Baine of Tulloch, Alexander Mckenzie of Balnaduchie, Alexander Mc∣kenzie of Gareloch, Alexander Mckenzie of Applecross, Roderick Mckenzie of Reidcastle,  Monro of Newmore, David Fearn of Tarliggie, Mr. John Bayne of Delnice, Hector Monro of Drummond, John Monro of Fyers, George Ross of Morinchie, Kenneth Mckenzie of Scatwell, John Forrester of Culnauld, Walter Ross of Cowillich, Malcolm Ross of Kindice, Mr. David Fearn of Pitcalzeon, Donald Ross of Knockgartie, William Rss of Aldie, Ale∣xander Ross younger of Pitkenie; Mr. James Mcculloch of Piltoun, Alexander Ross of Little-tarrel, Colin Roberson of Kindice, Alexander Ross of Easterfearn, Roderick Dingwal of Cambuscurry-upper, Roderick Mcleod of Cambuscurry∣nether, the Provost or eldest Baillie of Taine being for the time, Alexander Mon∣ro of Ardullie, Sir George Mckenzie of Rosehaugh, Mr. Roderick Mckenzie of Kinwhilladrum, Kenneth Mckenzie of Dagmaleuke, Murdoch Mckenzie of Fairburn, Mr. Simeon Mckenzie of Ferrarden, Murdoch Mckenzie of Ardross, and William Ross of Innercharrot.
ANd Ordains the first Meeting of the saids Commissioners for the several Shires to be at the Head-Burghs thereof, upon the fourteenth day of May next: And appoints the Major part of the saids Commissioners named for the re∣spective Shires, to be a Quorum at their first Meeting: Who are hereby Im∣powered to name their Conveener, and to appoint the next Dyet of Meeting, and the Major part of such as shall Meet at the second Dyet; or upon Advertise∣ment from the Conveener at any other Dyet to be a Quorum; with power to the saids Conveners for the saids Shires respectivè, to call the Commissioners afore∣said, at such Dyets thereafter, as they shall think necessary, for the effectual Execution of this Act. And for the Burghs, the Estates do Nominat and Ap∣point the Magistrats of the same for the time being; With power to them to choose Stent-masters within their respective bounds: which Commissioners of Shires and Burghs are hereby ordained to accept and discharge their Trust, as they shall be answerable: And they do hereby Impower the saids Commissioners, to prescribe, and set down such Rules and Orders within the respective Shires and Burghs, as may be most effectual for the speedy and easie Raising, Levying and bringing in of the said Imposition, and ordaining and doing every other thing that may concern the same, and to name their own Clerks and Collectors, for In-gathering of the said Imposition, for whom they are to be answerable, and to allow them such Fees as they shall think fit: Which Fees are hereby Decla∣ed to be over and above the foresaid Imposition, and no part thereof. AND the Estates do Ordain all Execution Real and Personal, to pass at the Instance of the Collector-general, and the Collectors of the respective Shires, and Burghs, against all persons deficient in payment of their Proportions, as was in use formerly against these deficient in payment of Cess: And also impowers the Commissioners, by their Officers to Arrest, Poynd and Destrenzie the Goods, and Imprison the Persons of the Deficients, ay and while they make Payment of their just Proportions and necessary Expenses: And for the more ready and effectual Payment, do also Impower the Commissioners and Collector-general, to Quarter upon Defficients, with this express Proviso, that every Horseman that shall be upon the place, shall have only free single Quarter alloted to him upon the persons deficient, or by quartering in Burghs, and Villages, as the Com∣missioners shall appoint to be satisfied, and payed by the Deficients, and not by those on whom they are quartered, except where they themselves are Deficient: And in that case to have fifteen shilling Scots a day from the time of presentng the Order to the Collector, upon whom they are to Quarter until he give them a List of the Deficients, and the Sums wherein they are deficient, and thereafter to Quarter upon the Deficients: And each Dragooner to have ten shilling Scots a day, and each Foot-man to have four shilling Scots, or his Dyet as the Commis∣sioners shall order; and the Commanders of the Party of Horse, Dragoons or Foot, to have only double Quarters or Pay of an Horseman, Dragooner or Foot∣man, as he serves. And Declares that in order to the Quarters and matters re∣lating to the Inbringing of this Imposition, any three of the Commissioners shall be a Quorum, and who are Impowered to proportion upon, and raise from the Deficients the Expense and Charge of their Deficiency, and to see payment made to these, on whom the Soldiers are quartered, who were not deficient: And fur∣ther the Estates Declare, that all Officers and Soldiers, Horse, Dragooners, and Foot, shall make due and punctual Payment of their Quarters, Local and Transient, as the same shall be appointed by the foresaids Commissioners, according to the Rates of the Countrey. And in case the Soldiers do not pay their Quarters, that the Quarters be stated betwixt the Quarter-Masters or other Officers, and any two of the Commissioners, and the Accompts being stated and fitted, that they be payed or allowed by the respective Collectors, in the first end of what is due by the Shire or Burgh where the saids Quarters are owing: Providing the saids Quar∣ters do not exceed two parts of their Pay, and which stated Accompts are to be
allowed to the respective Collectors by the Collector General, and to be by him retained of the first end of the Troops or Companies Pay: And in case the Offi∣cers remove before their Accompts can be stated, in that case the Collectors of the Shires and Burghs are to retain, what after trial the saids three Commissioners shall find resting, till the Accompts be stated in manner foresaid. And it is here∣by Declared, That no Petsons lyable in any part of this Imposition, shall be holden to produce their Discharges or Receipts of the same, after five years from the date of this Act, unless where Diligence hath been done by Denunciation before Elapsing of the said five years. And Ordains this Act to be Printed, and Published at the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and at the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Bughs of the several Shires. And for that Effect, Appoints Printed Copies thereof to be sent to the Sheriff-Clerks of the several Shires, that they may cause Publish the same accordingly. XXXIII. ACT in favours of the Vassals and Creditors of Forefaulted Persons. April 27. 1689. THe Estates of this Kingdom being fully Resolved to put the Laws to due and speedy Execution, against all Rebellious and Treacherous Subjects, who shall not submit to the present Government of the E∣states, under King William and Queen Mary; So they are most wil∣ling to Patronize and Encourage all those who are True and Loyal to the same: And it being one of the great Grievances of this Nation, that in the late Times many Honest and Faithful Subjects, have been Ruined and Undone in their E∣states and Fortunes, for other mens Crimes and Rebellions, to which they had no Accession. Therefore the Estates, for the further Encouragement of all good Subjects in their Obedience, and that no person be punished for the Crime of a∣nother; Do Declare and Ordain, that no Vassal or Creditor, Personal or Real, shall be prejudged, or lose any of their Lands or Estates, or any of their true and just Sums, resting to them by their said Superiors, or Debitors Forefault∣ure, unless the saids Vassals or Creditors joyn, Concur with, or Assist the saids Superiors, or Debitors in their Treason, or Rebellion. And Ordains these Pre∣sents to be Printed, and forthwith Published at the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and Head-burghs of the respective Shires of this Kingdom. XXXIV. ACT for a Contribution to the Irish and French Protestants. April 29. 1689. THE Estates of this Kingdom, taking to their serious Consideration, that there are many distressed Protestants fled out of Ireland and France in∣to this Kingdom, for Shelter and Refuge, whose necessitous Condi∣tion calls for the Charitable Supply of all good Christians: Therefore the Estates do grant Warrand for a voluntar Contribution throughout the whole Kingdom, both in Paroch-Churches, and Meeting-houses, for the Relief of these Protestants; and that either at the Door of Kirks and Meeting-houses, or to receive the same from Persons at their privat Houses, as the Ministers shall think most effectual, and that within fifteen days after Intimation out of the Pulpits, in such Paroches where there are present Ministers, and allows them to Collect any day within the fifteen days after the Intimation, and before the first of July, where there are no present Ministers; And Ordains the Ministers to intimate the same upon the twelfth day of May next at Edinburgh, and the next Lords Day thereafter, being the Ninteenth, in each Paroch Church, or Meeting-house, on the South side of the River of Tay; and on the Twenty sixth day of May, being the Lords Day thereafter, in each Paroch Church, or Meeting-house, on the North-side of the said River. And the Estates do hereby Recommend to the Mi∣nisters of each Presbytery, or Provincial Assembly, within which these Paro∣ches, having no present Ministers lyes, to preach in the said Paroches;
the time they make the said Intimation; and that they, with the assistance of such of the Parochioners as are best qualified for such a charitable Work, do make the said Collection; and when the Money is Collected, the Estates do hereby Ap∣point the Collection of each Paroch Church to be delivered to the Moderator of the Presbytery, or Provincial Assembly, upon his Receipt, bearing the Sum, to which the Collection of each Paroch extends; of which Receipt, the Receiver is to leave a Copy subscribed by him with the Moderator: And that the Mini∣sters of the several Meeting-houses do likewise deliver their Collections to one of their Number, to be appointed by them, upon his Receipt of the same, in man-manner foresaid: And Ordains the said Moderator and Minister thereafter to de∣liver the said respective Collections to Sir Patrick Murray, General Receiver, or his Deputs, for the use foresaid, upon his Receipt, with the Lists of the Paroch Churches, and Meeting-houses who contribute, and the Sums Collected in each of them, together with the Subscribed Copies, left with the Moderators, and o∣thers foresaid, of the Receipts granted by them, which shall be a sufficient Exone∣ration to them. And the said Estates do further Ordain, That the Receipts to be granted by the said General Receiver, be lodged in the hands of Sir Sohn Hall, upon his granting a Declaration under his Hand, that he hath the same in his cu∣stody; which Receipts are to be kept by him until the said Money to be collected shall be fully Distributed, and shall thereafter be delivered by him to the Persons in whose favours they are conceived: And Ordains the several Sheriff Clerks within this Kingdom, to distribute Printed Copies thereof to the respective Ministers in Churches or Meeting-houses within their Shires, with all convenient diligence. And likeways appoints thir Presents to be Printed. XXXV. Commission to the Committee of Estates. April 29. 1689. THe Estates of this Kingdom Considering, that several Persons of their Number are necessarly Absent from this Meeting, being Im∣ployed in the Publick Service, and that it will take some time be∣fore they can return to this place; and upon that and other Con∣siderations, it being Resolved to Adjourn the Meeting of the E∣states for some time; And seing it is Expedient, that during the time of their Adjournment, some of every Estate be appointed for managing the publick Affairs of the Nation. Therefore the Estates do Nominat and Ap∣point the Persons afternamed, viz The Marquess of Douglas, the Marquess of Athole, the Earls of Crafurd, Southerland, Mortoun, Lothian, Forfar and Dundo∣nald, the Viscount of Tarbat, the Lords Ross and Carmichael, Sir John Maitland of Ra∣velrig, Adam Cockburn of Ormistoun, Sir Patrick Hume of Polwart, Sir William Scot younger of Harden, the Laird of Lamingtoun, Thomas Drummond of Riccartoun, Duncan Forbes of Colloden, Sir Hugh Campbel of Calder, and John Dempster of Pitliver, Sir John Hall, Sir Charles Halket, Mr. William Hamilton, James Fletcher, Robert Smith, John Anderson Commissioner for Glasgow, John Muir Commissioner for the Town of Air, Hugh Brown, and Mr. Alexander Spittle, to be a Committee of the Estates, during the time of their Adjournment. And Nominats and Ap∣points the Duke of Hamilton to be Supernumerary, and to preside in the Commit∣tee when he shall be present; And in his Absence, Impowers them to choise their own Prrsident. And the Estates do give and grant full Power, Warrant and Commission to them, or any Thirteen of them, there being always three Noblemen, three Commissioners for Shires, and three Commissioners for Burghs, to meet at Edinburgh this same day in the afternoon for the first Dyet, and there∣after ae such times as they shall think fit. And to take such Course, and give such Orders, Warrants and Instructions, as shall be necessary for prosecuting the Acts already made by the Estates. With Power to them upon Information, to
call before them, and secure such Persons as are suspect, and to set at Liberty or enlarge such as are already Prisoners, or shall hereafter be secured, by their War∣rant, as they shall see Cause. With Power also to them to give such Orders, as they shall find requisite for putting of the Kingdom in a posture of Defence upon any Emergent, either of a Forraign Invasion, or Intestine Insurrection, and for making effectual the Levies of the Forces, already appointed by the Estates, and Mustering and Disposing of them, as they shall think fit; And to take course, that the Imposition now laid on by the Estates, and any bygone Arrears of Cess, and other publick Duties be brought in; And with Power to them, in case of any important Exigence, which may require a Meeting of the Estates before the Day, to which they are Adjourned, to Call and Conveen them: And generally to Act and do all and sundry other things requisite and incumbent to them in the Discharge of this Trust, which may conduce to His Majesties Service and the publick Good of the Kingdom. And it is hereby Ordained, that none be absent from the Committee without leave, and that the Committee take care, that there be allways a Quorum present. And the Estates appoint this Commis∣sion to continue until they meet again, or that His Majesties Pleasure after His Acceptance of the Crown be known therein. XXXVI. ACT Adjourning the meeting of the states. April 29. 1689. THe Estates of this Kingdom do Adjourn this meeting of the Estates, unto the Twenty first day of May next, at ten a Clock in the Foreoon; and Ordains all the Members thereof to attend that Day. XXXVII. Warrant to the Duke of Hamilton to draw Precepts for paying the Forces. May 24. 1689. THe Estates of this Kingdom, Considering that the Regiments of Foot, and Troops of Horse and Dragoons, Raised by vertue of the several Commissions granted by them, for security of the Nation in this Jun∣cture, are now compleat, and that it is necessary they should be entred into Pay, and maintained upon the publick Charge: Therefore the Estates do Authorize and Impower the Duke of Hamilton their President, to draw Precepts upon the General Receiver, for making payment to the Officers and Souldiers of the saids Forces, both Horse, Foot, and Dragoons of their Pay, conform to the present Establishment, from the day of their respective Musters, or their being together after the expyring of the ten days Provision, unto the first day of June next, and of a Months Pay after the said first of Iune. And the Estates Declare, That this shall extend to Forces in Garisons, as well as other Forces. XXXVIII. A Letter from His Majesty to the Estates, Declaring He had accepted the Crown and taken the Oath, whereof the Tenor follows. May 24. 1689. WILLIAM R. My Lords and Gentlemen, THe Commissioners sent by you have presented your Letter to Us, with your Petition, or Claim of Right, the Grievances, and your Address for turning you into a Parliament, which were all Read in Our Presence; after which the Queen and We did take and Sign the Oath tendered to Us by your saids Commissioners, which (by GOD'S assistance) We will Religiously observe. At Our first engaging in this Undertaking, We had particular Considerati∣on and Regard for Scotland, and therefore We Emitted a Declaration for that, as well as this Kingdom, which We intend to make good and effectual to you,
and you shall always find Us ready to Protect you, and assist you in making such Laws as may secure your Religion, Liberties and Properties, and prevent or re∣dress whatever may be justly grievous to you. VVe shall never believe that the true Interest of the People and the Crown can be opposit; and shall always account that our greatest Prerogative, to Enact such Laws as may promote Truth, Peace and Wealth in Our Kingdoms. At your desire, We have resolved to turn you (who are the full Representa∣tives of the Nation) into a Parliament; But, because the Instructions to Our Commissioner, and other things necessary, cannot be expected before the Twen∣ty one instant, to which you are Adjourned; Therefore We do Authorize you to Adjourn your selves to the fifth day of Iune next, against which time you are to require all your Members to be present; That then you may proceed with U∣nity and Alacrity, to dispatch what Affairs do most conduce to the right Settle∣ment of that Nation. And as We do assure you on Our part, that We will not put the Advantages the Crown may have, in the ballance with the True Interest of the Kingdom: So We do expect on yours, that (all Animosities, and privat Interests being laid aside) you will Cheerfully concur with Us, in settling the welfare of the Kingdom, by such Laws s may procure your own Happiness, and establish the publick Good. And so We bid you heartily Farewell. Given at Our Court at Hamptoun Court, the seventeenth day of May, One thousand six hundred and eighty nine, and of Our Reign the first Year. By His Majesties Command, MELVIL. XXXIX. A Letter from the states to the King's Majesty, whereof the Tenor follows. May 24. 1689. May it please Your Majesty, YOur Majesties Gracious Letter of the seventeenth instant, gives us occasion to acknowledge, that as with unexpressible satisfaction we look upon the Condition we now are in, of being of the number of Your Majesties dutiful Subjects, and so under the Protection and Conduct of our Deliverer, a Prince of so much Wisdom, Justice and Piety; and in a great advance of being freed from the apprehen∣sions als well of hazards threatned from abroad, as of intestine Commotions at home; So we think it our Duty, to render Your Majesty our hearty Thanks, that you have been graciously pleased to comply with our Desires, and to grant that this Meeting should be turned into a Parliament. In Obedience to your Royal Commands, we have issued forth a Proclamati∣on, Requiring all the Members to be present the Day appointed by Your Ma∣jesty; but several of them, very considerable persons, being necessarly enga∣ged, for Securing the Peace of the Countrey, to repair to the places of their inte∣rests, and there to continue, at least until the Levies be fully compleated, there is reason to believe, that the Meeting of the fith of June cannot be so frequent, as is necessary for the Great Affairs they may have under their Consideration; Therefore we do humbly desire, that a longer day may be appointed for the Meet∣ing of the Parliament. The Committee named by us, found it necessary, the time of our Adjourn∣ment, to Write to Your Majesty their Letter of the eleventh current, Represen∣ting some things they judged conducible for Your Majesties Service, and the Good of the Nation, which Letter we have Considered and Approven, and therefore humbly intreat Your Majesty may look on it, as the Sense of the Estates of this Kingdom assembled in this Meeting. And to the Effect Your Majesty may get a more particular Account of our Pro∣ceedings, we desire You will be pleased to allow the Duke of Hamilton our Pre∣sident (whose Zeal and Affection for Your Majesties Service, and Prudence and Vigilancy for the Protestant Religion, and true Interest of the Nation, has e∣minently
appeared on this Occasion) and with him the Lord Ross, Sir Patrick Hume of Polwart, and Mr. William Hamilton, three of our Number, to attend Your Majesty, to give you more full Information of some things Expedient, to be known by Your Majesty before the meeting of Your Parliament, being loath to trouble Your Majesty further than the necessity of Your Service doth oblige us; we pray God to give Your Majesty a long and happy Reign over us. Sign∣ed by Warrant, and in Name of the Estates, by our President, May it please Your Majesty, Your Majesties most humble, most Obedient and Faithful Subject and Servant, HAMILTON P. XL. ACT Adjourning the Meeting of the Estates. May 24. 1689. FOrasmuch as the King's Majesty, by a Letter under His Royal Hand to the Meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom hath signified, That at their Desire His Majesty has resolved to turn them into a Parliament, and Authorized them to Adjourn themselves to the Fifth Day of June next, against which time they are appointed to Require all their Members to be pre∣sent, that then they may proceed to dispatch what Affairs do most conduce to the right sttlement of the Nation. The Estates of this Kingdom, conform to His Majesties Warrand, Do Adjourn this Meeting of the Estates, unto the Fifth Day of June next; And do Ordain and Require all the Members to be present, and attend that Day, to the Effect mentioned in His Majesties Letter aforesaid; And grants Warrand to Heraulds, Macers, or Pursevants, immediatly to pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and there with Sound of Trumpet, to make Pub∣lication of these Presents, that none may pretend Ignorance. Collected and Extracted from the Records of the Convention of Estates, by us under-Subscribers, Commissioners appointed by Their Majesties for Exercing the Office of Clerk Register, BEILHAVEN, RO: BALFOUR, THO: BURNET, DUN: CAMPBEL, J: HAY. A TABLE Of the Printed ACTS. 1 A Letter from William King of England to the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland. Pag. 3 2 Act Declaring the Meeting of the Estates to be a Free and Lawful Meet∣ing. Pag. 4 3 A Proclamation for bringing in the bygone Arrears of the publick Reve∣nue. Ibid. 4 Act for putting the Kingdom in a posture of Defence. Pag. 5 5 An Order anent an Oath to be taken by persons in Military Imploy∣ments. Ibid. 6 Act Approving the Address made to His Highness the Prince of Orange. Pag. 6 7 A Proclamation against Papists. Ibid.
8 Act for securing suspect persons. Pag. 7 9 A Letter from the Meeting of the Estates to the King of England, in answer to His Majesties Letter direct to them. Ibid. 10 The Nomination of the Committee Elected for Settling the Government. Pag. 8 11 A Proclamation for Calling together the Militia on this side of Tay, and the Fensible Men in some Shires. Ibid. 12 Warrant to the Duke of Hamilton to secure suspect persons, and bring in English Forces, as he sees cause. Pag. 15 13 The Declaration of the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, containing the Claim of Right, and the Offer of the Crown to Their Majesties. Ibid. 14 A Proclamation Declaring the King and Queen of England, to be King and Queen of Scotland. Pag. 19 15 Act Declaring that the Estates are to continue in the Government until the King and Queen accept the Crown. Ibid. 16 A Proclamation against the owning of the late King James, and appointing publick Prayers for William and Mary, King and Queen of Scotland. Ibid. 17 Additional Warrant for publishing the Proclamation of William and Mary, the King and Queen of Scotland. Pag. 20 18 The Articles of Grievances, Represented by the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, to the King's most Excellent Majesty, to be Redressed in Par∣liament. Ibid. 19 Warrant for an Embargo on Ships and other Vessels on the Western Coast. Pag. 21 20 Act for a Levy of Horsemen out of the several Shires. Ibid. 21 The Oath to be Administrat to the King and Queen at their Acceptance of the Crown. Pag. 22 22 Act for a new Election of Magistrats in the several Royal Burrows. Pag. 23 23 Act for Levying some Regiments of Foot. Ibid. 24 Act for Modelling the 500 Horse in ten Troops. Pag. 24 25 Order for an Embargo to be laid on all Ships. Pag. 25 26 Act Nominating Commissioners to Treat concerning the Union of the two Kingdoms. Ibid. 27 A Letter direct from the Estates to the King's Majesty, with the Offer of the Crown. Pag. 26 28 Act Nominating Persons to attend Their Majesties, with the Offer of the Crown. Pag. 27 29 Address for turning the Meeting of the Estates into a Parliament. Ibid. 30 Instructions by the Estates of Scotland to the Earl of Argile, Sir James Mont∣gomery, and Sir John Dalrymple, Nominated and Appointed to atttend the King and Queen, with the Offer of the Crown. Ibid. 31 A Proclamation for a Publick Thanksgiving. Pag. 28 32 Act for raising four Months Supply. Ibid. 33 Act in favours of the Vassals and Creditors of Forefeited Persons. Pag. 38 34 Act for a Contribution to the Irish and French Protestants. Ibid. 35 Commission to the Committee of Estates. Pag. 39 36 Act Adjourning the Meeting of the Estates. Pag. 40 37 Warrant to the Duke of Hamilton to draw Precepts for paying the Forces. Ibid 38 A Letter from His Majesty to the Estates, Declaring He had accepted the Crown, and taken the Oath. Ibid. 39 A Letter from the Estates to the King's Majesty. Pag. 41 40 Act Adjourning the Meeting of the Estates. Pag. 42
