S2735 E156_1 99860800 112925
SEVEN ARGVMENTS PLAINLY PROVING THAT PAPISTS Are Trayterous Subjects to all true CHRISTIAN PRINCES. With a Touch of Iesuites Treacheries. Estote proditores Betraye your Country the pope, riding a seven-headed lion-like beast, encourages clerics and laymen to rebel. Printed in the Yeare 1641.
SEVEN ARGVMENTS PLAINLY PROVING That Papists are trayterous Subjects to all true Christian PRINCES. The first Reason. ALL good Subjects which obey for consci∣ence, as every one ought to doe, must have their consciences enformed by the word of God. But perfect Papists hate our Assemblies, espise the preaching of the Word, which should direct heir consciences both in dutie towards God, and loyal∣ie towards their Prince; and in stead thereof, entertaine a strange worship. Perfect Papists the worst knot of theeves, and why.Therefore perfect Papists cannot be sound hearted Subjects. I have heard wise men say, that there is no knot of theeves so dangerous, as when there is a whore in the company. There is none so arrand a whore in the
world, as the strumpet of Babylon, who is an actuall dealer in wicked and ungodly practices against all Kings and Kingdomes. Then whether hearts hating GODS truth, which should rightly enforme them, and carou∣sing of this whorish cup, which doth strangely enchaunt them, be faithfull to his princely person, or peace of this Realme, I commend it to the judgement of all them that love our prosperitie. The second Reason. Papists obedi∣ence but at the Popes plea∣sure.THey that carry a countenance conformable to his Majesties Lawes no longer then it stands with the Popes pleasure, can be no true hearted Subjects. But perfect Papists obey his Majesties Lawes no lon∣ger then it stands with the liking of the Pope, as the Je∣suit Hart sometimes confessed. Therefore perfect Papists can be no good subjects. Greater cause to feare than to trust them.Here let the true Subjects understand, that the Pope hath powred an opinion into his Papists, that Kings and Princes, if he dispence with them, may breake their faith and promise: that nulla fides est servanda cum haereticis, no faith is to be kept with Gods friends and his foes; that Papists with liberall permission may sweare & unsweare, if advantageable opportunitie doe occurre: which since that they doe beleeve to stand in his power to dispence withall, and that he is both able to pardon them, and wil∣ling to reward them; yea that it is within his reach not onely to give them the Kingdome of England, but the Kingdome of heaven also: then let them sweare, their protestations are not worth the paring of a rotten apple, their obedience is but at the Popes ad placitum: Where∣upon ariseth a good caveat, that we rather tie short than trust a two-legged Fox.
The third Reason. Papists reade and recom∣mend popish libels.THey that receive, entertaine, reade and recommend such lying libels and heart-stealing pamphlets, as whereby his Majesties right is impeached, his regiment reviled, his title of supremacy defaced, his faith defamed, Christian Religion nourished by him, called hereticall, devilish, and damnable, and the professours thereof worse then nullifidians and infidelious Atheists, can be no good subjects. But this is the dealing of our perfect Papists. Therefore the conclusion followeth, that such can be no good subjects. Many wicked and trayterous pamphlets have beene scattered in this realme to darken the glory of the Lords annoynted, to weaken the good wills of his highnesse lo∣ving subjects, to winne worthlesse male-contented mali∣cious wretches treacherously to conspire with our sworn enemies, whereby to fortifie the Romish faction. These have and doe want no favourers to scatter them in cor∣ners, to send them to their lovers, to commend their sub∣stantialnesse as matters unanswerable, both such Mer∣chants as send them, and such brokers as utter such Ba∣bylonish wares, are right worthy to pay their heart bloud for custome. The fourth Reason. Papists receive pardons to free them from loyaltie.THey that receive pardons, absolutions, and such like stuffe, to exempt, and free themselves from loyall o∣bedience, are but subjects in shew, watching their times to worke their owne willes. But our absolute Romane Catholikes receive pardons and absolutions, to acquite them from dutifull allegi∣ance.
Therefore shake a perfect Papist out of the masking weede of his pretended conformitie, and then shall you finde that an heart devoutly affected to the Romish Re∣ligion, is as deeply infected with the venome of trea∣son. Gregorie 13. Pius 5. Sixtus 5.The dealings of the Popes is not unknowne, of Grego∣rie the 13. Pius 5. and Sixtus 5. who labouring our sub∣version by Englands unnaturall children, have sent their pardons and absolutions to free them from subjection; a thing abhorring from all Religion, hated of the Hea∣then, the age present loathes it, and succeeding posteritie shall be astonished to heare of such cruelties. The fift Reason. The Pope ere∣cteth semina∣ries for the hatching of Fox-Priests, and Catholikes receive them to nursing.THey, for whose catholike good the Pope pretends the erecting of his seminaries, and therefore receive from thence such subtill treacherous and disloyall wretches, as infect them with poyson, and perswade them to trea∣son, cannot be faithfull and true hearted subjects. But the Pope maketh his Catholikes beleeve that he erecteth seminaries for their good, and they also receive and entertaine his Jesuits and Fox-Priests, issuing out of those dennes of Idolatrie. Therefore the conclusion followeth, that such can be no good subjects. Parsons. Campion.Parsons, Campion, and Hart, with the rest, cast in the Popes mould and fitted for the service of the beast that sits upon the seven hilles, have wanted no entertainment in this Land in their times, although there were nothing more intended of them then this, namely, to set the sub∣jects against their Prince, and Englishmen against their owne Countrey, as leave was given to Parsons and Cam∣pion by Gregorie 13. to interpret the Bull of Pius Quintus.
The sixt Reason. Papists gape for a golden day.THey that are weary of these dayes, and live in hope of another world, which in their ordinary by-word they call their golden day or yeare of Jubilee, can be no faithfull subjects to him, by whose gracious government these dayes are continued. But the Papists are weary of these dayes, and languish in looking for their golden day, which Almightie God send them in leaden haste. Therefore Papists can be no good subjects. Beleeve them without fur∣ther proofe.That the Papists are weary of these dayes and times, wish the death of his Majestie, and alteration of State and Government; there needs no further proofe then their conspiracies, their treasons and secret attempts, their platformes and practices for forraine invasion: whereby it is evient, that these are the dayes of their griefe and sorrow; and that they regard the safetie nei∣ther of Prince nor Countrey, so they may returne to the flesh pots of Egypt, and eate their fill with peaceable freedome. The seventh Reason. Papists regard no state, so that Popery may prevaile.THey that regard not into what subjection, slavery, shame and dishonour his highnesse, his Kingdome and subjects be brought unto, so that their blind wor∣ship and pageant of Papistry may be erected, can be no good subjects. But perfect Papists neither regard Majestie of the Prince, nor dignitie of the Nobles, nor gravitie of age, nor difference of sexe, nor excellency of learning: so that Popery may be set up in stead of the Gospell. Therefore such can be no good subjects. Wofull expe∣rience.The desperate dealings and damnable practises of Pa∣pists heretofore prove plainly, that allegiance to their
Prince cannot keepe them from treason; the dutie of love to their naturall Countrey, cannot withdraw them from favouring rebellion at home, nor lincking with strangers abroad; that the dutie of obedience of children to parents, or of parents affection to children, cannot keepe them from unnaturall crueltie; that the dutie of mutuall love, and societie betwixt the husband and wife cannot remove them from monstrous immanitie; that the dutie of kinde and naturall pittie cannot stay a Pa∣pists hands from murdering feeble sexe, tender babes, or reverent age: lastly, that the dutie of familiaritie in youth, of friendship in graver yeares, of continuall so∣cietie during all the life passed, cannot stay a Papists hands from sacrificing his dearest friends. Nay, which is more, not onely are they contented to yeeld their bracelets and carerings to the framing of the golden calfe, as did Israell, nor to offer their friends in sacrifice, as did that unnaturall King of Moab in offering his sons to asswage the ire of his angry Gods; but to make their owne lives a prey to their enemies; as did the Atheni∣ans, when they accorded by casting of lots to give them∣selves to be devoured of that gastly monster Mino∣taurus. Wherefore since it is so cleare a case, that the consci∣ences of these Catholikes are altogether Romish; that they hold the Popes Excommunication against our dread Soveraigne the Kings Majestie to be lawfull; that they yeeld their obedience no longer then durante bene∣placito of the Pope; that they receive and commend such libels as deface our Church, abuse his Highnesse person, and all his loving subjects; that they receive pardons to exempt themselves from dutifull obedience; that they receive and entertaine the enemies of this Realme, Je∣suits and seminarie Priests; that they looke for a golden day, and long for an alteration; that they care not to conspire at home with traytours, and to plot abroad with strangers, whereby to convey the crowne to a for∣rainer:
subence, I say, this is so, then two conclusions doe follow. First, that every perfect Papist is a secret traytour to his Prince and Countrey. Our land cannot be at ease, so long as these lye on her stomacke. They pricke and wound her sides, not with praying against her (for their imprecations wee hope, are irrita vota) but with prey∣ing upon her: and when all stratagems faile, ready to fetch arguments from the shambles, and conclude in ferio. Whose Religion is politicke, learning bloudy, affecti∣ons malicious, ambitious, divellish. The Inquisition is their Grammar, fire and fagot their Rhetoricke, fleet and fetters their Logicke, the Cannons roare their Musicke. and poysoning is their Physicke. Whose Priests have such almightie power, that they can make their Maker, that whereas in their Sacrament of Order, (as they tearme it) GOD makes an impo∣tent creature a Priest: now in their Sacrament of the Altar, the Priest shall make Almightie God. Yea, as he made them with a word, and put them in their mo∣thers wombe: so they can make him with a word, and put him in a box. They that thus blaspheme their Creator, shall wee trust them with their fellow-crea∣ture? It was an ingenuous answer of a Spanish Noble man, commanded by Charles the fist 10 lodge the Duke of Bourbon at his house in Madrid; I will obey thee, but set my house on fire so soone as the Duke is our of it. My Predecessors never built it to harbour Tray∣tors. Did he thinke that a conspirator would poyson his house; and shall we thinke that such are no infection to our Land? David did counterfeit himselfe madde. when he was not, for his owne securitie: these are madde, and dissemble it; till by one franticke act, they can bring us all to ruine. If they were forraine, publike and profest
enemies; we would not blame, not feare them) While Kingdomes stand in hostilitie, hostile actions are just. But these are domesticall, intestine, secret adversaries, bred and fed in the same Countrey; therefore the more intolerable, as the more pernicious. Tut, they can satisfie their consciences by distinguish∣ing of Treasons, Indeed, all their Religion is a religion of distinctions: such as that is, that an excommunicate Prince may be dethroned; and being once uncrowned, may on his penitent submissiō be restored to the Church, Quoad animam, non quoad rognum. Thus they leave positive, textuall, schoole divinitie, and fall to Crowne-divinitie Antichrist pleads, their Religion is maintain'd by the Fathers. Did ever any Fa∣ther allow of Treason? Shame they not to averre it? If any abused, wrested, falsified writing of the Fathers did seeme to consent to their errors: yet wee know, that Audiendi Patres, non ut Judices, sed ut restes: The Fa∣thers be heard as witnesses, not as Judges. It is Gods Scriptum est, not their traditum est, that must give deci∣sion of all doubts. And secondarily, that it is a safer way to trusse than to trust a two-legged Fox. Our gracions God that hath hitherto protected us, blesse his Majestie, and the nigh Court of Parliament, that through their wisedomes, zeale and courage, Gods glory may be promoted, the undermining of these Foxes, which destroy our Vines, soundly sifted, and secret traytours sharply punished. Then shall England lesse feare her ruine (which GOD forbid) by strangers force, when vengeance deserved shall strongly sease on houshold foes; nay, els may Eng∣land more suspect the weakning of her present state, by nourishing a Viper in her owne bowels, than Popish power, or any els, who gnash their teeth at her peace and well-fare. Thus holding Popery to be an hotch-potch of new Religion coyned in the mints of the Babylonish whore,
who contendeth to advance, her Kingdome above the Kingdome of Christ, by all meanes that themselves, or hell it selfe can invent, by crueltie, by blood, by deceit, by abusing the word of God, by equivocation, by what not? yea ee hath so taught , the Priests and Jesuites, and  by them seduced to sweare and forsweare, to promise and protest, by whatsoever can be named, (although they have no purpose to make good any of their vowes in this kinde) as that they have almost left no meanes whereby a man may be assured of anothers intentions, although he vow it never so seem∣ing setiously. Call to minde the great and serious protestations that Warson the Priest made in his Quodlibeticall questions, That albeit he differed in Religion from that which was pro∣fessed in the Church of England, yet if either Pope or Spaniard should seeke by hostile meanes to invade his Countrey, he would willingly spend his substance, nay his dearest blood against any such as should attempt it, and yet he himselfe was the first afterwards as I remember, that came to the gallowes for violating it. If I could finde any thing that good is in ei∣ther Priests of Jesuits, I would commend them for it, but because I cannot, holding them all to be traytors in heart unto his Malestie, and their favourers to be scarce∣ly good subjects; I will end for their commendations with the words of a late, but wittie, Satyrist, Fevet illis, quisquis de illis tacet.
A TASTE OF THE BLASPHEMOVS Treacheries of wicked IESUITES. SUch is the most bloody, and most blasphemous impudency of these Romish Incendiaries, that when they put on a devilish and desperate reso∣lution, to murther any Emperour, King, or Prince, whom they have once pronounced to be an Hereticke, and excommunicate person; and there∣upon intend to murther him by some Raviliack, whom they make choice of for the execution of the said Trea∣son; that after such an unfortunate and wretched person is once allured, and entred into their place of consultati∣on, or chamber of (Philonicall) prayers, (forsooth) as they call them: These infernall firebrands kneele all downe, who in their prayers observe their time; and put before the intended traytor, a knife folded up in a scarfe; shut up in a little Box, covered with an Agnus Dei; writ∣ten about with black letters of perfumes, odoriferous Characters: and when they draw it out themselves, they
cast or sprinckle some drops of holy water upon it, which done, they hang at the hafte of the said knife, five or six graines of Corrall, which are blessed by them, who blasphemously give him to understand, and make him beleeve that so many blowes, as shall be given by him with the said knife; so many soules shall be released out of Purgatory. Afterwards, putting the knife into the intended Mur∣therers hand, they pronounce these words, saying; Goe now like Jephte, with the Sword of Sampson in thy hand, the Sword with which David did cut off Golia's head, the Sword of Gidion; yea, the Sword with which Judith did cut off Holophernes head; the sword of the va∣liant Machaboes, and the same with which Saint Peter did cut off Malcas his care, yea, I say, the sword of Pope Julius the second, with the which (breaking the forces of oppugning Princes) he tooke out of their hands with great effusion of blood, the Cities of Sezza, Imola, Fay∣ance, Bologna, and many other Cities: Goe thus, I say, thou magnanimous Champion of the chaire of Rome, and be valiant, and God strengthen thine arme for the great worke now intended by thee. After which, this infernall kennell of Romish blood-hounds kneele all downe, and the most wretchedly renowned and cursed∣ly quallified amongst them, with a cauterized conscience and immarbled heart, pronounceth the bloody Conjura∣tion, impiously and impudently saying as followeth. Come Cherabims, come Seraphims, and highest Thrones that rule, come blessed Angels: yea, blessed Angels of charitie, come and fill this holy Vessell with glory and eternitie, and bring him presently the Crowne of the Virgin Mary, of the Patriarches, and of the Mar∣tyres, for he belongeth no longer to us, but to you. And thou Oh dreadfull and terrible God, who hast revealed to him in these our Prayers and meditations; that he ought to murther a Tyrant, and confound a He∣reticke, and to give the Crowne to a Catholike-King.
And being by us disposed to this meritorious Murther, vouchsafe to fortifie his senses, and increase his forces: to the end that he may accomplish this thy great will; and vouchsafe to arme and furnish him with the harnesse of thy powerfull providence, that he may valiantly per∣forme the worthy worke he hath piously undertaken, and may happily escape from those who would appre∣hend him: give him Eagles wings, that the spight and malice of those Barbarians whom he goes against, may not once touch his sanctified members. Extend also the beames of thy joy and celestiall relicitie upon his sacred soule, to the end that by the blessed influence thereof, the parts and members of his body also may be encou∣raged and enabled to this great worke, and that it may chearefully dispose it selfe to this holy Combate without feare or shrinking pusillanimitie. This accursed Conjuration being thus audaciously and gracelesly uttered, they carry the thus inchanted bloody Regicide, and set him before an Altar, where they shew him a Picture, wherein the Angels are seene and showne to have lifted up and elevated long since James Clement, a bloody Jacobine Fryer, and represented him (as it were) before the Throne or God, saying: Lord, behold thy Pupill, behold thy well-instructed Champion, and the accomplisher of thy justice: Where∣upon all the Saints rife out of their feats to make him roome, and give him place among them. And when all these things are thus done and finished, there are no more but four Jesuites onely left with him, who when they come neare him; they with diabolicall impuden∣cy and lying flattery, say unto him: that they seeme to perceive that there is some Diety infused into him, and that they are so astonished with the radiant light shining and glistering in him, that they hold it their honour to kisse his hands and feet, and make him madly to beleeve that they account him not a meere man any longer; but that they esteeme themselves (as it were) as they say,
halfe unworthy of the happinesse and glory which he hath already obtained by his Catholicke resolution, and sighing deeply before him; they say unto him: we would that God had chosen us, and called us to your estate: since we should be truly assured, that we should goe re∣ally and directly into Paradice without comming at Purgatory. And thus having intoxicated and bewitched the mise∣rable wretch, they thus leave him to his intended bloody designe. The end of the Conjuration. O Lord preserve our Noble King CHARLES, and all his posteritie from the power of all such Ro∣mish Regicides and bloody Traytors, who thus plot and practice to build up their Romish Synagogue with blood. And grant good God, that our gracious King Charles, may with his posterity, long continue a happie and prosperous Reigne over this Kingdome, for the maintenance and propagation of Christs Gospell in de∣spight of Antichrist, and all his bold and bloody adhe∣rents: and let every good and loyall subject, and true hearted English Christian say, Amen, and Amen. FINIS.
