T1151 E544_2 99863609 115819
The Rest of Faith: THAT IS, Souls fixed and established in God by believing on him through the Lord JESUS CHRIST. With the grounds of this Faith from sanctified Reason, the benefits of Faith, and the evils of unbeliefe. Proved by Gods Word, and pre∣sented to open view, By Coll. ROBERT TICHBORNE. Psalm. 125.1. They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abideth for ever. John 6.47. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believeth on mee hath ever∣lasting life. Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voyce of his servant, that walketh in darknesse and hath no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons at the gilded Lyon in Aldersgate-streete, 1649.
TO THE HONOURABLE, Lieftenant Generall CROMWELL. Honourable Sir, GOD having first pitched my medita∣tions upon the study after an establish∣ment in this perish∣ing World, and sha∣king times in which we live, and in this study more emminently then be∣fore, made knowne himselfe in the Lord Jesus Christ to be that Rocke of Ages which never failes such as trust in him, he did then draw forth my heart
upon a principle of common good  hold that forth to the World which he had made known to me, that so if God would blesse it to the end I intended it every soule might be as happy in a fixed state as my selfe; this is truly my end in publishing that to others, which God did in secret imprint upon my heart: Now in the publishing of this, I take boldnes to Dedicate it to your self, but if any aske why I doe so, I shall render them these two Reasons. First, it is proper for me to tender re∣spects to one from whom I have receiv∣ed so many, I shall be short in this and say no more, but that I remaine your Debtor. My second reason is this, Though the subject be of generall tendency to the wants of all Gods people, yet such as God puts most worke upon have most
need of this support, such as fight and contend with the enemies of God ei∣ther within them or without them, will finde faith in God to be their best wea∣pon; that God hath emminently called and used you in such a weighty work I need produce no proofes to the World, God himselfe hath done it; what God hath further for you to doe I know not, but this I know that faith in him will be your greatest strength in doing, and a certaine rest what ever your worke maybe; for this reason also I present this to your hands, the scope and sub∣stance of which I believe hath streng∣thened your heart and hand in all that concernes you here and for ever. Your enemies say you have done much, but I beleeve the voyce of your owne heart is, that God hath done all himselfe, wherein he hath used you
as an instrument; What is yet behind for you to doe or suffer God only knows: This I dare boldly affirme, faith in God will be your best companion and your surest rest in all conditions; therefore Sir, in sincere love I present my service and this Treatise of the rest of Faith to your hands, the Lord goe with it to your heart, and make himselfe your rest here and forever, which is the re∣all desire of him that truely loves you, and in love will be ready to serve you in the worke of the Lord, whilst I remaine, ROBERT TICHBORNE:
To the READER. READER, I Observe in nature that the strongest liquors are of most use when the spirits are weakest, as strong waters to a fainting man, and when the seas are most boisterous, then doth the Marriner cast forth his Anchor. The dis∣pensations of God in these latter dayes of the world in which we live, hath made both Sea & and full of troubles, by reason whereof much fainting of spirit, and trembling of heart hath o∣verspread the Nation. These out goings of God hath drawn forth my heart to follow that tracke of his Word in the light and strength of his spi∣rit which leads to himselfe, that so I might find in him reviving to my fainting spirit, and a rest for my weary soule, God having been so graci∣ous in manifesting himselfe to be my all here and for ever and given me a heart to rest upon him, by which I am in full and lasting rest: It was set upon my heart that I should not be unthankfull to him, and unchristian to others. If I should have onely sed upon this bread of life in spi∣rit, and not tel forth to the glory of his grace, and the good of others, how sure a resting place his bosome of love is, and how firmly all such shal
be established that believe on him, one drop of his love wll raise the lowest spirit, & that soule which stays it selfe upon God by faith will be at rest, though the storms of the world be never so great. If this be true, which I am confident many thousand souls besides my own can bear the wit∣ness of to God, then I am apt to believe the fol∣lowing Treatise will have acceptance with such as God hath made sensible, that he is now sha∣king not onely the earth, but the heavens also. Most complaine of the earth-quakes which the Land and world is ful of, but some complain of heart-quakes; to these complaints give me leave to speak in the Prophets language: Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be established. Believe in God as your God, so will your hearts be fixed, when as God shal write vanity upon al the world. God is now staining all glories besides his own but such as live and glory in God through belie∣ving, wil have a living glory in a dying world, & a bed of rest what ever troubles the world be ful of. Therefore Reader, if you would faine rest, you must live on God by faith: and if in this worke God shall use the following Treatise for your good, I shal blesse him for your soule as for my owne; truly this is the highest end of your servant in the Lord, Robert Tichborne.
Beleeving in God doth advantage a Saint with an established heart. 2 CHRO: 20. later part 20. Verse. Beleeve in the Lord your God, so shall you be established. THE Lord telleth us in his Word, Heb. 12.26. of a time when as he will not onely shale the Earth, but the Heavens also: Shake all that may be shaken, so as that which cannot be shaken may remaine and ap∣peare, this is his faithfull Word; and truly his great and glorious workinge in these our dayes doth seem to point out that time to be neere at hand; when God himselfe doth shake the whole Earth and heavens, though they be vast bodies, yet they must fall before the breath of the Almighty power which made them by a word; this shaking truth, and times, hath with more solicitousnesse drawne forth my heart to seeke after esta∣blishment: I found incouragement to this worke in that very text which holdeth forth the shaking both of Earth and Heavens also, for it seemeth to hold out thus much, that the end of Gods so shaking is to manifest that which cannot be shaken by its re∣maining, in which God taught me this truth, that the establish∣ment of his people lay in that which should remaine stedfast to eternity, even when himselfe should shake not onely the earth, but the heavens also; by Earth here I understand the whole Earth, in its frame and fashion, beauty, and glory, power, and government, the time is comming when God will shake all this into its first nothing, so that the establishment of an eternall being lyeth not in this: By Heavens I understand, not onely the materiall Heavens, as Sonne, Moone, Starres, and Firmament; but also the Law of Heaven and earth; namely, the Ordinances
and worship of God here, the Churches, and government of Christ on earth; truly these are very glorious as they are in God, and God in them, so that they may well bee called the heavens, but even these as they come from God have their time and their end; these are the top and exceeding glory of all one wildernesse mercies, but all these are to be shaken, their end will cease, and so must they too, these are as the pillars of cloude by day, and of fire by night, to the body of Christ whilst it, or any member of it remaines in the Wildernesse, but Christ our head is ascended whom will draw his whole body after him, and then the end of this will cease, and their shaking time will be accomplished to the full, so that though this be the glory of the World, yet they cannot make up establishment to eternall soules, because they are to be shaken. Now by this I am further taught where to begin in seeking establishment, namely, not in the whole Earth; no not in any part or appearance of Heaven that may be shaken, not in the or∣dinances or worship of God, but in God himselfe: not in the Churches or government of Christ, but in Christ himselfe. So that good King Jehoshaphats counsell to his people in their day of straights and shakings, will leade mee and all the people of God to a sure center of establishment: Beleeve in the Lord your God, so shall you be established. These are the words of Jehoshaphat the King, to Judah and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, at that time when they were un∣der much feare, and doubts concerning their condition, by reason of a numerous and potent enemy which was come up a∣gainst them; to an eye of fleshly reason they were a lost people and nation, but this good man had a better and more seeing eye to behold withall, namely the eye of faith; for in the 14, 15, 16, 17, verses of this Chapter we shall finde that Jahaziel the Prophet, having the spirit of the Lord come upon him in the middest of the Congregation, when all the people were ga∣thered together to seeke the Lord, did Prophecy and told the King, and all Judah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, that they should not bee afraid nor dismayed by reason of the great a multitude which come against them, for the battell, saith he, is not yours, but Gods: He gives further direction when to goe downe against them, and what to doe; he tels them they shall not needs to
fight, onely to stand still and see the salvation of the Lord; he bids them againe not to feare, for the Lord would be with them. Now upon this was Jehoshaphats eye of faith, he did beleeve in the Lord, and his word declared by his Prophet, and in this twentieth verse, telleth the people where his establishment was; namely, in God; and if they also should beleeve in God as their God, and in his Word declared by his Prophet, that they should thereby be established; Beleeve in the Lord your God, so shall you be established. My intentions are to take this Scripture in the largest sense, and to make use of it in the carrying on a Treatise of Faith, as faith, and beliefe in God doth settle and establish beleevers. The plaine and visible truth which lyes in this Scripture, and upon which I shall carry on what followeth, is this; That Saints are established, by beleeving in God, as their God. This is the sense, and almost the very words of the Scripture; and for its proofe, it hath the concurrance of the scope, if not the letter of the whole Word of God, the Prophet Isaiah in his seaventh Chapter, and ninth verse, prooves this by its contrary, when in the former verses he had told them what God would doe for them, he telleth them in this verse, If you will not beleeve surely yee shall not bee established: As if hee had sayd, it is not my bare narrative, or the history of God in his power, greatnesse, and goodnesse, that will establish you, if you doe not beleeve; it is faith, trust, and beliefe in God, as your God which is onely able to establish you, if you beleeve not, your foundation will alwayes bee tottering, so that surely you will not bee established; where beliefe is not, establishment cannot be; the reason is ob∣vious and plaine, for it is God alone that can and doth establish the hearts of his people: now faith and beleeving in God, is the onely discovery of union with God, in which soules come to be established, the soule by faith receiveth in God to it selfe, and involveth it selfe into God, and God in the soule makes it an established soule: 2 Ephes. 17. Christ dwels in the heart of be∣leevers by faith: This was Abrahams condition, who is called the Father of the faithfull; the Text saies, Rom. 3.19, 20. when God made him the promise of an heire out of his owne loyner, that he was not weake in faith, nor did he stagger at the promise through unbe∣liefe, notwithstanding his owne great age, and the deadnesse
of Sarahs wombe, yet he beleeved the word and promise of the Lord and was established; by beleeving this Father of the faith∣full gave himselfe up to God, he lost his owne fleshly reasoning, in beleeving the faithfull word of God; God had said, that he should have a Childe of Sarahs wombe, he giveth himselfe over to God by beleeving, so that there is no staggering, saith takes in the promise and the soule is established, but where there is not faith to take in the promise of God, or rather God in the promise, there the soule is not nor cannot be established; staggering is as properly the fruit of unbeliefe, as stability is of faith; and they demonstrate each other as white doth black, and black white; that Scripture which sayeth, If you beleeve not you shall not be e∣stablished, doth give proofe to that Text which sayes, Beleeve in the Lord your God, so shall you bee established: So likewise on the contrary, our Saviour gives in ample proofe to this truth, that Saints are established by beleeving in God as their God; in that John 6.47. Verily, verily I say unto you, hee that beleeveth in mee, hath everlasting life. To beleeve in Christ, is to beleeve in God as our God, and the effects of this is eternall life, here is full establishment indeed, here is life for ever; eternity cannot shake this beleeving soule, it is so established by beleeving in God as its God in Christ. I intend to take this fundamentall establishing truth into par∣ticulars; the which will give further light into what I aime at, and clearer testimony to the generall truth, That Saints are esta∣blished by beleeving in God as their God; I meane an applica∣tory, apropriating faith and beliefe in God. By beleeving in God, as our God, by which we come to bee established, I meane this: First, To beleeve in God in what he is in himselfe. Secondly, To beleeve God in what he doth; namely in all his workes. Thirdly, To beleeve God in what hee saith, in his whole Word. And in all these so farre as God is communicable to beleeve him to be our God. Beleeving thus in the Lord our God we shall certainely be esta∣blished. First, To believe in God in what he is in himselfe. God in
his Essence is incomprehensible, and inexpressible; so Exod. 3.14. When Moses asked God what hee should tell the Children of Israel his Name was if they asked him; Gods answer to Moses is, I am that I am, and so tell the children of Israel, I am hath sen me unto you, that is, I am so what I am; that I cannot be fully ex∣pressed, I am God, Jehovah, I am all God, and nothing but God: but this pure and eternall Essence is pleased so farre as is either fit or needfull for his people to know him, to make known himselfe by his Attributes: and in his word, workes and miracles, for the strengthening of his peoples faith, and establishing them in himselfe. And in this worke I shall take up Gods method, and first looke into the Attributes of God, for some discoveries of his Essence, wherein hee doth make knowne himselfe to his people, that they may believe in him, in what he is in himselfe; you must not expect I should be so large in this as to expresse all the Attri∣butes of God, that is a worke too large for a dying life, or a dy∣ing man, the fulnesse of that will fill eternity; all that may be at∣tributed to God, which can be attributed to none but God, and that all is exceeding large, I shall onely mention some precious corner-stones, for believers to build upon, so that they may cer∣tainly bee established. As first, God is the only, true, and perfect God, true, Attribute of God. so as there is no true God besides him: and perfect, so that all perfe∣ction is in him, and nothing but perfection in him, so in God as in none but God, and therefore onely to be attributed to God. I shall in this and all I write of God, produce his word for my authority, Isa. 46.9. I am God, and there is none else, I am God, Isa. 46.9. and there is none like me. God in this Scripture speaks positively; in the verse before this, the people worshipped and bowed downe to false Gods, to images of God; the Lord complaines of this in vers. 5. To whom will yee liken me, and make me equall, Verse 5. and compare me, that we may be like. As if God had said, you can liken me to nothing; for there is nothing like me, I am God, and there is none else (the true God) your false Gods cannot be like me. So in Isa. Isa. 45.33. 45.22. Looke unto me, and be yee saved all the ends of the earth, for I am God, and there is none else. Marke the Scripture, salvation in in me, saith God, I am the God of salvation. If the ends of the Earth be saved, they must looke unto me, for I am God, and there is none else; That is, there is no other true God, no God that can
save but me. God proves himselfe to be the only true God, by being the only saving God; God in truth is the God of salvation: That God which can save must needs be the true God, and so there is no other God but our God, hee is the true God, and a God of truth, all God, and all truth; this is a proper attribute of God, for it can be attributed to none but God. Againe, God is perfect, he is a perfect God, he is all perfe∣ction in himselfe, and all that is perfect is from him, hee is that perfection to which there can be no addition, hee giveth life and breath to all things, Acts 17.25. Acts 17.25. Neither is worshipped with mens hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing hee giveth to all life, and breath, and all things. God is perfect, hee needeth nothing, hee knowes no want; hee is the fulnesse of all things, and filleth all with himselfe; he is the fountaine and giver of all life, and breath, and all things. All that makes up perfection is alwayes in God, and goeth forth from God into all things, life and breath, which comprehends the whole; they are in the whole creation the breath∣ings forth of Gods perfection; God bounds all, but none can bound him. Perfection only lives in God: he giveth bounds to all things else, but can receive bounds from none: to the creature God saith, what have you that you have not received. But as for God himselfe, he is simply and absolutely perfect, simply purely per∣fect; 1 John 1.5. nothing but perfection, altogether perfect, 1 John 1.5. God is light, and in him is no darkenesse at all: So perfectly light, that there is not the least shadow of darkenesse in him; what is God, is perfectly light, or the light of God is perfect; for God is alto∣gether perfect, nothing can be said to be perfect but God, and God cannot be said to be any thing but perfection; light, and to darknesse at all, is perfect light, and this is God, for GOD is perfect. Another attribute of GOD, God the first, without all cause. which proveth the former, is this; That God is the first being without all cause, this is truly an attribute of God, which can be attributed to none but God, for he is the first, the only, and without cause, and the only cause of all things else; not any thing gave God a being, but God giveth being to all things, Revel. 1.8. Rev. 1.8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.
Marke it, I am the first, you cannot produce any thing as the cause of my being; for a cause must be before an effect, and if  be the effect of any cause, then I cannot be Alpha, the begin∣ning, but the proceed of some other first: but this I am not, for I am Alpha and Omega, both first and lust; I am first in my selfe, without all cause, and I am the first of all causes, for I cause all to be. I am the Almighty which gives first being, and all beings to all things, saith the Lord. The Apostle Paul doth acknowledge this truth in Rom. 11.36. For of him, and through him, Rom. 11.36. and to him, are all things. All things are of God, as God is the first cause of all: all things are through God, as they proceed of his will, power, and Majestie: all things are to him, to the glory of God, that is in himselfe without cause, Isa. 41.4. and the cause of all as hee is God, Isa. 41.4. Who hath wrought and done it, calling the gene∣rations from the beginning, I the Lord the first, and with the last, I am he. It is frequent in Scripture with God when he mentions a∣ny workes or beings, and the beginning of any thing, to declare himselfe to be the first, that hee might be knowne to be in him∣selfe without all cause, and the cause of all things else. Isa. 43.10. I the Lord am he that is the first. So in Isa. 43.10. Before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me. I am so the first in my selfe, that I am the first of all, and nothing shall be after mee. God in himselfe is without cause and end, Isa. 44.6. Thus saith the Lord the King of Israel, and his Redeemer the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 44.6. I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God. I am the first, and besides me there is no God; that is, there is no God besides mee, for I am the onely one, that is first without all cause of being: For were there a first cause of my being, then I could not be God; but I am God, and therefore there can be no first cause of my being. So the Lord Christ according to his God-head is said to be the beginning of the Creation of God, Rev. 3.14. Rev. 3.14. The faithfull and true witnesses the beginning of the Creati∣on of God. The God-head is the first of all beings, and the be∣ginning of the whole Creation. Many more Scriptures joyne in this truth, as Isa. 48.12. Rev. 1.17. Rev. 22.13. But I leave them to the Reader. A third Attribute of God is his immutability; this is an attri∣bute of God, that he is an immutable, unchangeable God, for this can be said of none but God; God hath made the whole
Creation mutable and changeable, which doth demonstrate that himselfe is only God, Num. 23.19. who is unchangeable. Numb. 23.19. God is not a man, that he should lye, neither the sonne of man that he should repent? Hath he said, and shall he not doe it? or hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good? What God saith, that he will doe, and what he hath spoken, he will make good; for he is an unchange∣able God, hee is not like man to lye, or repent as the sonnes of men: but he is God immutable, and unchangeable in all hee is, not one tittle shall faile of all that the Lord hath spoken: For I am the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3.6. God makes this an argu∣ment to prove himselfe God, that he changeth not: As if hee had said, there is change and alteration in all but my selfe, and I am the unchangeable God; I am the Lord, I change not. As if hee should say, if I were changeable, I were not God: but being God, I am unchangeable. If mutability dwelt in me, I could not be the foundation and fulnesse of all things both in Heaven and Earth: James 1.17. but so I am, therefore I am the unchangeable, im∣mutable God. This is fully proved in James 1.17. Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and commeth downe from the Father of lights, with whom is no variablenesse, neither shadow of turning. This is a full description of, and testimony to an im∣mutable God, in him sayes the Text, there is no variablenesse nor shadow of turning. Not the least shadow of change in God, the perfect God is an immutable God, and his immutability is per∣fect, for he is God in both; there can be no change in God, be∣cause there is no imperfection in him: where there is change and mutability, there must be the annihilating of something. Now it is impossible this should be in God, for hee is an entire Essence, which can admit of no annihilating, therefore not any shadow of change. God is purely and simply what hee is, without all compounds; he is one most pure and intire Essence, nothing in him but God: God is a Spirit, John 4.24. A fourth Attribute of God is this; God is infinitely great in Majesty and works, or the infinite greatnesse of our God doth appeare in the greatnesse of his Majestie and workes; God is so infinitely God, Isa. 465. that nothing can be like him, Isa. 46.5. To whom will yee liken me, and make me equall, and compare me, that we may bee like. As if God had said, doe you creatures thinke you have a∣ny thing amongst you that is infinite, that you goe about to
make the likenesse of me, I am an infinite God, finite creatures cannot be compared to me; or if you doe, there will be no more likenesse and similitude then between finite & infinite. So Isa. 40.15, 16, 17. Behold, the Nations are as a drop of a bucket, Isa. 40.15, 16, 17. and are counted as the small dust of the ballance. Lebanon and the beasts there∣of, are not sufficient for a burnt-offering. All Nations before God are nothing, compared to him lesse then nothing, and vanity. This pro∣veth the infinitenesse of God, that all besides him cannot be compared to him, because God is infinite, and so is none but God, and it is the infinitenesse of God that makes all things be∣fore him, and compared to him, to be so empty a vanity. This infinitenesse of God doth further appeare in the greatnesse and Majestie of his workes. The Prophet David had great experience of God in his great and glorious workings, and we shall see what ample testimony he gives to it, in Psalm 86.8. Psalm 86.8. Among the Gods there is none like unto thee (O Lord) neither are there any workes like unto thy workes. As if the Prophet had said, there is no infinite God besides thy selfe; and it appeares in thy workings, for there is no workes full of Majesty and power like thine: Psalm 135.5. So in Psalm 135.5. For I know that the Lord is great, and that our Lord is a∣bove all Gods. The Prophet makes this an argument to stir them up to praise God: the declaring of his greatnesse, hee is great a∣bove all Gods: He is infinite in power and Majestie, and this makes him in his workes great above all Gods. The Prophet is in the same frame of spirit in Psalm 145.3. Great is the Lord, Psalm 145.3. and great∣ly to be praised: & his greatnesse is unsearchable. Mark the Scripture, his greatnesse is unsearchable: As if hee had said, God is infinitely great, and none is infinite but God, so that his greatnesse is un∣searchable; for finite creatures can never search or finde out the infinitenesse of an it finite God. So in Psalm 147.5. Psalm 147.5. Great is our Lord, and of great power, and his understanding is infinite. God is infinitely great, he is so in power, in understanding, in work∣ing, in all he is: that is, God is infinitely what he is, he is finite in nothing, nor can he be confined by any thing, because Lee is the infinite God, of whom all things are; his infinite power gives bounds to all things, but can be bounded by nothing, Jer. 23.24. Jer. 23.24. Can any hide himselfe in secret places, that I shall not see him, saith the Lord? Doe not I fill heaven and earth saith the Lord? God is infinitely great in knowledge as well as power; what can be
hid from the al-seeing eye of an infinite God. Our God is infi∣nitely full, he filleth heaven and earth, he filleth all with his in∣finite power and greatnesse. The vastnesse of Heaven and Earth can make no dimention to the infinite fulnesse and greatnesse of God: Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth his Foote-stoole, and all filled with the infinite fulnesse of his power and greatnesse. Fifthly, God is an eternall God. Eternity is properly and truly the Attribute of God, and of none but God: God is from everlasting, before every thing, and on whom all things depends, he is to all eternity, without beginning or end, and therefore must needs be an eternall God, Isa. 41.4. Isa. 41.4. Who hath wrought and done it, calling the generations from the beginning, I the Lord the first, and with the last, I am he. The Lord himselfe telleth us, that he called the generations, that he was first, before all begin∣ning of beings, and that he abides for ever, and is with the last: that is, Isa. 43.10. as if God had said, I am the eternal God. So in Isa. 43.10. God calleth the people to be his witnesses, that before him there was no God formed, nor shall there be any after him. Yee are my witnesses saith the Lord, and my servants whom I have chosen, that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me. God confirmes the former Scripture by this, that he is first and last; that is, he is eternall, hee is before all beings, and all o∣ther beings depends on him, so that nothing can be after him; If he should cease to be, there could be no beings, because all have their beings from him, therefore God must needs be eternall, that is the first and preserver of all beings: Isa. 44.6 So likewise in Isa. 44.6. Thus saith the Lord, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer the Lord of Hosts, I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God, As if the Lord had said, there is none that is first and last but me, and therefore no God, but I: it is onely the attribute of God to be eternall, and that am I. I am first and last, I am eternall; that is, I am God, there is no God besides me, therefore none eternall, none is first and last besides mee, I am onely the e∣ternall God, and I am truly so, for I am the first and last: God only is that high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, Isa. 57.15. There is no everlasting but God, and he is the everlasting God: Moses doth acknowledge God to be so, Psal. 90. beg. in Psalm 90. beg. Before the mountaines were brought forth, or ever thou hadst formed the earth,
and the world; even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God: That is, thou art the everlasting God, that wert before the World was, thou didst bring forth the mountaines, thou hast formed the earth, and the whole World: Thou wert everlast∣ing before the World was, and it was thy everlasting power that made the World, and thou art the same God still, and remain∣est what thou art; From everlasting to everlasting thou art God. So the Prophet in the 102 Psalm. 12, 27. But thou O Lord, Psa. 102.12, 27 shalt en∣dure for ever, and they remembrance unto all generations, but thou art the same and thy yeares shall have no end; thou art the everla∣sting Lord, the same for ever, thou art what thou art without end, there is no end of thy being God; for thou art the everla∣sting God; Of old hath God layd the foundation of the earth, Psal. 102.25, 26. and the heavens are the worke of his hand, and though they perish and wax old as a garment, yet the Lord he endureth for ever: he is from everla∣sting; for he must needs be before that which is made by him, and he is to everlasting, for he indureth when the heavens & the earth wax old, as God had nothing to make him God, so there can be nothing to ungod him, he is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, he is the eternall God, he made all things of nothing, but not any thing can make him nothing, or lesse then he is, for he is the eternall God; and so the Apostle Paul sets him forth in the 1 Tim. 1.17. Now unto the King eternall, immortall, invisible, the onely wise God, be honour and glory for ever and ever. Amongst o∣ther Attributes the Apostle gives God this, the King or God e∣ternall, to whom is glory due for ever and ever; as he is the e∣verlasting and eternall God, for this is an Attribute and a glory onely due to God. Sixtly, God is an omnipotent, Almighty, alsufficient God, he doth what he will, his word is a Law, he maketh all things with a word; God said, Let there bee light and there was light; Gen. 1.3. the whole creation hath its forme, light, and being from the will and word of this Almighty, Omnipotent, and alsufficient God, there needs no more then a word from God to make day, and night, heaven and firmament, morning and evening, to gather the waters together, and to make dry land, to cause the earth to bring forth after its kinde, to make Sunne, Moone, and Starres, to rule in the Heavens, and to give light in their courses, to cause the waters to bring forth abundantly of moving creatures after
their kinde, and the earth to bring forth living creatures after his kinde; Cattell and creeping things, and beasts of the earth, I, the powerfull word of this omnipotent God made man after his owne Image, and gave him dominion over the fish of the Sea, the fowles of the ayre, over the Cattell, over the earth, and over every thing that creepeth upon the earth; all this power flowes from the Word of an omnipotent God: God said, let it be so, and it was so to all this: 1 Gen. In this faith Isaac blesseth Ja∣cob, in the 28 Gen. 3. And God Almighty blesse thee, and make thee fruitfull: As if he should say, if the Almighty God say but the word, thou art blessed, for he is the Almighty God, his Word is a Law, where hee blesseth none can hinder blessing, all things are at his command, they were so in their first being, and they have their being to be what he will have them, there is nothing hard or impossible with God, so our Saviour telleth his Disci∣ples in the 19. Matthew 26. But Jesus beheld them and said un∣to them, Mat. 19.26. with men this is impossible, but with God all things are pos∣sible. It is a full Scripture to what I bring it, the omnipotency of God, al things are possible to him, it is not possible that any thing should be impossible to the almighty, omnipotent God. When the Angell in the 1. Luke 36. Luke 1.36, 37. brings tydings to the Virgin Mary of her cozen Elizabeth being with Childe in her old age, and that it was then the sixth moneth with her, giveth this for the reason in the 3. verse: For with God nothing shall be impossible: That is to say, God is Omnipotent, Almighty, nothing can be hard to him, he doth what he will doe, nothing is impossible to him, nor can any thing hinder what hee will have done: In the 11. Numbers 21. Num. 11.21, 23. Moses questions with God about making good his word to give flesh to all the people: the footmen amongst them be∣ing six hundred thousand; in the 23. verse God answere Moses: And the Lord said unto Moses is the Lords hand waxed short: As if the Lord had said, this I have spoken seemes impossible to thee, but I will doe it my selfe; I will make it good, and I am the Almighty omnipotent God, thinke you that my hand waxeth short, no it is an omnipotent, almighty hand, for I am such a God, can the Lords hand waxe short; can alsufficiency, almigh∣tinesse, and omnipotency be lessened, no it cannot, and the A∣postle Paul blesseth God upon this very consideration; in the 3. Ephes. Ephe. 3.20, 21. 20. Now unto him that is able to doe exceeding abundantly a∣bove
all that we can aske or thinke, unto him be glory 21. verse: that is, the Apostle glories in God as an an omnipotent God, hee is able to doe exceeding abundantly above all that we can aske or thinke: the vastnesse of our thoughts or wants, are too short to measure out the omnipotency of God, he is exceedingly more then wee can aske, want, or thinke, for he is Almighty, to him be glory whom is thus glorious, almighty, alsufficient, and omnipotent God, this is the glory of God, for God is onely this, and none but God. This, all this, and infinitely more then this, is God in himselfe, and such souls as be established by beleeving in God as their God, doe beleeve God to be this in himselfe. But I shall mention some few Attributes more of God, in which he makes himselfe more visably knowne to his people. As first, God is a God of free grace; we may call our God the gracious God, or the God of mercy and grace, wee may safely looke upon God thus, for God lookes upon us in his free grace; witnesse his Covenant of free grace: Jer. 31.31. so for∣ward, God doth there ingage himselfe to put his Law in our in∣ward parts, and to write it in the bearts of his people, that hee will be our God, and that wee shall be his people, that his people shall all know him from the least to the greatest of them; that he will for∣give all our iniquity, and remember our sinne no more; God in this Covenant doth clearely speake himselfe to be a God of free grace, for the Covenant is all grace, it is pardoning and purging grace, justifying and sanctifying grace, and as it is all grace, so it in all God; for God onely ingageth himselfe, and this makes it to be all free grace: As God is gracious in his Covenant that it is a Covenant of free grace, so he is in his workes to his people; they are all workes of grace, and he is a God of free grace in all. As in his first worke of choosing and electing his people: 1. Ephes. begin∣ning. E∣phes. beginning, Chosen and predestinated us in Christ, unto the a∣doption of children, according to the good pleasure of his will, To the praise of the glory of his grace. God is free, hee chooseth according to his owne will, and that any are chosen and predestinated in Christ, it is the glorious workings of his free grace, he chooseth according to his owne good pleasure, and to the glory of his grace; God is ingaged to none, he is free in his choice, nay all
have sinned and come short of the glory of God; and therefore wh ever God chooseth he taketh into grace, for it is free grace tha chooseth, it is onely of grace, saith the Apostle, that I am what I am as I am an electe vessell, that is of grace, God hath chosen  in Christ to the glory of his grace, so that God in his electing worke is a God of free grace. Secondly, in his worke of Salvation he is altogether 2 God of free grace, 2. Ephes. 4, 5. But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith bee loved us, even when we were dead in sinnes, hath quickned us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved.) The Apo∣stle here telleth us positively that salvation is the worke of grace, I, and proveth it; for sayes he, God who is rich in mercy, loved  even when wee were dead in sinnes, and hath quickened us together with Christ, so that it must needs be by grace that we are saved; i can be nothing but free grace in a holy God that can love soules dead in sinne, and the salvation and quickening of such soules in Christ, must needes be the work of his rich love, and free grace, so in the 8. verse, For by grace are ye saved through faith, though faith be the hand to receive the salvation of God; yet it is free gr in God, that giveth this salvation; free grace giveth both salva∣tion, and the hand to receive it withall, all the workes of God to poore sinners is the workings of his free grace, the whole work of Salvation, and redemption in God, must needs be the work∣ings of his grace, both by reason of the subject and the time, he saves sinners, the worst of sinners; and then even when we are dead in sinnes and trespasses: Ephes. 2.1. This rich love of God breakes forth to us even when we lye in our blood and no eye to pitty us; what but free grace would choose such a subject to pitch eternall unchangable love upon, and such a time when no eye b∣sides could so much as pitty; the reason is plaine, none hath an eye of free grace but God, and no other eye besides that could pitty, and pardon poore sinners when they lye in their blood, in their filth and pollution of sinne; now for soules to bee justified and acquitted of all polution in the eyes of a holy pure God, what can this be but free grace: Rom. 3.23, 24. For all have sin∣ned, and come short of the glory of God; Being justified freely by his grace: As if the holy Ghost should say, You justified soules, you have sinned and come short of the glory of God. It is not your owne justification which you stand before God in; but the justificati∣on
of his free grace, it is the free grace of God that doth acquit you, and make you righteous in his owne presence, God gives the beauty he delights in, his free grace gives a compleat righte∣ousnesse to poore sinners, and justifieth them in the righteous∣nesse of his owne free grace, thus is God a God of free grace; yea, in all his gifts he is the same, a God of free grace; it is his free grace that giveth Christ, in whom, and with whom, hee giveth all things to his people as a God of grace in his rich love; it is of Gods grace that Christ is made, wisedome, and righteousnes, and sanctification and redemption to his people, 1. Cor. 1.30, We did not purchase Christ, but Christ did purchase us, and redeemed us, and to this worke he is the gift of Gods free grace, and all that more exceeding and eternall weight of glory that our poore soules have with, and by Christ; all is the gift of Gods free grace, the Lord proclaimes his free grace by his Prophet, in the 55. Isa. 55. x. of Isa. Ho, every one that this steth, come ye to the water, he that hath no money shall have Wine and Milke without money, and without price. Here the Lord proclaimes to wanting, thirsting soules, that hee is a God of free grace, in all his gifts; as if the Lord had said, though you be full of wants and unworthinesses, yet let not this hinder your comming to me, for I am a God of free grace; all my gifts are free, I give my Wine and Milke without money and without price, I never turned any back which came to satisfie their thirst in me, because they had no money to buy; I satisfie all that comes to me, I am free and full in my grace, and with that I satisfie all soules that thirst after me: God is a giving God, not a selling God; it is his free grace that gives all things out of himselfe needfull to his people, for life and godlinesse, for grace and glory: So in the 7, Matth. 7. our Saviour bids us to Aske and it shall bee given to us: He doth not bid us to buy, but to beg; he knew God to be a God of free grace, and therefore puts  upon the grace of God, for God is the God of free grace in all his workes, and in all his gifts to his owne people, he elects and chooseth to salvation in his free grace, and saveth all his Elect by his free grace; God giveth Christ as the great gift of his grace, and in Christ he giveth the fulnesse and fenesse of his grace to his people; so that it is truely the Attribute of God to call him the God of free grace, in this Attribute God makes knowne himselfe to his people; and in this a beleeving soule looks up to
God, and is established by beleeving in God, as a God of free grace to be his God. Another Attribute of God in which he makes himselfe known to his people is this; Namely, That God is a faithfull God. Not a tittle which he hath spoken to his people shall falle, what God speaks to his people he would have them beleeve, now he never did nor will faile his people that beleeve his word, Num. 23.19. God is not a man that he should lye, neither the sonne of man that he should repent; Num. 23.19. hath hee said and shall be not doe it, or both hee spoken and shall he not make it good, what, can there be falshood or failing in God? shall he repent, and not make good what hee hath spoken? no hee is a faithfull God, Heaven and Earth may passe away, but not one tittle of his Word shall fayle: Yea, though the making good of his word desolve Heaven and Earth; both shall consume, Num. 11.23. but not a tittle of his word shall faile; for hee i the faithfull God, Numb. 11.23. Thou shalt see whether my word shall come to passe unto thee or not. Moses made a question how all that people should eate flesh which the Lord had said should eat flesh; well, sayes God, I am God still, my arme is not shortned, nor doth my faithfulnesse faile, for thou shalt surely see my word come to passe, it is my word Moses, and I am the faithfull God; though thy faith be weake, yet my faithfulnesse is strong and sure; it is the Word of God and it shall not faile, thou shalt sure∣ly see it come to passe: The Psalmist doth acknowledge the te∣stimonies of God to be very sure; in the 93 Psalm. 5. Hee had found that what ever God promised he made it good, and all∣wayes proved himselfe a faithfull God, His testimonies were ever sure; so the 119 Psalm. 65. Thou hast dealt well with thy Servant, O Lord, according to thy Word: Thou hast not deceived them, but thou hast made good all thy word and promises to them: As if he had said, Thou art a faithfull God, thou makest good all thy word; so in the 89 and 90 verses of that Psalme, For ever, O Lord, thy word is setled in Heaven. Thy faithfulnesse is unto all Ge∣nerations: That is, thou art for ever a faithfull God, thy word is as fixed and sure as Heaven, there can nothing faile of all that the Lord hath spoken: Take some few instances of Gods fulfil∣ing his word to his people as a faithfull God, consider the first promise God made of Christ in the flesh, Gen. 3.15. That the seed
of the Woman should breake the head of the Serpent: And how faith∣full God hath beene in making good his word, Christ in the flesh, and Christ Crucified, the whole currant of Scripture is proofe o it. When God promiseth Abraham that he shall have a Son from Sarahs wombe, though the wombe be dead, yet the promise lives, it is the word of a faithfull God, and must be made good; now Isaac the Child of promise comes from this dead wombe to ma∣nifest God to be a faithfull God. God sends Moses to Pharoah and telleth him that he shall leade the Children of Israel out of E∣gypt and from under their bondage and slavery to serve the Lord their God in the Wildernesse; Moses goes upon the word of God: Now notwithstanding the hardnesse of Pharoahs heart, and the power of his hand, yet God makes good every tittle of his word to them, though he make their way thorough the deep waters, yet all must obey to fulfill the faithfull word of God, and in that Divine story we may see with how many miracles and wonders God makes good all his faithfull word to them. God is a faith∣full God, he could not else be God, and I may truly say all these Scriptures which proves him God, doe prove him to be the faith∣full God, for unfaithfulnesse and God are inconfistant; they can no more be together then light and darknesse, in truth, there is no comparison to be made of the vastnesse of their disagreement; God and truth are one, for God is the God of truth, hee is a faith∣full God: There is exceedingly more of the glorious Attributes of God which would abundantly take up the Meditation of a spi∣ritual soul, but I intended only a short touch of some of them, wch might leade to, and carry on the designe I drive at, which is the establishment of soules by beleeving in God; in this God assisting, you may have some small helpe to the understanding of what God is in himselfe, the improvement of it for establishment, I in∣tend in the conclusion; this for the opening part of it shall bee all to the first of the three things I proposed in the beginning of the Booke: namely, To beleeve in God in what hee is in him∣selfe. For the other two: To beleeve in what God doth, and in what God saith, as the word and workes of God wraps up the salvation of his people in them, I shall here put them both together, under this consideration.
Namely, a briefe collection with its proofes, of the whole de∣signe and worke of God in the salvation of his people. And it is this; To manifest the glory of his free-grace in the full redemption of his people through Christ, and in their receiving and applying it to them∣selves by believing. First, The great designe of God in his saving worke to his people, is to glorifie, or to manifest and declare the glory of his owne eternall, originall free-grace and rich love. The free-grace and rich love of God is God himselfe, that God which is an incomprehensible and inexpressible Essence, the true and perfect God, who is first without all cause of being, an immutable God, and of infinite great Majesty; an Eternall, Omnipotent, and Almighty God: This is the God of Free-grace; now the designe of this God in the salvation of sinners, which is the worst and most miserablest piece of the whole creati∣on in it selfe to all eternity, is to glorifie, or to manifest the glo∣ry of his owne free-grace. For this, take the testimony of the holy Ghost by the Apostle Paul, in Rom. 3.23. That hee might make known the riches of his glory, on the vessels of mereie. The holy Ghost in the former part of that Chapter, pleadeth the sove∣raignty of God; not any piece of clay could finde fault with the Potter what ever hee made it, nor any creature with God. Now in this verse hee telleth us, if any be made vessels of honour, and heires of glory, it is that God might make knowne the riches of his glory its his mercy and free-grace. As if the holy Ghost had said, God accounts of his grace and mercy to be the riches and excel∣lency of his glory: Now to make it knowne that this is his great designe, God silleth heaven and earth with this his glory, the redeemed in Heaven, and the redeemed in Earth shall be one in Heaven at last, and therein ages to come, even to all eternity, be swallowed up into the exceeding riches and glory of his grace, Ephes. 2.7. And the holy Ghost in this, and the verse before it, telleth us, that is Gods end and designe, in raising us up together, and making us to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: That in the Ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindnesse towards us through Christ Jesus. If wee observe this Scripture, it holds forth this; that all the kindnesse wee receive from God, it is his grace in Christ, and Gods designe in the
manifesting of this his free-grace in Christ, is to shew forth the exceeding riches and glory of it; the whole worke of salvation will cleare up this truth; for if we consider all the subjects of sal∣vation, we shall finde no object for any thing of God but his free grace and rich love, the pollution of faine man in his naturall condition could not be an object of preservation to the holy, just, and pure eyes of an omnipotent God, nothing but free-grace and rich love in God could looke the lookes of life to souls dead in sinnes and trespasses: And if thus, then it plainely ap∣peares, that Gods great design in the salvation of sinners is name∣ly to glorifie, or to manifest the glory of his owne eternall rich love and free-grace. God will have soules live by his grace, that hee might manifest the life and glory of his grace; that grace which giveth life, appeares in the life it giveth, so that every sa∣ved soule is a monument of the riches and glory of the love and grace of God, and the wise God layde his designe sure when hee made choise of the salvation of sinners, to manifest the glory of his free-grace by. In the next place, I shall hold forth how God doth accomplish this great end and design of his: Namely, by making the whole frame and worke of salvation to flow from, and to depend upon his owne free-grace, so as there is nothing in the whole worke of salvation from first to last, but the free-grace of God, Ephes. 2.5.8. Even when we were dead in sinnes, bath quickened us together with Christ. (By grace are yee saved.) The time speaks grace, when dead in sinnes; this is a season only for grace, and that the grace of God too, appearing, when not only in sinne, but dead in sin, past all recovery, as from selfe, if doing could prevaile; yet here is no life to doe withall; this is onely a time for a living love in God to act free-grace in: If ever salvation comes to soules dead in sinne, it must be by grace, the grace of God saves of it selfe, without any cause out of it selfe, and this is the true salvation of soules dead in sin, (by grace yee are saved) to be saved by grace, that is, to be saved in the salvation of God, the whole worke to be of his free-grace, not any tittle of it of our salves, Rom. 3.23, 24. For all have sinned and come short of the glory of God: Being justified freely by his grace. Marke it, there is all selfe under sin: but saved, justified, and acquitted soules from sin, are the fruits of Gods free-grace; though selfe come short of the glory of God,
yet free-grace makes perfection that justifies, this is the salvation of God, to justifie freely by his grace, Rom. 5.21. That as sinne hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reigne through righteous∣nesse unto eternall life by Jesus Christ. Here sinne and selfe hath its reign, but it is to death: but all the parts of salvation is the work of Gods free-grace: grace reignes through righteousnesse in Jesus Christ. The righteousnesse of Christ to saved soules, or Christ made righteousness to such souls, what is it but the reign of Gods free-grace; that is, grace is supreame, the grace is all in the whole worke of salvation; this truth will be made more cleare in pro∣ving the parts of this great worke the salvation of GODS free-grace. But now consider that God layes this worke, the salvation of his free-grace sure, in the full satisfaction of his owne divine ju∣stice, that so the saved of his grace might stand spotlesse before him to all eternity. And herein is the mistery of salvation, that Gods justice is ful∣ly satisfied, and yet that his grace in saving his people should be perfectly free: but both these doth plainly appeare in the salvati∣on of God to his people; the work of his free grace. Now the way of grace in God to satisfie Divine justice to the full, and yet to keepe it selfe entire free grace to all that are sa∣ved, is this: Namely, to chuse out, appoint, and to send Christ in the flesh (God-man) to satisfie the Divine justice of God for man, in whom the wisedome of God giveth full satisfaction to his owne Justice, and perfect salvation to his people all of free grace: In this glorious mistery, free grace in God is the fountaine, full sa∣tisfaction to Divine Justice the way, but perfect salvation and rdemption to all his elect body in Christ the end. I shall now come more particularly to the parts of this great worke of God, the salvation of his owne free grace. And first of Gods electing grace. That it is free grace in God which elects to salvation; that I shall first prove by the subjects of Gods salvation, which is fallen sinners, Ephes. 2.1. Dead in trespasses and sinnes. A lump of fin∣ners dead in trespasses and sinnes, hath God to choose out as sub∣jects for his love, vessels of honour, and heirs of glory. If grace in God make not the choise, surely the whole lump of fallen
sinners would be left to remaine dead in sinnes and trespasses: but the Apostle in Rom. 9.18, 23. telleth us that God hath mercy on whom he will have mercy: That is, God is full of mercy: but he is free in it, his mercy lyes in his owne will, he chooseth his own vessels of mercy, That he might make knowne the riches of his owne glory. He chooseth where he pleaseth, that it might appeare he chooseth according to his owne will and pleasure; that is, that all his mercy and grace is free, and that the first worke, or part of the worke of salvation, his Election, is of and from his owne free grace: So Ephes. 1.4, 5. According as he hath chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and with∣out blame before him. Having predestinated us unto the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himselfe, according to the good pleasure of his will. That is, God chooseth from all eternity, such as he wil make his children, and heirs of glory by Christ, and this hee doth according to the good pleasure of his own will: all fell alike in the first Adam, nothing in one more then in another to move God to love, for all were dead in sinnes: but the whole work in God, is the worke of his grace, it is all begun and finished accor∣ding to the good pleasure of his owne will, all is the worke of his free grace. But secondly, whom God thus chooseth by his grace, he chooseth in Christ, Ephes. 1.4. According as hee hath choosen us in him (that is in Christ) so that all along grace is free in God, and the whole worke of salvation only of his free grace, Rom. 5.15. What ever is in Christ is the gift of grace: so that Christ being the way by which God workes satisfaction to his own justice, and salvation to his people, it is all of grace; the reign of life in Saints by Christ, is the reigne of grace in God to Saints through Christ, vers. 17. Shall reigne in life by one Christ. God in Christ doth reigne over soules in righteousnesse, as the God of life and salva∣tion; it is God in Christ, a God of free grace. But in the carrying on this worke of Gods grace, in the salva∣tion of his people through Christ, it is needfull that Christ take flesh, according to that promise in Gen. 3.15. The seede of the woman shall bruise the head of the Serpent. And this is accomplished in the fulnesse of Gods time, Isa. 9.6. For unto us a childe is born, unto us a sonne is given. The childe which is borne, is the sonne which is given, Christ in the flesh; the sonne of God is the gift
of his free grace, this child Jesus is the gift of Gods grace,  Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles: To open the blinde eyes, to bring the prisoners from the prison, and them that fit in dark∣nesse out of the prison-house, Isa. 42.6, 7. So that as grace giveth him, so his worke in the flesh, is that worke of grace in all the parts of it: Thus farre we have Saints in Christ, and Christ in the flesh, and the free grace of God in all. This which followeth will appeare to be as purely grace in God as what hath gone before, though now God comes to have actuall and full satisfaction to his justice. Now the elect are in Christ, and Christ for us in the flesh; now the holy law, and Divine Justice of God comes for fulfilling and satisfaction. But to whom? why to Christ, so that when justice is fully sa∣tisfied, yet that the whole of salvation might be a work of Gods free-grace. Quest. But why should Justice come to Christ for satisfaction? had he sinned? Answ. I answer, no: but in the great designe of Gods grace, to redeeme his people in Christ, Christ was willingly made sinne for us, and tooke our nature that hee might stand before Gods Justice in our roome as the sinner. The holy Ghost cleares this truth in that 2 Cor. 5. last. For hee hath made him to be sinne for us who knew no sinne. The verse before cleares up this (hee) in the Text to be meant of God. Be yee reconciled to God; for (hee) hath made him sinne: and this (him) in the Text must needes be meant of Christ, for it is said of this (him) that he knew no sinne; that is, he had no sin of his owne; he was that spotlesse lamb with∣out sinne, so was never any in flesh, since the fall from innocency but Christ: so that the Scripture is plaine, That God made Christ is be sinne for his elect body; that is, not to be guilty of any finne in himselfe, but to be the surety, the debtor, and paymaster to the justice of God for all the sins past, present, & to come, of all his elect body, so that divine justice goes only to Christ for satisfacti∣on, and in Christ divine justice hath full satisfaction, so that ju∣stice and grace in God, are both pure in the salvation of sinners through Christ that is thus made sin for us. Here wee have Christ made both sinne and flesh by God, and now in the flesh wee shall sinde Christ making full satisfaction to the justice of God; for all
those whom he is made sinne for; as Christ came in the flesh to take up the debt of sinne for his people, and to lye under the wa∣ges of sinne, which is death; so in the flesh and in his death hee giveth such full satisfaction to Almighty God, that God doth acknowledge himselfe fully pleased in the travell of his soule, Isa. 53.11. Hee shall see of the travell of his soule, and shall be satisfied: That is, God doth behold that satisfaction which Christ hath made to his justice for the sinnes of his people, and in it doth acknowledge himselfe fully satisfied, and for ever well pleased with his Elect in him; that whole Chapter is a proving of Christ in the flesh, being made by God an offering for sinne, verse 10. to be wounded for the transgression of his people, and bruised for our ini∣quities, having the chastisement of our peace put upon him, so that by his stripes we are healed, it having pleased the Lord to lay on him the iniquities of us all, 5, 6. verses. So that here is not onely Christ in the flesh, but Christ made sinne for his people; that is, hath all the iniquities of his people layd on him by God, with all the wounds, bruises, and chastisements due to them; that is, all the punishment due to sinne from Gods justice; and this Christ undergoeth to the utmost, so that by his stripes we are heoled: that is, by his suffering and satisfaction, his Elect are in the justice of God, wholy acquitted and discharged, for God chose Christ to fatisfie his justice for sinne, and having laide the debt with all the weight of it upon him, and Christ having discharged this debt to the full, Gods justice cannot but discharge it where ever it was due; otherwise as one Text speaks, Christ had dyed in vaine, and the designe of Gods free grace to poore sioners could never be accomplished: So the Apostle in the 3. Gal. 13. telleth us, that Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us. Christ as our suerty and publique Redeemer, tooke sinne with all its weight and curse upon himselfe, and what he hath taken from us, he hath fully delivered us from; so that in his satisfa∣ction he doth fully acquit his elect body; the first debtor, from the whole debt and danger of sin, either in curse or punishment: And the Apostle Paul argueth out his tryumph in the 8. Rom. latter end, upon this very consideration, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, it is God that justifieth, who is bee that condemneth; it is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen againe:
As if the Apostle had saide; God doth justifie his elect body as he is a just God: For Christ hath dyed and is risen againe: That is, Christ is risen as the satisfier of Gods justice in his death, for had not Christs death satisfied Gods justice when as the sinnes, curse, and punishment of sinne, for all his Elect body was layd on him, he could never have risen again, but now his is risen, and risen as the justifier of his people, and the satisfier of Gods justice: Now if any shall charge the Elect of God with what Christ hath borne and satisfied for them; Even the justice of God, or the just God will acquit them, and if God acquit who can condemne, and therefore hee glorieth: So the same Apostle in the 4. Rom. 25 speaking of Christ as being risen from the dead, sayes thus, Who was delivered for our offences, and was raised againe for our justifica∣tion: That is, it was the sinnes of his Elect that crucifyed him, and it is the justification of his Elect for whom he dyed, that he is risen; and as nothing could have crucified him but our sins, so now nothing can condemne those for whom he dyed, he being risen, his resurrection pleades to all justice, satisfaction in his death: And Christ was therefore delivered up to death for our offences, that in his resurrection we might be justified from all offences, Gods great aime and designe of grace: Run thorough the former to the latter of these: Rom. 10.4. the holy Ghost telleth us there, That Christ is the end of the Law for righteousnesse to every one that beleeveth: As if he had said, The beleeving soule shall finde that Christ hath fulfilled, and doth fully keepe the whole Law for him, and so is an end to it for righteousnesse; that is, Christ is now the soules righteousnesse not the Law; the Law is kept and fulfilled by Christ for a beleever, so that it can∣not charge any soule in Christ to condemnation, but the righ∣teousnesse and justification of the soule in the sight of God is Christ, not the Law; if any soule could keepe the whole Law in it selfe, the Law might have been for righteousnesse to that soule, but all having sinned and come short; now the Law is an accuser not a justifier, but Christ for his people, hee fully satisfies and keepes the Law; so that Christ is the righteousnesse of his people and an end to the Law for righteousnesse: This is a faithfull say∣ing, 1 Th. X. 15: and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ came into the World to save sinners: 1 Tim. 1.15. It was the end of Gods giving Christ, and of Christ comming to save sinners from sinne, Law, death,
Hell, and what ever would destroy them, and this end is effected, for Christ did not onely dye but is risen, did not onely take sin but hath satisfyed for sinne, and all this is the worke of grace, which appeares in this, it is the worke of God in Christ; the Apostle Paul doth acknowledge and confirme this truth in Rom. 3.24, Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. The Apostle here sayes it is redemption through Christ, but that doth not hinder our being justified by free grace in God; though God workes through Christ, yet it is all the worke of his free grace, it is through Christ, and Christ is through grace, there is not any tittle of redemption, or justifica∣tion through selfe, it is all through Christ and by grace, which is no more but grace working through Christ; the great gift of Gods free grace, what ever God doth in Christ can no wayes de∣minish his free grace, for Christ is the Mediator or middle per∣son betweene God and Man; in whom God magnifies his grace to Man, and giveth to his people the riches and greatnesse of his love wherewith he loveth them through him: This indeed doth manifest the wisedome and justice of God to redeeme his people through Christ, but it no wayes lesseneth the freenesse of his grace, nay it makes it more glorious grace, for that justice is ful∣ly satisfied, makes mercy the greater mercy, and the justified is nothing in himselfe all this while but a sinner; now that God should make Christ his way to satisfie his Divine justice by, and to save sinners; this must needes magnifie the grace of God, be∣cause the saved and the justified are nothing in the worke them∣selves, onely sinners and the worst of sinners, saved onely of grace by grace, it is grace in God and grace in Christ, the grace of God through Christ, that makes such as are dead in sins to be quick∣ned together with Christ; and from this the holy Ghost telleth us, that (by grace wee are saved:) Ephes. 2.5. Christ came from Heaven to doe his Fathers will; that was, to save all which his Fa∣ther had given him, not to loose any but to raise them up at the last day, John 6.38, 39. God chooseth Christ a body, John 6.38, 39 of which h ma∣keth him head and Saviour, and send him into the World that he might rederme his body by satisfying justice, so that he might save the whole, and raise them up at the last day at his redeemed body; and all this the worke of Gods free grace through Christ, for Christ doth acknowledge that his worke of redemp∣tion
was his Fathers will, and his word was to perfect the de∣signe of his Fathers grace, that all God had given him might be redeemed through him, and justified by his Fathers grace; in the death of Christ God commendeth his love and grace to e, Rom. 5.8. But God commendeth his love to us in that whilst wee were sinners Christ dyed for us: Marke it, the satisfaction that Christ gave to the justice of God for sinners, was so farre from being any diminution to Gods grace, that it is a commendation of it, or an exaltation and glory of it, for it exceedingly commends the glory of Gods love and grace, that Christ should dye be∣cause we were sinners; there lyes the emminency of Gods love, it is Christ the gift of his grace dying for sinners, this makes all the worke grace, grace in God sends Christ to dye for sinners, whom otherwise must dye eternally in sinne; can there bee any thing but grace in this; in the Apostles account Christs dying for us when when we were sinners, doth much demonstrate the love and grace of God, and surely so it doth. Thus doth God save his people by grace, and satisfie his justice in Christ: Now Christ having satisfied his Fathers justice, fulfilled and kept the Law to the utmost for all his elect body, he bringeth them to the throne of his fathers justice, as well as the throne of his grace, and there God as a just God doth justifie head and members, Col. 2.9, 10. For in him dwelleth all the fulnesse of the God-head bodily: And yet are compleate in him. As if God should say, Christ hath satisfied my justice as God, Man, and though my justice were the justice of a God; yet him in whom the fulnesse of the God head dwelleth bodily, hath fully satisfied it, and all his members are compleate in him, I have received full satisfaction for them in him, and in him doe sully acquit and discharge them of all guilt and unrighteousnesse, before me to all eternity, for yee are compleate in him: That i, compleate in his compleatnesse, For he was made sinne for you which knew no sinne, 2 Cor. 5. last. that you might be made the righteousnesse of God in him. Marke it, the end of Christ being made sinne was, that in him his elect body might bee made the righteousnesse of God; that is, that Christ might bee our righteousnesse as the gift of God, so that Christ being our righteousnesse wee might bee righteous in the righteousnesse of God, and so compleate in him, namely Christ, as Christ is the righteousnesse of God to his peo∣ple. So are they all compleate in him; and in this the righteous∣nesse
of God, Saints are justified at the throne of Gods justice, and taken up into his bosome of grace, for in union with Christ there can be no condemnation, Rom. 8. Thus doth free grace in God accomplish and finish its worke of salvation for all his elect through Christ, God doth this worke in Christ that it might be all free grace, and that he might take off all boasting in the creature by the Law of faith, Rom. 3.27. whom hee chooseth from all eternity to be heires of glory; hee chooseth them in Christ, Ephes. 1.4. whom he calleth out of nature into his grace he calleth in Christ, Rom. 8. latter end: Such as he redeemeth he redeemeth through Christ, and makes him to bee redemption to them: 1 Cor. 1.30. Rom. 3.24. Them which God justifies and makes righteous, he justifieth and maketh righteous in Christ, Rom. 4.25. 1 Cor. 1.30. Rom. 10.3, 4. Rom. 4.25. Gal. 5.4. So Christ he is made sanctification to his people, 1 Cor. 1.30. Rom. 1 Cor. 1.30. Rom. 8.10. 8.10. And when Saints are taken up into their fulnesse of glory, then they reape the fulnesse of their union with Christ, John 17. latter end, John 14.19. Rom. 8.17. So that this whole salva∣tion is the worke and gift, of Gods free grace wrought in Christ. Now that it might be free grace in God, and onely free grace, which begins, carries on, and perfects this worke of Salvation in all the parts and degrees of it; this is the will of God, That the hand which taketh, receiveth, applyeth, and oppropriateth thi free gift of Gods grace to the soules of his Elect body, should bee the hand fo saith; so that as it reignes in the soules of beleevers, Rom. 3, 24, 37. 1 John 3.23. it might appeare to be of grace and not of workes, Rom. 3.  27. 1 John. 3.23, And this is his Commandement, that  should beleeve on the name of his Sonne Jesus Christ: The will of God appeares in his Commandement, and that is to beleeve in the name of his Sonne Jesus Christ, to beleeve in Jesus as a Saviour and a Redeemer, to save and redeeme his people from their sins: Matthew 1.21. And she shall bring forth a Sonne, and thou shalt call his name Jesus; for hee shall save his people from their sinnes. This is to beleeve in the name of Jesus, to beleeve in Jesus, as the Saviour of his people from their sinnes; this is the will and comman∣dement of God; in this sense in Scripture, Rom. 3.1. we are often said to be justified by faith, Rom. 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: That is, not
by faith as a meritorious grace to merit justification, for then it were of works which would destroy the nature of faith, and the designe of Gods free grace, but by faith as an appropriating and applying hand to lay hold on the salvation of Gods free grace through Christ, in beleeving of Gods Word and worke of Salva∣tion, by his free grace through Christ, so as to cast the salvation of our eternall soules, Rom. 5.1. upon Gods free grace, in the satisfaction and redemption of Christ; therefore Justified by faith, wee have  with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: That is, by faith laying hold on Jesus Christ as our Lord Jesus Christ, so the soule comes to be at peace with God, and to finde God to be reconciled to it, and is thus justified in its owne bosome by beleeving in Christ, that is, the soule doth now beleeve all that God hath said con∣cerning Christ, and what Christ hath done and suffered for fin∣ners, 2 Cor. 5. last. and doth by faith apply, and appropriate this to it selfe, my Lord Jesus Christ, saith a beleeving soule, whom God made to his sinne for mee, Isa. 53. that I might be the righteousnesse of God in him, upon whom God hath layd all my iniquities, and the chastisements due to my sinnes, Col. 2.19. and by whose stripes my soule is bealed; So that now I stand compleate before God in him: Thus by beleeving and appropriating Christ to our owne soules, wee come to be justified in our owne spirits, and to be at peace with God, in beleeving God to bee as peace with us, we come to be at peace with him; that is, all hard thoughts of God they are gone with unbeliefe, now the soule beleeveth in God through Christ, it findeth God to be a gracious loving, reconciled Father, and is now at peace with God, or at peace in God, full of peace by beleeving in God through Christ, this is the justification that faith giveth the soule, it lives upon the peace of God in Jesus Christ, and quiets the soule in this, that God is at peace with it through Jesus Christ, and in this sense through the whole Booke of God, wee must understand those Scriptures wherein it is said we are justified by faith, Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a man is not justified by the workes of the Law, Gal. 2.16. but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even wee have beleeved in Jesus Christ: That is, knowing that God doth justifie all through Christ by his free grace in beleeving, and not any by workes; we doe be∣leeve in his free grace through Christ, and are thereby justified, not of workes; no, not by faith as a grace, for then by workes, but of his grace through Christ, laid hold on and apply by faith;
the Apostle Paul in Rom. 3.22. Even the righteousnesse of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all that beleeve, the righteous∣nesse of God is the grace of God in Christ, or the grace of God making Christ our righteousnesse, which righteousnesse of God by Jesus Christ we apply to our selves by beleeving in the grace of God which hath made Christ our righteousnesse, and in Christ as hee is made righteousnesse to us, righteousnesse is the gift of grace, but if faith as an act in us could justifie us, then righteousnesse and justification would not be of grace, but as faith is onely a hand to lay hold on Christ the righteousnesse of Gods free grace, and this faith the gift of God, not of our selves, Ephes. 2.8. So it hath its place and worke in the great designe of God, the Salva∣tion of his free grace: So in Rom. 10.4. For Christ is the end of the Law for righteousnesse to every one that beleeveth. Rom. 10.4. The holy Ghost doth not there say, that by beleeving which is a worke of grace in the soule, the soule doth put an end to the Law; that is, sa∣tisfie it, and make it selfe righteous; no, for then righteousnesse would be of the Law, but Christ he hath put an end to the Law for righteousnesse to every one that beleeveth; that is, by beleeving in Christ as our righteousnesse, there is an end put to the Law, the Law is no righteousnesse, but Christ is righteousnesse, and the fulfiller of the Law for all that thus beleeve on him; faith is on∣ly the hand to lay hold of, and to appropriate and apply Christ to the soule whom is Gods righteousnesse, and the sulfiller of this Law for all that so beleeve on him: Beleevers should be ex∣ceeding tender of preserving the glory of Gods grace, for it is by grace that wee are saved, and onely of grace that we are what we are; and for this very cause was faith made the hand to lay hold on grace; grace in God hath not made a hand to destroy it selfe, we must be very watchfull in this thing, and make the grace of God to bee the tryall of faith, for that faith cannot bee true which doth not advance the free grace of God; the highest pitch of faith in which it is very glorious, is to apply the grace of God to the soule, and to cast the soule upon the free grace of God, to unselfe the creature, to trample its best workes under feet as drosse and dung, and resting full in the grace of God through Christ, desiring onely to be found in him, Not having our owne righteous∣nesse which is of the Law; Phil. 3.8, 9. but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousnesse which is of God by faith, Phil. 3.8, 9. True
faith, it lifts up free grace in God, by seeking his righteousnesse by faith; it aimes no higher but to be a hand to receive the gift of grace (Gods righteousnesse, the Lord Jesus Christ.) The true worke of faith in the soule is to bring in Christ, and cast out the Law as that Schoole-Master which keep the soule under feares till Christ came, and to acquaint the soule that it is a Childe of God through Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.25, 26. John 6.40, 47 Gal. 3.25, 26. and that in Christ it hath everlasting life, John 6.40.47. Thus beleeving in Christ the soule is strengthened in the inward man, Christ dwelling in the heart by faith, Eph. 3.16, 17. Ephes. 3.16, 17. and establishing the soule in its union with Christ, that soule which beleeveth in Christ as the gift of Gods free grace, in whom God giveth eter∣nall life, 1 John 5.10, 11. hath the witnesse in himselfe; 1 John. 5.10, 11. Hee is sealed up to the love of God, in beleeving the record of God, that saith he loveth it freely and hath given Christ for it, now the soule beleeves this word of God, and rests upon it, take Gods word for its eternall salvation; this is the true office of faith in the foule to lay hold of the Salvation of Gods free grace in Christ, declared by his word, and to apply and appropriate  to it selfe, so as to rest and depend wholy upon it for Saivation, and herein the soule comes to have the witnesse within its selfe, by beleeving thus on the Sonne of God: That it might appear to be the will of God, that all which are saved of his free grace by Christ, should be made partakers of this Salvation in themselves by beleeving in him, and the salvation of his grace. I shall of at two things to consideration: First, The Covenant of Gods free grace. And secondly, The promulgation and spreading abroad of the Gospell. First, Gods Covenant of free grace in Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. and Heb. 8.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. In which God doth freely ingage him∣selfe, To be our God, and that wee shall be his people, to put his Low in our inward parts, and write it in our hearts, that all his people shall know him from the least to the greatest, and that hee will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sinnes no more: In this Covenant God wraps up all the parts of the salvation of his free grace, and doth fully oblige himselfe to them all: Now what is the reason that God doth thus oblige himselfe by Covenant, is it because of himselfe, that he might not goe back from his designe of grace to his people?
No, he is God that changes not, an immutable God, Numb. Num. 23.19. Psal. 90.2. 23.19. God from everlasting to everlasting, Psal. 90.2. But God makes this Covenant for our sake, that we might beleeve in him as a God of grace, and a faithfull God; the holy Ghost argues thus, he telleth us that a faithfull man will keepe his Covenant, much more God; as if hee had said, The faithfull God hath made his Covenant of grace, that you might beleeve he will make good his Covenant, as he is a faithfull God; God obligeth his owne faithfulnesse in a Covenant of grace, that his people might have both his grace and his faithfulnesse for a foundation of their faith, God will be beleeved by his people, and therefore hee in∣gageth himselfe as a faithfull gracious God: to the faith of his people, sayes God, I will pardon your sinnes and remember them no more, I will put my Law in your hearts, the Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, and I will be your God, and you shall be my people; beleeve all this, for I will doe it saith God, I the faithfull, the gracious and omnipotent God; I that am omnipotent, who can hinder me, I that am gracious, so that your sinnes can be no barre; nay, I that am faithfull and cannot lye nor repent, I have spoken it and I will make it good, what is the meaning of all this? but that we should beleeve the faith∣full word of our faithfull and gracious God; he will oblige his owne faithfulnesse by way of Covenant, that wee might beleeve in the free salvation of his owne grace made out in that Cove∣nant. Secondly, Consider what is Gods end in the promulgation, and spreading abroad of the Gospell. It is not that his people should beleeve in the salvation of his owne grace, why is Christ pleased to be the way of Gods salva∣tion to his people of his owne free grace, so that whom ever be∣leeveth thus on him, hath everlasting life, John 6.47. But that they might beleeve and bee saved by him, 29. verse, This is the worke of God that yee beleeve on him that hee hath sent: This is the end of the Gospell, for it is the effect of it, where it workes sa∣vingly, this is Gods worke, or the worke of his spirit in the Gospell, to make soules beleeve in Jesus Christ whom hee hath sent; when Christ sent forth his Disciples to preach the Gos∣pell, he directs them to the lost sheepe of the house of Israel, and biddeth them to Preach this, Mat. 10.6, 7. that the Kingdome of Heaven was at
hand, Mat. 10.6, 7. Matth. 10.6, 7. That is, goe to poore lost soules in them∣selves, and tell them that the Salvation of Gods free grace i at hand, it is neere to them, it seekes them, and saveth them freely; but what is the end of this, onely that the history of Christ might come to these lost soules; no sure, that is not enough for lost sheepe, but that they might beleeve in the salvation of Gods free grace and bee saved, and for this end hath God preserved his Gospell in the World, and made it to prosper, against all the power and malice of Satan and his instruments, that thereby his people might heare the glad tydings of salvation by free grace in Christ, and in the beleeving of it be saved and established, John 6.40. This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which stt the Sonne and beleeveth on him may have everlasting life: It is not onely a bare hearing or seeing of Christ in the flesh, but beleeving on him, that makes Christ to bee everlasting life to the soule; and this is the end of God in the Gospell, that soules might haw everlasting life, through beleeving in Christ; it is faith in the soules of his people that God intends both by giving the Gospel to the World, and preserving it in the World: So that for these two reasons, which might have bin exceedingly more inlarged, is doth appeare, That this is the will of God in keeping his salva∣tion to bee wholy the worke of his grece; that the hand which received and applyeth it should be a hand of faith, which is the worke of his owne free grace in the soule. Thus farre I have held forth matter for faith in the soules of beleevers to rest on for establishment in the poynt of salvation, by shewing, in some of Gods Attributes what hee is in himselfe, and what the designe of his free grace is, in the salvation of sin∣ners. My intention is to hold out more matter for faith to take in, before I give the arguments for Faith, or motives to Faith. Now I finde this by my selfe, and others; that feares and doubtings in the soule, next to its owne salvation, is about the Church and people of God on earth, how it will fare with them, and therefore I shall in the next place take that into con∣sideration. You shall heare poore soules that love Christ and his people, bt are weake in faith, make these sad complaints; O the poore Church and people of Christ, what will become of them; the
multitudes of the World they hate them, so that they use all their power and policy to ruine and destroy them; Princes off the Earth joyne themselves together and take counsell against them, if any in power own them, it is but a little number, and they but for a little time, we finde them men subject to temptations, many times when as by faire promises and some sinall beginnings men in power beget a confidence in Gods people concerning them, till fairer advantages are offered by Satan in a temptation to their flesh, and then they prove false to former promises and undoe all their beginnings of good, by setting open the Flood-gates of evill and tyranny upon the Church and people of God; Satan sheweth them the World, they are taken with the tempta∣tion, fall downe and worship him; and if Gods people will not doe so too, then the furnace must bee hear seaven times hotter then before; and if they desire to go into the Wildernesse to wor∣ship the Lord their God, then they are idle, the Task-masters must increase their worke; so that truly sayes this poore bleed∣ing heart, if a man have any thing more then a naked profession of Religion, in such a forme that will be turned by every blaft of power from men, he is then taken for a Sectary, an Heritique, and an enemy to Caesar; So that not onely the ignorant multi∣tude, but even Authority it selfe, which should protect them, is set against them: Now helpe Lord, sayes these afflicted Spirits, Psal. 12. good and goodly men they cease, for the faithfull fall among the children of men: They speake vanity every one with his neighbour; with flatter∣ing lips and with a double heart doe they speake: So that all world∣ly men, who are much the greater number, are either open or private enemies to the Church and people of God; therefore words are but the fleshly policy of their false hearts, the mischiefe lyes at the root; so that what ever the Serpent brew'd, prove, their businesle is to bruise the heele of the Woman, Christ in his Church and people; So that indeede, the condition of Gods Church and people in the World is very sadd, they are a Lilly amongst Thornes, enemyes either open or private round about them. Is it so poore heart? Why then looke up with an eye of faith, are all men false, yet God is true; will not the powers on earth bea kinde to Zion, doe they neglect their duty to protect the praise-worthy; Yet feare not, God will he kinds and faithfull
too, he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, all the powers is Heaven and Earth must obey him, for thy incouragement, and matter for thy faith to build on to the establishments of thy ∣rit, take into thy bosome, and seriously consider what fol∣lowes. First, Isa. 43.1. confider Gods interest in his people; Isa. 43.1.  now thus saith the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and hee that ∣med thee O Israel; feare not, for I have redeemed thee, I have ∣led thee by my Name, thou art mine. Observe the end of God is this Scripture is to keepe up his peoples hearts above feare, and the way God taketh is this, to let them know his interests is them; why sayes God, I have not onely created thes, but I have redeemed thee also, thou hast not onely my first but also my se∣cond creation upon thee, the new creature; thou are my re∣deemed one, my image, so that thou bearest my name, thy  myee looke upon thee as the redeemed of the Lord, thou beare my Name, and thou art mine, my interest, thou art Jacob my ser∣vant, Isa. 44.. and Israel whom I have chosen: Marke the Scriptures, Th art my chosen interest, my redeemed interest, my new crea interest, my servant whom I have chosen to beare my names the are thou mine, Now why shouldest thou feare? Doest thou think I will let my name be blotted out? I am God not Men, I cannot Iyes I cannot hee changable; if I choose thee to love thee, to make thee my redeemed one, upon whom I will ingrave my Nature, as a holy God in the new creature, and so proclaim thee to the World to be mine; I will never cast thee off againe, nor out of my love and care; thou art mine, and I am thine, my love thine, I am thine as I am a God of free grace in Christ, I am thine, my power is thine; that is, it is all for thee, as I am  Omnipotent, Almighty, alsufficient, and Eternall God, so  I thy God, therefore feare not; none can pluck the out of my hande: Zh. 2.12. Gods Church and people are his inheritance, Zach. 2.12. And the Lord shall inherite Judah his portion in the holy L Gods people are his inheritance in that Land where they are, God so accounte of them, that is, though Heaven and Earth be the Lorde, yes he counts his people his inheritance, that which he most loves and priseth; so that hee will never cast them off nor destroy them: God useth these tearmes meeely to speake o our capacity, that he might tell us we are to him, that which
count most deare to us, so as never to part with them, but to use our utmost power to preserve and keepe them, as our Name, and our Inheritance, we are exceeding tender of these, and doe our utmost to preserve them; so sayes God, my Church and people are to mee exceeding deare, as tender as the apple of my eye, all my power shall preserve them, they are my Name and my Heritage; nay the Church and people of God is Gods habi∣tation and his dwelling place, not as a confined God, but as a glo∣rious God and loving Father, Ezekiel 37.26, 27, 28. Ezek. 37.26, 27, 28. God Co∣venants to set his Sanctuary and his Tabernacle in the midst of his people for evermore: That is, I will dwell amongst you for ever, you shall be my delight, and my habitation for evermore. I will walke among you, sayes God, and will be your God, and you shall bee my people, Levit. 26.12. I am your God you are my interest, Lev. 26.12. I will live in you and walke amongst you, as in my Heritage, and the people which I have chosen to beare my Name; so the Apo∣stle Paul writing to the Church of God at Corinth, 2 Cor. 6.16. 2 Cor. 6.16. telleth them that they are the Temple of the living God, the people whom God had chosen to dwell in, and to walke in them as their God, and they as his people: Wee see then this is the Churches interest in God, they are his people whom he ownes for his, dwelleth in them, sets his Sanctuary and his Tabernacle in the midst of them, walkes with them, puts his Name upon them, makes them his owne Inheritance, and is as tender of them as of the apple of his eye; and this God declares to his Church and people that they should not feare, for hee hath power enough to preserve his owne interest, and love enough to answer all their wants; Gods people they are the sheep of his pasture, Psalm. 100. Psal. 100. Hee feedes and keepes them, as his owne peculier interest, the children of Zion finde bread enough in their Fathera house, Psalm. 134. last. Psal. 134. last. The Lord that made Heaven and Eerth blesse thee out of Zion: As if the Psalmist had sayd, God as a God of blessngs dwelleth in Zion, that is his heritage, his throne where he sits and blesseth; So in the 146 Psalm. last. The Lord that reignes for ever, Psal. 146. last. even the God of Zion: and the 147 Psalm. 12. Praise thy God O Zion: Psal. 147.12. The Lord is for ever thy God: O Zion, therefore praise him; this i Gods interest, he is the God of Zion, and so he regties forever, there he wraps up the glory of  grace, and there he right in his power and greatnesse for over: This doubtlesse is ground of
great establishment to our souls concerning the Church and peo∣ple of God though in the wildernesse, amongst ravenous beasts, and subtle foxes that seekes to destroy the tender vines; ye eve here they are Gods interest, his inheritance, his chosen and re∣deemed ones, in whom he dwelleth, and amongst these golden Candlesticks he walkes, so that his Church and people are cer∣tainly safe as they are thus his interest. But as if this were not enough to our doubting unbelieving hearts, see how God hath engaged his faithfulnesse to his Church and people by way of Covenant, besides the first making of his Covenant of grace in the 31. Jer. 31. Hebr. 8. Isa. 59.20, 21. Jer. and Hebr. 8. Observe how hee followeth it, Isa. 59.20, 21. And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turne from transgression in Jacob saith the Lord. As for me this is my Covenant with them, saith the Lord; My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seede, nor out of the mouth of thy seedes seede, saith the Lord from henceforth and for ever. This is Gods Covenant of giving Christ and his Spirit to his Church and people, that so hee might preserve his interest in them for ever; he makes his Covenant in Christ, that it might be an everlasting Covenant, Fsahn 89.34, 35, 36. and that believers might plead his owne Covenant before him in Christ. So in Psalm 89.34, 35, 36. My Covenant will I not breake, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Once have I sworne by my holinesse that I will not lye unto Da∣vid. His seede shall endure for ever, and his Throne as the Sunne be∣fore me. By David here is meant Christ; God makes a Cove∣nant and an Oath in Christ, that his seede, his Elect, Gods Interest, his Church and people, shall endure and stand before him for ever: God makes his Covenant to strengthen faith in his Church and people, that we might argue thus, God is an infi∣nite, pure, faithfull, and unchangeable God: so that what her covenants and sweares to, must certainly be, not one tittle of his word can faile, because he is a faithfull God, and his faith∣fulnesse he hath freely engaged to his Church and people by Co∣venant, for the establishment of their soules. In the next place, consider Gods care of his Church and peo∣ple, and his promises to them, in which he declares his interest in them. Isa. 43.2, 3. In Isa. 43.2, 3. When thou passest through the waters, I wil be with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not everflow thee.
When thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, for I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel, they Saviour. Observe Gods care of his Church, they shall not goe without him: and then the effect of his presence, though they go through dangers, yet in Gods care and presence they shall be preserved from all danger and ruine: God preferveth them as his owne interest; though they goe through deep waters, even rivers, yet they shall not overflow them; God keepes their heads above wa∣ter, he will not let his owne interest sincke; though they walk through the fire; yet God preserveth his interest from burning and consuming: This care over his Church and people God doth engage himselfe to by promise; thus God engageth his faithful∣nesse, that he will preserve his owne interest in the World, his Church and faithfull people; both which, his interest, and his faithfulnesse are strong arguments to faith, and God maketh this use of them. Feare not (sayes God) I am with thee, vers. 5. So in the next Chapter, beg. Feare not O Jacob my servant, Isa. 44. beg. and Jesu∣run whom I have chosen, for I will give you water when you thirst, and poure my Spirit upon your seede. And so goes on, making promises to his people and comforting them in their interest in him; I am your God, and your Redeemer, the holy one of Israel, besides me there is no God. If I say I will preserve you, none can hurt you, for besides me there is no God: I that am your God, am the only God, & I that am this will preserve you in all dangers as my owne interest, I will not leave you in fire or water; that is, not in any danger: so God speaks comfortably to Zion, in Isa. 51.3. He saith, Isa. 51.3. hee will comfort all her wast places, and hee will make her wildernesse like Eden, and her desart like the garden of the Lord; joy and gladnesse shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voyce of melody. God for his Churches comfort doth engage himself to make her fruit∣full in her most baren places, and it shall be the fruit of joy and gladnesse: She shall be fruitfull as the garden of the Lord, and in the Spirit of the Lord, and the fruits of that Spirit shall be thankefulnesse and a voyce of melody to the Lord. Here is God still maintaining his owne interest in his people, in all his care o∣ver his Church and people, & in his promises to them, therefore feare not, for the interest of God hath God for its interest. So in Ezek. 34.20. to the end; Ezek. 34.20. to the end. there God makes many a precious
promise to his people, and expresseth much of his care over them, and what a defence he will be to them: Sayes God, I will be judg betweene Cattle and Cattle, I will save my owne flocke, they shall us more be a prey to those proud cattell which thrust with the side & shoul∣der: But sayes God, I will set a shepheard over them, my servant D∣vid (which is Christ) and he shall feede them, hee shall be their shap∣heard, and I will be their God; yea, Christ shall be a Prince among them, I the Lord have spoken it. And I will make a Covenant of peace with the beasts of the field, so that they shall dwell safely in the wildernesse, and sleepe in the woods, and all about them shall be a blessing to them; Thus shall they know that I am with them, and that they are my people and the flocke of my pasture saith the Lord God. Here is a bundle of promises, all full of mercies, goodnesse, care, and providence from God; what is the reason of all this? why sayes God, they are my people: My interest is in them, they are the sheepe of my pasture, therefore Christ shall be their shp∣heard and their Prince, he shall take care of them, and rule over them with righteousnesse: Doe you thinke that I am carelesse of my people, my interest in the world, for I have given them a Prince of power and righteousnesse to rule over them, and to take care of them, even Jesus Christ, who shall feed them and pre∣serve them as the sheepe of my pasture. Isa: 4.5, 6. So likewise in Isa. 4.5.6. God promises to be a defence about all the glory of Zion, to be to them as a pillar of cloud by day, and of fire by night; to be a tabernacle, a refuge, and a covering to them from heate and stormes. This is the fruits of the Kingdome of Christ, it was Gods care in making him King over his Church; that they might not only be gover∣ned in righteousnesse, but also preserved by his power, and in him have a defence about all their glory, Hosea 14.4. God promi∣seth to heale the backe-sliding of his people, and to love them freely. This is a precious promise indeed, that Gods free love will heale the backe slidings of his people; it is a signe he will keepe his interest in them, if he loveth them freely, and that free love doth san∣ctifie them, and heale their back-slidings; nay God doth pro∣mise to doe it, so the this people may plead his promise to them when they finde their owne wants. See what care God takes of his Church and people whom he loveth freely, Isai 27.3. Isa. 27.3. I the Lord doe keepe it, I will water it every moment lest any hurt it, I will keepe it day and night. See what care God take of his Vineyard,
to keepe it day and night, so that none can hurt it, and to wa∣ter it every moment, that it may be very fruitfull in the spirit: God will make his Vinyard holy, it is his owne, he will mani∣fest his interest in making it like him, and then hee will preserve it as his owne, never leave nor forsake them, keepe them day and night safe in his free love and protection, so that not any shall have power to hurt them. Wicked men, though very indu∣strious, cannot be so watchfull to harme the people of God, as God is to keepe them from harm; he is a God that neither slum∣bers nor sleeps, he takes care of his people day and night, yea, every moment; there is no feare that he will loose his interest for want of care, nor can he loose them for want of power, for he is an infinite omnipotent God, and there is no God besides him, therefore care and power in God is sure defence to all his peoples glory, who are his interest, Isa. 30.18. The Lord waites to be gra∣clous to his people. As if he had said, God stayes for opportunities to doe his people good in, his heart and hand is full of mercies, and hee waites to shew forth the riches of his grace to them: God there exalts himselfe to shew mercy to his people: And the Pro∣phet David makes this ground to exhort Princes to give glory to God, by reason of his power and protection to his people, in Ps. Psalm 29.10.11. 29.10, 11. The Lord sitteth upon the flood (saith he) yea, the Lord set∣teth King for ever, the Lord will give strength to his people, the Lord will blesse his people with peace. It is the Lord that is King, it is he that reignes, and only can blesse with peace: and whom will he thus blesse, why, his people, his inheritance in the world, there∣fore Princes and earthly powers commit folly to thinke they can curse where he will blesse; for the Lord sitteth King for ever, and all earthly powers are made by him, and for to be his fotstoole, so that hee can kicke them downe when he pleaseth: and if they meddle with his annointed chosen heritage, hee will reprove Kings for their sakes; That is, as they are his foote-stool, so hee will trample them to dust, if they touch the apple of his eye, God will preserve his interest, his people, when as he shall turne the world to its first lump of darknesse, and were it not for this his interest that is in the world, the world would soon have a pe∣riod. And in Psal. 112.6. Psalus 112.6. Surely (sayes David) a good man hee shall not be moved for ever, the righteous shall be had in everlasting remem∣brance. It is the righteous man that is Gods interest, whom he hath
in everlasting remembrance of mercy. Psalm 125.1. So in Psalm 125.1. They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion, which cannot be moved, but abideth for ever. Mount Zion, that is, the Church and people of God, which is Gods interest, it cannot be moved; this moun∣taine can never be overturned, it is fixed in God, hee takes care of it as that whereon he hath placed his Name, to abide for ever. So in Psal. 133. last. Ʋpon the mountaines of Zion, there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore. Zion is the place where God commands his blessings & life for evermore to dwell; God dwels in Zion as a God of blessings, & the life of his Church and people for evermore, Psalm 147.2, 3. Psalm 147.2, 3. The Lord doth build up Jerusalem, he gathereth together the out-casts of Israel. Hee healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds. This is Gods care over his inheritance in the World, his chosen people, hee buildeth them up, and gathereth them together, hee healeth the broken-hearted, and bindeth up the wounded; that is, he ma∣keth them what they are, and supplyeth all their wants, he makes them his people, and takes care of them as his people: and upon this his interest hee doth expostulate the case with his people, how they should thinke that he should forget them, Isa. 49.14, 15, 16. But Zion saith the Lord, hath forsaken mee, and my Lord hath forgotten me. Why sayes God, can my people argue this thing with me? Can a mother forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the sonne of her wombe? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold I have graven thee upon the palmes of my hands, thy walls are continually before me. Mark it, God puts the case as home as possible creature-affections could carry it; can a tender mother forget the sonne of her womb, and the child of her breast? yea it is possible, for she is a creature: but what then, I am God, I will not forget my people; why sayes God, you are my people, my interest, I cannot forget you, I have gra∣ven you upon the palmes of my hands: you are continually before me, you are engraven in my hands, and my heart too, my eternall love hath done it, and eternity cannot wipe it out; you are e∣ver before me as my interest, I can never forget you, my thoughts are ever upon you for good, and my care is ever over you for protection; my right hand is over you, and my left hand is under you, my loving kindnesse doth embrace you for ever, you are the jewels I have chosen to glorifie my free grace on to all eterni∣ty;
you perhappes have found man false, what i that to me; though they seek to serve their corrupt ends on you, yet my end is pure, to preserve my glory in you as my interest, you must not judge me by men, the World is their interest, but you are mine: And when they sleight and trample you under foote to close with the World, then wil I sleight and trample them under soot in the preservation of you that are my peculiar interest, I will not give up my people whilst I keep my being; and I am God from everlasting to everlasting, and there is no God besides me: I will keep my people as my being, for it is the designe of my eternall love and free grace that my people shall have their being in me and with me for ever, you are graven upon the palmes of my hands for evermore; you are my people in Co∣venant, the elect and chosen of my grace, to be my inheritance and dwelling place for ever, I cannot forget you, you are ever before me, you lye in the wounds of my Sonne Jesus Christ, and you are righteous in my owne righteousnesse; so that to forget you, were to forget my selfe and Jesus Christ; I am a full trea∣sury of mercy and grace, and you are the onely vessels whom I have chosen to fill with my mercy and grace to all eternity, think you that I can forget you, as you are my inheritance; so I have made my selfe your inheritance, Rom. 8.17. and you are fellow heyres with Christ, is it possible I can forget you to whom I have given my selfe for an inheritance; no, I have you in remembrance as my beloved ones for ever, my owne grace hath begotten you, my heart of love is to you, and my outstretched arme of power and Majesty is for you, you shall knowe I have not forgotten you. I, and so shall your enemies too, they shall know that you are my interest, and my care is over you as my chosen Inheritance, whom I will preserve; in the utter ruine and destruction of your enemyes. Bloody hard-hearted Pharoah and all his Host overthrowne in the Red Sea, doth proclaym this to the World; so those that cast the three emminent Children of God into the fiery Furnace, they were consumed with the blast of the Furnace, when the Saints of God walked harmelesse in the fire; in the 33 Isa. beginning, Isa. 33. beg. there is a w pronounced against those that made waste and spoils of Gods people, and dealt trea∣cherously with them; the righteous God will be sure to spoyle
all treacherous wretches which deale treacherously with his peo∣ple: I, sayes God, doe you thinke that I have forgotten my people, and that you shall prosper in your treachery? Surely to, I have set my King upon my holy hill of Zion, Psal. 2. and hee shall breake the enemies of my Inheritance, my Church and people, with an Iron Rod, he shall dash them in pieces like a porters ves∣sell: Observe the Scripture, it is the power of Christ that is the defence of his Church, and the ruining of their enemies, and he doth it with an Iron Rod; Christ reignes over them in his in∣dignation, he dasheth them in pieces very easily, as a Potter doth a brickle piece of clay, and when they are thus broken they are quite destroyed, never to be made whole againe, no more thn a broken Pot; the enemies of Christ and his people, they rage, take counsell together, and set themselves against the Lord Christ and his annoynted people, but the Lord he fitteth in Heaven and laugheth them to scorne; what sayes God, you thinke to bring your ends about, and your designes to passe, you thinke your counsels very deepe they cannot be found out, and your power so great that it cannot be shaken; and nothing will satisfie your lusts but to destroy my interest from off the face of the Earth; I tell you sayes God, you imagine a vaine thing, and you are all this while inventing your owne ruines, you ingage your selves to certaine destruction when you set your selves against my people, be you what you will, Kings or Counsels, you shall surely be crushed to pieces in the undermining my interest, it is your folly to looke upon them in themselves, so they seeme a poore despisa∣ble people which doth harden your hearts, but did you see them as they are in me, my interest, you would then see your folly; what are you, or all the Nations of the Earth to me, no more then the drop of a bucket, or the small dust of the ballance, I will speake to you in my wrath, and vexe you in my sore displeasure, if once you touch my people the apple of myne eye; therefore sayes he, be wise O yee Kings, and be instructed you Judges of the Earth, you that make Lawes, and you that rule and reigne, take heed, be wise, meddle not with my Inheritance, I am onely King and Law-maker there, i will be your wisedome to kisse the Sonne, and to serve him with feare and trembling; but if you intrench upon his Kingdome and offend one of his little ones, I assure you he will be angry, he is zealous over them and his owne glory, he
will have no sharere in his Kingdome, nor will he suffer any to rend his Flock, but he will be angry, and then O Kings and Counsellors, you shall all perish from the way, you shall never bring your designes to effect, God will bring his designe to per∣fection, which is your ruine and your end, when Christ is in∣trenched upon in his glory and his jewells, then is his wrath kindled very hot, and then he shewes himselfe what he is in his victory over his enemies; in the 63. of Isa. Then he commeth from Edom with dyed garments, stained all over in the blood of his enemies, this is the day of his vengeance, now he treads downe his ene∣mies in his anger, makes them drunke in his fury, and brings downe their strength to the earth, thus doth Christ destroy the enemies of his people, For he hath an interest in them as God hath: in this 2 Psalme 6. Christ is King of his Church, Psal. 2. Isa. 9.6. Cant. 4.8, 1. Reve. 19.7. Eph. 1.22, 23. Mat. 12.49, 50 the govern∣ment is upon his shoulder, Isaiah 9.6. The Church is Christe Spouse, Cant. 4.8. his Love, 1. Shee is the Lambes Wife, Rev. 19.7. The body of which Christ is the head, Ephes. 1.22, 23. And Christ owneth his Saints and people to be his Brethren, and Sisters, Mat. 12.49, 50. Now what doe all these relations speake, but union with Christ: Cant. 2.16. My beloved is mine and I am his, Cant. 2, 16. and Christs interest in his people, which he will preserve as his glory and delight; he will not spoyle his Kingdome, nor suffer others to doe it, he rules in the middest of his Kingdome, in the hearts of his people with a golden Septre, even his owne spirit, he binds them to his commands by his words of love, and he protecte them from ruining by their enemies with his Rod of Iron, he will be sure to preserve his Kingdome at his glory, this his glory he will not give to another; and his Spouse he will keep as his delight, she is the Wife of his bosome, his love, his faire one, one whom he hath made faire by his love, and lovely in his loveli∣nesse, compleate in him, he hath washed her cleane in his owne blood, and hath made it life blood to her, so that she liveth to the glory of his grace, that streames in his blood; Christ hath made his Church so cleane in his blood, that it becomes his owne body, and he the head of it; Christ having purified a body for himselfe, will never be a head without a body; for he is  head as can both purifie and preserve his body; yea, he is such a head as is sensible of the sufferings of his body, as Christ hath
taken his people into all the relations of love, so they shall surely finde the fulnesse of his love in all those relations; Christ will be a King of love to his Kingdome, a Husband of love to his Spouse, a loving head to his body; and all his Brethren and Si∣sters shall finde him a Brother of love; Nay he is a loving Re∣deemer, so full of love that he became sinne for us to make us righteous, so full of love that he would beare all the stripes due to our sinnes, so that we might be healed in his stripes: What doe you argue from hence? Why that he will never cease to love his people, nor will he ever lose his interest in them, or be failing of his love in any re∣lation to them: he will certainely preserve them alive for whom he hath dyed, to give live: Because I live, sayes Christ, you live also, John 14.19. John 14.19. You are my body I am your head, I have life in my selfe and give life to my body; for I cannot be a head to a dead body, what life is in me is your life, for that is your interest in me, and this is my glory and the glory of my Fathers grace through me, That whom ever beleeveth in mee hath everlasting life, John 6.47. John 6.47. John 14.1. Now sayes Christ, let not your hearts bee troubled, you beleeve in God, beleeve also in mee, John 14.1. Beleeve in God through me, I have an interest in you as God hath, and I will be very tender of it, for I dyed to purchase it, and I live to main∣taine and preserve it, and assure your selves as certaine as I live you live, I live that in me you might have eternall life, and that God in me may fulfill all those promises which he hath made unto you of my peacefull Kingdome, and of the righteousnesse of my reigne in you and over you; therefore consider them, they are Gods promises made in me, not one tittle of them shall faile, they are your portion, your peculiar interest; take them and live upon God in them, for he will make them all good in me; you are Gods interest and mine, and these are your interest in God through me, Feare not little flock it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdome, the Kingdome of grace and of glory, of righteousnesse and peace, where none shall be able to disturbe or distroy you. I intend here to gather up some Scriptures together which holdeth forth this righteous and peacefull, Kingdome of Christ in the Earth. A first, Jer. 23.5, 6. Jer. 23.5, 6. Behold, the day is come saith the Lord, that
I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall reigne and prosper, and shall execute judgement and justice in the Earth. In his dayes Judah shall bee saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is his Name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OƲR RIGHTEOƲSNESSE. This is a promise of the righteous and peaceable Kingdome of Christ, this righteous branch and King in the Text is meant of Christ, for this is his Name, The Lord our Righteousnesse, which is Christ, whom is a God made righteousnesse to us; now behold Christ our King and righteousnesse, his day is come saith the Lord, when he shall reigne in righteousnesse amongst his people, and shall execute judgement and justice in the Earth, and in his dayes Judah shall be saved and Israel shall dwell safely, it shall be a Kingdome of peace and safety, for the Lord our righteousnesse shall reigne; a righteous reigne must needs produce a peacefull Kingdome, therefore Christ the righteous is called the Prince of peace, when he shall execute his judgement then will justice be done in the Earth; then Judah shall be saved from the hands of the spoyler, and Israel shall be kept in safety: I, this will make a Kingdome of peace indeed, and this is the peace that Christ our righteousnesse will bring in the dayes of his glorious reigne a∣mongst his people in the Earth; so in the 11. of Isaiah, Isa. 11.1. to the 10. from the 1. to the 10. verse: There is a Prophesie of the peaceable Kingdome, of the Branch out of the Root of Jesse, which branch is Christ; it is said the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, and it shall be a spirit of Counsell, and might, and knowledge, and the feare of the Lord; so that he shall judge the poore with righ∣teousnesse, and reprove with equity, for the meek of the Earth: That righteousnesse shall be his girdle, and faithfulnesse the gir∣dle of his reynes: Now observe what is the fruite of the reigne of this righteous King, why it is peace in all the holy Mountaine, neither Wolfe nor Leopard, Lyon or Beare, Aspe nor Cocka∣trice, shall hurt or destroy in any part of it, but this King of righteousnesse will make the Wolfe and the Lambe dwell toge∣ther, the Leopard to lye downe with the Kid, and the Calfe and young Lyon together, and a little child to lead them; the Cow and the Beare with their young ones to feed and lye downs together, and the sucking child to play at the hole of the Aspe, and the weaned child to put his hand into the Cockatrices Den.
What is the meaning of all this? Why it is a description of that glorious change which the righteousnesse of Christ in his reigne over the Earth, shall have upon the natures of his and his peoples Enemies those Beasts of prey; though they remaine Wolfe and Leopards, Lyons and Beares, Aspe and Cockatrices, yet the righteousnesse of his reigne shall be so glorious that it shall chiane up their devouring nature and take off their strength to mischief, his righteous government shall over awe them, and be as a hooke in their nostrills, so that a young childe, a little strength shall lead them, for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea; God shall be knowns to reigne over all the Earth; it shall be covered with the brightnesse of his glory, his enemies shall know and tremble, and his peo∣ple shall know and rejoyce: Isa. 42. beg. So the same Prophet in the 42. Isa. beginning, speaking of Christ, sayes of him, A bruised reede shall be not breake, and smoaking Flax shall he not quench: for hee shall bring forth judgement unto truth, he shall judge and give judgement in truth, hee shall set judgement in the Earth, and the Isles shall waite for his Law. He shall reigne and command the whole earth, they shall all waite for his Law, and then shall the whole Earth be filled with judgement when the righteous childe Jesus shall reigne: So the Prophet David speaking of the reigne of Christ, under Solomn his Type, in the 72. Psalme 7. so on: In his dayes shall the righ∣teous flourish, and abundance of peace so long as the Sunne and Moone endureth; he shall have dominion from Sea to Sea, un∣to the ends of the Earth, those that dwell in the Wildernesse, the Beasts of prey, shall bow downe to him, and his enemies shall licke the dust; Kings shall come in with their presents, and offer gifts to him; yea all Kings shall fall downe before him, all Na∣tions shall serve him, and he shall deliver the needy and poore, he shall redeeme their soules from deceite, his Name shall endure for ever; men shall be blessed in him, and all Nations shall call him blessed, the whole earth shall be filled with his glory. Thus will Christ reigne in righteousnesse, and all the Kings of the Earth shall tremble for their unrighteous reignes, they shall all come in and offer up their Crownes and Sceptres to this King of righteousnesse, bow downe before him and lay all their power at his feet, and waite upon him for his Law, then shall
the Earth rejoyce that the Lord reignes, and then shall the righ∣teous be glad that the King of Zion rule in the whole Earth, then shall the Land be a Land of peace; when righteousnesse reignes then will peace flourish like the Tree planted by the river side, that is alwayes green and flourisheth: When Christ comes to reigne thus in the Earth, it must needs be peace, for then all his people will be one, they will all have but one Name, the Lords people and his name written upon them; Zachariah 14.9. And the Lord shall bee King over all the Earth: in that day shall there bee one Lord, and his Name one. When the Lord thus reignes over the whole Earth, his people will be one, then Names shall not di∣vide his people, for they shall all be knowne by his Name, and he their King; a holy King and a holy People, he shall be known by his holinesse and righteousnesse, so shall his people; his holy Name shall be written upon them, and that shall be a defence a∣bout all their glory: Take one Scripture more which is exceed∣ing full to this purpose, in the 2. Isaiah beginning: Isa. . beg. Micha 4. beg. And it shall come to passe in the last dayes, that the Mountaine of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the Mountaines, and shall bee exalted above the Hils: and all Nations shall flow into it, and many people shall goe and say, Come yee and let us goe to the Mountaine of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and hee will teach us of his wayes, and wee will walke in his pathes: For out of Zion shall goe forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem; and hee shall judge among the Nations, and shall rebuke my people; and they shall beate their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Speares into Pruning-hookes; Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, nei∣ther shall they learne War any more. First, this Scripture telleth us the time of Christs reigning thus in righteousnesse, it shall be in the last dayes the latter end of the World. Secondly, How this thing shall be, that Christ shall be lifted up above all Hils and Mountaines, above all powers and great∣nesse in the World; he shall then take all power and govern∣ment into his owne hands, all the Mountaines shall flow into him; the Mountaine of the Lord shall swallow them all up, there shall in those dayes goe forth no Law but what goeth forth of Zion, Christ shall reigne amongst his people, and the Earth shall be filled with the peace of his reigning in righteousnesse,
when the Law goeth forth of Zion, then the spirit for War shall be rebuked, and the Sword of Gods spirit shall turne the Sword of the flesh into Plow-shares, and the Speares into Pruning∣hooks, so that Nation shall never war against Nation more, all Wars shall be hush't and gone, righteousnesse shall reigne, and peace which is the fruits thereof; for Warre is the fruit of un∣righteous reigning and governing, nothing but righteousnesse, justice, and judgement, can bring lasting peace into the World, or any part of it, and I wish all that love peace did love righte∣ousnesse as well, and imbrace peace for righteousnesse sake; all such as doe so, Christ will satisfie them, for behold he comes with healing under his winges, he brings righteousnesse and peace with him, his righteousnesse brings peace; he is the righteous King and the Prince of peace, and he that shall come will come and will not tarry. But if any shall aske what I intend in all this: My answer is, To gather up matter for faith to live upon, to the establishment of my owne soule and others, By beleeving in the Lord our God: And I trust I shall not lose my end; it appeares to me to be precious matter, for Faith to live upon God, and Christ, to the establishment of soules: That the Church and people of God on Earth, are Gods interest and Christs interest, Gods Inheritance and Christs Kingdome, over whom he doth reigne in righteousnesse; his jewels, the purchase of his blood, and the throne of his glory; those whom God hath chosen from all eternity to be the redeemed of his free grace, to unbo∣some his love, and reveale his glory too, to all eternity; those to whom he hath given Christ and in him all things, to whom God is a God in Covenant, and that of free grace, for whom God hath satisfied his owne justice through his grace in Christ, and made them compleate, even his owne righteousnesse in him; for whose sake God reproves Kings, overthrowes unrighteous powers, dashing them in pieces like a Potters vessell with his I∣ron Rod, and amongst whom Christ shall reigne King for ever, in peace and righteousnesse. This is to me abundant ground of faith, to believe in, and to cast my precious eternal soul with al my comforts and concernments, upon Gods eternall love and free grace in Christ, salvation in all the parts of it to Gods Elect in Christ, is the fruits of eter∣nall
love and free grace in God; this is a sure foundation to build on, it beares a great weight its true, but it will never shrinke or faile, it hath been tryed from eternity; free grace is the foundation, and Christ the corner stone of this eternal buil∣ding, so that it will abide to eternity. Upon these very considerations we shall finde the Church of God in the 46, 47, and 48. Psalmes living upon God by faith, 46, 47 and 48. Psalmes. and praising him through beleeving. God is our refuge and strength: a very present helpe in time of trou∣ble, sayes the Church: That is, God is our God, and we are his interest, so that he is presently at our helpe, he waites to be gra∣dous to us, he cannot forget us we are so deare to him; well, what use doth the Church make of this; why to establish her selfe upon God by beleeving; Therefore will not wee feare though the earth be removed, and though the Mountaines be carryed into the midst of the Sea; and so goes on in her confidence in God, what is it makes the Church so confident? Why this, that shee was Gods interest in the World, and therefore though he should con∣found the whole frame and power and glory of the earth, carry all the mountaines into the middest of the Sea, as Pharoah and his Host; yet that he will preserve his Church and people, as his owne interest: There is a River of Free grace in God, Psal. 46.4. that streames for ever to make glad the City of God; his people are the Children of his infinite wombe of love, and the preservation of these, is the proper act of his Almighty power; this City of God is Gods interest, and inheritance, his dwelling place: Psal 46.6. God is in the middest of her, shee shall not be moved, he uttered his voice, the earth melted; but this City remaines, for it is his interest, and God is her refuge. Therefore sayes God to the Church, live upon me as your Re∣fuge, and your present helpe in time of need, doe not doubt or feare, but be still and quiet in your spirits: Be still, Psal. 46, 8, 9, 10. and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the Heathens, I will be exalted in the Earth, I will cease Warres, I will breake Bow and Speare, and burne the Chariots with fire: I will doe all this for you that are my interest; I will make good all my promises to you, of the peacefull and righteous reigne of my Son Christ over you; I will be exalted in the Earth. The Church beleeves God in this and shee is at rest, shee is still and quiet knowing that God is God, and
that shee is his interest; The Church answers th in verse 11. The Lord of Host is with us, Psal. 46.11. the God of Jacob is our God. Therefore will we not feare, but rejoyce in God as our God, our strength and our refuge, and we his interest: O clap your hands (all yee peo∣ple) and rejoyce in God with tryumph, for God is King of all the Earth. Psal. 47.1, 7. God reignes over the Heathens: God sitteth upon the throne of his bolinesse: then sets forth his judgements on his peoples ene∣mies, and the feare that comes upon the Kings of the Earth; Ac∣cording to thy Name O God, so is thy praise unto the ends of the Earth, thy right hand is full of righteousnesse: Psal. 48.10. Marke the Scripture, Ac∣cording to thy Name thou art righteous and that is thy praise; thou art called a God of righteousnesse and we so trust in thee, and thou art according to thy Name; this is thy praise, thou art righteous God; Psal. 48.11. observe the conclusion that is made of these promises: Let Mount Sion rejoyce, let the Daughters of Judah  glad, because of thy judgements: That is, let them that have an in∣terest in thee, and who is thy interest in the World, rejoyce and be glad that thou art according to thy Name, a God of judgement and righteousnes, for this makes it certain that thou wilt preserve thine owne interest, & them that thou causest to trust in thy name as a righteous God; come, sayes the Church, see what God hath done for us, and then you will say as well as we, that God is according to his Name a righteous God. Walke about Sion, Psal. 48.12, 13. and goe round about her; tell the Towers there∣of: Marke yee well her Bulwarkes, consider her Palaces, that you may tell is to the Generations following: Marke well and consider how the righteous God defends his interest in the World, those that trust in his Name, his mercy, his providence, his Almighty pow∣er, greatnesse, and majesty; these be the Towers and Bulwarks of Sion, his bsome of love, and his Temple of holinesse, that is her Palace of delight, shee hath her delight in God, and her defence in God; Marke and consider it well, that you may tell is the Generations following, that they may fall downe at the feet of this righteous God, which will ever be according to his Name, and not dare to grieve a member of Sion, or to wound the inte∣rest of God; For, sayes the Church, this God is our God for ever and ever, Psal. 4.14. he will is our guide even unto death: He in our God, and he is ever so; we are his interest and he will preserve us so for ever, he will guide us to death, carry us safe through all the Wilder∣nesse,
till we come into Heaven. Thus is the Church of God e∣stablished by beleeving in God as her God, and a God that will ever be according to his Name, a faithfull, righteous, gracious, and glorious God to all that trust in him: Thus also doe the Saints of God tryumph in God as their God, and as they are his interest in the World: So the Prophet David, Psal. 92.4. Psal 92.4. Thou Lord hast made me glad, I will tryumph in thee: Thou art my joy and thou shalt be my glory, this is my joy that thou art mine, Psal. 95.3, 4. and I will glory as I am thy interest; So in Psalm. 95.3, 4. He glories in the greatnesse, power and majesty of God, because he did beleeve that God was his God, and that he was part of Gods interest in the World; and in Psal. 96.10. Psal. 96.10. Psal. 97.1. I sayd among the Hea∣thens that the Lord reigneth: And Psal. 97.1. The Lord reigneth, let the earth rejoyce: Psal. 98.8, 9. Let there be joy, sayes he, Psal. 98.8, 9. for the Lord commeth to judge the Earth, with righteousnesse shall bee judge the World, and his people with equity: So Psal. 99.1, 2. Psal. 99, 1, 2. The Lord reigneth, let the people tremble: The Lord is great in Zion hee is bigh above all people. What doth the Prophet meane by all this? Why he telleth us in the 121. Psalme, I will fix my eye upon God, sayes he, my helpe commeth from the Lord, the Lord is my keeper and shield: And so goes on to declare his faith in God, that God which he had before so extolled: why sayes he, this is the God I will live upon, it is faith in God that makes my heart glad: I beleeve he reigneth over all the Earth in his power and great∣nesse, he is my God, I am his interest, and he reignes over me in righteousnesse; by all this it doth appeare that the Church and people of God, have beene and are established by beleeving in God as their God, taking his Word of truth for truth, and be∣leeving God in it, resting upon God according to his Name, be∣leeving in him as the God of free grace; taking the counsell of good King Jehoshaphat, Beleeve in the Lord your God, so shall you bee established. But me thinkes I heare some ready to Object, Is it no more but beleeve? doe you make so easie a thing of beleeving? why doe you tell us of beleeving? is that in our power? is it not the gift of God? is it not above the reach of humane reason and un∣derstanding? is it a worke of nature or grace? To this I answer, and acknowledge that Faith is the gift of God, Ephes. 2.8. But take this with it, this God is a God of free
grace, which giveth Salvation to his people, and the hand of faith to lay hold on his salvation, all in his owne grace; and therefore I tell my owne soule and others of beleeving in God, because he is a God of free grace, I know faith is the worke of Divine power, it is not of our selves; therefore I say againe God is a God of free grace; stay not in selfe, lye at the throne of grace as that poore man in the Gospell: Lord I beleeve, helpe thou my unbeliefe: Me-thinkes he speakes thus, Lord I beleeve that thou canst helpe me against my unbeliefe; that thou canst destroy the unbeliefe that is in me, and make me to beleeve upon thee, to establishment; and I thinke this is the language of the Objecti∣on, which saith, Faith is the gift of God; is it not the same with this? Lord thou canst make me beleeve in thee, it is thy worke to destroy my unbeliefe, and to helpe my soule against it. This is all I say, God is a God of free grace, and faith is the gift of his grace; he waites to be gracious to give his free grace and all the gifts of it freely to those that need it, nothing in crea∣ture but want, makes it an object for Gods grace; for he gives all freely without price, and without money: Now if faith be the gift of God, as thou doest acknowledge, then lye at the throne of his grace, if thou wantest, know all he hath is for those that want; waite on him, and tell him he can helpe thee against thy unbeliefe. But you demand whether faith were not above the reach of humane reason and understanding? I acknowledge, Yes; when it is under its naturall darknesse; so that the soule it lives in nothing but nature as it fell from the first Adam: So The naturall Man descernes not the things of God, neither can be, because they are spiritually discerned. But when God comes to worke the worke of his grace in any soule, he doth not destroy his owne first and pure worke of nature in the man, the fall from grace corrupted the reason and understanding of man, as it did the whole man; so the restoration to grace doth restore the first image of God in the reason and understanding of men; though faith as it leads to God, and pitcheth the soule upon God, be above the light or reach of reason in it selfe, yet when God workes faith in the soule, and so takes the soule up to himselfe, to live in him and to rest on him, God doth not thereby
destroy reason and understanding in the man, that were to make him a Beast: No God doth inlighten and convince the soul in its reason and judgement, though when it was in its corrupted na∣ture, it could not discerne the things of God, nor understand the worke of his salvation of free grace in Christ through be∣leeving, so as to choose God for a portion, and to rest on the salvation of his free grace; yet when God shall inlighten the reason and judgement of a man by his owne spirit, so that now it is spirituall reason and judgement, then by the spirit of God in it, it comes to apprehend and to close with the salvation of Gods free grace in Christ through beleeving; it is now reason and judgement sanctified, and made light in the Lord: so that now it seeth a beauty in the grace of God, and Christ the gift of his grace; now it is no more its owne under its corruption, but Gods in his renuing grace, by which in Christ he hath redeem∣ed it, out of the power of Satan and the region of darknesse into his owne marvelous light, though t first it may onely fee men walke as trees, yet God will not leave it, till he makes it see plainely, God is light, and in him is no darknesse at all. So that as God commeth into the reason and judgements of his people, they have light in the Lord, the worke is neverthe∣lesse but the more a worke of grace in God, that he doth thus sanctifie and inlighten the reason and judgements of his people, carrying on the worke of his salvation in the soule; God is not bound to worke thus, for the whole worke of his salvation is free, but that hee chooseth to worke thus, I thinke is the experience of all Saints that ever had reason and judgement, in which Saints have much joy, and by which doubtlesse the glory of Gods free grace is much manifested and declared; and there∣fore I shall in the next place hold forth some grounds and rea∣sons, to the sanctified reason and judgements of Saints why to beleeve in God, why to take his word, and to rest upon the salva∣tion of his free grace. Grounds for faith from reason. First, Because there is truth in none but God and his Word; by God here I meane Father, Sonne, and Spirit; all truth is in this Fountaine, and what ever truth is in the creature, it is a streame from this fountaine: so much of truth, so much a beama of God in any soule; It is one of Gods Attributes which we have
mentioned to be a God of truth, which is the true God: I shall adde little to the proofe of it, only a Scripture or two, Psal. 18.30. As for God, Psalm 18.30. his way is perfect: the word of the Lord is tryed, be is a buckler to all those that trust in him. As if the Prophet had said, I have tryed God, by trusting him, and I find him true and per∣fect in all his words and wayes, his word is perfectly true; if her say he will be a buckler to you, you may trust him, he is a tryed God of truth, he never deceived any foule that trusted in him, his truth reacheth to the clouds, Psalm 57.10. sayes the Prophet, Psalm 57.10. It is boundlesse truth, it is the truth of God, whom is all truth. So Psalm 117.2. The truth of the Lord endureth for ever. That is, God is for ever a God of truth, hee is nothing but truth, not doth he speake any thing but truth; not any soule can be decal∣ved by believing what he sayes, he meanes what hee sayes, for he is the God of truth. Now I would argue with reason, and aske it whether it would choose truth or untruth to believe in: Doubtlesse this will be the answer of a rationall man, I doe choose truth; for this it my misery, I know not what to believe, there is so much untruth is the world, nor can I finde any man, or sort of men to trust, all men are so false: If mens words, promises, or engagements were any safety, wee have had enough of them: but men forget their words as winde, there is no truth in them, so that as a reasona∣ble creature I am at a losse what to believe, of when to believe any thing that man shall say; Is it so Reason? Would you believe truth if you could find it? why then looke up to God, ponder his word; if you find any promise that answers your wants, be∣lieve in him, he will make all good that he hath said, you dare not trust men, because they have so often deceived you; let me re∣turne the argument backe upon you, therefore trust God because he never deceived you, nor any that ever trusted in him; take his word into thy armes of faith as fulfilled already, for not a tittle of all that he hath spoken shall fail; what God promiseth to give his people, is as really theirs, as though they had it in possession, and they may build upon it, he will not deceive them; nay he can∣not, for he is God, and cannot lye; this is one argument to rea∣son; the truth of God, because it is an act of reason to put trust in truth, and to choose truth to trust in. A second argument to reason, is the Almighty, omnipotent,
and infinite power of God; and me thinks this should be a strong argument with reason, because reason is so apt and prone to trust in power: Darke and corrupted reason makes the powers of the world to be an argument against faith, when faith would have the soule trust upon God, and to walke in the wayes of ho∣linesse and righteousnesse. Why sayes this sinfull reason, all the powers of the earth will be against us, and come as a flood upon us and devoure us if we should doe so. Well, if power bear so much sway in reason, then to sanctified reason it will be a good argument to beget trust in God, to plead the power of God, Isa. 40.15. and so on, Isa. 40.15. so on. there you may read of the power of God, That it is so full and great, that all the Nations of the earth are but as the drop of a bucket, and the small dust of the ballance: all power compared to God is vanity, and lesse then nothing. Now sanctified reason, here is power for thee to trust in, that power which is all power, and commande all powers; that foun∣taine which giveth forth all power, and can draw all into him∣selfe againe when hee pleaseth; that power that doth in heaven and earth what ever pleaseth him; That power with whom all things are possible, Matth. 19.26. It is not possible for thee to trust in this power for any thing which is, or can be impossible to him: could corrupted reason but find a glimpse of this amongst men, it would adore it, and make a god of it; Oh then let san∣ctified reason admire this God and rest upon him, who is really that power with whom all things are possible. God hath an in∣finite power, he can doe for us exceeding abundantly above all that we can aske or thinke, Ephes. 3.20. What thinke you of this, Ephes. 3.20. Rea∣son? you thinke your thoughts are very vast, and that you can aske very much; yet in all this you are exceeding abundantly be∣low, what the Almighty, Omnipotent, and Infinite power of God can doe: We can want but as finite creatures, but hee can give as an infinite God; the flesh we feare, is finite flesh, the God we trust is an infinite God. If power can sinck the scale with reason then when God appeares to it, all flesh will prove ligh∣ter then vanity, lesse then nothing. Job mentions some of the acts of Gods power, in Job 12.7. so on, and 26.5. so on. Job 12.7. so on. Job 26.5. so on. How he rules in his whole creation, the Beasts, the Earth, the Foules; that in his hands is the soule of every living thing, and the breath of all man∣kinde. That with him is strength and wisdome, that hee looseth the
bond of Kings, he leadeth Princes away spoyled. Hell is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering: The pillars of heaven trouble, and are astonished at his reproofe. So goes on to set forth Gods power and greatnesse: and in the last verse of Chap. 26. L these are parts of his wayes: but how little a portion is heard of him: but the thunder of his power who can understand. When he had spoken all what he said before, these, sayes he, are but part of the ways of the insinite great God, and a very little part of that omnipotent power that is in him, it is but a very little that wee can conceive of God, the great thunder of his power cannot be understood by us, it is too great for us; hee is the great God, and infinitely great in power. Psal. 24.8, 10. So the Prophet David in Psalm 24.8, 10. Who i the King of glory, the Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle. The Lord of Hosts is the King of glory. This is his glory, he is Lord of Host, the strong and mighty God, infinite in power. And in Psalm 29.4, 8, Psal. 29.4, 8, 9, 10. 9, 10. He shewes what power God hath in his voyce, how full of Majesty it is, That it shakes the Wildernesse; that is, the Whole world, and that he is King for ever. This is the King of glory, this is our God of power: Now here is pow∣er for sanctified reason to live upon, and it is the power of the God of truth, which will for ever be as truly power, as hee is truly God: so that if either truth or power may be arguments with Reason, here is both in God, which if believed on, will for ever prove powerfull truth, and truth in power, because it is God in both. The third argument for faith which I shall offer to sanctified Reason, is the eternity and immutability of God; That his truth is eternall truth, and his power is unchangeable and immutable power, you shall never finde him lesse then God, and that is in∣sinite all, more then can be conceived or expressed. Reason will choose a tocke to build upon, because it is a sure foundation, and will abide; why now let me tel the best of reason that this is God, he is the eternall Rocke of Ages from everlasting, and will abide to everlasting; there is no shaking this foundation, nor destroy∣ing what is built upon it: time did not make it, nor can time make it lesse then it is. Reason, what can you aske for perpetuity that is beyond eternity: Eternity is God, and what God is, is e∣ternall, every thing besides God changes, but nothing can change God, Psal. 41.13. he is the God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm 41.13.
Israel's God is an eternall God, alwayes God, Psalm. 48.14. Psal. 48.14. For this God is our God for ever and ever. There it no end of  being God, and that his people sindes and confesseth, Psal. 93.1, 2. Psal. 102.12. and so shall every soule that trusteth in him. The Prophet Isaiah in his 26. Chap. ver. 4. cals upon Gods people to trust in him upon this very consideration: Trust in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jebovah is everlasting strength. As if hee had said, when you trust in God, trust in him as an everlasting God: Doe not doubt the Lord Jehvah, as though hee should faile you at any time, for he is everlasting strength, and everlasting God, he is Jehovah, so that he can never saile, and therefore trust in him. So Job says of God in his 23d Ch. ver. 13. Job 23.13. Mal. 3.6. That he is of one minde, and who can turne him. And God sayes of himselfe in Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not, therefore yee formes of Jacob are not consumed. God is unchangeable in his eternall purposes of love and free grace to his people, therefore they are not confir∣med; therefore trust in him, because his love is unchangeable. Let me aske sanctified Reason now, if it have any thing to object against trusting soule and body, and all that is, or can be deare upon the eternall love and free grace of the eternall, immuta∣ble, and unchangeable God: Nay, doth it not come with autho∣rity upon Reason, that eternall free grace should be trusted with eternall lost soules, which have nothing to plead for their salvation but his everlasting grace. If my eternall grace be your argument for salvation, sayes God, then let it be your rest, rest upon it, it shall be your salvation, you shall finde it so to all e∣ternity: As I am eternally God, and God from everlasting to everlasting, unchangeable in my love, so shall the salvation be of all such soules as thus rest upon me for salvation, for I can no more change in my love, then cease to be God: Soules that rest on my love for their salvation, shall find me eternally God, and my love their eternall salvation. The 4th consideration wch I shall offer to sanctified Reason as an argument why to live fingly upon God by faith, is our own, & other Saints experiences of God in his grace and goodnesse, in his power and faithfulnesse, and the glorious workings of that fulnes that is in himself for the good of his people; this is a large field I have to walke in, it is a most glorious subject, more fit for a large treatise then an argument: but I shal in this only use
it as an argument, and in it confine my selfe to as  a com∣passe as possible I can in so large a subject; I shall first gather from holy writ such experiences, as Saint of old have reco which they did doubelesse to manifest Gods glory, and to esta∣blish the hearts of Saints in after Ages, and then I shall wish a remembrance of those many wonderfull miraculous experience that this present age hath had of the glorious workings of God in his power, wisdome, Majesty, and mercy, to and for his poore hated and desplied people that rust in him. First, the experiences o Saints in former ages; I shall beg with that of Mordecai, Queene Esther, and the whole Nation of the Jewer; the Booke of Esther doth at large set forth the wicked and bloody designe of proud and wicked Haan against all these, and to what ripenesse he had brought his worke,  to the Kings feale and authority, for him to let forth the flood gates of his malice and mischiefe up in them, and how ready thi wretch was to put in execution the power hee had obtai∣ned, for he had prepared a gallows for Merdecai:  reading that History, we sha finde how in every part of the designe of that bloody man he is disappointed, how he fals himselfe into the pit which he had digged for others, and is hanged himselfe upon that gallows which he in the pride and malice of his  did prepare for Mordecai: I shl leave the Readers to that Histo∣ry in Scripture for further light, and onely make refiral of the close of it in Esther 8.15, Esther 8, 15, 16. 16. And Mordecai went out from the presence of the King in royall apparell, of blew and white, and with a great crowne of gold, and with a garment of fine linnen, and people, and the City of Shushan rejoyced and was glad. The Jewes had light and gladnesse, and Joy, and honour. Observe the experience that these poore hearts had of the power, the mercy, and the wisdome of God, that when H∣mans malice had conjoyned it selfe with the Kings power, so th all things were ready, and the time oppointed to make a find end at once of Gods interest amongst them; the whole Nation of the Jonas must be sacrificed to Haman's lust: Then God appear, and  knowne his designe, and changes the whole faced things as they did then appeare; the Kings heart, that is cha∣ged, and Merdecel, whom represented the whole Nation of the Jones,  must be by the same hand that decreed him,
recalled from the gallowes, to be honoured in wearing before the people the Kings royall apparell, and a crowns of gold; That is, Mordecai and the whole Nation of the Jewes, which to all hu∣mane understanding, were past all hopes of being any thing but  and undone people, and now made a people of safety, honour, and glory in the Land: This is an experience of God, that his workes of mercy and grace for his people, they are sure and secret; though God hides his workings for his people from the world till his owne time of ruling comes, yet these workes of God are sure, though secret; the workes of God are like E∣zekiel's vision of the wheele within the wheeles, he workes his owne ends in giving a long life to wicked men to runne in after their ends, and makes the wicked doe his worke, when as they thinke they are doing their owne; it was Gods designe that Ha∣man should prepare his owne gallowes, which he did, when he thought he had been working his own ends in making it for Mor∣decai, so God made Haman to dictate to the King what Mor∣decai's honour should be, when as he thought he had been pre∣paring honours for himselfe: the wayes of God are past finding on: but doubtlesse such experiences as these cals very loud for tru∣sting in him, and depending on him, this is one great experi∣ence of God. The Prophet David in a day of calamity cals to mind the experiences that our Fathers of old had of God, Psol. 22.4, 5. Our fathers trusted in thee, and thou didst deliver them, Psal. 22.4, 5. they cryed unto thee, and were not confounded. That is, they had experience of thee to be a gracious, faithfull, powerfull God; and upon this account he blesseth God, in Psal. 18. to last. Psa. 18. to last. as ha∣ving had experience of him in his great workings for his people, in setting up the Throne of Christ, and preserving his seede for evermore. And in Psalm 23. the Prophet makes mention of the experiences that he had of God, as a ground of his resting on him, and assurance that God would never faile him, he makes this declaration of his faith in the first verse, I shall not want; this is strong faith. What is the reasen of this  in the ? why hee telleth us it is his interestion  that he had of him: my reason, say , is this;  my Shepheard, therefore I shall not want. But why are  fident? may not you want though the Lord be  why sayes the Prophet, I am confident up
maketh me to lye downe in greene pastures, hee leadeth me bside the stil waters, he restoreth my soule, he leadeth me in the paths of rights∣nesse for his Names sake. These are the experiences that I have had of God, and doe you aske mee now why I am so confidet? Why sayes he, I have not only received all this mercy and grce from God, but God hee is the fountaine of all the mercies I re∣ceive, and it is his owne bowels that moves him, he doth a this to me for his owne Name sake, not because of any worthinesse in me; I could not then be confident, but he leadeth me into, and cloatheth me with his owne righeousnesse, and all for his name sake, to the glory of his grace: This is the experience that I have of the Lord who is my Shepheard, and upon this I am so esta∣blished i God, that though I walk through the valley of the shad of death, I will feare no evill, for thou art with me: And I have had such often and ample experiences of thy mercy, power, faithfulnesse, and goodnesse, that though the way I walke in be as dark as death, that my flesh can see no way out of it, yet I will trust in thy power and mercy to deliver me, upon the for∣mer experiences I have had of thee. This I know, it is thy free grace that hath chosen me to be an heire of glory from all eter∣nity, and all the experiences I have had of thee, hath proved thee to be a God of free grace, and that this love and grace shall, as it is thy selfe, abide for ever; so that this is a ground of assurance to me, my experience of thee, that I shall be for e∣ver with thee; for so he sayes, that hee shall dwell with the Lord for ever. This Prophet had a great stocke of experience in God, and in this place he makes the right use of them, that for which I shall here gather them up together; the Prophet David he acts for his owne soule, and doth counsell other souls upon the experiences he had of God, in Psalm 31.5. He commits his spirit into Gods hand: That is, casts himselfe wholly upon God, and in vers. 7. giveth the reason of it, because hee had experimented God in his adversities, that God had not shut him up in the hands of his enemies, but set his feete in a large roome. This ex∣perience of God make him commit his spirit to God, thus hee acts for his owne soule upon experiences of God: and in the 2. last verses of that Psalm he counsels Saints to love God, and to trust in him, upon this consideration, the experiences that hee had of him as a faithfull God, who preserveth his faithfull ones, and
plentifully rewardeth the proud dor: Therefore sayes he, be of good courage, fear not, trust in God, he shall strengthen your hearts, all ye that hope in him; as if he should say, I have had such experience of God, that I dare assure you if you trust in him he will not faile you: So in Psalm. 32.10. Many sorrowes shall be to the wicked, Psal. 32.10. but be that trusteth in the Lord, mercyshall compasse him about: I speake this sayes the Prophet upon experience that I have of God, and when you know God experimentally as I doe, you will say as I say: Therefore in the 34. Psal. 8. he cals upon Saints to taste, and then they should experimentally know that God is good; so good, so kinde, so gracious, so faithfull, and so omnipotent, that the man is certainely blessed that trusteth in him; he cannot but be a blessed man for he trusteth in God, whom can never faile him; God i an experimented God for truth and faithful∣nesse by all his people, as in the 19. verse, Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivereth him out of all, and so goes on, shewing the goodnesse and faithfulnesse of God to his people; I, sayes he, upon the experiences that I have had of God, I can boldly affirme that they are blessed that trust in him; Therefore he giveth this counsell in Psalme 55.22. Psal. 55.22. Cast thy burthen upon the Lord, and be shall sustaine thee: be shall never suffer the righteous to be moved. The Prophet giveth this counsell to his owne soule and to o∣ther soules, why sayes he, we have had expecience of God, how faithfull he is in preserving his righteous one, those that put their trust in him, they shall never bee moved: Therefore why should we distrust, and through unbeliefe take the burthen up∣on our selves; as we have experimented God so let us trust him, and he doth so indeed, for in Psalm. 61.3. he flyeth to God upon his former experience that he had of him, For thou hast beene a shelter for me, and a strang towre from the enemy. I have had this experience of thee, therefore in all streights and in all con∣ditions, I will trust in the covert of thy wings; and in the next Psalm. 7, 8. verses, he professeth that all the resuge he had was in God; and saith he, I have experimented God, he is a sure re∣suge to his people, He is my salvation, my glory, and the reck of my strength; the Prophet tells us what God is from the experience that he had of him, Psalm. 145.17, 18. The Lord is righteout in all his wayes and holy in all his workes: The Lord is nigh to all them
that call upon him in truth: This is God upon experience, and abundantly more then this dth that Man of much experience in God set him forth to be. Againe, consider the most glorious experiences of God, th those three emminent servants of his, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego had, which is recorded in the third of Daniel, wee may read in that Scripture upon what consideration the Funac was heat seaven times hotter then before, for these three faith∣full ones to be cast into it; and in the 17. verse, how they cast themselves upon God for their deliverance: Our God, say they, is able to deliver us from thy burning firy Furnace, and hee will deli∣ver us out of thy hands O King: Well, marke the issue, they deny Nehuchadnezar and trust in God; this inrages the Kings fury, and into the sire they are cast bound hand and foot: Now God giveth them to know by experience what it is to trust in him for deliverance, Hee maketh them to walke in the fire, loosed from their bonds, without the least harme, and a fourth to bee with them, whose forme wat like the Sonne of God; This presence and appearance of God did astonish the King, so that he called them to come forth, and when they came out of the firy Furnace, they were so farre from any harme, That a haire of their heads was not singed, mither had the smell of fire passed on them: What a most glorious experi∣ence of the power, faithfulnesse, and goodnesse of God is here, the Kings fury was so hot, that the Furnace must be heat seaven times hotter then before; and it was made furious in heat in∣deed, for the flames which came forth from it, slue them which cast in Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, to the firy Furnace; but notwithstanding all his fury, God preserveth those that trust in him, he is with them according to his promise, when as they passe through the fire; and as the Winds and Seas, so the flames of fire obey him, for they finge not so much as the cloathes of these faithfull ones, nor leave so much as the smell of fire upon their Garments: O the infinite power and faithfulnesse of God; fire shall lose its nature and cease to burne, rather then such as trust in him shall be consumed by it; God hath power enough to preserve his owne interest those that trust in him, even in the eag∣ing flames of consuming fire, no flames nor fury can destroy that which the power and mercy of God will preserve, and now here is a full experience of God, he will preserve that which his
people commits to him, and trusts to him for the preservation of it; these precious soules God had brought to this glorious pitch, that they sleighted the Kings power and fury, by beleeing in the power and faithfulnesse of himself; And now, sayes God, it shall he knowne what I am, and what it is to trust in me; God could either have turned the heart of Nebuchadnezzar, or have crushed his power that he should never have been able to have cast them into the firy Fumace, but in this also God workes as the wheele within the wheeles, he lete the furious man go on, that he might have the fitter opportunity to manifest the glory of his grace, power, and faithfulnesse in their deliverance, and that his people might have greater experience of their safety in trusting him, God lets them goe into the fire that they might have experience of his love in going with them, and of his power in preserving them, and bringing them forth againe to the astonishment of all be∣holders, and that it might remaine on Record to after Ages, that Generations to come might say this is God, and this will God be for ever to his people. Should I inlarge according to the matter and worth of these experiences, I should swell into a great bulke which I seke to a∣voide, and therefore shall upon the matter onely make resitall, and leave inlargements to the Spirit of God upon the hearts of the Readers. We shall finde in this Booke, another glorious experience of God which the Prophet Daniel himselfe had; in the sixth of Daniel we shall finde a decree to cast the Prophet into the Den of Lyons was deceitfully gotten, and the cause was his making of petitions to God; the Prophet knew of the decree which wa, as of the Meades and Perans not to be altered, and yet he al∣ters not his course of calling upon God by Prayer, he opens his mouth to God, and trusts God to stop the Lyons mouthes, he lifts up his hands and heart to God, and trust God to kepe downe the Lyons pawes; well, God will not deceive his trust, but yet he will let him be cast into the Lyons Den, Daniel 6.16. Though the King was sorry, yet he commanded Daniel to be cast into the Lyons Den; and there Daniel is as safe as amongst Lambes, the Angell of God had shut the Lyons mouthes, that though they remained Lyons still, yet to Daniel they had no more harme in them then so many quiet Lambet, and when the King comen
early in the morning with dread in his spirit lest the Lyons should have feasted themselves upon that precious piece; Hecryes out, O Daniel servant of the living God, is thy God whom thou ser∣vest continually able to deliver thee from the Lyons, Vers. 20. vers. 20. In the 22. vers. Daniel answers him, My God hath sent his Angell and shut the Lyons mouthes, that they have not burt mee: In the 23. vers. Then was the King exceeding glad, and commanded to take Daniel out of the Den; so he was, and not any manner of  found upon him: But in the 24. vers. when his accusers were cast into the Lyons, They brake their bones before ever they came to the bottome of the Den. The Lyons were raging Lyons in themselves, though their mouthes were stopped by God in the preserving of Daniel, that put his trust in him; O the power of God, fire cannot burne, nor Lyons bite where God forbids, he that made all for his own glory, can change the nature of what he hath made, when in so doing he may magnifie the glory of his grace and faithfulnesse to his people; doth not these experiences say that God is onely to be trusted and feared; he shuts where no man opens, and o∣pens where no man shuts; Daniel had experience of Gods love and power in this; that those very Lyons that lay like Lambes by him, should devoure his enemies before his face; none can bound the holy one of Israel, but he can lock up the Lions mouths and open them at his pleasure; sure it is good to trust in so good a gracious and powerfull God, one that giveth such full experi∣ence to his people that trust in him of what he is; a God infinite in power, mercy, and goodnesse; there is a spirituallity in all these experiences of God, which if God give in, in the reading it will make them exceeding sweet, and apt to that end I quote them for; namely, to beget faith in God, and a holy dependency on him. Amongst these holy witnesses, let the Prophet Jonah be admit∣ted to bring in his experiences of God, and we shall finde them to be very glorious; the Prophet doth at large declare how he came to be cast into the Sea in a great tempest; here is nothing appeares to fleshly reason but destruction, and doubtlesse those that cast him out of the Ship expected nothing else, but that the Sea should be a grave to his dead body, therefore they prayed that God would not lay his blood to their charge, in the 14. verse:
But in the 17. verse. Now the Lord prepared a great Fish to swallow up Jonah; Jonah 1.17. and Jonah was in the belly of the Fish three dayes and three nights: Well, and is this a likely way of preservation; is there not as much death in the belly of the Fish, as in the belly of the Sea: Lay aside fleshly reasonings for a little, and observe the end of Gods worke: In the 2. Chap. vers. 10. And the Lord spake un∣to the Fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land. Now comes in the experience, God intended to preserve Jo∣nah, and though he chooseth an unlikely place to reason to keep him alive in, yet all persons and places shall serve his end how unlikely soever it may seeme to reason, the fish which naturally opens its mouth to take in its nourishment, and to live upon what it takes in, shall now open his mouth to take in Jonah that he might be kept alive in the chest of that body; that power which preserves Daniel by shutting the Lyons mouthes, doth preserve Jonah by opening the fishes mouth; his power fille Hea∣ven and Earth, the Sea and all that therein is; if God will pr∣serve Jonah, he shall go from death to death, and all that is but Gods way of life, from deaths in the Sea, to deaths in the fish; and all this is that God might experiment himselfe to him, in making this Fish to bring him from the raging Sea, and set him upon dry Land; there is much spirituality in this dealing of God with Jonah, he is a Type of Christ in the grave; very much might be observed from it to a spirituall use, but I shall here one∣ly use it as a very great experience which the Prophet had of the power and wisedome of God; the power of God made the Ly∣ons to be as Lambes to Daniel, and here it makes very death to be life to Jonah, the Sea shall cover and not kill when God com∣mands it so to doe, and the Fish take into its belly but not de∣stroy, if God appoint that a place for Jonahs safety, it shall be so, and in Gods time as a Vessell unload himselfe of the Prophet and set him upon dry land; thus we see neither fire nor water, beasts on earth, nor fish by Sea, can destroy what God will pre∣serve; nay, the wisedome of God to magnifie the glory of his owne grace, and the infinitenesse of his power, chooseth these wayes to preserve his Children by, which are most certaine wayes of ruine to an eye of reason, that so his people may upon en∣perience of what he is learne to trust in him, and to know that his power did make, and doth command all other powers, he
that inhabits eternity rules, in Heaven and Earth; Jonah which disturbed the Ship hath safety in the fishes belly. Againe, faithfull Noah and his whole Family had great exp∣rience of the faithfulnesse of God, and what safety there is in be∣leeving the Word of God, and obeying his will: The frath and seventh Chapters of Genesis doth at large set forth Gods com∣mand to him to make an Arke for himselfe and his Family, with two of each kinde of all the creatures of the Earth, that they might be preserved alive, for the Lord toulde him hee would drowne the whole World; Noah beleeved God in all that he had saide, Gen. 6.22. which appeares by his obedience, Gen. 6, 22. Thus did N∣ah according to all that God had commanded him, so did hee: Well, and what is the effect of it? Why Noah and his whole Family, with all in the Arke are preserved alive in all that deluge of wa∣ter which destroyes the whole World besides; Gen. 7.23. Gen. 7.23. Neah onely remained alive, and they that were with him in the Arke. Nak prepared the Arke in faith beleeving God, but now he hath ex∣perimented the power and faithfulnesse of that God which hee beleeved in, for now he found by experience that God could make his word good, both in drowning the whole World, be∣sides them in the Arke, and in saving alive all those in the Arke according to his promise; this is a living experience indeed, that he and his Family should bee the onely living upon the whole Earth; Noah can say upon experience, that it is not in vaine to trust the Lord, his power can kill and keep alive; the faithful∣nesse of God was Noahs Arke, otherwise he had beene drowned with the rest of the World: Notwithstanding his floating hous he made the Arke in obedience to God, but God was his safety, not the Arke, and he found him so by experience, thus God  one experience to another that his people might learne to trust in him as an experimented God, as the insinite power and faith∣fulnesse which hath been found to be so upon great and often ex∣periences. So Joseph he had many and great experiences of God, as we may reade in the latter Chapters of the Booke of Genesis; As when his brethren did unnaturally, first cast into a Pit to murther him, and as last sould him into Aegypt, thinking to bereave him of all his Friends; yet God was a father to him, when he was from his Fathers house, and when his owne brethren proved
cruell and unnaturall to him, yea God gave him favour with a stranger even Potiphar, there Josaph began to experiment God in a strange Land; but God had a great worke to doe, in which he would yet give him greater experiments of himself, so through the wickednesse and foolishnesse of his Mistres, Joseph loseth his favour with Potiphar, and hee is cast into the Prison; all this serves to carry on Gods designe, and to bring in more experi∣ments of God to Joseph; for here God gave Joseph favour with the Keeper of the Prison, that in stead of being a Prisoner, a suspected person, hee had all trust committed to him: Well, through many more experiences of the power and goodnesse of God, Joseph is at last brought to Pharoahs, made the second per∣son in the Land, and hath all trust and power committed to him; his brethren that sell him, God brings to him to buy corne to keep them alive, though they thought to have put an end to his life, yet God preserves him that he might, as God instru∣ment, to preserve their lives; his Father that mourned for him as dead, lives to see Joseph alive, and sent to Aegypt before to pre∣serve the lives of his kinde Father, and uninde Brethren; here is a rich treasury of experiences, most glorious manifestations of the wisedome and power of God, here is the wheele within the wheeles: Againe, God working his owne ends by letting men perfect those workes which they intend to an end contrary to God, by the issue we see which was Gods end in letting Joseph be sold to Egypt, and there cast in prison, it was every step of it in his way to that advancement by Pharoah, which he came to in the end; his Brethrens end was to muther him, or at least never to heare more of him; his Mistres her end was to dishonour him, it is no matter what they intend, God will accomplish his ende by their workes, though in them they have a contrary end; God will let his Children experiment this of him, that he workes his owne glory and his peoples good, even through the evill worken that are in the hearts and hands of his, and his peoples emies▪ God can bring meat for his Children out of the Eater, he in all good, and doth bring good to his people out of the evill that i in the hearts of their enemies; Josephs experienes of God, ∣sides many Saints more doth declare this upon the house top, and telleth the ages to come so long as the Sunne and Mo end∣reth
that God is a faithfull, gracious, and omnipotent God, up∣on experience had of him. For the next witnesse to this, let us call in Moses, and consi∣der that progresse of experiences which he had of God from his Cradle to his grave; I, from his birth we shall finde in the be∣ginning of his Booke of Exodus, that there was a Decree passed for his death before he had life, in that command that the Mid∣wives had from Pharoah to murther every male Childe of the Is∣raelites in the birth, of which Moses was one, but God tyed up their hands and gave him favour in their sight, that they obeyed not the command of Pharoah; there is his first experience of God, and when he could be hid no longer in his Mothers house, then God taught her as he did Noah, to make an Arke to preserve her Sonne Moses from drowning, and that Arke or Cradle of Bul∣rushes doth preserve this precious Infant till God brings other hands to take care of him, in which worke of God there is much experience of his power, and wisedome, that Pharoahs Daugh∣ter should preserve tht a which her Father had appointed to dye, and that his Mother which brought him forth should be the Pape which doth give him suck, this act of Gods providence brings double mercy with it, both to Mother and Babe, it joyes her heart to have her Childe in her armes; shee sayes as Jacob, my sonne Moses yet lives; God had speciall worke for him to doe, therefore he commits him to speciall care in bringing him up, e∣ven the bosome of his tender Mother; truely these are very great experiences of God, yet he had more then these, God doth not leave him that he had thus preserved, but takes care of him in his Mothers house, and in Pharoahs Court, and when God comes to use him in that worke for which he had preserved him, hee then findes God to be all in him; he went to the people of Israel up∣on Gods message, and in the name of God to leade them out of Egypt into the Wildernesse to serve him, and as he went in Gods name, so all along he had great experiences of God. God made Moses his messenger to Pharoah, and in this also he had great experience of God, in his judgements upon Pharoah his houshold and the whole Land, you may reade them at large; but when God had by Moses brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt, then Pharoah in the hardnesse and malice of his heart with a potent Army followeth them to the Red Sea, then the
people murmured against Moses, he goes to God and opens their condition before him, and comes backe to the people upon the experiences he had of God, and bids them from God, to stand still and be quiet, they should see his Salvation, and how full salva∣tion that was, they all had experience of, it was wonderfull sal∣vation wrought in wonders, which doth upon experience de∣clare God to be a God of salvations, and a wonder-working God, a faithfull God; that made every tittle good which he had promised, they had full deliverance, and did see their enemies no more alive. Here Moses had exceeding full experience of God in his power and faithfulnesse, that as God did imploy him, so he went along with him and made the Sea dry land for him and the people he led, to passe through death from death, into the Wildernesse, where God gave him and his company many and great experi∣ences of himselfe. Now I shall joyne Moses and the Children of Israel together in their experiences, and here they had a Pillar of cloud by day, and of fire by night, in which they did experiment God to be a safe guide though in a Wildernesse, and an untrodden path, they thirst, I, and murmure too for water, God by Moses giveth them water from the Rook, Exod. 17.6. here they experiment that the bar∣ren Wildernesse, Exod. 16.4. and the stony Rock doth bring forth water at the command of God, nothing can be too hard for the omnipo∣tent power of God to melt into his owne will: Well, Exod. 15.25. they want food, Moses cryes to God, he giveth them Quailes and Manna, by which they have further experience that no place can straiten God in giving to his people what he pleaseth, and for Shooe, and cloathing, though their Journey last forty yeares, yet these ware not out, but last as long; by which they doe againe experi∣ment, that the eternall God doth give continuance to what he pleaseth, and as long as he pleaseth: Thus I have pointed at some of those many yeares experiences that Moses and the Children of Israel had of God, from which we may gather thus much tha God is an experimented God by his people of Olde, to bee aglorious, gracious, wise, faithfull, omnipotent, and wonder∣working God. Againe, Joshuah which succeeded Moses in this worke of God, had great experience of God going along with him in
the worke; I shall mention only in one particular, that is in Iosh. 6.20. In the besieging of Jericho, when the Priests blew the Trompets, and the people shouted, the Text sayes the wall fell downe flat, so that the people went up into the Citie, every man stright before him, and they tooke the City. This is such an experiment of the power of God, as for clay to open the blinde mans eyes, the one as likely meanes as the other, but GOD was all in both. Like unto this was Gideons experience of God, when as with three hundred men he overthrew the whole host of the Midia∣nites, Judges 7. Judges 7. We shall finde in this Chapter, that God com∣manded Gideon to lessen his Army of two and thirty thousand, to bring them to three hundred; God assures him victory with these few, and giveth him this reason why hee would have no more men, that the victory might appeare to be hie; Gideon o∣beyes Gods will, and God makes good his word; Gideon did believe God could save as well by few, as by many, that the vi∣ctory would be Gods, not mans: and God makes him to expe∣riment that of him which he did believe: Here is an experience of a full God amongst empty creatures, when they engage against full creatures empty of God. God makes the victory his owne, and the slaughter of his enemies, for they kill one another; it is all one to God how weake soever the meanes be hee useth, whe∣ther his Army be Flies, as in Aegypt, or three hundred men, as here, the strength is his owne, and that will certainly occom∣plish what it intends to doe, all these experiences doe plainly speak it. So that widow in 2 Kings 4. in that great increase of her cruse of oyle, had ample experience of the fulnesse of God, there is nothing too little for God to make enough; that is plain in this experience, this little oyle God makes it enough to pay all her debts, and answer all her wants; God is all himselfe, therefore it is no streight to him to make the lesse to be enough, his own experience doth the worke, because he is all in himselfe; what God appoints to give out satisfaction to his people by, shall never cease to give forth, till his people confesse they have e∣nough: This fountaine of life giveth living streames which al∣wayes flow and refresh the City of God, this is God upon ex∣perience.
Our Saviour Christ in Matth. 8.26. shewes his power as hee was God, in rebuking the windes and the Sea, when there was a great tempest, so that his Disciples in the ship with him were greatly affraid: Christ there checkes their unbeliefe, and giveth them an experience of his power by stilling the winds and Sea at his rebuke, so that the Text sayes, there was a great calme. The calme was an act of Christs power, as the feare was of the Dis∣ciples flesh, so that in this they had double experience of their owne fleshly feare, and Christs almighty power. The Apostle Paul, both when he was Saul and Paul, had great experiences of God; as first, in his conversion, when hee was Saul, and breathed out threatnings and slaughter against the Disci∣ples of the Lord, Acts 9. beg. How wonderfull was his conversi∣on, what glorious experiences of Gods free grace and his pow∣er is there in that worke; they were so great, that the Apostle doth acknowledge them all his life following, when hee is brought before Judges & Councels for preaching of Christ cru∣cified, and salvation by free grace through Christ: hee telleth them of Gods wonderfull worke in his conversion, what ex∣perience he had of his grace and power, and mayes his experi∣ences of God as a groud of resting o him for strength to carry on the worke of his Apostleship, which God so in raculously had called him too. We may finde all the wiings of this holy man spread with his experiences of God, as in his voyage where the ship was cast away, and yet nt the life of one man lost: in that venomous beast upon his hand, which did him no hurt: in his often bonds and stripes, and his comfortable going trough all conditions with joy and establishment in God, 1 Cor. 6. as having no∣thing, and yet possessing all things. Here was very great experi∣ence of God, what ever he had, God was the all of that, and what ever he wanted of the creature, yet God was all to him, to that he wanted nothing, but in God possessed full satisfaction; God was strength to him in all his sufferings; through Christ that strengthned him he could doe all things. God was safety to him from all perils, and upon this experience hee was true to the service of God, not fearing any danger that should befall him. So in Acts 5. There we may read of the same experiences that Peter and the rest of the Apostles had of God, when as they were brought before the Councell, and imprisoned for preaching in
the name of Christ, how they were delivered out of prison, and yet the prison doores all fast shut; they had a man set over them to keepe them, and an Angel sent to deliver them; they had full experience of the power of God, that no power on earth, or watchfulnes of men, could imprison them that God would set free. There is another experience of this nature of the power and glory of God, Acts 16. lat. end. in Acts 16. latt. end. where by an earth-quake God opened all the doores of the prison, with the bonds that were up∣on Paul and the rest of the prisoners; yea, and the hard heart of the Jaylor too, for he comes trembling now to enquire after sal∣vation: This Earth-quake God useth to shake the Jaylor and his Family out of their earthly condition into a heavenly; he and his Family were hereby taught to believe in God, then followeth the kinde usage of the Apostles, and their deliverance out of pri∣son; this affords great experience of the powerfull and glorious workings of God: God doth not onely shake the earth and the heavens also, but by shaking the earth, he shakes into heaven, he shakes the earth of unbeliefe out of this family, and filleth them with heaven through believing; doubtlesse it is glorious power that shakes earth out of soules, and those soules into heaven, this is the work of God upon experience. I shall now in some few particulars mention the experiences of Gods power and justice in his righteous judgements: I shall mind you of Gods judgements upon Pharoah and all his host in the red Sea: but no more then mention it, because I have used that Scrip∣ture already. But in the next place consider Gods dealing with Herod, Acts 2.22, 23, 24. in Act. 12.22, 23, 24. The proud wretch tooke Gods glory to himselfe. Now see how God doth vindicate his owne glory, he is immedi∣ately smitten by the Angel of God, & eaten up with worm. God is zealous of his glory, he will not give that to any other, nor suf∣fer him to live long that takes it to himselfe; the people made a god of this proud man, and he was content to be accounted so: but God will let him and them know, that he is but sinfull man, for he dyeth immediately like man, and under a fearfull judge∣ment, as the just recompence of that pride, which would have been taken for God: Here is a glorious experience of Gods pow∣er, and his zeale for his owne glory, which should make all flesh tremble, and be carefull that they cloath not their pride with that glory which is only due to God.
We have another experience of God in his righteous judgement upon the Sodomites, being strucke with blindnesse in their bo∣dies, when in the blindnesse and wickednesse of their souls, Gen. 19.11. they would have abused the Angel of God that came to Lots house, ac∣cording to the lust of their owne hearts; the Scripture sayes, Verse 4. there came all the men of the City, olde and young, and all the people from eve∣ry quarter. A tumult of wretches full fraught with the sinne of Sodome, and yet behold the experimented power of God, that preserves his few faithfull ones from this multitude of Sodomites, and judgeth their first kindnesse with a second, so that they were weary in their pursuite after wickednesse. I should be glad if this example might teach all blind wretches to be carefull how they meddle with the servants of the most high God, for hee is upon experience a God that revengeth the wrongs done or intended to his people. Lastly, Gods fearfull judgement upon Korah and all his com∣pany; you may read the story in Numbers 16. and in vers. 31. how the ground opened and swallowed them up alive, they lived in death, and were buried alive, they murmured against Moses, and believed not God; these were dead souls in living bodies, and God throws in his displeasure, their living bodies into the graves of death. Thus we see the Scripture is ful of proof in this, that God is an experimented God; these are the experiments that Saints of old have had of God, and left them upon record for the use of after ages: It is a great mercy that wee have these experiments of God, but I doe believe no age that ever lived were without parti∣culer experiences of God, I am sure this present age is not with∣out wonderful, many, and great experiences of God in his good∣nesse, faithfulnesse, power, mercy, and grace to his poore, hated, and despised people. I shall not here mention any particulers, I trust providence hath a faithfull store-house for them, and a time to bring them forth entire to the glory of God, who is the living and eternall fountaine of all mercy. Yet let me desire Saints for their establishment in God, to look backe upon the foote-steps of his power and providence, his faithfulnesse and righteousnesse, in ordering of battles, and dis∣posing of victories, even amongst the sonnes of men. If you can∣not looke many yeares, yet looke but some mone
which you may see such glorious experiences of God, that if you understand them they will fill your hearts with admiring God; and the language of your lips will be as the servants of God in former ages, to be telling forth the experiences of God wheree∣ver you come. God giveth to his children some more, and to some lesse experiences of himselfe: but in these latter dayes, God hath given such great experience of himselfe to the whole body of Saints, that I trust he wil thereby establish his people through believing in himselfe as an experimented God; this is the thing drive at in my selfe and other Saints, and therefore have I made so large a recitall of these experiences of God to the sanctified rea∣son of precious soules. And give me leave now to argue the case a little with sanctified Reason, and to tell you that God is no new-found fancy or ap∣pearance, which may prove good or evill to the soule upon try∣all, but God is the ancient of dayes from everlasting, and a try∣ed God, such a one whom Saints in all ages have tryed and found to be a faithfull, gracious, just, righteous, glorious, and omnipotent God. Now tell me the best of reason, that which is most sanctified; if God be not the best, nay the only foundation to build our saith upon: and if one so much experiment doth not captivate thy reason to himselfe, I know it is a principle of right reason to trust that most which hath been most tryed, and always found faithfull; therefore have I been the more large to hold out God to sanctified reason as a faithfull God upon experience. Now rea∣son must either deny it selfe in its owne right principles, or else choose God as the only object of faith: If so, then I may cease to argue, for I have my end: if otherwise it cannot be argued with as reason, for it ceases so to be, in denying its owne right and true principle. But if any soule full of sanctified reason shall speake like it selfe, and say, I will trust my selfe where I find by experience; there is most grace, and goodnesse; faithfulnesse and righteousnesse, most power to preserve me, and most fulnesse to supply all my wants, then I say to such a soule all this is God, and none of this is any where else but in God, and that God is an experimented God in all this; if thou knewest his dealings with thy own soule, thou wils confesse him to be so; his Saint of olde have recorded
some of those many and great experiences which they had of him. Now here is that thou lookest for, experimented goodnesse and faithfulnesse in God, and that which God lookes for, is that: Now thou shouldst trust him upon all that experience which thy owne soule, and other of his Saints have had of him: If thou hast any thing to object, make thy objection, there is fulnesse enough in God to answer all that thou canst desire; if all be answered, then trust him that is all, and doth satisfie all that trust in him with his owne fulnesse. The fifth argument that I shall offer to sanctified Reason why to believe in God, is this; That God counts his faithfulnesse his glory, and was never stained in it, nor can ever be, because he is the faithfull God, a God that never failed any that trusted in him: so sayes the Prophet David, Psal. 18.30. Psal. 18.30. As for God his way is perfect, his word is tryed, bee is a buckler to all those that trust in him. God is perfectly faithfull in all his words, his workes, and his wayes; hee cannot deny himselfe to be God, therefore can never be unfaithfull. From hence the Psalmist in Psalm 33.21. Psal. 33.21. saith, that the righteous doe reigne in the Lord, when he makes them to trust in him. For they then joy in their desires as fulfilled; for if God make them trust in him for it, he will certainely accom∣plish it, he will never be stained in his faithfulnesse. Mal. 37.40. So in Psalm 37.40. God will save his people from the wicked because they trust in him: That is, God will preserve his owne faithfulnesse, not any soule shall trust on him in vaine, much lesse be deceived by rely∣ing on him. So Psalm 48.10. This it the praise of God unto the ends of the earth, that he is faithfull and righteous according to his Name, he will never loose nor staine the name of a faithfull God: So he sayes himselfe in Psalm 89.34, 35. My Covenant will I not breake, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Psal. 89.34, 35. Once have I sworn by my holinesse that I will not lye unto David. That is, I will make good what ever I have said, my Covenant and promises shall all be performed, for I have sworn by my holinesse, I have engaged that which is most deare to me, and I will not foreiit. And in Psalm 105.8. Psal. 105.8. His Saint beare witnesse to him that thee remembreth his Covenant for ever. So in Psalm 119.89. For ever O Lord thy word is setled in beaven. It is as sure as heaven, thou  so faithfull a God: And in vers. 90. Thy faithfulnesse is unto all Gene∣rations. It never weares out, or becomes unfaithfull; it is the
faithfulnesse of God that is eternall like himselfe, Psal. 119.160. Psal. 119.160. Thy word is true from the beginning, and every one of thy righteous judgements endureth for ever. That is, God is true to his word from everlasting, and his truth and righteousnesse abideth for ever, not any that can challenge him with unfaithfulnesse; his robe of righteousnesse is spotlesse; this is his glory, and so he values it. And the Prophet Isaiah bears witnesse to it, in Isa. 34.16. Seeke yet out of the book of the Lord, Isa. 34.16. and read, no one of these shall faile. That i, looke into Gods word, and what ever you finde hee hath said, he will make it good, not any tittle of his word shall faile, you shall never blemish him in his faithfulnesse, for it is his glory. Now sanctified Reason let mee aske you if this be not a good reason why you should trust in God, because it is his glory to be faithfull, and that glory which hee hath unspottedly preserved from everlasting. Fleshly judgements sees reason in this; for when they commit businesse and trust to men, they will choose as they thinke the most faithfull to the worke: and when men do otherwise, we count they have lost their common reason, and when we choose men to fight our Battles, in whom we commit much trust; Doe we not choose such men who make it their glo∣ry to be gallant; and will rather choose to dye, then staine their fidelity and their valour? Why, upon this account sanctified rea∣son may safely commit all trust to God, it is his glory to be saithfull: Sinne and all the other enemies of God and his people shall perish in the maintaining of the glory of Gods faithfulnesse: I am to seeke of all reason if this doe not answer the best of rea∣son, to trust that God who makes it his glory to be faithful, and that faithfulnesse which never was stained. A sixth reason that I shal offer, is this: That God is an inexhau∣sted fountaine and treasury of all grace and goodnesse, that either the soules or bodies of his people can stand in need of, he can ne∣ver promise more then he can perform, nor can any of his people want that good which is not in him; hee is not onely all good in himselfe, but also the fountain of all that which fils heaven and earth: good is originall in God, and in every thing else, as it is derived from God, or received of God; what ever of mercy and grace, either externall or internall, it is received, and God is the fountaine. The Prophet David doth acknowledge God to be the fountain
and giver of all the good he enjoyed, Psalm 23. It was God that made him lye down in green pastures, that lead him by still waters, that restored his soule, and lead him in the paths of righteousnesse; that prepared a table before him in the middest of his enemies; that annoynted his head with oyle, and made his cup to run over. He found God so full of all good, that he filled him, till his cup run over, and that in the middest of his enemies, a place more apt to streights then fulnesse; yet this was Davids condition, be∣cause God was his shepheard, he received from an inexhausted fountaine, therefore his cup runs over: God is so full, that if he doe but drop of his owne fulnese, the narrow vessel of the creature runs over, he is the fountaine of life, and the God of salvation, Psal. 68, 19, 20. He daily loadeth his people with benefits, for he is the God of salvation. The sull fountaine of all blessings, there is fulness of grace in him to kil sinne, and to save the sinner; there is ful∣nesse of love in him to pardon the greatest evill, and to love the least good in his children; there is fulnesse of power in him to crush and destroy a world of Enemies, and to preserve his owne little Flocke; there is riches of goodnesse and mercy in him to supply all the wants of his people: In a word there is all good in God that wee can either aske or need; to read his Attributes, will discover his fulnesse. And now me-thinkes sanctified Rea∣son should answer as Simon-Peter did our Saviour in the 6th of John, verse 68. When Christ asked his Disciples if they would leave him also, his answer is, Lord to whom shall wee goe, thou hast the words of eternall life. So should Saints fil∣led with sanctified Reason say to GOD, thou art an inex∣hausted fountaine of grace and goodnessee, wee can go no whither but to thee for Eternall life, for thou art to thy people the fountain of life; That is, life from all Eternity. To my understanding this should bee a prevailing argument, with the purest and rightest reason to cast all upon him that is all, and to trust in the fountaine of life, for life, that can give most which is most, and nothing can give all, but GOD that is all in himselfe. Eternity cannot wast nor consume the least of GODS fulnesse, therefore is GOD a suitable fulnesse for Eternall soules, and him on∣ly to be rested upon that can never fail to be what our souls stand in need of to all eternity: Reason carries men from one thing to
another, because they conceive a greater good in the last then in the first, how should it teach men then to goe from all to God, because in him is all good, and to rest in nothing but in him, because there is good in nothing out of him, and for over to depend on him; because he is not onely good, but the fountaine of all good. The seventh and last argument that I shall give to sanctified Reason, is this: That what ever any soule beleeveth and trusteth in besides God, it must and will deceive the soule, there is no rock of ages besides him, nor is there any Almighty power ou of him, vanity is at the root of every created being, and doth as the worme to Jonahs Gourd, bring them to nothing; that which cannot preserve its owne being, cannot of it selfe preserve any other being, though committed to it; but no created being can preserve or continue it selfe by its owne strength; therefore not able to preserve any thing committed to them; borrowed strength, and received abilities will not be trusted by right san∣ctified Reason; because the lender may call back his owne, and then the receiver is empty of any ability to answer trust, and must of necessity faile the expectation of the Trustee: Now this is all that can be thought of besides God, by nature empty Ves∣sel, meer Ciphers, have nothing originall that is worthy; eve∣ry dram of excellency and good is received, now such a subject is altogether unsutable to make a God of; that is, to commit the trust of eternall soules, or any thing that is precious too, but if trusted, it must needs deceive, because that which is no∣thing in it selfe, cannot add any thing to another, that which is vanity in it selfe cannot give better to any, nor make a better re∣turne to any that trust in it; and the Wise man sayes of all things under the Sunne that they are vanity, Eccles. 1.14. and vexation of spirit, Eccles. 1.14. At they are vanity, so they deceive all that trust in them, and in the deceiving of trust, and great expectations, so they be∣come vexation of spirit: So the Prophet David, in Psalm. 62.9. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lye: That is, men of all degrees have so much vanity in them, that they are not simply in themselves to be rested upon; the highest degree of men, are but men; (so vanity ) and must p rove a lye, to that flesh which trusts in them: The Psalmist in Psal. 103.15, 16. shewes the vanity of all flesh in man, the top of the whole
creation, As for man his dayes are as grasse: as a flower of the field so he flourisheth. For the winde passeth over it, and it is gone; and the place thereof shall know it no more: This makes good the Wise mans truth that all things under the Sunre vanity: For if man the chiefest piece of the whole creation, be so light as a flow∣er of grasse, which is withered, dead, and dry, by a puffe of winde, so made nothing that the place it was in shall know it no more, then surely vanity is a girdle about the loynes of all crea∣ted beings, then of necessity they must crack under any weight that is laid upon them, and prove a lye to all those hoped for contentments that flesh lookes for from them, they must prove like Jonahs Gourd, because of that worme of vanity that is at the root, and they will leave the soule as the Gourd did Jonah, ar∣guing for its peevish folly, saying it doth well to be angry; though it hath committed a double evill; First, in trusting to vanity, and then to be angry that it appeares vanity. In the 46. Isay beginning, there the Prophet shewes how the Idols of Babylon could not save themselves, but they and them which trusted in them, were led into captivity together: I shall offer but one Scripture more to this truth, and that is in the 17. Jer. 5, 6. Thus saith the Lord, Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arme, and whose heart departeth from the Lord, for he shall be like the Heath in the desart, and shall not see when God commeth: Here we see is the curse of God upon trust∣ing that in flesh which is onely proper to God; this is his glory which he will not give to another, and the curse of God will soone blast all flesh that is but grasse; so that it shall prove vani∣ty and deceive all that trust in it; thus I hope the truth of the argument appeares by Scripture, and sure I am, the experience that every soul hath had of the vanity of all things besides God, doth add much testimony to this truth; and if thus, give me leave to aske sanctified Reason, if it can justifie it selfe to be rea∣son, in choosing vanity to put trust in, and laying the weight of eternity upon that which hath not a moment of its owne, or a dram of sufficiency to answer that weight; if not, then to this sanctified Reason I dare affirme, that God is the onely object for a soules bellese, and that there is no other eternall and sure foun∣dation to build upon; and this is the maine scope that I have in all the arguments, to hold this forth to sanctified Reason, that
God who is the onely true, Almighty, Omnipotent, infinit, e∣ternall, faithfull, experimented God, and an inexhausted foun∣taine and treasury of mercy and grace, is the onely foundation of trust and confidence, and that all things besides God will prove vanity under such a weight, so that the light of God in the reason of his people; that which sanctifies reason, might from these arguments that suites with right reason, leade the soules of Saints out of their owne flesh and all other vanity, to cast themselves onely and eternally upon the free grace of God in Christ, by beleeving in God to the establishment of soules, is my end in all this; and I trust thus dealing with sanctified rea∣son, will appear to be in the way to that precious end: I have done with the Arguments, I trust the Lord will make them his, and blesse them to the end they are intended. In the next place I shall offer by a few particulers, in some measure a discovery of the evill of unbeliefe, of not trusting of God, and in God, of not trusting all upon God, and making him our all in all; and this discovery hath one and the same end with the former arguments. The first evill which I shall hold forth of unbeliefe, is this: That it doth as much as in us lyeth, make God a lyer: For proofe, consider that full Scripture to this purpose, in the first E∣pistle of John 5.10. He that beleeveth not God, maketh him a lyer, because hee beleeveth not the Record that God giveth of his Sonne: This Scripture holds forth plainely this, that not to beleeve the Record of God, is to say in the unbeleife of our earts, that God is a lyer, truly unbeliefe can speake no other language, nor give no better title to God, for not beleeving the Record of God, is a denyall of the truth of that Record, and so consequently the truth of God; for the Record of God cannot bee false so long as God is true, and that unbeliefe which sayes the Record of God is not true, doth in the same breath say, that God is not true; now not to beleeve the Record of God, is to say it is not true, for this carryes the strength and basses of all reason along with it, to beleeve that which we judge to be true, and to deny beliefe where we judge untruth: The old Serpent the Devill be∣gan in Paradise with this temptation, to perswade our first Pa∣rents, that what God had said was not true, that they might
eate of the forbidden fruite, that death was not in the act, as God had said, But the knowledge of good and evill; It was unbe∣liefe of God in their hearts that made them call God the lyer, and what the Serpent said to be truth; therefore chose to eate, not beleeving they had eate to death, as God told them, and so in their hearts making God a lyer; this is properly the fruit of unbeliefe, to count Gods record untrue, and so to act contrary to the recorded and revealed truths of God: This is a horred evill, that which Saints in truth cannot but tremble to thinke of, to put the lye upon God, reproach upon his perfection, to trample his truthes under our feet as untruthes, and to question the righteousnesse of the ever righteous God; this is the spring∣head of all evill, the onely safe and retyring place for Satan, he reignes no where so securely as in the unbeleeving heart, where God is made a lyer, that darknesse makes the Devill to be count∣ed as truth, so that there his lawes prevaile, and he reignes as supreame. Secondly, Second evill of unbeliefe. Unbeliefe makes men to deny and forsake their fairest professions of Christ and holinesse, rather then to suffer for them; and this is the true reason why so many Professours of Christ and holinesse in times of prosperity and publike owning of godlinesse, doe forsake both Christ and holinesse in times of suffering for God and his wayes, because these withering bran∣ches were onely in Christ by profession, not by faith; these profess Christ for the gaine of an outward reputation, but do not live in Christ by faith, and in times of suffering, the beauty of Christ is lost to such an eye; and for want of an eye of faith by which the fulnesse, glory and excellency of Christ is discerned, these unbeleeving professors, deny their profession, and their Ma∣ster too, if it comes to suffering with Christ, if on him, they will sweare with Peter, they never knew him, and though they sweare yet they doe not lye; for such as leave their profession of Christ and holinesse through unbeliefe, and become unholy, they may truely say they never knew him, for whom ever truly knows Christ in the spirit will never leave him; an eye of faith sees so much beauty, faithfulnesse, power, grace, and goodnesse in God and Christ, that though sufferings comes as waves of the Sea, yet will not leave God and Christ, but cleave closer to him, beleeving in his grace and goodnesse for support and deliverance,
but that soule which beleeves not in God, and doth not by an eye of faith see fulnesse in him of power, grace, and goodnesse, to support and deliver, will never trust in him; but with De, imbrace the present World; such as follow Christ onely for the Loaves, will leave him at the appearance of his Crosse: That forward Professor in the 18. of Luke 18. so on, which justified himselfe in keeping all the Commandements from his youth, yet could not part with his worldly riches and make Christ his por∣tion, much lesse take up sufferings, because of unbeliefe; he would leave his good Master, as he called Christ, rather then his goods, which were indeed his Master through the unbeliefe of his heart, all his faire profession and offers after Christ, comes to nothing, because of unbeliefe; this Christ knew, therefore makes discovery of the man by trying his faith, or by manifest∣ing his unbeliefe; it is the beleeving soule that followes the Lamb wheresoever he goes, it is onely faith by which the soule is able to take up the Crosse of Christ and follow him, but unbeliefe leaveth Christ and his Crosse together, though it have professed not to leave Christ though it should dye with him; yet in the appearance of such a tryall the unbeleever denies his profession to save his outside from suffering; this is the constant associate of unbeliefe; and therefore God is pleased in his wisedome to let sufferings be the attendance to the profession of his name in truth, that thereby he might discover even to the World, the precious from the vile, who live in him by faith, and whom onely by profession; thus doth God discover the evill of unbe∣liefe, of which argument this present age hath not been wan∣ting. A third evill of unbeliefe, Third evill of beliefe. is this, unbeliefe it questions with distrust the very power of God, it doubts whether God be God, or his power Almighty and Omnipotent; can God give bread in the Wildernesse, and can God bring water out of the Rock, is there fulnesse enough in God to make a barren Wildrnesse fruitfull, and to give food where there is no appearance of food, nay can God make a hard, dry, and stony Rock to bring forth water; can God worke both without meanes, and against meanes, is this power in God; thus doth unbeliefe question, and distrust the power of God: So that proude unbeleeving wrtch, King Nebuchadnezzar, in the 3. Dan. 15. Who is that
God that shall deliver you out of my hands: As if he had said, is there any God hath power greater then I, is there any God or any power in God, that can deliver out of my hands; when I have heat the Furance seven times hotter then before, what power can preserve you from the fire of my fury, and my Fur∣nace. We may finde unbeliefe in Sarah putting this very question, in Gen. 18.12. Therefore Sarah laughed within her selfe, saying, After I am waxed old shall I have pleasure, my Lord being old also: If we observe the Scripture it amounts to this, What now I and my Lord am old, now all hopes in nature is gone, can God now make good his word to me in giving me a Childe, now we are both old; this is the true question that unbelief makes, can God doe this great thing? Shee laughed in way of sleighting the ty∣dings, through unbeliefe, concerning the power which should effect it: So when Elisha the Prophet did Prophesie of that sud∣daine and great plenty in Samaria, when they were at that time strongly besieged and in great wants, 2 Kings 7.1, 2. the Text sayes, That a Lord on whose hands the King leaned, answered the man of God and sayd, Behold if the Lord would make windowes in Heaven, might this thing be; This is the proper language of un∣beliefe, thou talkest of too great things for God to doe, are not we straitly besieged, and all our provisions gone, and doest thou speake of so great a plenty in so short a time, which way should God doe this; what shall he make windowes in Heaven, and raine downe this plenty, it can come no other way; thus we see the great evill of unbeliefe, how it questions the power of God, and as it were ungods him, for to make his deficient, is to make him no God. A fourth evill is this; Unbeliefe is the seale of damnation, he that beleeveth not is condemned in himselfe; we have a full Scripture to this purpose, in John 3.18. But hee that beleeveth not is condemned already, because hee hath not believed in the Name of the onely begotten Sonne of God. Unbeliefe it seales up to con∣demnation, because it casts off the salvation of Gods free grace; now that which denies the one, seales up the other; not to be∣leeve in Christ is to put from us all possibility of salvation, and to seale the soule up to a certainty of damnation; reade the last verse of that third of John, He that beleeveth on the Bon hath ever∣lasting
life, and hee that beleeveth not the Sonne, shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth in him: Whom ever beleeveth not in Christ, the salvation of God, shall never see life, shall never live in the beholding of God reconciled to him, but hath the wrath of God, the seale of damnation abiding on him, Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible to please God; As unbeliefe keeps the soule from God, so it makes the soule unpleasing to God, that there is no intercourse betweene God and an unbe∣leeving soule; now what can be a more visible seale of damna∣tion then this? Separation of the soule from God which unbe∣liefe makes, unbeliefe biddeth defiance to God and his salvation, and so seales up the soule unto condemnation, unbeliefe is so truly the seale of damnation, that no sinne nor sinnes can damne any soule without, for where faith in Christ liveth, there Christ is the death of all sinne, satisfaction for all sinne, and the life of soules, though all sinne be damnable, yet no sinne nor sinnes can damne without unbeliefe: John 3.15. Whosoever beleeveth in him (which is Christ) shall not perish but have everlasting life. Ob∣serve the Text, and you shall finde this in it, that nothing but unbeliefe can hinder the soule of eternall life; for whosoever, the greatest and vilest of sinners, that shall beleeve in Christ, shall certainely be saved; whosoever sinnes and beleeves not in Christ hath damnation in every sinne, and his unbeliefe is the seale of his damnation, but whosoever beleeveth in Christ, though the greatest of sinners, shall not perish, but have everlasting life; damnation is sealed in unbeliefe, and unbeliefe seales up dam∣nation; the Devill delights in all sinne, but he lives in no sinne so contented and secure, as in unbeliefe; it is the great seale of his Kingdome, that which holds fast all his interest in the soule, unbeliefe it maintaines the Devils interest most of all sinnes in the soule, therefore his indeavour most of all is to maintaine unbeliefe in the soule; it was want of faith in the Apostles when at they could not cast out Devils; Satan is never deposed of his interest in any soule or body but by faith; if he maintaines un∣beliefe he maintaines his interest, the seale of his Kingdome of darknesse. A fifth evill of unbeliefe is this, It makes men vile in secret, though openly they make a profession of godlinesse, he that professeth holinesse with his outside, and indeavours onely to
keep that faire which comes to the view of the World; but im∣braceth secret opportunities to be evill, and to doe evill, must needs doe it from a principle of unbeliefe; for did they beleeve the al-seeing eye of God, and see God with an eye of faith, they would be more carefull of committing evill in his sight, then in the sight of men; an unbelieving soule, may upon some considerations of repute, and esteeme with the World, endea∣vour to avoide open sinnes which makes open scandall, and so brings open shame, but for secret sinnes it is ready to serve Satan when he pleaseth, because it seeth not God, nor doth indeed beleeve that God seeth him, and therefore Satan doth never di∣sturb nor discourage that outward profession of holinesse, which giveth obedience to his commands in secret, he is content the outside should seeme to be Gods, so that the inside be his, his chiefe businesse and endeavour is to hinder true faith in the soul, he cares not, let profession be at what height it will, if he can but keep a foot unbeliefe in the soule, he knowes in secret that soule will obey him what ever profession it makes of God and godlinesse to the World; the Devill loves to be in Gods room in the heart, and if he can but by unbeliefe maintaine his interest there, he hath his ends; and a profession of holinesse in hypo∣crisie, makes the soule seven times more his, then before; and this advantage he makes to himselfe and his Kingdome, by keep∣ing unbeliefe alive in the heart, for thereby he keeps the heart intire to himselfe, and can make such a soule sinne in secret at his pleasure. Sixtly, Men will through unbeliefe be false to their vowes, promises, and ingagements, both to God and his people; when as their corrupted reason telleth them that they may be gainers by it, or their carnall hearts conceive a necessity of it: Such as live not truely on God by faith, they never ingage to God or his people but for their owne ends; it is selfe-love that inga∣geth them, they neither love nor would they trust either God or his people, could they effect their owne ends, but many times God casteth them into such streights, that their fleshly reason tel∣eth them there is no way out, but by the assistance of Gods peo∣ple; at such a time these unbelieving hearts will not stick at the making of any vow to God, or promises to his people; but if once they come as it were to see shoare againe, or but to have
one foote upon the Land that the danger and bitternesse of dth is over, then they thinke there is no such need of the assistance either of God or his people, and then all former vowes and pro∣mises are forgotten: and it may be in this very nicke of time flesh∣ly powers presse upon them to be faithlesse to God and his people, declaring themselves to be enemies to all that shall be friends to God and his people: Now the unbelieving soule calls this a neces∣sity to him of being false to God and his people, in all its former vowes and promises; such soules will argue thus, what should we doe? the multitude call vpon us, and are restlesse with us, so that they will give us no rest till we satisfie them in that which makes us false to God and man in our former vowes and promi∣ses. If we were not so pressed, we should not doe as we doe; we should in some measure make good what wee have formerly said. This answer is made upon a mistake: It is not the pressing of the multitude, but the unbeliefe of the heart that makes such prove false in their engagements and promises to God and his people; were there faith to trust God, that would keep the soul close to God; believing soules make God their refuge in all streights, and counteth nothing to be so great an evill as to be false to God, or to distrust his faithfulnesse: but unbelieving souls they owne, and deny God, they promise, and prove false to God, as their fleshly reason presents God to them, and their owne advantage in what they doe; this pretending to truth and reality in falsenesse, is the naturall proceed of unbeliefe in the heart. Gen. 40.23. We may read a discovery of this in Gen. 40.23. The chiefe Butler forgot both Joseph and his promises to him in the prison, when as himselfe was in those enjoyments that his heart thirsted after; when soules live upon God by faith, such faith maketh them faithfull to God and his people; but where selfe is the high∣est life, there it is the highest end: and thus it is with unbelie∣ving soules, they prize nothing above selfe, therefore can be false to all, when as their fleshly reason telleth them, that there∣by they may preserve and advance selfe. This is another great and certain evill of unbeliefe. Seventhly, Unbeliefe it damps the glory of God, and lessens the grace of God to the soule: A distrust of the truth and reality of any thing takes away from such an eye all the beauty and glo∣ry
of it, so puts a damp both upon the beauty of the thing, and the affection of the soule. If a man be shewed a rich Diamond, and he believeth it to be but some piece of glasse, or at best but a crystall; this his beliefe doth to himselfe much take off the beauty and value of the Dia∣mond, so that the affections are little or nothing answerable to the esteeme, and this ariseth from his unbeliefe: So is it with the unbelieving soule, say what you can of the riches, the glory, and excellency of Gods free grace, of Jesus Christ, and the re∣demption of his grace; yet he believeth not any thing; If this unbelieving soule should heare the Spouse in the Canticles say, that Jesus Christ her Beloved is fairer and fuller of beauty then all the belo∣veds in the world. Hee would not believe, but thinke that the world is a more beautifull Beloved then Jesus Christ, and upon this consideration, unbelievers choose the world for their Belo∣ved, as by faith soules close with, and center in Christ: so by unbeliefe soules leave Christ to embrace this present evill World. The reason is this; faith sees the beauty, and believes the reality of Christ, and the free grace of God, so rests and centers there: but unbeliefe that sayes there is no such grace in God, nor any such riches of glory in grace, no such beauty in Christ, nor such necessity of being saved onely through his blood, and therefore rests and centers their eternall soules in something below God and Christ; this is another true property and perfect evill of un∣belife in the soule. Another evill of unbeliefe in the soule, is this; It makes men inordinate in their pursuites after the World, and so likewise in their sorrow upon their disappointments or losses of the World; it makes men seeke their heaven here, and looke upon nothing in God as enough to repaire the losse of the World: An unbelie∣ving soule cannot live upon God day by day for its daily bread; if the barns be not full, it believeth it shall starve; the fulnesse of God cannot satisfie it; If the heart be empty of faith, the hand must be full of the World, or there will be no quiet in the bo∣some, and therefore unbelieving soules will in their inordinate pursuite after the World, venture soule and all upon this foun∣dation of unbeliefe; men create their owne happinesse in them∣selves, and shape their owne felicity in their owne braines, and pursue their owne fancies with a violent zeale of spirit. Now if
God disappoint them, if hee cracke their foundation, throw downe that building which they have raised in their owne fan∣cies as a habitation for themselves to rest in, then they are as in∣ordinate in their griefe, as they were before in their pursuite, and both these the fruit of unbeliefe; unbeliefe makes them seek felici∣ty out of God, and the same frame of spirit makes them to be as men without hope, when as the world proves empty, though God be everlasting fulnesse: Unbelieving soules have no eye to see that more exceeding and eternall weight of glory which is in God, in Christ, in heaven for Saints, and therefore they so ea∣gerly pursue a dying glory, and are such livelesse, hopelesse, undone soules when that sailes them; If there be no heaven in the world, such soules thinks there is no heaven at all; if their owne heaven faile them, then there is not heaven enough in God to satisfie them. It is worthy the observing, how unbeliefe in Job did make him break out into passion upon this very conside∣ration, Job 3. beg. Job 6.8. How he quarrels with the day of his birth, and makes it his request to God that he would cut him off: What is the matter with Job now? this language had not hee heard to fall from his lips formerly? why now Job is stripped of the worlds riches, hee would be cut off from the world; if the comforts of the world dyes, then he would have no longer being in the world: If it be thus with Job when the sunne of unbeliefe which is dying in him doth but appeare, how is it then with those that live in unbeliefe, and have no acquaintance with God at all, their disappointments is their hell; and they say of God as those evill spirits did of Christ, That he is come to torment them before their time. Thus we see that unbeliefe is so potent an evill in the soule, that it unjoynts the whole frame of the soule, leaves it so loose, that every blast shakes it, and overturnes all the joyes and comforts of it; that which is not fixed in God, is apt to change with all that is changeable, and living only in changea∣ble vanity, is alwayes in a troubled sea, where it can finde no place to cast the anchor of hope on, because it sees not God: This is another certain evill of unbeliefe. The last evill which I shall mention of unbeliefe, is this; It is a sinne which hath all other sinnes in it, and keepes the soul in a readinesse to answer all the temptations of Satan with obedi∣ence. It was unbeliefe that made the children of Israel to mur∣mure
against Moses, and to doubt of Gods making good his word to them, Exod. 14.10, 11. And they said unto Moses, Exod. 16.2. Exod. 17.2. be∣cause there were not graves in Aegypt, hast thou taken us away to dye in the Wildernesse? They distrusted God as well as Moses, and therefore they murmure at the worke of God by Moses. It is un∣beliefe makes the anger, so that it is a teeming sinne, it brings forth more sinnes then it selfe, and keeps the soule in a readinesse to entertaine all sinne; the unbelieving heart it is a treasury of o∣bedience to the Devill, hee is sure never to faile of service from that soule which doth not believe in God; nay the Davill can have no service from any soule, 1 Chron. 21. beg. but so far as unbeliefe lives in the soule. Had not the Devill found unbeliefe in David, he had ne∣ver prevailed with him to number the People; when his heart be∣gan to doubt the strength of God, then was a time for the De∣vill to tempt him to try his owne, therefore sayes he, number the people: Know how strong the arme of flesh is, that thou maist have something to trust too; this is as true a touch-stone of unbeliefe in the heart as any liveth; when the soule by faith sees enough in God, it is not solicitous to have an account of the fulnesse of flesh: but distrust in the former, puts the soule upon enquiry after the latter for satisfaction, and thus unbeliefe keeps open house for Satan at all times; it is the chiefe engine by which he upholds his kingdome and his credite; no sinne so neare and deare to him as this, it is his second selfe, where ever it beares sway, it maintaines his lawes, and his Image. See an emminent example of this in Judas, Matth. 27. Matth. 27.4, 5. Who when he had betrayed his Master, went and hanged himselfe. Satan by his Engine of unbe∣liefe drew him through the one sin to the other, he did not believe in Christ, therefore he betrayed him; nor did he believe there was grace enough in God to pardon the worst of sinners, & there∣fore hangs himselfe. So the Devill first perswaded Eve in Gen. 3.4, Gen. 3.4, 5. 5. Not to believe what God had said, and then he knew hee was able to effect his owne ends, to make her disobey God, and obey him, in eating the forbidden fruit; he useth hsi grand pick∣lock, unbeliefe, to open the doore, to let him in, and so soon as ever hee gets entrance in at that doore, his commands become lawes: Unbeliefe is the owner and power of darknesse in the soul, by which Satan reignes as supreame. This is the strongest hold of Satan in any soule; and if once that stronger man, the Lord
Jesus Christ cast him out of this hold, hee loses his whole late∣rest in, and command over the soule; but so long as he can keep this Garrison, the soule shall surely be kept in a warfare against Christ. Want of faith in God must needs make want of love, service, child-like fear, and obedience, and where these are not, all manner of evill must needs be. I hope by these particulers I have given some little light into this Kingdome of darknesse: it is a large field, the dimensions of it can be taken by no hand, but such an one as can compasse the whole earth, and all the but it; for all the evill of the world will come within this circle of un∣beliefe. I intend here no farther a travell upon this discovery then I have gone; to a spirituall heart I am sure every one of these par∣ticulers will appeare to be very great evils, then the fountaine of them must needs be exceedingly great in evil; All I aim tis this, that as unbeliefe is the greatest evill in, and the greatest enemie to the soule, so that the Readers would thus looke upon unbe∣liefe, and as soules fore-warned, to be fore-armed. Secret ene∣mies are the worst of enemies; I have therefore pointed at this great enemy that it might not be greater then it is in it selfe, by its secret lurking undiscovered in the soule. I shall in the next place in some particulers as before, hold forth the benefits of faith in God, in Christ, and his word, in the soules of believers. The benefits of FAITH. First, Faith in God makes the life of the soule pur, it is a life only in God, it liveth upon nothing else but what God is, doth, and saith: This is properly the life of faith, and the true advantage of the soule by that life. Faith is that eye by which the soule lookes into, and hath a discovery of the goodnesse, grace, and glory of God to it selfe. Now in this knowledge the soule is carryed out of it selfe into God, to live purely and singly upon God, it now comes to know Gods strength to be excee∣dingly more then its owne, and so forsakes its owne strength to live upon the strength of God. By faith the soule sees the full salvation that is in God, and so casteth it selfe upon God for salvation, and liveth purely upon God, and no∣thing but God for salvation and deliverance out of the hands of
all its enemies, to serve him in saith above carnall, distrustfull feare; the life of saith in God, Luk. 1.73, 74. with this benefit of that life doth very emminently appear in the Prophet David, Psal. 62. He be∣gins the Psalm thus: Truly my soule waiteth upon God. This is his faith, he believeth in God, and therefore waiteth upon him: Well, but what is the ground or reason of the Prophets thus waiting upon God, hee telleth us in the end of the first verse; from him commeth my solvation. He did by faith live upon God as the God of his salvation; that is, God was all to him, his life of faith was a living purely and singly upon God; therefore in verse 5. he layes a charge upon his soule: My soule, wait thou on∣ly upon God. Have thy eye no where else, live purely upon what God is, for my expectation is from him. The good I looke for is the good which is in God, my waiting and believing is to see the salvation of the Lord. So in 6. and 7. verses, He only (meaning God) is my rocke and my salvation, my defence and my glory, my strength and my refuge, therefore I shall not be moved. Observe this life of faith, it is purely in God, what God is, and makes its conclusion according to what God is, I shall not be moved. Why not? Because God is my rocke and salvation, hee is my defence and strength. What is in God is the ground of his confidence, therefore God himselfe is the object of his soule. This life of faith in David, is purely a life in God, such a life as liveth purely upon what God is. This life of faith in David puts him in the latter part of that Psalme upon an exhortation to others to trust in God; that is, to live upon what God is in himselfe: In this worke he sets forth the emptinesse of all things out of God, hee telleth us in verse 9. That men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lye: to be laid in the ballance, they are altogether lighter then vanity. All these are empty things compared to God, are lighter then vanity, not to be trusted in, or lay any weight upon, God is onely e∣nough to answer the wants of eternall soules: Live upon God, this is purely the life and benefit of saith in the souln of believers, to live upon the living God, that is, to live pure∣ly upon what is in God. So the same Prophet, in Psalm. 3.3. But thou Lord are a shil for me, my glory, and the lifter up of my head: In the verse before he telleth us that many say of him, There is no helpe for him in
God; but sayes he, I know the contrary, and I doe live upon thy selfe as my shield, my glory, and the lifter up of my head; his life is what God is, for faith hath pitched upon God for his life, Psal. 7.10. and he lives in what God is; So in Psal. 7.10. My defence is of God: That is, God is his strength, and the strength of God is his defence, he liveth upon God, And puts his trust in God, Psalm. Psal. 16.1. 16.1. And in the 23. Psalme, The Lord is my Shepheard; all he hath it is received from the Lord, upon whom he liveth, he makes mention of no Name but the Name of God, as the fountaine of all the good he injoyes, and this makes, him in the 42. Psalme last. to call upon his soule when as it was cast downe, to hope in God; for sayes he, I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance and my God: Though my springs at creature, are soone drawne dry, so that my soule may faint for thirst, yet hope my soule, For God is thy life; I shall praise him because he is my life: Thus doth faith live and satisfie the soule in what God is in himselfe; Psal. 121.2. and in Psalm. 121.2. My helpe commeth from the Lord: It is what is in God that the believing soule looks upon for helpe, and therefore the life of faith liveth when all things below God have no life in them, for it liveth in God, and upon what God is: Give eare to the voice of a be∣lieving soule speaking, in Lament. 3.24. The Lord is my portion, saith my soule, therefore will I hope in him: This soule beleeveth God to be its portion, and therefore lives upon God; thus faith pitcheth upon what God is in himselfe to satisfie the soule with∣all; the Prophet Habakkuk in his faith on God, mentioned in his 3 Chapt. vers. 17. to the end, is a very emminent proofe to this truth; he telleth us there, Although the fig-tree shall not blo∣some, neither shall fruit be in the Vines: the labour of the Olive shall faile, and the fields shall yeeld no meate, the flocke shall be cut off from the fould, and there shall bee no heard in the stalles: Yet I will re∣joyce in the Lord: I will joy in the God of my salvation: The Lord God is my strength. Observe the frame of his spirit and it speakes this; That though all creature comfort should faile, and be cut off from him, yet that could not empty him of joy and rejoycing, so long as the Lord continued to be the God of his salvation, and his strength; what doth this speake, but that the Prophet lived purely upon what was in God, and upon God himselfe as the
God of his salvation, for had his life been out of God, his joy and rejoycing would have been cut off when the creatures of all kindes and in all places did faile, but his soule living purely up∣on what God was in himselfe, his joyes are alwayes green, be∣cause God is the fountaine of his joy, this is truly the benefit of the life of faith in the soule, that must needs be a living advan∣tage that leades the soule to a living fountaine, and layes it to rest in the armes of God, satisfying the soule with what flowes from the bosome of God, that soule can never feare wants that hath this for its beliefe, that what God is in himselfe he is for that soule, and what is communicable in God, shall according to the wants of that soule be communicated to it; and this is the life of faith, a life of joy and rest in God, living upon the e∣verliving God, it is esteemed an advantage to joy and rest by the worldling to have his Bags and his Barnes full, it is truly an advantage of joy and rest to a believer to live upon a full, for God is ever full, though the field and the barne faile, though the bag have a hole in the bottome and cannot hold what is put into it, yet the soule that liveth on God is full of joy and rest, because God never failes. Nay this is the advantage of a believing soule that liveth by faith in God, it lives spiritually, the streames that continually runs through the soule are Evangelicall, the light is pure, it is the light of the Lord; the life is pure, it is the life of God; is lives upon what is in Heaven, in God there is its treasure and its heart also; the life of faith it is the evidence of things not seen, not common objects to earthly eyes, but sublime and spirituall objects; the grace, love, redemption, purity, power, and faith∣fulnesse of God; these are the objects of faith, which doe cer∣tainely make a most glorious life and rest in the soule, this soule is of Heaven, heavenly; it is begot and new borne in Heaven, and there it lives, where ever it moves; though the body be ca∣ryed from one piece of earth to another, yet the heart is always in Heaven, the object, rest, joy, and satisfaction of this soule is spirituall; God is all to this soule, and all its life is in God; the eye is spirituall, and the heart is spirituall, this eye doth al∣wayes see that in God which satisfieth the heart; for the heart seasts and filleth it selfe with what it seeth and injoyeth in God; if the Rocks in the Wildernesse should give no water, yet the spi∣rituall
eye seeth Christ to be a Rock and a fountaine of life, and there it drinketh and satisfieth it selfe with the waters of life; the Prodigall had this eye when he said, In my Fathers house is bread enough; that eye which beholds God as a Father, doth acknowledge that there is bread of life enough in God, and that is the spirituall eye, that eye of faith which makes God in single object, and satisfies the heart with what God is in himselfe and to hs people; such souls as by experience knows what it is to live by faith in God, I am sure doe value this as an exceeding great be∣nefit and advantage of the life of saith, that it hath God to live upon for its life. A second benefit of faith in the soule, is this: By faith soules attaine to the righteousnesse of God (which is Christ) a believing soule makes Christ its righteousnesse, so the Apostle Paul, Phil, 3.9. Phil. 3.9. And bee found in him, not having mine owne righteousnesse which is of the Law, but that which i through the faith of Christ, the righteousnesse which is of God by faith: So long as this Apostle lived in his legal spirit & principles, his legall duties and priviledges, were his righteousnesse; but so soone as the life of faith lives in his soule, Christ is made the righteousnesse of his soule, hee counts all his former righ∣teousnesse, but as drosse and dung: Now nothing will satis∣sie his soule but to be found in Christ; that is, to have Christ his righteousnesse, that God may behold him in Christ his owne righteousnesse; faith it climes as high as God for righteousnesse, nothing below Christ must be a righteousnesse to a believing soule, To be found in him, (Christ) the righteousnesse which it of God by faith: When faith seeks a righteousnesse, it restes no where till it attaine Christ, Rom. 9.30. who is the righteous of God: And this righteousnesse the Apostle telleth us in Rom. 9.30. That the Gentiles attained to by faith: That the Gentiles have obtained righteousnesse, even the righteousnesse of faith: That is, they have by faith pitched upon Christ for righteousnesse, and so through believing have attained the true righteousnesse, that righteous∣nesse which the soule can attaine to no other way but by belie∣ving; the Jewes in all their legall duties could not attaine to that righteousnesse which the Gentiles did by believing. The righteousnesse of God is not of works, but by faith; Christ is Gods righteousnesse, he doth purchase and redeem the
soule to believe, faith doth not purchase Christ for a righteous∣nesse, but believe in the purchase and redemption that Christ hath made for it, and so attaines Christ its righteousnesse, who is Gods righteousnesse, and in whom the soule is to all eternity righteous in the sight of God: Rom. 4.3. Thus was Abrahams beleeving in God, accounted to him for righ∣teousnesse: It is not Abrahams doing, but his believing, by which he attaines to the righteousnesse of God, and is counted righte∣ous in the sight of God; Gods righteousnesse is the gift of his free grace, and can be attained by the soule, no other way but in believing, because any other way would destroy the grace of God in the gift. Now this God is exceeding tender of, therefore he keeps all hands but the hand of faith off from laying hold on Christ his righteousnesse, whom is the great gift of free grace; but as all other hands are excluded from medling with the righteousnesse of God, so this hand of faith, that never failes; when ever Gods puts forth this hand of the soule, he puts his owne righ∣teousnesse into it; faith in the soule doth certainely attaine the righteousnesse of God, it is such a hand as will preserve the free grace of Gods righteousnesse pure in the heart, Christ the righ∣teousnesse of God in the heart doth preserve and keep up intire the glory of free grace in God that made him righteousnesse to the soule, and the hand of faith doth not slubber this glory, but keeps it pure upon the grace of God, and doth acknowledge that it selfe, as well as the righteousnesse it hath attained, is all the gift of Gods free grace. Now faith as it thus attaines the righteousnesse of God, must needs be an exceeding gret benefit to the soule, because the righteousnesse is of so great a value; the feet of them which brings glad tydings is welcome; so must needs be that glorious hand which receives Christ in into the soule, none can tell but them that have it, what a mercy it is to have a hand and a heart for Christ; this is the benefit of faith in the soule, it is such a hand as receives whole Christ, and delivers up the whole soule back againe to Christ, it takes in Christ as its righteousnesse, and giveth up the soule to Christ to be made righteous in him; that soule which attained Gods righteousnesse, can at all times goe to God in his owne righteousnesse, this is the benefit of
faith in the soule, it can goe with holy boldnesse to the throne of grace, and to the throne of justice too, because it can come before God in his owne righteousnesse, and can plead that to God which by faith it hath attained of God, even the righte∣ousnesse of God by faith. A third benefit of faith in the soule, is this: True faith in the soule quenches the firy darts of Satan; the Devill is a very skilfull fire-master, he makes his firy darts so ex∣act, that none but God can quench them in the soule, and he is very free of his worke, he will be alwayes casting into the soul, for his businesse is to keep the soule in a flame, that is the pro∣per Element he lives in; these firy darts are his temptations, with which he goes about the Earth seeking whom he may de∣vour; with these he sought to winnow Paul like Wheate, and he is not onely fitted for Pauls temper, but he hath temptations to suite all tempers and all times, he hath baites to please the various pallats of all flesh, he answers the proud, the peevish, the covetous, the envious, the selfish and worldly wise man, in all their desires, he makes all sweet to the taste, how bitter soever it proves in the belley; he is properly the tempter, it is his course of life which he hath used ever since our first Parents were in Pa∣radice; this is his worke to fit temptations to persons and con∣ditions, and to shute these firy darts continually into the soules of men and women: Now the onely shield to keep of these firy darts, is faith, and the onely hand to put out and to quench these temptations in the soule, Ephes. 6.16. is faith: Ephes. 6.16. Above all, taking the shield of faith wherewith yee shall be able to quench all the firy darts of the wicked: The scope of the holy Ghost there, is to shew the soule its proper armour of defence, against the De∣vill and all his instruments, the wicked, and the wicked one, and in this above all things, he commends faith; faith sayes he, that is able to quench all the firy darts, all the temptations of the Devill and his instruments; and there is an exceeding full reason to be given of this: For it is the true property of faith to lead the soul to God, the believing soule will go to God for his allowance and approba∣tion before he doth any thing; now this is a sure way to quench
all the temptations of Satan, to carry them to God, and not to doe any thing till God have written his name and his will upon it; the believing soule tels Satan when he tempts him to any thing, I am not at my owne disposing, I am Gods servant I will goe to him and tell him your demand, if God give me leave then, and not till then will I obey you; O no sayes the Devill, God is light, and if you goe to him he will discover to you my darknes, I cannot abide the brightnesse of his presence, if you will not o∣bey without Gods leave I must b gone; thus faith quenches the firy darts of Satan: Now under this consideration how great a benefit and advantage is faith in the soule, it contends with, and destroyes Satan in his temptations, it is the great trouble of Saintsion earth, that they have so busie and so watchfull a De∣vill for their enemy: Now the shield of faith is a sure defence against this enemy, the believing soule lives in God, and hath God to be a hiding place to it from the tempter, the life of such a soule is by the faith of the Sonne of God, it lives in God by faith through Christ, and the Tempter cannot goe through Christ to God to destroy such soule, but the soul can go through Christ to God to destroy the Tempter in his temptations; thus faith in God is the life of God, and the death of sinne and Sa∣tan in his temptations in the soules of believers; and sure I am, all such soules as have experimented this benefit of faith in them∣selves will say, it is properly named a glorious advantage and be∣nefit which the soule hath in believing. A fourth benefit and advantage of faith in the soules of be∣leevers, is this: By faith Saints goe to God in all their wants as to a Father: In the patterne of prayer which our Saviour left, he holde forth thus much; That the soule which prayes in faith, goes to God as to a Father, though in Heaven yet a Father, our heavenly Father; faith is that seed of God in the soule, by which the soule is assu∣red that it is begotten of Gods free grace; the new creature is a childe of Gods free grace; now faith it carrys the soule to its o∣riginall in all streights and wants, it telleth the soule it is outly of grace that it is what it is, and what ever yet is wanting, th same fountaine must supply; nay sayes faith to the soule, God is your Father, he hath begotten you in his owne free grace to
a lively hope in himselfe, you have therefore the greatest and nea∣rest relation to plead with God of any other, could you suppose any other so able as God to answer your wants, ye there is none so near to you as God in relation, to whom you may plead the interest of a Childe, and from whom you may expect the bowels of a Father, and upon this foundation the believing soul goes to God in all its wants as to a Father; believing soules are onely satisfied with childrens bread, and this they look for from their Father, so answerably in all their wants goes to their Fa∣ther; faith is a great advantage to the soule in this, in all its wants to carry it to a full fountaine, and to bowels of love which is ready to answer the souls with its owne fulnesse; a Fathes hath a quick eare and a tender heart to his childe crys and wants, God is in this more exactly a Father then any on earth, he is most ready to heare and answer the wants of his children, this faith doth assure the soule of, and hereby drawes it forth to goe to God as its Father and make his wants knowne: First Epistle of John 5.14, 1 John 5.14, 15. 15. And this is the considence that wee have in him, that if wee aske any thing according to his will he beareth us: And if we know that he heareth us whatsoever we aske, wee know that wee have the petition that we desired of him. Faith keeps the soule carefull to make petitions according to the will of God, and in the name of Christ, assures the soule that its petition is granted; the reason is this, the Child beggs of the Father for the Fathers will to be done and fulfilled in him, for that is it which a believing soule wants and seeks for, onely that God may be all in it, and that his will may always be done by it; now this spirit and this assurance will be certainly carry∣ing the soule to God as to its Father in all wants, when crea∣tures in their wants comes to lower relations then a Father, they give this for a reason, my Father is not able, or my Father is dead, were he alive I would not trouble you; which speakes this, that if they had a Father to goe to, which were able to helpe them, they would carry all their wants to him, and center all their desires in him, because a Father; but now saith in the soule it makes out God to bee a living Father, able to answer all the wants that soule or body hath, and maketh knowne to him, and therefore carrys the soule in all its wants to God his father; interest is the strongest of all pleas, and
the nearer the interest and relation is, the stronger is the plea of the soule; the Prophet David in Psalm. 28.1. Psal. 28.1. useth this argu∣ment with God for his assistance. Ʋnto thee will I cry, O Lord, my Reek; bee not silent to me: This is his plea, thou art my Rocke; that is, my foundation and my defence, I have builded on thee, therefore be not thou silent; you see relation and interest is his argument, thou art my Rock therefore I come to thee; I, sayes faith, thou art my Father, therefore I come to thee, be not thou silent thou art my Father, I know thy bowels cannot but yearn to see my wants, and the injuries done to me; he that beleeves most in God is least in revenging his owne injuries; the reason is this, faith carrys the soule to God, and there it tels God all the injuries and wrongs that are offered and done to him, and then the soule is at rest, leaves the recompence to his Father; this throughly and spiritually considered, is a very great advantage in the soules of believers, which is demonstrable by the many great evils it keeps the soule from; what is the reason that men of the World in their wants will deceive and lye, nay steal ra∣ther then goe without what they lust after, and in their streights will sweare and forsweare, yea doe any unlawfull thing to break through, is it not want of faith in God, they say they have no other ways to helpe them; that is, because they have no faith in God, Gods children finds other wayes though they be in the same wants, they goe to their Father, saith pleadeth the interest of a Child, and begs day by day its dayly bread, and keeps the soule believing that as God is an inexhausted fountaine in him∣selfe, so that he can never let that dye which himselfe hath be∣gotten, nor be worse to his Children then earthly parents are to theirs; it is faith in the soule keeps it living upon God as a Fa∣ther, which preserves the soule from all evill ways to answer its wants, for it carrys the soule to God as a Father in all its wants both for soule and body, see the operation of faith in Davids soule, Psal. 31.14. I trust in thee, O Lord, I said thou art my God. Psal. 31.14. Where faith clears up interest it begets trust, thou art my God therefore I trust in thee; so doth faith clear up the relation of a Father in God to the soule, and then what followes; Thou art my Father, therefore I come to thee and trust in thee: The soule is exceeding full of sweetnesse, joy, rest, and holy holdnesse, when it can come to God as to its Father, and stand in his pre∣sence
as in presence of his Father: Now this sweetenesse, joy, rest, and holy boldnesse of the soule, is the fruit of faith in the soule: Faith in the soule makes the soule much in heaven by prayer, because it delights to be in its Fathers presence, and spreading before the bosome of his love all the wants it is in. Burthened hearts doe use to seeke some true friendly bosome to open themselves to, and so in some measure to ease themselves; now in this, faith is a mighty advantage to the soule, for it leads the soule to God, and God its Father, where it shall not only open, but certainly ease it selfe of all its burthens. Come unto mee all yee that are weary and heavy loaden (sayes God) and I will refresh you. I, sayes faith in the soule, goe to your Father, he will ease you of all burthens, and rest you in his owne bosome; when as the soule sees the power of a God, and the love of a Father centre in one object, it is easily drawn to runne after it in all its wants. Now thus faith holds forth God to the soule, as God our Father, and by faith believing souls goes to God in all their wants, and cry out, O our Father, we want victory over sin in our conversations, deliverance from the temptations of Satan, to be carryed in thy Spirit above the love and joy of the world, to have our wils wholly melted into thine, to be spirituall in our light, motion, and worship; We desire as our head did for us, to be kept from the evill of the world, and that thou wouldst provide for us all things needfull quite through the Wildernesse; these are our wants and desires. But thou art God, in whom there can be no want, and thou art our Father, therefore wee pray thee answer all our wants according to thy wisdome and thy glory; these are the brea∣things and motions of true and lively faith in the soule, it car∣ryes Saints thus to God as to a Father in all their wants, and makes them much with God in the opening their wants to him, because God is their Father: Now what ever keeps the soul much with God, must needs be a great benefit to the soule, and this is faith, that which carries the soule in all its wants to God, and keepes the eye of the soule steady on God as a Father, therefore a great benefit to the soule. A fifth benefit of faith in the soule, is this; By faith Saints doe chearfully undergoe sufferings for Christ,
and choose them, though grievous to the flesh, rather then finne. This is so truly the benefit of faith in the soule, that none but such soules as believe in God can doe thus. Saints doe this by a strength out of themselves, even in God, which they have in God by believing. By faith in God Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, Dan. 3. chose Nebuchadnezar's firy furnace, rather then to worship his golden Image which hee had set up: Faith made it easier to them to suffer for God, then to sinne against him; though the Furnace was heat seven times hotter then before, Nebuchadnez∣zar gave them their choise, & saith taught them what to choose; These believing soules counts the flames of sin to be more dread∣full, and fuller of smart, then any flames which the Tyrant could cast them into: they had faith to trust in God, and that carry∣ed them above the commands of sinne, or the feare of punishment in the disobeying of man. The same effect of faith we find in Da∣niel, in the sixth Chapter of his Booke, vers. 10. Dan. 6.10. Now when Da∣niel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his Chamber, and prayed three times a day. Hee knew what snare was laid to catch him in, yet he omitted not his duty, he chose rather to be cast into the Lyons mouths, then to keepe his mouth shut from ma∣king Petitions to God: Thus faith in God kept him close to his duty, though it led him into the snares of death. Faith leept up the Apostle Paul's soule to this pitch in Acts 21.13. Acts 21.13. when s fleshly relations would by teares have perswaded him to omit du∣ty, that hee might wave bonds; hee answers their solicitations thus: What meane yee to weepe, and to breake my heart, for I am rea∣dy not to be bound only, but also to dye at Hierusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. As if he had said, your weeping is my greatest burthen, you break my heart with that; as for bonds and death for the Name of Christ, faith in God will carry me through all that, and I had father choose to dye at Hierusalem, then to o∣mit my duty, and not to goe for feare of bonds. Thus we see the choise of soules believing in God, when sinne and sufferings are before them, one to be chosen, and the other left; now none but a believing soule can doe thus, for it is faith in God which keeps the soule close to God; the pleasure of sinne though but for a season, will leave such soules as have not their pleasure in God. Now none can live in God with delight that doth not believe in
God, so that it is only the believing soule that chooses God for its delight, and will rather choose sufferings, then leave God Christ hath many which professe to follow him, and to be in him: but when hee tryes them by sufferings for his Name and his Truths, they leave him, and with Demas embrace the present world, by which hee discovers them, that they were onely of him by bare profession, not truly in him by faith, for then they would abide with him, and accounted of Christ to be as worthy and as lovely with his Crosse, as with his Crowne, and would have chosen in all conditions to abide with Christ; I, as Moses, to choose afflictions with the children of God, rather then the pleasures and honours of Pharoah's Court; to a believing eye Christ puts a beauty upon sufferings, and a blackenesse upon sin, so that the soule for beauty-sake chooseth sufferings rather then sinnes; this is a precious advantage in the soule: but the truth of it speaks this, that there is very little true faith in the world: this faith is accompanied with much love to God and Christ, and that makes it the more rare and scarce to be sound: but where i is, it makes a glorious soule and conversation: Wee may finde many that doe choose sinne in love to sinne, though sufferings be visible to the eye, and shame at the heels of such courses: but it is only the believing soule, that to shun sin will choose sufferings, and that out of love to God and faith in him: This is a rare ad∣vantage, for it makes the soule a rare soule, such a one as is no where to be found but amongst Gods Jewels, his little flock and peculiar ones; this faith is always leading the soul of sin to take in Christ, though sufferings comes with him; nay chooseth to em∣barque in a storm with Christ, rather then to goe with sinne in the most pleasantest calme that the world affords: It feares not to be with Christ in troubled Seas, because it believes he can rebuke them at his pleasure, so that both wind and Seas shal obey him: Faith knows nothing can bound God, but God can bound the creature when he pleaseth: Faith knowes, if God say the word, though the ship be split in the midst of raging Seas, yet not the life of one man shall perish whom God hath promised to bring safe to shore, and hereby faith perswades the soule to choose suf∣ferings in communion with God, thereby to avoid sinne, which leades the soule from God; the believing soule can see no happi∣nesse out of God, therefore refuseth to embrace any seeming plea∣sure
which leads from God, and this soule sees such full happi∣nesse in God, that it believes what ever sufferings it meets with∣all in communion with God; that God in such communion will swallow up the soule in himselfe above all sufferings; and in this saith, doth the soule cheerfully undergoe sufferings for God, and choose them rather then sin, which is a greater advantage to a child of God in this world, then if all the world were at his dis∣posing. A sixth benefit and advantage of true Faith in the soule is this: Faith makes the soule steady in its worship and service of God; when as a soule believes that it doth worship God according to his owne mind and will, then it in not easily removed or shaken in its worship and service of God, therefore sayes the Apostle, let every one be fully perswaded in his owne minde; that is, what ever men doe in the service and worship of God, let him fully believe that it is the mind and wil of God he should so serve and worship him; for uncertainty of Gods minde, will make unsetlednesse in mans worship; hee that believeth not that God is pleased with what he doth, cannot be steady in that service to God: He that worships an unknown God; that is, God in such a way as hee knoweth not whether God will approve of or not, will not bee long known by that worship; If faith cleares not up the will of God to the soule in its way of worship and serving God, the soule walkes in the darke, and hath trembling in it suitable to darknesse, and trembling joynts cannot be steady in the way they walke, the uncertaine soule will goe with every one that pretends to set it right: but when faith hath cleared up Gode will to the soule, then it moves steadily: Faith is a steady eye, and it makes God its object, so that where faith lives, the soule is steady in its motion; and though it may, as God comes nearer to it goe from lower to higher former, yet in all it goes nearer to God, and is more and more clear in the mind and will of God, more steady and spirituall in its worship and service of God; that is, worships God more purely, more out of the flesh and more in the Spirit, according to that Gospel-worship our Saviour speaks of in John 4.24. God is a Spirit, John 4.24. and they that worship him
must worship him in spirit and truth. In spirit, because he is a Spi∣rit; in truth, because he is the true God: Now none but the be∣lieving soule can worship God either in spirit or truth; for he that believeth not his worship to be according to God, cannot worship in truth, because he knows not the mind of God who is the God of truth: nor can it be in the spirit, for the Spirit is light, and makes knowledge of God, therefore it is only the believing soul that can worship God in spirit and truth, and no other souls can worship God truly, or be true to the worship and service of God which it doth professe. It was faith made the three Chil∣dren and the Prophet Daniel, in the Booke of Daniel, so emmi∣nently steady in their worship and service of God, and truly it is want of faith that makes the unsettlement of souls in this thing, and such as are so zealous to have multitudes to worship God, whether they know and believe it to be Gods minde or not, may bring many pretenders to God, but not any whit more of wor∣ship and service to him. Faith makes men true to the worship and service of God, and force makes men true to the wil-worship of man; for as hee that believeth will not swerve from what God hath revealed to him, so such as worship onely by the rule of mans will and power, is always ready to worship in what manner soever man will have him, and this makes him as uncertain in his worship, as man is who is his rule for worship: but the soul advan∣taged to worship & serve God in spirit and truth, is the believing soule; for what faith fixes of God in the soule, that the soule is steady to God in, and alwayes ready to worship and serve God with; it therefore concerns such as would be steady in their wor∣ship and service of God, to doe nothing in his worship and ser∣vice but what they can doe from a principle of faith, believing it to be the mind and will of God concerning their souls, in their worship and service of him, and in this faith the soule will be steady to God, and it may say as the Prophet David: O Lord my heart is fixed, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise. My heart is fixed on thee, my joy is continually in thee, and my praise and worship shall be alwayes to thee according as thou hast by faith sixed my heart on thee, so shalt thou have fixed worship and service from me; Soules thus fixed are rarely found, nor are they ever found but where faith liveth, and as faith growes, so the soule fixes: This is a benefit and advantage fixed to saith in
the soule, for they alwayes goe together, and the want of either is the want of both, but sure I am, where both are, they may truely be called benefits and advantages to the soule, for that soul is advantaged above all the unsteady soules in the World, what∣ever they pretend to besides. A seventh benefit of Faith in the soule, is this: Faith it makes a ready submission in the soule to the will of God, that soul which believeth in God, and liveth upon God for alit hath or hopeth for, doth not quarrel with, or dispute against the will of God, nay though Gods will be never so opposite a∣gainst the will in man, yet where faith liveth and bareth sway in the soule, there the soule layes downe its owne will and rea∣dily submits to the will of God; this was Josephs case in Matth. Mat. 1.24.25. 1.24, 25. there God bids him to take unto him his wise though she were with childe: Now in the 19. verse, his minde was to put her away privily, because he would not make her a publique example, but when God by the Angell had revealed his will to him, he forsakes his former resolutions, and doth as the An∣gell of the Lord had bidden him: Now observe, it was faith in Joseph made him thus to submit to Gods will, for had not he be∣leeved the Angell of the Lord when he told him in the 20. verse That which was conceived in her was of the holy Ghost, doubtlesse he would have keps to his former resolutions to put her away privily, but believing that the thing was of God, and of it was the will of God, he said, Take unto him Mary his Wise; he through faith makes ready submission to the will of God: And in the 2. Matth. 14. there by saith he readily obeyed God, Mat. 2.14. In taking the young Childe and his Mother by night and departing into Aegypt, which in the 13. verse was the command of God to him by the Angell the second time, because Hered sought the Childes life: thus Joseph believing God is ready to submit to all the will of God: It was thus also with Peter and Andrew in Mat. 4.19, 20, Mat. 4.19, 20. when Christ called them to follow him, he promising to make them fishers of men; the Text sayes, They streighway lift their Nets add followed him. Had not they beleeved in Christ they would never have followed him, but they did it streightway: Faith it made them readily willing to obey the call of Christ; saith it is the
day of Gods power in the souls, and it makes his people il∣ing people unto his will. This made Joshua readily obey all the commands of God in his besieging of Jericho, as appeares at large in the fixt of Joshua he beleeved the word of God in the 2, verse, That God had given Jericho into his hands, therefore waites on God for his directions and acts accordingly; it is faith makes the soule wil∣ing to the will and worke of God: So sayes the Author to the Hebrewes, Heb. 11.7, 8.9. in Heb. 11.7, 8, 9. By faith Noah being warned of God, prepared an Arke to the saving of his house: And By faith A∣braham when hee was called to goe out unto a place which bee should after receive for an Inheritance, obeyed, and he went out not knowing whither hee went, and so on: The holy Ghost makes this ex∣presse, that it was faith in the soules of these faithfull ones that made them ready to all the will of God; what ever flesh might have to object; yet faith bearing sway, the soule obeys, where faith lives there the will, of God lives, and there Gods will is readily obeyed; this is no small advantage to soules in their Wildernesse journey, to be bound up in the will of God, to have that live in them by which they live in God, have Gods will for theirs, and their will for God, this is true faith in the soule, it keeps the soule in a ready posture to say. Amen, to all the reveal∣ed will of God, and to doe in Gods strength all that he requirs such soules and bodies to doe, this ready frame of soule to all the revealed will of God is that which Saints doe breath after at the throne of grace, therefore cannot but be welcome and highly prized by such soules, that which is worth the seeking is a benefit to injoy, but ready submission to the will of God, is that which Saints do earnestly seek; therefore this effect of faith in the soule must needes be a very great benefit and advantage to the soule. The eight benefit of faith in the soule, is this: Faith makes the soule waite patiently upon God for his de∣liverance out of all its streights, though with a single eye of ha∣mane reason it can see no way of escape; this is the language of faith in the soule; disquiet not thy selfe by making conclusions according to thy darke apprehensions, stand still and see the
salvation of God; salvation and deliverance is Gods not thine, be quiet and still, and thou shalt see the salvation of God, faith speakes and workes thus in the soule that feareth the Lord; That when it walketh in darknesse, and hath no light; then to trust in the name of the Lord and to stay himselfe upon his God, Isa. 5.10. Isa. 5.10. Not to give up all hopes, and to cast off all attendance upon God, when it cannot see a way of deliverance by its Naturall reason, but is wholly in the darke in that point; Nay I thinke the Scripture goes higher when as faith cannot see what God meanes, whether he will deliver or no; yet then to trust in God, and to waite upon him for the manifestation of his will, though faith cannot make out what God will doe, yet faith keeps the soule waiting upon God, and that in a still frame of spirit to see his salvation: Hee that beleeves, sayes the Text, makes not hast; he goes not before God, for faith keeps the soule in a waiting posture upon God in all conditions; The believing soule makes not hast, through impatience to cast off any burthen before Gods time, nor doth it make haste through inordinate affecti∣ons to enjoy what it delights in and desires before Gods time; faith in the soule esteemes of things in season, as in their full beau∣ty, Like apples of Golde in pictures of Silver; and to this soule Gods time is the season for all things, Gods time is the most beau∣tifull season to lay downe a burthen in, and to take up an injoy∣ment in to a believing soule, therefore it makes not haste but waites upon God for his season, lyes patiently at the poole side till the Angell of the Covenant come and trouble the waters; this was Davids frame of spirit, in Psalm. 13.5. But I have trusted in thy mercy, my heart shall rejoyce in thy salvation. Observe, he had put his trust in God, and therefore rejoyces in his salvation; the Psalme is a prayer for salvation, it being in faith the Prophet joyes in the salvation of God, as though he were in present possession of the thing he prayed for, doubtlesse he wait∣ed joyfully, when as he joyed in the salvation to come as if it were present, the same frame of spirit we shall finde in the righteous, Psal. 33.20, 21. Our soules waiteth for the Lord, Psal. 33.20, 21 he is our helpe and our shield: For our heart shall rejoyce in him, because we have trusted in his holy Name: Marke it, here is a waiting upon God and that with joy, and this the fruit of faith; Because men have trusted in his boly Name: Faith in God makes the soule waite on God
with joy: So the Prophet David in Psal. 37.7. giveth this counsell as the effect of faith in his owne soule, Rest in the Lord and waite patiently for him, free not thy selfe because of him who prospereth in his way, because of the man who bringeth wicked devices to passe: As if he had said, thou poore heart weake in faith, thou frettest thy selfe because the wicked prosper in their wayes, wert thou strong in faith thou wouldst not minde them so as to disquiet thy selfe, but rest in the Lord, and waite patiently on him, their prosper∣ing hinders not Gods designe, therefore waite on God and be at rest; this is the effect of faith, in my soule sayes the Prophet, and I recommend to thee, beleeve in God so wilt thou be at rest, and in that rest waite patiently on God for the manifestation of his will; So in Psal. 40.1. their waiting patiently on God is expressed to be an effect of faith and confidence in God: And in Psal. 62.1, 2. Truely my soule waites upon God, he is my Rocke, my salvation, my defence, and so forth: His soule by faith trusts in God, he had made God his Rock, what is the effect of this faith, therefore truely sayes he, my soule waites upon thee, faith makes the soule truely to waite upon God: Lamen. 3.26. Lament. 3.26. It is good obat a man should both hope and quietly waite for the salvation of the Lord: This is the voice of faith in the soule, when the soul asket faith, what is good? faith gives it this answer, It is good to waite patiently on the Lord, Vers. 1. though thou art the man that hath seen al afflicti∣ons; yet it is good for thee to waite patiently on the Lord; this is both the counsell and practice of faith where it liveth in any soule, and doublesse to have the soule in a quiet sweet frame of spirit, waiting and depending on God is no small benefit; faith leades the soule to God and acquaints the soule with Gods ful∣nesse, so that thereby the soul is brought into a quiet waiting up∣on God; this blessed benefit, neither is nor can be any where but in beleeving soule, therefore men fret themselves, and make so which hast in their owne wayes that they breake their necks, de∣stroy themselses and their designes, because they have not faith to waite on God, it is the property of faith to keepe the souls close to God, as neare God as can be, that the beleeving soule pres∣seth after; now this nearnesse is to waite on him, to follow him,  no to go before him; this is a true and great benefit of sake in the soules of belv.
The Ninth benefit of faith in the soule, is this: By faith all Mountaines of difficulties are removed from the soule; if thou beleevest, sayes the Text, all things are possibl, there is nothing too heavy for faith to remove, because faith in the strength of God in the soule, for it is the soule going out of it selfe into God, out of its owne strength into Gods; therefore to him that beleeveth, all things are possible; consider this ope∣ration of faith in Queen Esther, Esther. 4, 16. Esther 4.16. There shee directs Mordechai and all the Jewes to seek God, and her selfe and her Maidens doth the same; shee had a great businesse in hand, in which very great difficulties to the flesh lay before her, shee seeks God to be with her, and then shee castern her selfe and businesse on God by faith, shee gets above all the Mountaines of opposi∣tion into this resolution to doe her duty, and leave the issue to God; and in to the King shee goes with this resolution, If Ipe∣rish, I perish: Shee was upon the wings of faith carryed above all those Mountaines which did threaten perishing, shee now did not feare to perish, faith in God carryed her above those feares, removed those Mountains and made her way plaine; faith wrought to this height in Shadrach, Meshach, and Abedingo: Dan. 3.17. Dan. 3.17. If it be so, our God whom wee serve is able to deliver us from the burning firy Furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hands, O King: How bravely doth faith here mount them, above all Mountaines of opposition, our God is able to deliver us and wee will trust him, heate thy Furnace as hot as thou wil, it shall be no Mountaine in our way, for our trust is in our God, and th faith carryes us above all that thou canst either say or doe; but for the clearing up of this truth, take that one Scripture for all, in Marke 11.22, 23. . 11.22, 23 they are the words of our Saviour to his Disciples by way of exhortation to stedfastnesse of faith: And Jesus saith unto them, have faith in God, for verily I say unto you, that whosoever shall say unto this Mountaine, be thou removed, and bee thou cast into the Sea, and shall not double in his heart, h shall be∣leeve that those things which hee hath said shall come to passe, he shall have whatsoever hee faith: This is an exceeding full Scripture to the thing in hand, which is the efficacy of faith in the soule to remove Mountaines, it comes with the authority of Christ him∣selfe,
Verily I say unto you: Well what is it that Christ sayes? why this, that whomsoever in faith stedfastly believing shall say to any Mountaine, be thou removed and cast into the Sea, it shall bee done; I conceive none understandingly can lay up our Saviours meaning here by that tearm Mountain to a Mountain or heape of earth, for that would be little advantage to faith or in∣couragement to lay out faith upon, but that by Mountaine our Saviour largely meanes all Mountaines of difficulties that are in our way to Heaven, and by Sea is meant a place of devouring, of obscurity to what is cast into it; so that our Saviours meaning is this steady faith, the soule that doubts not removes all Moun∣taines that it meets withal in its way to Heaven; so that they are devoured in obscurity that the soule shall never see them more; our Saviours exhortation is this, Have faith in God, doubt not in thy heart but beleeve in God, and Verily I say it, take my word for it, this faith shall remove all Mountaines: That is, the soule which thus undoubtingly liveth in God, shall in that life be a∣bove all Mountaines of opposition that are below God, and shall be able to nihilate them through faith in God, as though they never had been; Have faith in God, doubt not: What doth this meane but an undoubted beliefe that God can and will de∣stroy all Mountaines in our way to Heaven; thus it was with Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, they undoubtingly beleeved, our God can, and our God will deliver us; and verily God did destroy those mountaines that were in their way, God is the same in every soule that hath faith in him, and beleeves un∣doubtingly, he throwes downe all Mountaines into the Sea of de∣struction, and mounts up such souls into himself, above all that might hinder them in their way to Heaven; unbeliefe is that great Mountaine in the soule, which brings forth all those lesser Mountaines of feare which the soule meets withall in its way to Heaven: Now faith in God it lives in the death of unbeliefe, and so destroyes that teeming Mountaine which brings forth all o∣ther reall or imaginary Mountaines of feare in the soule, thus faith in God plucks up the Mountaines of feare which flowes from on beliefe, by the roots; and in this is a very great benefit to the soules of beleevers.
A tenth benefit of faith in the soules of Beleevers, is this: Faith soules up the soule to the redemption of Gods free grace, faith is that worke of God in the soule, which in man is the soule to Gods Covenant of free grace, He that beleeves in God, puts to his seale that God is true: That soule which doth beleeve in God, and in his Covenant of free grace, so as to cast it selfe for salva∣tion and all good upon God and his grace, doth therein put to his seale that God is a God of grace, and will make good his Covenant of grace to his soule, otherwise he would never venture his soule upon it; and our Saviour speaking of faith in the soul, in John 6.47. sayes, Verily, verily, I say unto you, John 6.47. he that beleeveth on me hath everlasting life: Christ delivers it as a most emminent truth, with a Verily, verily, I say it: And what is it that Christ sayes but this? that faith is the seale of life to the soule, He that beleeveth, he hath everlasting life: That is, by faith the soule hath the seale of salvation in it selfe, all the elect have salvation in God and Christ, according to the eternall purpose of God in himselfe, but when God makes soules to beleeve, then they have the salvation of God sealed in their owne bosomes; so sayes the Apostle Paul, in Rom. 5.1. Rom. 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith wee have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: That is, faith in Gods grace doth seale up the soule to a justified state through Christ Jesus, and the soule having this seale in it selfe knowes its peace with God; faith cannot be understood to be a justifier in the soule as by purchase, for then there were no need of Christ to goe along with it, but as the seale of purchase through our Lord Jesus Christ, and this is the true meaning of the Text: for thus the free grace of God and redemption of Christ is preserved in the salvation of soules, but in the other sense both are destroyed, now in this sense it proves the thing in hand, that faith soules up the soule to the redemption of Gods free grace through Christ, and herein is the soule justified in it selfe by faith, But of grace through Christ: So the Author to the Hebrewes in Chap. 11. vers. Heb. 11.1. 1. giving a definition of faith in the soule; sayes, It is the sub∣stance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seene; Faith is such a grace as giveth a substantiall injoyment satisfact∣ry to the soule of that is hopes for, and this is doth by evi∣dencing
and sealing up to the soul its reall interest in God, Christ, and heaven, though through the clouds of the flesh is cannot  the fulnesse and glory of its inheritance, yet i doth fully believe its interest in the inheritance, because i hath the seale in i selfe: thus faith is the seale and evidence to the soule of that which no other eye can see, nor any other heart suck the substance of it seale up the soule to the redemption of Gods free grace, and thus it is an exceeding great benefit and advantage to the soule; the want of this makes those sad complainings that be in soules, wh they heare of grace and good in God, this blowes up the flames of their misery; what is this to me sayes a soule that believes not in God, I have no share in all this, or at least I know of no in∣terest that I have in the redemption of Gods free grace, and so breakes out into such sad complainings of its condition, as doth wound the hearts of standers by, and breaks the heart that beare the first wound, for a wounded spirit who can hear; this soule would give ten thousand worlds if it had the power; for the seale of the redemption of Gods free grace in it selfe; wee use to say, things are worth as much as will be given for them: by this rule the sealing love of God in his redemption of free grace to the soul by faith, is more worth then can be expressed; from whence I ga∣ther this, that faith as it seales up the soule to the redemption of Gods free grace, so it is an exceeding great benefit and advantage to the soule. Another benefit of faith in the soule, is this: Faith carries the soule above feare into the strength of God, so that though all creatures and meanes failes, yet the believing soule hath its refuge and rest in God. Faith in God carries the soule to God, and there it lives in what God is, in which life all distrustfull and distracting feare is banished from the soule. It was thus with the Prophet David, Psalm 27.1. The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear: The Lord is the strength of my life, Psalm 11.36. of whom shall I be affraid. Here is first his faith in God, and his living upon God by faith. The Lord is my light, my salvation, and my strength; hee did be∣lieve God to be so, and lived upon God as his light, salvation, and strength: But now observe what is the fruit of this faith i
his soule, and what the benefit of such a presence: Why it is this, the soule is carryed above feare into the strength of God, he lives in God, and this makes him to be above feare; whom should I feare, of whom should I be affraid. Is there any greater then God can any power take me out of his hands? he is my light in which I see the powers of darknesse, and know they are too weake to contend with him; he is my strength, so that not any thing can destroy me, which cannot overcome him: Nay, he is my salva∣tion, he hath in the glory of his grace already saved mee out of the hands of all my enemies, to this end, that I might serve him without feare; he hath so overcome all enemies for me, that as I live in him, so I have none to be affraid of; these are the argu∣ings of faith in such soules as live upon God, (which is the life of faith) such soules argue their safety from what God is, and therefore till a greater then God appeares, they know no cause of feare. This is the Apostle Pauls argument, when as he was strong in faith, Rom. 8.31. If God be for us, who can be against us. Rom. 8.31. His life was in God, and by faith hee argues thus; what power can contend with God, hee speakes there of the greatest powers of darknesse, that sayes, if God be reconciled to us, no power, or powers can stand against him; now faith in the soule sayes, God is reconciled to us, he is for us, he is our salvation and strength, none can be against us and prosper in their way, therefore whom shall we feare, or of whom shall we be affraid. So the same Prophet in Psalm 31.14. In the verse before he sayes, that fear was on eve∣ry side, untill faith came into his soule: but faith, that banisheth feare. I trust in thee O Lord, I say th art my God. Faith was his advantage to carry him above all those feares that were before on every side, & he commends to all Saints for such an end in v. 23. Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your hearts, all ye that hope in the Lord. As if he had said, you may live above feare if your trust be in God. In Ps. 56.9.11. Psal. 56.9.11. We shall find the Prophet in the pra∣ctices of what he exhorted to in the last Scripture: When I cry unto thee, then shall my enemies turne backe: this I know, for God is for mee. Mark it, here is his faith, that when he cryed to God for help against his enemies, that they should be confounded and turned backe; and the ground of his faith is this, for God is for me, God will engage on my side, and I live on him as my strength and my salvation; but in vers. 11. There is the ffect of this faith
in his soule, and that is it carryes him above feare. In God  put my trust, I will not be affraid what man can doe unto me. Observe, it is not feare, because I have put my trust in God: Faith in God caste feare out of the soule, for it carryes the soule up to God above feare; I have put my trust in God, and shall I now be affraid of man? Shall I feare such an inferiour power to God, that which God can destroy in a moment, in the twiack∣ling of an eye; this feare hath no confistancy with faith, nor can it live where faith liveth: Faith in God assures the soule, that all the Nations of the Earth are but as the drop of a bucket compared  God, and therefore where faith lives, the soule cannot feare the stroak of all the empty powers of the world to be against it, when as God is for it, Psal. 91.1, 2, 3. and it hath put its trust in God, Psal. 91.1. He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most high, shall abide under the shadow of his wings. Whom ever lives in the bosome of God by faith, knowes it selfe to be safe in the protection of God, and so is above feare as it is in God; God is the refuge, fortresse, and de∣liverer of such as trust in him, therefore as he is all this, and my God, in him will I put my trust, and surely he will deliver me, sayes the believing soule; therefore whom should I feare, and of whom should I be affraid. By faith soules live satisfied in God, and a∣bove feare, though all creatures faile, as the Prophet Zephaniab, in Chap. 3. vers. last. Though the Fig-tree and all other crea∣tures and fruits of the earth should fail; yet sayes he, I will rejoyce in God, & joy in the God of my salvation, for the Lord he is my strength. Here is living upon God, above, and without the creatures, and this life is a life of joy, which must needs be above feare. Faith is a life in God, as a God of salvation, so a life of joy, and this purely in God; not because of any creature enjoyment that might goe along with God, but in God when all these faile, and yet this a life of joy, a life above feare, this is the life of faith in the soule, and the benefit of such a life. So the Church of God in Psalm 46. liveth by faith above feare as it liveth in God: this is the Churches faith, God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. Now the next verse tel∣leth us what is the effects of this faith in them: Therefore will not we feare though the earth he removed, and so forth. This is the be∣nefit of faith in God, it quenches and destroyes fleshly and car∣nall feare, i empties the soule of all but God, so as it makes
God all to the soule, and to live only upon what God is: Faith in its growth destroyes feare in its very being; for as faith growes higher and higher, so is the soule carryed more and more into God, by which it liveth more on God, and God in the sould destroyes that fleshly carnall feare that is the seed of nature in all flesh: Faith at this pitch in the soule is an exceeding great advan∣tage in times of tryall; for where fleshly feare liveth as supreame, there fleshly power commands the whole: Now in times of tryall such soules will sayle amisse, that have this power at the sterne; If in stormes faith be not the Pilot, soules will split on rockes, but never arrive at God; nay every calme will endanger the soule, if faith guide it not to God: so that as faith doth destroy carnall feare, and keepe the soule close to God, so it is a very great be∣nefit and advantage in the soules of beleevers. Againe, Faith in GOD doth advantage the Soule in this: Faith makes soules faithfull, true to their trust and promises, trusting in the true God to protect and carry them through all difficulties. It was thus with Queene Esther, Est. 6.16. Shee promises Mordeeai and the Jewes, that shee would first seek God to goe with her, and then she would go in to the King; the story telleth us that there was great difficulties in the way, yet this be∣leeving soule was true and faithfull to her engagements, and the trust that was reposed in her: She sought God to goe with her and in God doth faithfully discharge her duty and trust, though death and danger was in every step of the way: Faith i a vigo∣rous grace in the soule, it filleth with spirits, and carryes soules in the wayes of the faithfull God, though Lyons and Beare lye in the way: Thus faith wrought in this Heroick piece of the w∣ker Sex, depths of dangers could not make her unfaithfull to her God and Nation. Faithfull Joseph is another proofe to this truth, in Gen. 39. Gen. 39. his lew'd Mistresses temptations could not make him false to his Ma∣ster, and he giveth this for his reason, hee could not be false to that trust his Master had committed to him, nor durst he some a∣gainst God, faith kept him true both to God and man, and that is the true nature of faith to be faithfull; therefore faith James in
his Epistle, shew me thy faith by thy workes. If thou hast faith, it will keepe thee faithfull both to God and man; what ever soule is false to God and man in that trust which God & man hath com∣mitted to it, I dare affirm, it is the effects of unbeliefe; men in trust prove false to trust as they thinke for fleshly advantages, or upon some outward necessity: but the true cause is unbeliefe; for had they faith in God, they would be faithfull to God, and the trust committed to them: Did they believe in God to owne them, they would in that faith keepe true to God, and owne him; did they beleeve God to be the owner, the author, and pre∣server of all truth and faithfulnesse, they would in this beliefe be faithfull to God, true to their trust, and trust the God of truth to preserve them; for this is the effect of faith in the soule, and I know no truer a demonstration of an unbelieving soule, then to be false to God and man in the trust that is committed to it, upon any pretended grounds whatsoever, nor is any thing a truer ef∣fect of faith, nor a clearer image of God in the soule then faith∣fulnesse to God and man: In trust committed, and in engage∣ments given forth, this effect of faith I confesse doth declare the present generation to be exceeding faithlesse, but yet let God be true, though all men be lyers; for such a soule as lives by faith, lives in God, so in truth, and cannot be false to God or his peo∣ple, to trust, or their owne promises: This is a precious benefit of faith, it is not only a benefit to such soules in whom it is, but al∣so to that Land and people where such soules do dwell. A further effect and benefit of faith in God, is this: It makes men deny themselves to lift up Gods glory, and will not by any meanes take Gods glory to themselves, though they have fair advantages for it. See this fully proved in Peter & John, Acts 3.12. Acts 3.12. Acts 4.10. so on. Acts 4.10. so on, when as by faith in God they had to the wonderment & amazement of the people been instruments to make the lame man walke, so that all the people ran about him to see what was done: Then Peter being affraid, lest they should ascribe Gods glory to them, hee speakes to the people in Chap. 3. vers. 12. And when Peter saw it, hee answered unto the people, yee men of Israel why marvell you at this, or why looke you so cornestly on us, as though by our owne power and holinesse we had made this man to walke.
This Scripture clearly proves thus much, that the Apostles were carefull that not so much as a thought should remaine in the peoples hearts that the lame man was made to walk by any power and holinesse that was singly or originally in them, and there∣fore to put all that out of dispute, they declare themselves no∣thing, but Christ all in the worke, in Acts 4.10. Be it known un∣to you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom yee crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him doth this man stand before you whole. Observe the care of preserving the glory of God and Christ in∣tire that was in these faithfull soules, for they make a full De∣claration of the power which did the work, at which they were so amazed. Know all you, and doe you make it knowne to all the people of Israel, that by the Name and power of the Lord Jesus Christ this worke is done; They had here a faire opportunity to gaine great honour to themselves from the peo∣ple, but faith in the soule makes it its businesse to lift up the Name and glory of God, and to live upon that in all it doth. By faith these Apostles were instrumentall in this worke, and this faith keepes them true to the originall glory which they acted by, namely God and Christ, they wrought this great worke in the Name of Christ, and by the power of God, and their second worke is to keepe the glory of it upon its owne foun∣dation, namely God and Christ: Now that they might more plainly shew God and Christ to the people in this great worke, they throw downe all that stands in the way, and first begins with themselves; Looke not upon us as if wee by one owne power and holinesse had made this man whole. God hath used us as instruments, but in this God is origi∣nally all, therefore looke upon God, not us: Thus faith in GOD throwes downe selfe and flesh, that GOD in his glory may appeare, that the soule might glory in what God is, and not what selfe is; this is a precious grace in the soule, for it makes a precious soule, a soule willing to worke for Gods glo∣ry, and accounts this a full recompence to all its labour and worke, that God is thereby glorified, but withall is exceeding tender that nothing of selfe should share with GOD in the glory onely due to his Name: Faith at this pitch is very rarely found in these latter dayes, wherein mn are lovers of them∣selves
themselves more then lovers of God, but where ever it is, it is an exceeding benefit and advantage to the soule, such soules doe the worke of Heaven on Earth, lift up the name and glory of God in all they doe, and are not contented in doing any thing but in which they may doe this, throw downe the vaile of their owne flesh, that the glory of God might appeare in them and by them, all those fleshly selfeish carnall principles and practices that are in the hearta and lives of men, they are the fruite and effects of unbeliefe in the soule; the evill of which doth give demonstration to the excellency and benefit of faith; saith that workes and rules in the soule and conversation, to the throwing downe of selfe, and to the lifting up of Christ in the World, this is so great a benefit that none can prize it but they that have it, it is more in the injoying then it can be in the desiring. Another benefit of faith in the soule, is this: Faith in God keepes the soule in a steady expectation of Gods fulfilling and making good his promises though the acts of his providence may seeme to worke crosly: Faith centers the soule upon God in his promiset, and brings it to this pitch that though it cannot see Gods way of working, yet having belie∣ved God in his word doth rest in this, that all his workes shall and doe make good his word; so that the soule when it is at a losse concerning Gods way of working, yet it is at rest in the end of God made knowne by his Word, and can argue thus with it selfe, though in the actings of God he seemes to cross his owne ends, yet I know they shall all runne into his faithfull Word, and what he there speakes he is now a doing; though I am a stranger to the way of his working, yet he will never be failing to his owne holy ends declared in his word; and upon this account the soule is kept to waite quietly and to bee steady in its expectations of Gods sulfilling and making good his pro∣mises, though the workings of his providence may seeme to act crosly: Therefore sayes the Prophet, I will trust in thee though thou killest mee: Whatever thou deest I know thou wilt fulfill thy promises; this was Moses faith at the Rad Sea, and his counsell to the Israelites, Exod. 14.13. Exod. 14.13. Not to feare but to stand still and see the salvation of God: As if he had said, I and you have
received promises from God that he will be with us and deliver us out of the hands of Phareah and his Task-masters, why let us beleeve these promises, though his workings at this present may seeme as though hee meant to let Pharoah destroy us, yet having his word to the contrary, feare not his workes, but stand still and see the salvation of the Lord; all his workes shall accom∣plish the fulfilling of his Word; therefore in faith be quiet and waite for it, there is not any thing that is more truely the nature of faith then this to keepe the soule quiet in waiting on God for the fulfilling of his promises; God exhorts to this in Psalm. 46.10. Psal. 46.10. Be still and know that I am God, I will bee exalted amongst the Heathen, I will be exalted in the Earth: That is, you that have beleeved my word, if it have spoken good to you, be still and quiet in your spirits concerning the fulfilling of it, for I am God I am faithfull and true, though my workes seem contrary to your eyes, yet they are but to exalt my name among the Heathen, and in the whole earth, that men may not trace me in my way, but yet know, I am God, I will be faithfull to my ends and promises, fixe you your eyes there and quiet your heart in them, judge not my end by my wayes, but my wayes by my end, waite on the fulfilling of my word, be still and know that I am God. Faith in God makes the soule still and quiet in all Gods dis∣pensations to it, because it knowes that he is God, therefore can∣not be unfaithfull to his promiser, but is in all accomplishing his owne will in the giving in to his people the fulnesse of his p∣mises made to them; this the soule by faith is assured of, and therefore waites patiently, and is not moved from its beliefe of God though his present dispensations speaken some other thing to his fleshly understanding: Now if this hee the workings in the soule, as doubtlesse it is, then faith is an exceeding great be∣nefit in this very thing; for a soul fixed on God in his word and promises, is in a measure in Heaven already, it is as rest in God, and is filled with the joyes of God in its rest, it lives above t∣ward appearances even in what God in and what God saith, no doubting but that all his worke shall make good his word; to that what ever his owne flesh or any other shall speake contrary to the Word of God, that faith beates downe in the soule, and keeps up the soule in a steady expectation of Gods making good all his promises, and a patient waiting upon God for his
time; the troubled unfixed soules of unbelievers, could they speake, would set forth the exceeding benefit of faith in this par∣ticuler; that which fixeth the soule in God, leaves it in the full possession of all good; now this is the true property of faith, it is that gift of God which gives the soule singly and purely up to God, to live onely in him and upon him, and from hence flowe this benefit to the soules of Beleevers. Againe, Faith in God is a benefit to the soule in this, namely, That, By Faith Saints are weaned from the World. When a soule by faith sees its interest in God in that more ex∣ceeding and eternall weight of glory; then, and not till then hath it a low esteeme of all the dying vanities in the World, that i as the Wise man computes vanity all things under the Sunne; Faith is such an eye as can read that love which is in Gods heart, and behold the glory of that love as an heire of God, a joynt heire with Christ, and a Citizen of the new Jerusalem, and in this vision is the soule in all its affection centered in God, and so truely weaned from the World, and it is nothing lesse can doe it, there is such a naturalnesse, a congruity, and onenesse between the World and our owne fleshly hearts that nothing can breake off this league and mount up the affections of the soule but an Almighty power, the indwelling of God in the soule by saith, through which the soule dwels in God, and is continually feast∣ed and satisfied with fuller love and richer glory then the World can give, the soule now being made spirituall, sees God and to be the onely fountaine of love, the single object worthy of love, and its eternall portion of love, and so is carryed in its love and affections above the world into God and Christ; being thus swal∣lowed up into God, the soule in its love, joy, pursulte, and rest, becomes crucified to the World and the World to it, it looks up∣on the World as a dead thing and its heart is truely dead to the World; this is a true effect of faith, see this in the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 2 Cor. 5.1.2. 5. begin. For wee know that if our earthly house of this Taber∣naclwere dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands but eternally in the heavens: This is the worke of faith in the soule, to assure the soule of its interest in God; this we
know sayes this Apostle that God is our interest, himselfe is our eternall habitation; so that when ever these clay walls shall crumble into dust we shall be no loosers by it, for the dissolving of them is nothing else but the possessing of our full interest in God: Now marke the effects of this faith in the 2. verse: For in this we grone earnestly, desiring to be cloathed upon with our house, which is from Heaven: The knowledge of interest in God which is the proper worke of faith in the soule, it makes the soule not onely weaned from, but also a weary of the World, it groanes earnestly to be uncloathed of the flesh, to be absent from the bo∣dy that it might be fully present with the Lord; faith weanes the soule in the whole lumpe from the World, it would leave it who∣ly, it groanes to be uncloathed of the body that it might leave the World in all it is, the disappointments of the World doe many times make worldlings out of love with sonte pieces of i, but it is onely faith that weanes any soule wholy from it, and that because faith in God manifests the fulnesse of God to the soule, and the soules interest in that fulnesse, so that it rests in God n onely as its interest, and so better to it then all the World,  as a better interest, so that being made wise in Christ its wise∣dome, the soule makes choyse of God, as having seene the dying glory of the World, and the living glory of God by a spirituall eye of faith, it is thereby made dead to the World and alive to God; Christ he speakes to a believing soule in the spirit, and tels the soule It is your Fathers good will to give you the Kingdome; and that the Kingdome of glory, to he joynt heirea with me in glory, the soule believing this becomes dead in its love to all the Kingdomes of the world, and to a world of King lomes, Christ tels the soule further that in your Fathers house are many Man∣tions, and I goe to prepare them for you; your building in God is ready when ever God shall uncloathe you of your flesh; the soule in believing this hath its heart where its treasure is, it in now risen with Christ and gone to Heaven, and in its affection doth manifest it selfe to be Crocified with Christ to the World, wner from all lower glories, because liing in the glory of God; th is, in God where all glory centers, and from whom all gloryen have their originall; so that when the soule is at the  doth not thirst after narrow streames, whom over dinkes of thin fountaine of life thirsts no more; that is, no more after fatil∣faction
in any thing but God, it hath all in God, therefore wean∣ed from all below God, doubtlesse this is a rare benefit of faith in the soule, it is rare in its appearance, and for such soules that with Demas forsake God and imbrace this present World, what ever they have professed, and though never so long under a pro∣fession of God and godlinesse, yet they never truly knew God in the spirit, nor did they ever live in God by a true and lively faith, for if they had, it would have wrought this effect in the soule, to have weaned their hearts from, I, and have Crucified their hearts to the World, had they ever tasted God in truth, the would never have forsaken him for tenne thousand Worlds: For the life of God in the soule is the life of faith, and the effect of faith in the soule is a weaning of it from the World, by a gathering of it into God. The last benefit of faith in God which I shall mention, is this: True faith in God doth truly fixe and establish the soules of Beleevere in the redemption of Gods free grace from all our ene∣mies from sinne, death, Hell, Law, grave, men, and Devils, none of these can hurt or destroy such soules as lives in the free grace of God by faith; free grace it freely pardons finne, and so plucks out the sting of death, delivers from the jawes of Hell, satisfies and fulfils the Law, gathers from the grave that which in sowne in corruption and cloathes it with incorruption, chains up the power and malice of men and Devils against his people; this free grace doth, and by faith the soule lives thus on God, by which it becomes a fixed and established soule; beleeving soules are not like the restlesse waves of the Sea, that rowle from shore to shore and soame up their owne mire, but they are soules fixed in God and Christ; God by faith did answer the Prophets pray∣er, which dered to be led to that Rock which was higher then himselfe; that is, the work of faith, it leads the soul to God and Chirst, and then it is an established soule, it is then built upon  Rock higher then it selfe, so that windes cannot shake it, nor  undermine it, as if it had built upon a sandy sounda∣tion; faith builds upon a Rock, and that, the Rock of Ages, i  in the free grace of God, the redemption and the righteous∣nesse
of Christ, so that neither life nor death nor any thing, no not finne, shall ever be able to separate such soules from God and Christ, and hence it is that soules beleeving thus in God through Christ by his spirit are fixed and established soules; the Prophet David in Psal. 125.1. gives in testimony to this benefit of faith in the soule; he telleth us there, They that trst in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be moved, but abideth for ever. Faith in God fixeth the soule in everlasting safety, and keepes it upon a Rock of establishment even when Earth and Heaven is shaking. Now I shall gather up what I aime at in all this, in reference to my owne soule and others, and it is singly this, to eye God with a single eye, and to rest upon him with a steady undoubt∣ing heart; by a single eye, I meane a single heart fixed upon what God is, does, and sayes concerning his people, and then by faith to apply, and appropriate that to our selves, resting steadily and undoubtingly upon him, assuring our soules that what hee sayes concerning us he will fully make good unto us: God cannot lye, when he speakes he speakes his heart, and what is in his heart to doe, no power or powers can hinder his hand from doing, such soules then as thus see God and rest upon him, are sure to be e∣stablished; so as the counsell of good King Jeboshaphat is wor∣thy to be received by all soules, Beleave in the Lord your God, so shall you be established. Then first give me leave to advise to a serions and constant in∣quiry after God, if establishment in the soule come by believing in God, then knowing of God aright is of absolute necessity  such a believing; now soules sleight or inconstant in their in∣quities after God in what he is, doth, and saith, are very unlike∣ly soules to come to such a knowledge of him as will bring forth beliefe to establishment; It was the saying of an established soule in God, I know whom I have trusted; and doubtlesse there had not been trust to establishment, but that knowledge was in the very foundation; the argument seemeth to me to runne thus, I know God, and therefore I have trusted in him, and  I know him, I am assured I shall not be deceived by him; so that from this knowledge I am established through believing; dark∣nesse is the proper wombe of feare, there in nothing else foture∣ly begotten there, so is light of faith and establishment; thi
I say and speake by experience in which I shall appeale to the ∣perience of all Saints, that the more any soule truely knows God the more that soule will trust him; therefore give mee leave a∣gaine to say, Be serious and constant in the inquiries after God, study him as he is in himselfe, in his Christ and our Saviour, i his Covenant of free grace, in all his promises and performan∣ces, in his word and workes, in our owne and other Saints expe∣riences of him: And this I dare boldly affirme, the more God is thus spiritually knowne of his people, the more he will be ad∣mired, loved, and trusted by them, and such soules the more tru∣ly established. Secondly, This seemes to be suitable advice, to be exceeding watchfull over Satan and our owne hearts in all the temptations to, or movings of unbeliefe in our soules, there is nothing so great a friend to the Kingdome of Satan, and so great an eneny to the Kingdome of Gods free grace as unbeliefe is, nor can any sinne so certainely destroy the soule as unbeliefe; nay all other sinnes without this can never destroy any soule; doubtlesse these reasons have weight enough in them to make Christian soules stand upon their guard, against this enemy of unbeliefe; it is the Generall of the Host of evill, it commands all other sinnes, and where it enters it comes with great attendants of evils subservant to is selfe; unbeliefe is the supreame Agient in the World for the Prince of darknesse, in what ever God is distrusted and not believed, Satan shall surely be served; Faith is that Anchor that keeps the soule close to God, if that be plucked up; Satan sils the Sailes, I meane the heart with the World, and so carryes the Vessell where he pleaseth; Faith is Gods interest, and unbeliefe the Devile interest in the soule, and at the last day when Christ shall give the Devill his due, I mean his share of men in the world, i will be onely unbelievers; for he hath interest in, nor can lay claime to none else; therefore unbeliefe should be dreaded as the Devils brand, that by which he markes his owne; distrust God, and honour Satan, for they cannot be parted, he that doth the former cannot avoyd the latter: A soule watchfull in this thing i so for Gods glory its owne peace and eternall saivation, for these two can never be parted, what preserves the one preserves the other, but unbeliefe looseth both; consider free grace is the originall, the first cause of all Gods promises to, and his dea∣lings
with his people: Now a distrust in these, how doth it dis∣honour God, and not onely unestablish, but undoe our owne soules; therefore no enemy so dangerous as unbeliefe, and should with most watchfulnesse be prevented, unbeliefe it opposeth Gods ends in his Covenant of free grace, and in all his gracious promises to his people, which is, that all the ends of the Earth should come unto him and be saved; that is, beleeve on his free grace for salvation; Now this is Satans grand designe to hinder faith, because he is the great enemy of Mans salvation: Our Sa∣viour tould his Disciples, that to them that beleeve all things were possible, Satan knowes this full well, and therefore doth all that possibly he can to hinder faith in the soule; therefore be exceeding watchfull over Satan in this thing, and looke often and diligently into our owne hearts, and know that so much unbeliefe as is there, so much interest the Devill hath in us, and by that possession he hath an iolet to the soul for any temptation, therefore I say againe in our Saviours words, Watch and pray, lest you enter into temptation. But in the last place, I shall winde up all in the Prophets owne words, Beleeve in the Lord your God, so shall you be established. And first, beleeve God in himselfe, and now I pray look back upon his Attributes, and you shall finde him God, and alwayes God, an everliving and eterna  God, a faithfull God, and a God that cannot lye, a God of love and an everloving God, his love is like himselfe unchangable, he is the originall of all pure and holy love, and as love is originally in him, so that love is eternall like him, he is a God of free grace and hath made his owne grace to be his Childrens title to life and salvation: Now I date confidently affirme, that whom ever thus believes in God, shall be established, what can shake that soule that lives upon God, as God Almighty, Omnipotent, infinite, and eternall, what can kill those joyes and comforts that lives in God as he is a God of eternall and originall love and free grace, these joys and comforts will live so long as the fountaine of their life a∣bider, and that is for ever; God in what he it, is unchangable, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, from everlasting to e∣verlstaing; where God is the foundation and Christ the Comer stone, that building will abide for ever; shakings and great ss
doe arise from sandy foundations: But the Prophe: Davld tel∣eth us that such people are blessed whose God is the Lord; that is, they have this blessing to be established, whom have pitched upon God for their all, and live upon what God is, that soule which lives in God is above the feare of any other strength to o∣verturne or destroy it, because it lives upon an Almighty God, neither can this soule feare to outlive its comforts and delights, because they are bound up in an ever-living God, and the eter∣nall love and free grace of God, to be the hand that bound them up, and the wombe that brought them forth; therefore this believing soule doth not say it shall one day fall by the hand of Saul; that is, of this or the other lust, but that the eternall love and free grace of God hath delivered it from, and carryed it up above all its enemies, so that it may serve him without feare, as a soule established in himselfe, living purely upon what God is, so that nothing can shake or unsettle this soule, which can∣not lessen God, and as no power can make God lesse then the true, Almighty, Omnipotent, Eternall and ever faithfull God; no more can such powers shake, much lesse destroy such soule, soules as lives thus upon God; the Author to the Hebrewes tels us, Chap. 12. vers. 27. That there are things which are made, that are and must be shaken, and there is a Kingdome which cannot bee shaken but shall remaine for ever: Truely all below and besides God are now shaking, and shall not cease til they return to their first nothing, but the Kingdome of God, or more properly God the glory of that Kingdome, shall never be shaken but abide for ever, so shall all those that live in him, this is Mount Zion, which cannot be moved, to live in God ever hath and shall be a life of glory, therefore this exhortation is alwayes ful of weight and glory; but me thinkes in these latter dayes of the World, when as the whole World is as it were giving up the ghost, and every man complaining that there is no sweet nor relish in it, the most discerning eyes plainely beholding its glory departed from it, the Pillars cracked and breken, so that it can be but a very little time before the Fabrick fals: Now me-thinkes that which cannot be shaken but shall remaine for ever, should have its ex∣ceeding worth and glory in our eyes and hearts, and this is no∣thing else but God himselfe: O then such as would live for e∣ver must live in God, for all things else are not onely dying, but
very neare their death: God hath written upon honours, plea∣sures, and profits of the world, Death so visible in such bigge characters, that every eye almost can reade it: but himselfe is the ever-living God; hee that made all things out of nothing, can when hee pleaseth make all that hee hath made returne to its first nothing, and yet himselfe be to eternity what hee was from eternity, an Almighty, glorious, and ever-living God: Oh therefore live onely in the glory of this ever living God, so shall you live when the World is dead, so shall you dye to the World, but live above the World; Jehovah will be eternal life to all that live in him: Faith in Jehovah will make an establi∣shed soule. Secondly, Believe on God in the Covenant and salvation of his free grace, in Jesus Christ the great gift of his grace, in whom he hath satisfied his owne pure justice, and perfected the salvation of his people, and in all his gracious promises. First, believe him in his Covenant of free grace, believe that he meanes to keepe it, and will perform it to the utmost: were there no o∣there reason, this is enough to make us believe hee will keepe it, because he hath made it in himselfe, and hee is God that cannot lye, he is Almighty, and can want no power to prove himselfe the true and faithfull God; it is all grace, and so all God, that it can never be lesse then it is, but for ever the grace of God, or the Covenant of the God of grace. A little consider the conditions of this Covenant, and then see how faith on God in this Covenant will establish the soules of believers. First, Sayes God, this shall be the Covenant that I will make with my people: As if God had said, it is my Covenant, so that if you that trust in it should finde it faile, blame me: but I am God and cannot lye. It is the Covenant of my grace; that is, it is the powrings forth of my selfe, it is eternall as my selfe, and shall never faile in a title of it, it is tru as I am true, therefore be∣lieve this my Covenant as you would my selfe if I should speak to you face to face, and in beleiving thus on mee shall your hearts be established. Secondly, God doth engage himselfe by Covenant to forgive the iniquity of his people, and to remember their sins no more. Now to beleeve God in this his own Covenant, how exceedingly will
it establish the soule; there is nothing like sinne and iniquity to make an earth-quake, and a soule quake: If God once brings a soule or a Land to account with him for sinne and iniquity, that will make dreadfull shakings indeed: so on the contrary, where God acquits from sinne and iniquity, he makes rest and establish∣ment, for it is sinne that is the troubler of Israel: but when God in his Covenant of grace shall engage himselfe to pardon and ac∣quit soules from sinne; such soules as receives this Covenant of God, and believes that he hath and will make it good to them, will surely be at rest. But this is not all, for God Covenants further with his people: That he will put his law in our inward parts, and write it in our hearts, so that he will be our God, and that wee shall be his people. Now examine it over againe, and see what is wanting to make an established soul, if God be believed in it, and rested upon for the fulfilling of it: Here is choosing grace, par∣doning and purging grace: here is justifying and sanctifying grace, yea all this is grace, free grace, the grace of God, and God in his free grace, engaging himselfe to make all this good to such soules, as rest upon him. What now can any soule say against trusting in God for all that hee hath covenanted to doe in his owne free grace; if the soule say I am not worthy, what is that to the free grace of God, God doth not move upon any such grounds, it may be a good heart may say it is not broken enough; why a broken heart is a new heart, that which God hath Covenanted to give; trust God, hee will make good every part and tittle of his owne Covenant, that should not hinder faith, for it is the effect of faith: Seeke not first to make thy heart good, and then to trust God, but trust in God, and he will mend thy heart; nay, he will give thee a new heart, that which thou wouldst give all the World to gaine, he will give thee freely, if thou trust in him; he will not onely establish thy heart, but sanctifie it also. Now hence I dare be bold to affirme to any soule, if it believe i God and his Covenant of grace, it shall be established, finne shall not shake it, for God hath acquitted such soules of that, and cast all the sinnes of Believers out of his remembrance; God hath done this great worke in his owne grace, and neither can nor will ever undoe it: Corruption shall not be able to unestablish a soule that believes on God in his Covenant of grace; for such soules goe to God, and spread their corrupt hearts before him,
and pleading his owne Covenant with him for new hearts, and that he would renue right spirits within them. Believing soules are fixed upon a rocke that is higher then themselves, so that no∣thing in selfe can reach them, and what ever is in God doth esta∣blish them; such souls see God to be rich in mercy, full of grace, pardming iniquity, transgression and sins for his owne Names sake. Thus are soules established by believing in the Lord their God. Againe, Believe God in Christ; our Saviour himselfe cals for this in John 14.1. You believe in God, believe also in me: That is, believe in God through me, looke through my wounds, and see how he loves you; behold the streumings of my blood, and see how freely and fully he hath justified you; consider your union with me, and therein how he hath made you compleatly right ∣teous in his owne sight: He hath made me to be sin for you who knew no sin, that you might be made the righteousnesse of God in me, 2 Cor. 5. last. Now believe thus in God through me, that I have born your sinnes, and satisfied his justice to such a perfection, that you stand the righteousnesse of God in me: Believe in God through me, so shall you be established above the feare of sinne or puniment; for you shall see I have borne them both for you, Isa. 53. I have orne your griefes and carried your sorrowes; God hath strucke, smie∣ten, afflicted, and wounded me for your transgressions, he hath brui∣sed me for your iniquities, the chastisement of your peace hath hee laid upon me, and with my stripes are you healed, for the Lard hath laid on me the iniquities of you all: God hath made my soule an offering for your sinnes, and hath seene the travll of my soule, and is satisfied. Now if you believe thus in God through me, your soules will be satisfied too, you will be established as soulee that are fixed in the bosom of God; me-thinks Christ sayes here, goe with holy boldnesse to the barre of Gods justice, and by faith offer up my wounds, my stripes, and the travell of my soule in full satisfa∣ction for all your sinnes, and I dare assure you hee will acquit and write your discharge by his owne spirit in your own bsom, I begge of you (says Christ) have not the least doubt of his faith∣fulnesse, or the fulnesse of my satisfaction; I have paid the ∣most farthing, you may boldly goe to Gods justice, believing this, there shall not to all eternity be a tittle laid to your charge: No sayes he, God will be just both to you and me, he will n∣ver
charge you with that which I have paid, and be  have finished the whole worke of redemption, I have  that believe in God through me from the curse of the law, being  curse for them. In the whole worke of redemption I did the will of my Father, in my agony, when I sweat drops of bloud, and on the Crosse, when there issued out from my sides streates of ∣ter and blood: I did bear your sinnes, for I had none of my own, and in all this I have perfected your redemption in the ll sati∣faction of my Fathers justice: so that by believing in God through me, you will see Gods Justice fully satisfied for your finnes, and your selves wholy acquitted from sinne, and made righteous in the righteousnesse of God himselfe, and this I am sure will e∣stablish your hearts; where sinne is discharged, and righteous∣nesse sealed up, there all cause of feare and shaking is banish, and this is by believing in God through me, sayes Christ; for  the great designe of Gods free grace my blood hath discharged all your sinnes, and I am your righteousnesse; I that am the ful∣nesse of the God-head bodily, and you compleat in me, perfect∣ly righteous without spot or wrinckle in the pure eyes of God; nay sayes Christ, had not my blood made a full end of sinne, I should have valued it at a higher rate, then to have shedd it as I did, had I been but a perfect Redeemer: but I wel knew that the price of my precious blood was a full satisfaction to my Fathers justice for all the finnes of all those that should believe in him through me. John 6.47. Verily, verily, I say unto you, bee that beleeveth an mee hath everlasting life. What soule soever believeth in the salvati∣on of Gods free grace wrought by mee, shall certainely, nay, hath eternall life, and if eternall life, then doubtlesse sure esta∣blishment. Sayes Christ, I came from heaven, and tooke flesh for your sakes that shall believe on God through me, and I staid on earth till I finished the work of redemption purely for your sakes, so now I am ascended, and at my Father and your Fathers right hand in glory; I am here for you as your head, to draw all my members after me; as your Mediator, I live for ever to make in∣tercession for you, to prepare your Mansions, and to presere your glory, where you shall be fellow-heirs with me, and when I come againe to judge the World, it will be to pronounce you the blessed of my Father, to change your mortality into in mor∣tality,
and then to give my Kingdome up to my Father, where you shall be for ever with the Lord, and in all this my Father and I am one, therefore believe in God through me, so shall you be established. In the next place believe the word and promises of God, or God in them, and you shall find them full of establishment. And now once more let me defire you to turne backe and con∣sider those glorious and gracious promises which God hath made to his Saints, his Church and people on earth, how hee hath gaged himselfe to take care of them, and to preserve them as his peculiar interest, so deare to him as the apple of his eye, for whom he hath given Christ, and to whom with Christ he hath given all things. Remember that generall promise of God, and believe it, that he will never leave nor forsake his people. So in Isa. 4. bg. There God makes promises to particular cases: When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not over flow thee. When thou walkest through the fire thou shalt not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Now how exceedingly will the heart be established if God be believed in this, the promise contains great things: but remember it is the promise of an infinite and Almighty God, it is I that make this great promise say God, I that cannot lye, I that can doe what I will, and will be sure to make good every tittle of my promise to all that trust and believe in me. Now to believe God in this, how will it spirit a soule, and carry it above all feare, above deepe waters, and slanting fires, above all dangers and difficulties; what an heroicke spirit will this make, this man will be acted above himselfe, because he lives believing in God, so above the feares and doubtings of his owne flesh: This faith will make soules speake in the language of the Church, in Psalm. 46. God is our resuge and strength, a very prosent help in time of trouble, in fire and water, in all difficulties and streights, therefore will we not feare though the earth be remo∣ved, and the mountaines carryed into the middest of the Sea. This is a soule that takes Gods word, and believes that he will deli∣ver it from all seights, and therefore is not affraid what ver it ken or removed, so a God remaines, having trusted in him for refuge and help in all times of trouble. So in Isa. 51.3. Isa. 51.3. There
God by the Prophet promiseth to comfort Zion, yea to co∣fort her in all her wast places, to make her Wildernesse like ∣den, and her Desart like the garden of the Lord. This  wraped up in the armes of faith, will much establish the hear, for it doth beget great thoughts of heart, how shal it fare wi the Church of God, and how shal it be with me that am a mem∣ber of that Church: Now believing on God in this promise an∣swers those doubtful questions, and so establisheth the hear i believing. Isa. 27.3. So in Isa. 27.3. We may read Gods care of his vin∣yard, I the Lord doe keepe it, I will water it every moment lift my hurt it, I will keepe it day and night. That is safe which God keepes, and doubtlesse such soules as believe God in this pro∣mise, will believe themselves to be safe in the care and keeping of God, and so will be established soules; God doth both pro∣mise and professe his care of his Church and people, Isa. 49.15, 16. in Isa. 49. He tels us there, though a Mother may forget the soune of her womb, yet that he would never forget his Church and people; Nay sayes God, I cannot forget you, for you are graven upon the palmes of my hands. Now believe God in this, and try if it will not make an esta∣blished soule; againe in any or the greatest opposition, remem∣ber that promise of God, That no weapon formed against his Church and chosen ones shall prosper: He will blast tongue and hands, head, and heart, and all that  themselves against him in his people, though in their setting forth they may promise themselves victo∣ry, yet they shall finde God will make good his word to his people; such instruments and weapons shall not prosper. Oh then take Gods Word, and our hearts will be quiet; though the Heathens doe rage, yet they imagine but a vaine thing: God hath said it, and hee will make it good, heaven and earth shall passe away, but not one tittle of his word shall faile. Read with an eye of faith that great and glorious promise of God to his people, in Isa. 41.10. and so forward. Though Ja∣cob be a worme, yet hee should not feare, when the Almighty is his God. It is too large to recite, but not too great for the armes of faith to containe: and if believed, I am sure it will make great e∣stablishment. And now give me leave to begge saith in God for the fulfilling of al those promises which God hath made concern∣ing
the glorious and peacefull Reigne of Christ amongst his Saints in the latter dayes; I dare say, such soules as beleeves God in them, wil finde much establishment in that faith, those lattr dayes must needs be hard by: Now the World is so near aend, and to believe that glorious Reigne of Christ at hand, wil make much joy and settlement in the heart, though the pre∣sent workings of God be to turne, and overturne things, yet all this serves to accomplish these glorious promises of his, in bringing forth this Righteous and peacefull Kingdome of Christ. God is now a shaking and overturning all unrighteous pow∣ers, and governments; now such soules as doe not believe these promises of God, are ignorant of Gods end, and so full of un∣settlement in their spirits concerning the issue of his present dis∣pnsations, and hereupon Gods shaking worke makes shaking hearts and trembling soules, but had they faith in God concern∣ing these promises they would stand still and be quiet waiting believingly for the salvation of God, in the peacefull reigne and righteous government of Jesus Christ; were God but believed in what he sayes, all the temptations of Satan and the doubt∣ings of our unbelieving hearts would be silenced and brought to nothing, what exceeding folly is it in our hearts, that GOD whom never deceived any that trusted on him, should be distrust∣ed by any, and not believed by all; he is the God of truth, so is his word the word of truth, and not any soule that ever tryed God by trusting him upon his word but found him so. The Apostle Paul, Rom. 8.28. tels us, that all things workes together for good, to them that love God: This takes in all things as the other generall did all times; so that put them together, and it amounts to this, that all things and all times are filled with Gods love to his people, and so worke all together for the good of all his, God loves his children as dearely upon their beds of sicknesse as in their most perfect health, and his love in both makes both worke together for good to his people, upon this account the Apostle knew both how to want and to abound, and in all estates to be content; such a presence of God is in the word of God promised to his people, and God th belie∣ved on, doth quiet and establish the heart in all conditions, all
carnal feares are the fruits of our owne darknesses,  the  of faith open to see the loving kindnesse of God at he ha ∣nifested it in the flesh of his Sonne, and in his written , these seares would vanish and our hearts would be fully  ∣ed by living on the fulnesse of God; I have mentioned b ∣ety Tets of Scripture, but I beseech you receive them and  whole into the armes of faith, they will prove cordials to  hearte and establishment to your soules; beleeve it, GOD is worth the trust, if faith open the everlasting gates and let this King of glory in, his presence will make all such to be glori soules, he dispels all darknesse, and so all feares, he fixes  soules a believe on him in the Lord Jesus Christ, and layes them to rest in his owne bosome, so as no thing or time, no not Hrulty i selfe can either shake or disquiet them. My whole design in this is to be an Advocate for faith in God, therefore give me leave to mention one , and two Rules which are subservant to this glorious end. The caution is this: He wary that you check not the spirit of God when it comes om God about this worke. The Rules are these: First, Nourish all your experiences of God. Secondly, Be diligent in observing the workings of GODS Pro∣idence. But first a little of the Caution: Be wary that you cheek not the spirit of God when it comes from God to worke over, and to seale up your soules in the beliefe of himselfe; GOD and Christ hath promised that the spirit of God shall beare witnesse with our spirit that we are the Children of God; now this pro∣mise is fulfilled many times in the hearing of the Gospel, in rea∣ding of his Word, or it may be in the immediate workings of himselfe upon our soules; O be careful to entertaine this spirit wel, a wound here may danger eternal life; But it may be you
wil say, how shal I know the spirit of God from the dltisins of my owne heart, and the temptations of Satan. I answer, Try Gods Spirit by his Word, and you shal finde them both centre in the manifesting Gods free grae in the sal∣vation of the worst of sinners through Christ in believing. Now the delusions of our owne hearts wil lift up selfe, not God and Christ, and the motions of Satan wil be to distrust God, as it was to our first Parents, Does God say the day thou ea∣test thereof thou shalt dye, sayes he, It is not so, God doth but de∣lude thee, te and thou shalt bee as God knowing Good and Evil. By this we may distinguish what spirit speakes in us, and as the word and spirit of God, beares witnesse each to other, so doth Satans contradicting what God sayes confirme the truthes of God, for were it not truth, he could not oppose, himselfe be∣ing the Father of lyes; so that when I would lay hold of truth, I would observe what Satan sayes to choose the contrary; wel then, if God by his spirit make known a Christ crucified to and bid us believe on him through this Christ for everlasting sal∣vation; have a care of checking this spirit, if the Dvil and our owne darke hearts in which by nature the Prince of dark∣nesse rules, doth contradict the testimony of Gods spirit in this truth; that is, the fuller confirmation of the truth, if in any streight or condition whatsoever, God shall by his spirit bring to your hearts any suitable promse or place of Scripture, be ex∣ceeding watchful that you check not that spirit; this spirit is a free spirit, it is as the winde, blowes where it pleaseth; this i Scripture advice, try all spirits if they be of God; that which comes from God wil leade thee to God, quench not the spirit which leades thee to God in himselfe, in his Sonne, in his word and in his workes, for that spirit which thus leade thee, wil bring thee to God whom wil establish thee; Oh prize that spirit that prizes God, and tels thee his grace is free and rich, his r∣demption ful and compleate, his word true and faithful, his workes great and glorious, and the injoyment of him to be e∣ternally with him, if this spirit be deare to thee, it wil seale thee up in this beliefe, that thou art deare and neare to God in Christ, and so establish thy soule by believing in the Lord thy God.
Now a little of the Rules. First, Nourish all thy experiences of God; this wil much advantage faith in the soule, we are apt to trust experimented creatures, much more if spiritually wise shal we trust an ∣mented God; I have been large in the particulers of this beon, I onely mention it here by way of Rule, for doubtlesse such souls as nourish their experiences of God doe thereby nourish and in∣crease faith in God; if such as have fought Gods battles doe preserve and nourish the experiences they have had of the pow∣erful presence and loving kindnesses of God in those dying and difficult workes, surely it wil nourish faith in their soule to trust God, if ever hee shal bring to any more such workes again; Surely Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, did never feare to fol∣low GOD through the fire, after they had experimented the power of his presence with them in the fire, nor Daniel the Lyons: Experiences are to faith as oyle to the fire, it increaseth the flames, where they meet in any soule there is much mount∣ing up to God, that soule which keepes its experiences of God fresh and green, wil be sure to have its faith flourish; God gives many experiences of his love and goodnesse to his people that they may believe on his Name: Now what God uses to his ends must needs be an effectual meanes, therefore such soules as would have faith live, must be sure to keep their experiences of God a∣live; these are choyce Jewels, they wil be no burthens to our bosomes, every one that reades knowes his owne experiences best, be they more or lesse keep them all alive, faith wil delight to live with them in the soule; but if these be lost, faith wil judge there is no company fit for him, and so take his leave and be gone, and then wil doubting and shakings be the compa∣nions to such a soule, be he that keepe experiences alive, wil thereby keepe a living faith; and such soules as believe in the Lord their God shal be established: This is the first Rule for the preservation and nourishment of faith in the soule.
The second Rule, is this: Be diligent in observing the workings of Gods Providence; God is various in those dispensations, but they all work toge∣ther to the fulfilling and making good of his promises, his wise∣dome is past finding out, and his foot-steps cannot be traced; no man can certainely say by the present dispensations of God in his providences either to Person, or Nation, what wil be his next, but whom ever doth diligently observe Gods providential workings in the World, wil finde that though one after another it may be many yeares, yet that they worke one with another to the accomplishing of the most glorious wil, word, and promises of God, the former making way for the latter, and those that come after, confirme them that went before; so that such soul which like the Virgin Mary doth ponder and lay up the words and the workings of Gods providences in their bosomes, wil finde such eyings of God and treasuring up of his ways of provi∣dence to be exceeding usefull to the maintaining and increasing of faith to God in the soule. This was the Prophet Davids frame of spirit, Lord, sayes he, thou hast delivered me from the Lyon and the Beare, and thou wilt al∣so deliver mee from this uncircumcised Philistim: Mark it, he had diligently observed and treasured up in his heart Gods former providences to him, and this is the use his soule makes in the re∣membrance of them, to trust God in another great undertaking for him, as if he had said, I have had ample experience of thee in former acts of thy Providences to me, and thou are the same God for love, power, faithfulnesse, and goodnesse; so that in the remembrances of thy loving kindnesse of old wil I tst in thee, and though I contend with a Gyant, yet that I shal be safe under the shadow of thy wings. Againe, it is worth the observings of the most curious eye in the World, how God doth Season his providences, he brings them forth in such seasons that when they appeare they are like Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver; not onely  o beauty in themselves, but also exceeding glorious in their season; Eher 5. such wa the workings of God upon the heart of Abas the King, to
hold forth to Esther the Queen the Royal Sceptre, when as she hazarded her owne life to plead for the life of has Nation; the season of this kindnesse and Providence of God, had as much beauty upon it as the life of Esther and the whole Nation of the Jewes could make, one wrinckle in the brow at this time would have killed al the smiles of former times, but a holding forth the Sceptre at this very nick of time, doth crowne al former kind∣nesses with life; the King knew not what was in Esthers heart, but God knew, and by his most seasonable Providence did pre∣pare the heart and hand of the King for her entrance and her motion: I shal give but this one instance, though there be many more in Scripture of the like kinde, and sure I am, the experi∣ences of this present Age is not without instances of the same nature, I meane the seasonable working of Gods provilences, to, and for his people; many times when our unbelieving hearts have given all for lost, and could see no way of deliverance, all lower helpes proving either weake or false, then even then, hath God divided the Red Sea to make way for his peoples delive∣rances and their enemies destruction; God hath layd his owne, and his peoples enemies low in the highest pride of their hearts, and raised his people from the lowest of their feares, both which reasons doe much advance the glory of his Providences: Now sure I am, such hearts as spiritually treasures up these wayes and workings of Gods seasonable acts of Providence wil be much ad∣vantaged to trust God in all times and tryals they shal meet with through their whole pilgrimage; therefore I beseech you make use of these Rules, if they advantage your soules to such an end as faith in God, you wil blesse his Name, and be blessed in the trusting upon his Name. Now give mee leave to argue with my owne soule and others, in the behalfe of God. Me-thinkes I heare the Lord say, You that distrust me come forth and produce your reasons; Am I not God, and for ever God, is there, or can there ever be any above me? I say I am infinite, Almighty, and eternall; disprove me if you can, but if you gre me this, sayes God, then you can pretend no cause
to distrust me in poynt of power; Nay, sayes God, I am not onely powerfull, but I am also faithfull; I affirme it, that I am God and cannot lye, and I call your owne hearts to be my wi∣nesses, I challenge you to produce one tittle of all my Word, my Covenant, and my promises, that I have made to you, and you have trusted in me to make good wherein I have failed and de∣ceived your trust, if you can produce none, but that your owne hearts are the witnesses within you of my faithfulnesse, then sure I am, those very witnesses will upbraide your unbeliee, and make as black as Hel all those black and hard thoughts you have of mee; you will choose a faithfull man to trust, that very choyce will condemn you in distrusting me that am the faithfull God, if I have my witnesse in your hearth that I am faithfull, why doe you distrust mee, you must bee false to your owne bosomes, when you have thoughts that I should bee false to you. But it may be you will argue that you are sinfull mortals, so that you feare my Justice, and my Majesty, that you dare non draw neare to me or rest upon me, for feare I should consume you; why then come and argue with my free grace, my eternal and unchangable love, my Christ crucified, and therein my ju∣stice satisfied, and a perfect righteousnesse freely given to all that believe in me through him, the pourings forth of my holy spirit, and those mantions prepared in Heaven from all eternity for all that shall thus believe on my Nature through Christ: I tell you poore doubting trembling soules, it is my chiefe delight as God to glorifie my free grace in the salvation of sinners, and to shew forth the riches of my eternall and unchangable love to poore soules lost in themselves, doe not feare to draw neare to me to call me Father, and to trust in my free grace, for you can∣not please me better; if your hearts say you are unworthy to be beloved, yet heare what I say, I love purely from my selfe, and I save onely of my grace, so that your unworthinesse may heighten my grace, but it cannot hinder your salvation that be∣lieve in my grace; argue not that against your selves which I will never aggrevate against you, beleeve in my grace, I will never charge you with your own , for I have laid them upon Christ, and he hath  my Justice fully for them all,
I tell you so, and he is your righteousnesse made so of me, that now you are righteous before me in him to all eternity. If I that can onely charge you will acquit you, why doe you feare; if I acknowledge my selfe satisfied for all your sinnes in Christ, why do you so injure my justice and my grace, to thinke I will e∣ver charge them upon you againe; nay me-thinkes Christ speake to our soules in this, as hee did to Thomas, put your hands into my wounds, be no longer faithlesse, but faithfull; by this hand of faith in my wounds, you may feele my Fathers justice satisfied, he loved me so dearly that he would never have wounded me up∣on any consideration whatsoever, but to save you: Oh sayes God, distrust not my saving grace, & Christ he sayes, Oh distrust not my bleeding wounds, for your salvation is the end of both these, and the eternall salvation of your soules lyes in believing this; Gods grace, sayes Christ, is so full, and the redemption of my blood so compleate, that no sinne or sinnes, without unbeliefe in these can damne you: Now why will you dye O house of Israel, sayes God; here is my free grace and the blood of my Son for your lives; believe, and you have eternall life; nay I have pro∣mised my spirit to them that aske it, ake me and trust me, see if I deny. For your own sakes, sayes Christ, I beseech you believe in God through me, your salvation doth not advantage my Father, for hee is in himselfe that perfection to which there can be no ad∣dition; it is for your sakes that I tooke flesh and dyed; me∣thinkes you should believe this love. And now for your owne sakes, I beseech you cast your eternall soules upon the eternall love and free grace of God in his redemp∣tion through my blood; stronger arguments of love cannot be given: but if refused, they will be the stronger aggravations a∣gainst your unbeliefe. Nay, sayes Christ, there is mansions above prepared for them that love the Lord, and believe in him; God loves you so dearly, that he will have you for ever with himselfe: Oh let there never more be a hard thought of this love of God, and this God of love; trust him, love him, admire him, rejoyce in him, and speake good of his Name the longest day of your lives. His free grace, sayes Christ, hath plucked you our of the power of the Prince of darknesse, and made you heirs of glory:
Oh glory in this inheritance, be you filled with joy unspeakable and full of glory in believing; Nothing can hurt you but unbe∣liefe: Oh begge heartily, and watch carefully against those wounds of Satan: Nothing but unbeliefe can shake our soules in the rest and joyes of them through this shaking World, there∣fore such as love and seeke establishment must take this way to at∣taine it, for it will be found in nothing else but by beleeving in the Lord your God, and so shall you be established. To winde up all, let this faith live in our bosomes in all Gods wayes to us, and our walkings with God in the World; it hath pleased God to make our beings in those latter dayes, in which the Scripture tels us shal be perillous times, and that because of this, men shall be lovers of themselves more then lovers of God. We see that Scripture fulfilled in our daye most exactly; why, what shal wee doe now for establishment in these perillous times: why believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be established. Search his word, and what ever Scripture you finde which administe comfort, believe in him, he wil make that good as wel as this, let not this be our reliefe, that a little time may settle the worlds shakings, and give us a more fixed being here: but let this be our rest, to live in God himselfe, let him be our all here then, though the whole world be not only shaken, but overturned al∣so, yet we shal have rest in him on these troubled Seas, and ful∣nesse of glory when we come into that safe harbour of Heaven; to live believing on him wil make us all the wildernesse along, ∣dy in our way and worke; we shal doe Gods worke in the world faithfully, and live by faith in himselfe above the World; though Devils & men rage, yet such soules as live by faith in God wil be fixed, so that they as David, will in their soules sing and give praise: If the earth tremble, yet this soule is established, because it liven upon that rocke which is higher then it selfe, yea as high as hea∣ven, even God himselfe. Oh then, wee cannot complaine of God when as we complaine of shakings, but of our selves; for if we live in God through Christ by faith, we shal finde he will establish our hearts above the feares of Devils, World, or e: Though thousands encamp against me (sayes David) and  sands make warre with me, yet will I not be affraid, for my  in thee. Thou art my shield, my buckler, my defence,
all, and therefore was his soule so full of joy, rest, and holy confi∣dence, because he knew whom he had trusted, so shall all sucle as trust in God be established upon his fulnesse: such soules will by faith be able to bring the whole Nations of the earth before God, and to see them as the drop of a bucket, and the small dust of the ballance, when as they contend with God, and here∣in keeping close to God, he knowes nothing can hurt him, hee can with God goe through fire and water, and believe that God will bring him safely out of all: Base feare can finde no corner to creepe into, when as by faith the soule is imbosomed in God, and bathed in the blood of Christ: This is not only the counsll of King Jehoshaphat, but of our King Jesus, to believe in the Lord our God for establishment. This I will end withall: Believe in the Lord your God through Jesus Christ, so shall your hearts be esta∣blished, though in a shaking World even for this life and to eternity. FINIS.
