A396 53981437 180084
AN ACCOUNT OF THE Sufferings AND Dying Words, Of Several French Protestants, Under this present PERSECƲTION As it was received from the Hands of several Protestant Ministers, who Arrived lately in England. LONDON Printed, and Re-printed at Edinburgh 1699
A Brief Account of the Suffer∣ings and Last Words of several French Prote∣stants, under this present Per∣secution. MOnsieur de Hamlin (a young Gentleman of very good Parentage, and very Zealous in the Protestant Religion) living long privately in his own House, with an other Gentleman, and his Host, whom he instructed in all the Principles of the Pro∣testant Religion; at last they were Ap∣prehended, and cast into Prison: And while they lay there, in came a Priest, with all his Accoutrements, to say Mass: But Monsieur de Hamlin, inflamed with Zeal against such Ridiculous Fopperies, went and overthrew the Chalice and Candle∣sticks, saying, Is it not enough to you to Blas∣pheme God in the Church, but you must also polute the Prison with your Idolatries? The Jayler seeing this, fell upon him, and beat
him most desperately, & also removed him into a Dungeon, loading him with Irons, which made his Legs to swell, where he lay Eight Days in a most pitiful manner: The other Gentleman, and his Host terrifi∣ed with the Prison, and Fear of Death, Re∣nounced their Profession. Whereupon M. de Hamlin said to the other Gentleman,
O Unhappy, and more than Miserable Man! is it possible that you shall be so Foolish, as to save your Life for a few Days? Doest thou think Eternal Life so mean a thing, as to prefer the Present Life before it? Remember Man, that the sufferings of this present Life are not comparable with the Glory that shall be revealed: If thou suffer with him thou shalt also Reign with him. Thou can'st not answer for what thou hast al∣ready done; yet the Gate of Mercy is not quite shut: Heap not Sin upon Sin, lest thou epentest when it is too late, and be an Example to all Apostates. Having ended his Speech, the other young Gentleman with the Priest going out of Prison; The Priest informed grievously a∣gainst M. de Hamlin: And he being Con∣demned, and carried to the place of Exe∣cution, and there tyed to the Stake, he cryed out with a loud Voice, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. How long shall Darkness overwhelm this Realm? How long wilt Thou suffer the Tyranny of these wicked Men? They endeavoured to drown his Voice with the Sound of Trumpets, but in the midest of the Flame he Prayed and Ex∣horted the People to Constancy and Truth. The Fire was slow, therefore put him to the greater Torment: But that which most troubled him, was the Clamorous and Wicked Men set on by the Jesuites and Friers, who continually cryed, Turn thou Heretick, call on our Lady, say, Salve Regina. To whom he Answered, Depart from me, and trouble me not, ye Messengers of Satan: For the Fool hath said in his Heart, there is not a God: The Men of Sin have hardened them∣selves to do Evil continually; But those that Suffer with Christ shall also Reign with Him. So he render'd up his Soul unto God in the midst of the Flames, At Mascon in France, the 17 of April 1697.
TWO Ministers who fled out of France in the time of the late Per∣secution, into Germany, where they continued a long time: But returning to Valence in France to see some particular Friends; thinking to pass unknown; They being discovered, and cast into Prison, the Judge commanded them to be brought before him; where they were accused of Instructing and Encouraging the Protest∣ants to continue in their Profession: To whom the Judge said, Are ye the Authors of this Sedition? Are ye the Cause that so many lose their Lives? By God I swear, that ye shall suffer for them all, and shall suffer the Torments ye encourage them to undergo, To whom they answered, Thy Sentence we joyfully embrace; and we are most willing to be Sacrificed for our Brethren, and resolve to shed our dearest Blood in the Profession of the Protestant Religion,
and unanimously of∣fer up our Lives for the same. The Judge being much in rage with this stout Answer, commanded their sides to be Lanced with Knives, till their Bones were laid open: But the Holy Ministers preached the Li∣ving God▪ and the Lord Jesus Christ, and exhorted the People to continue in the Protestant Religion, and to Abstain from the Idolatrous Worship of the Church of
Rome. Upon which the Judge comman∣ded to strick out their Teeth, that their speech might be hindred. His Orders were obeyed, and their Faces also buffetted, their Eye lids torn off, their Cheeks Cut and Gasht with Knives, the Skin of their Beards by degrees pluck'd off, and their comely countenances wholly defaced and deformed. Yet for all this, the Meek and Patient Ministers and Marryers said only this; We thank thee, O Sir, that thou hast opened to us so many Mouths to Preach our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and to Con∣fess the Truth of His reformed Religion: For as many Wounds as we have, so many Mouths have we to Bless and Praise God, and Jesus Christ our Redeemer, for giving us Patience and Constancy in the Truth. The Judge being enraged with their Constancy, or∣dered the one called Monsieur Perued, to go back to Prison, from the place of Exe∣cution, & cast in a Dungeon, & there Strang∣led: And the others Body to be teared and rent in Peices with a Hurdle and an I∣ron Grate: But he being no way affright∣ed or daunted therewith, did sing. The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what Man can do unto me; I will fear no evil, because Thou, O Lord, art with me. As for thee, O unjust Judge! I appeal from this thy Ty∣rany, to the Righteous Throne and Judgment Seat of Jesus Christ the Righteous Judge; where it will appear ye are but Bloody Ty∣rants to inflict such horrid Tortures upon us innocent Protestants. Then coming to the place of Execution, the Judge cried to the Hangman or Executioner, Dispatch the Heretick Rebel: He nothing troubled therewith sang aloud, — O Lord I yeild to Thee, To whom the Death of all Thy Saints We know most dear to be.
Thus perswading and encouraging the People to dye in the like Cause, he with a chearfull countenance, gave up his Body to the Torments, and his Soul un∣to God: And is one of these before the Altar that cries, How long, &c. At Valence in France the 27 of June 1698.
ANother young Gentleman at Calis, who upon professing himself to be a Protestant, was apprehended and cast into Prison. And being brought be∣fore the Judge, boldly acknowledged, He believed in Christ, and in the Protestant Reformed Religion, and valued not what they could inflict on him for his Profession. Then the Judge called for several Tortures, and all manner of Torments to be inflict∣ed on him. To whom he said, It would be a Loss and Damnage to me, if I did not suffer diverse Torments and Punishments for Christ in his Cause. The Sheriff more incensed▪ hereby, commanded all the Torments usual to be inflicted on him; with which he was nothing disturbed, but sung. The Lord is my Helper, I will not fear what Men can do unto me; I will fear no Evil, because Thou art with me, O Lord. Then he blamed the Tormentors for favouring of him, and desired them to do their outmost. The Sheriff not prevailing that way. He, with some Jesuits and Priests, though by Flattery to Seduce him. promising him Preferment, Riches, and Honour, if he would deny his Profession: But he dreed∣ed them as Foolish and Mad, saying, I look for greater Preferment in Heaven than ye can give me here on Earth. He was then Condemned, and carried out of the City to be Burnt; Multitudes of Friends and others, following him, some Kissing him; Weeping for him, and entreating him with Tears to pity himself: To whom he An∣swered, Weep not I pray you for me, but weep for the Enemies of God, who fight against the Protestants: Weep, I say, for them who prepare a Fire for us, purchasing Hell Fire for themselves in the Day of Vengence. Cease, I pray you, thus to molest my settled and quiet Mind: For truely, for the Name of Christ, and the Protestant Reformed Religion, I am ready and willing to suffer a Thousand Deaths. Others perswaded him to deny his Religion with his Mouth, and to keep his Conscience to himself. To which he An∣swered, O Fools! my Tongue, which by God's
Goodness I have, cannot be brought to deny the ame: For with the Heart we believe unto Righteousness, and with the Tongue we Confess unto Salvation. And thus perswad∣ing and encouraging the People to be will∣ing to Dye in the like Cause, and not to forsake their Profession for earthly Enjoy∣ments; with an unparalelled Countenance; he gave up his Body to the Flames, March. 18. 1698. ANother young Gentleman, a Soldier in the Garison at Dunkirk, forsook all Company, gave himself to Fasting and Prayer, Meditation and Reading of the Holy Scripture; Coming into the City upon a Holy-day, and seeing the People at their Pastimes, and other Ceremonial Follies, declared himself a Protestant, and cried, Away with such Ridiculous Idola∣trous Foppries: For God will not be mocked with your Superstitions; For These that Worship Him, must Worship Him in Spirit and in Truth. He was apprehend∣ed, and tormented with diverse Torments, which he regarded not, saying,
There is nothing in my Mind that can be com∣pared to the Kingdom of Heaven: Nei∣ther is all the World, if it were weight∣ed in a Ballance, comparable to the price of one Soul. And further said, Who can separate us from the Love of Christ? Can Tribulation or Anguish? And again, I have learned of my Lord Jesus Christ, not to fear them that can kill the Body, and have no power to kill the Soul. Having endured a Multitude of Tor∣ments, he received Sentence of Death: And at the place of Execution he said I give Thee Thanks, O my Lord God, who hast accepted me to be a Partaker of Thy Death. and has not suffered me to be Devoured of my fierce Enemies, Satan & a subtile World, but hast kept me constant in Thy true Faith unto the end. And so he lost his Head, but found a Crown of Glory; Dunkirk, Agust 3. 1698. ANother young Gentleman, seeing the Persecution of the
Protestants in Piedmont, being of eminent Religious Pa∣rents, and he himself being most Zealous in the Protestant Religion: His Parents fearing, that his Zeal might make him Guilty of his own Death, keeped him closs at their Countrey House, a great way from the City of Turin. But he hearing of the great many persecutions of the Pro∣testants, both in City and Countrey, de∣tasting any further delay, went all along through By-ways, and much Danger and Weariness, toward the City, where he came in the Morning: And going be∣fore the Judge, said, What a Shame is it for you, thus wickedly to take away Mens Lives by all manner of Cruelties? And also endeavour to destroy their Souls, by compelling them to deny their Reli∣gion? Would you know. O ignorant Souls, what I am? Behold I am a
Pro∣testant, and an Enemy to your Devilish Sa∣crifices: I scorne and despise your Idols, and tread them under my Feet; and ac∣knowledge only God Almighty, the Crea∣tor of Heaven & Earth, & Jesus Christ His only Son our Lord: But for your prayers to Saints and your devilish dead Idols, which are the work of Mens hands, none but Fools will owne and worship the same, &c. Come on therefore, and let the Hang∣man. Burn, Cut, and Mangle this poor Mortal Carcase; it is very easie to break and destroy a weak and brittle perish∣ing Body, but the Mind and Soul, you cannot touch with all that you can do, The Judge enraged herewith, said to the Executioner, Take him and let him feel the power of our Torments, and know what we can do:
Yet, O sturdy youth. I would fain have thee before thou dy∣est, to Recant this thy Wickedness, and to save thy self from a wretched Death Consider what Pleasures thou mayest enjoy in the House of thy honourable Parents: Consider the Lamentations and Tears of thy miserable Family and Re∣lations, which by thy Perverseness will be brought to Ruine: Consider thou art in thy youth, in the flower of thine Age, in the way to Honour and Preferment, by an Honourable Marriage agreeable to thy Quality and Estate; do not these glistering Glories, and the Delights of this World move thee? Does not the Terror and extream Grief of thy dear Parents incline thee to pity thy self and them? Yea, who is there doth not la∣ment thy madness and folly. If this doth not prevail, consider the terrible Death that thou art like to suffer: Con∣sider what variety of Torments are prepa∣red for thee; for thou shalt either be Be∣headed by the Sword, or thou shalt be torn in pieces by the Teeth of wilde Beasts; or else thou shalt be thrown alive into the burning Flames. Now, how easie and small a matter is required of thee to avoid all this punishment, and take a little Incense between thy Fingers, and put into the censure in honour of the
Ro∣mish Religion, thou shalt be set free pro∣mising always to desert from the Hugon Religion. When he heard him thus speak: being extreamly moved, he spit in the Tyrant's Face, and presently threw down the Censure, and kicked the Incense, and said; Away with your Idols out of my sight: Whereupon the judge commanded the Hangman, without further delay to pluck his Limbs out of joint, and then with the Claws of wild Beasts, tore off the flesh from his Boes; while he not in the least daunted with their cruel Torments, fell a singing and praising in this manner▪ O Lord, I will never forget Thy Goodness and Mercy; what a pleasure is it, O Lord Jesus, to remember thy triumphant Victories, who by suffering hast attained the height of Glory? Thus with great Constancy and Courage he continued joyful, and chearfully sang Praises to God, when he was all overstain'd and imbrewed in his own Blood, and cruel∣ly tormented in all parts of his Body. Then they proceeded to the last Torments, which was to cast him alive into the burning Flames; where he dyed a joyfull Marty▪ singing Praises and Hallelujah's to God. Tu∣rin October 27. 1698. FINIS.
