C4033AA 52528766 178732
ARTICLES OF INQUIRY CONCERNING Matters Ecclesiastical, EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Church-Wardens, and Side-men of every Parish with∣in the Arch-Deaconry of DURHAM. Anno Dom. MDCLXIII. LONDON, Printed for T. Garthwait. 1663.
The Oath to be given unto the Church-wardens and Side-men of every Parish. YOƲ shall Swear to inquire with the best diligence that you may, and to make a true answer unto every Article of this Book now given you in charge, presenting every Person of your Parish that hath done any offence, or omitted any duty therein mentioned. And this you shall do without any favour or hatred, or fear of displeasure; So help you God and the contents of this Go∣spel. Directions to the Clergy. YOU are desired by your Ordinary, to read these Articles distinctly unto the Churchwardens, and to warn them of their Duty, so often as you shall see occasion: but especially to meet together some day before they are to give in their presentments, and that then you confer with them, in directing them about their said Presentments, for the better preventing of perjury on their part.
ARTICLES OF VISITATION and INQUIRY EXHIBITED To the Church-wardens and Side-men of every Parish in the Arch-Deaconary of DURHAM. Anno MDCLXIII. TITUL. I. Concerning the Fabrick, Repairing, Keep∣ing clean, and Furnishing of Churches and Chapels. 1.IS there in your Parish a Church or Chapel with a Tow∣er or Steeple adjoyned to it and a Chancel at the East, all well and fairly built, duly kept, and maintained, for the honour of God and for the performance of Re∣ligious duties? 2. ARE the Roofs thereof well leaded or slated with∣out? well cieled within? the windows well glazed? the walls well plai∣stered? the Tables of the Ten Commandments, and other sentences of
Scripture well placed? the floors well paved? the seats well framed? and all things so decently ordered, as may best beseem the house of God? 3.HOW many Bells are there in the Tower or Steeple of your Church or Chapel? have any of them that formerly belonged to it, or any lead of the roofs of the Church or Chancel, been imbezelled and sold away? and if any such thing hath been done, who did it? and who consented to it? and what was the value of the thing so sold or imbezelled? 4. IS there a Font of Marble or other stone decently wrought and cove∣red, set up at the lower part of your Church, for the administration of the Sa∣crament of Baptism? Is there a partition between your Church and your Chancel a comely fair Table there, placed at the upper part of it, for the ad∣ministration of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper? Are there two fair and large Coverings for it, one of silk-stuff, or fine cloth, another of fine linen, with a Plate or Paten, and a Cup or Chalice, of silver, and two fair fla∣gons of pewter or purer metal belonging to it? Have none of all these things been purloined, destroyed or made away by any person whom you can name? and if they have been taken away, are they again restored, or other such provided in their place? 5. HAVE you in your Church or in your Chancel, a convenient seat ere∣cted for your Minister wherein to read the dayly Morning and Evening Ser∣vice, a Desk whereat to say the Letany in the midst of the Church, accor∣ding to the Injunctions set forth in the time of Q. Eliz. and a Pulpit for Sermons with a comely cloth before it? Are you provided of a Bible in the largest volume, and of the last approved Translation, and in what year was it printed? have you two books of Common-Prayer set forth by publick authority, according to the late Act of Vniformity? and are they both also of the largest volume, one for the Minister and another for the Clerk, to use at the celebration of all divine offices? Have you likewise a book of Sermons or Homilies that were set forth in the time of King Edward the sixth, and in the Reign of Queen Eliz. together with the works of Bishop Jewel in de∣fence of the Church of England, which King James commanded to be had in all Churches, and a book of the Constitutions or Canons Ecclesiastical, and a Table of marriages prohibited by the Law of God? 6. HAVE you a large and decent Surplice (one or more) for the Minister to wear at all times of his publick ministration in the Church, and another for the Clerk, if he hath heretofore been accustomed to wear it, when he assisteth the Minister? Are not either of their Surplices now grown old and torn? and what are they at this time worth? or if new have been lately bought, how much did they cost by the yard? 7. HAVE you in your Vestry a Hood or Tippet for the Minister to wear
over his Surplice, if he be a Graduate? a book of Parchment wherein to re∣gister the Christnings, Marriages and Burials of your Parish? another book of paper, wherein to record the licences of strange Ministers that are admit∣ted at any time to preach in your Church or Chapel? and a third book wherein to write down the accompts of the Church-wardens, and to keep an Inventory of all things provided and belonging to your Church? Have you a strong Chest with Locks and Keys wherein to keep all these Books, and other Furniture for divine services in safe custody? And lastly, have you a Box, wherein to put and keep Alms for the poor, and a Bier with a black Herse-cloth for the burial of the Dead. TITUL. II. Concerning the Church-yard, Parsonage-house, Alms-house, Glebe, and Tithes. 1.IS your Churchyard well and sufficiently fenced? Is it decent∣ly kept, without sufferance of any beasts to enter in and annoy it? Hath any person incroached upon it, or made a new door into it out of their own habitation or ground about it? 2. IS The House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, well built and kept up (with all out-houses thereunto belonging) in good and sufficient Repair? 3. HAVE you a true note or Terrer of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens, Orchards, Tenements, and portion of Tithes appertaining to your Parso∣nage or Vicaridge? Is it kept in your Vestry, and a Copy of it delivered into the Bishops Registry? 4. IS there any Alms-house, Hospital or Free-School in your Parish? Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron thereof?
TITUL. III. Concerning Ministers, Preachers and Lecturers. 1.IS your Minister, Parson or V icar, a Deacon or a Priest ordai∣ned by a Bishop according to the Laws of the Church of Eng∣land? 2. WAS he without any Simoniacal Compact, promise or payment, freely presented instituted and inducted into his benefice? and did he within two moneths after his Induction publickly read in your Church upon some Sunday or Holy-day in the time of Divine Service, and in the Audience of his Parishioners all the 39 Articles of Religion, set forth and established in the Church of England by Authority? And did he then profess and publish his assent unto them all, subscribing his name thereunto, in the presence of the Church wardens, and other persons of your Parish, who can bear witness of the same? Do you not know, or have you not heard, that in his reading, or pretending to read these 39 Articles of Religion, be omitted▪ or skipped over some one or more of them? what Article was it, or what part thereof, that he left unread? 3. DOTH he use any other words or form than what is prescribed in the Book of Common prayer, in the publick reading of the dayly Morning any Evening Service, and in the Letany which is to be added to the Morning Service upon Sundays, Wednesdays and Frydays weekly, and at all other times when it is appointed by the Bishop▪ as likewise at the reading of the Communion-Service, and the Administration of the two Sacrament, (Baptism and the Lords Supper) at the Celebration of Matrimony, Chur¦ching of Women after Child-birth, burying the Dead, and pronouncing Gods Commination against impenitent Sinners? And doth he all their without omission, addition, or alteration of any of them, using all the Rites and Ceremonies appointed in that Book? And particularly doth he give due warning before the celebrating of the holy Communion, that the people may come better prepared? And whether doth he in particular (according to the tenor of the exhortation before the Communion) seriously admonish the peo¦ple
committed to his charge, not to presume to come to that holy Sacrament, before they have sincerely endeavoured to be reconciled, as to God, by true repentance and humble confession of their sins to God, and if need be, for the quiet of their own Conscience, to Gods Priest also; So in case of of∣fence to be reconciled to their neighbour, both by acknowledgment, and like∣wise farther to their power by making restitution and satisfaction for any wrong by them done, or for other mens ill-gotten goods heretofore at any time usurped under whatsoever publick or private pretence, that so they may come to the Lords Table as they ought, with clear and a quiet Conscience. And whether if any persons sick or in health, having confessed their sins pri∣vately unto him, for the unburthening of their conscience, and receiving of spiritual comfort by the ministerial absolution, the said Minister hath revealed to any person whatsoever, such crimes and offences so committed to his trust and secrecy, contrary to 113 Canon. 4. DOTH he alwayes at the reading or Celebrating and divine Office in your Church or Chapel, constantly wear the Surplice, and other his Eccle∣siastical habit according to his Degree? And doth he never omit it? 5. DOTH he diligently instruct the youth of your Parish in their Cate∣chism, and visit the sick, as he is directed for the performance of both those Offices in the Book of Common-Prayer. 6. DOTH he bid and observe the Holy-days and Fasting day, appoin∣ted by the Book of Common prayer, as they occurr from time to time in the whole year? together with the 5 of Nov. Jan. 30. and May 20? 7. IS he a Graduate in either of the Vniversities of this Realm, and to what degree hath he been there admitted? 8 HATH he been Licenced by the Bishop to preach? And doth he con∣stantly preach in your Church or Chapel, or (when he is hindred by sickness or by some other urgent cause) doth he procure a Sermon to be preached by a discreet, able and approved Substitute, every Sunday, besides the Anniver∣sary days of Christs Nativity, and his Passion at the least: And if there be no such Sermons preach'd, both he, his Substitute or Curate, read one of the Sermons or Homilies appointed by publick authority, for such several times and occasions? 9. DOTH he or his Curate observe the Three Rogation days before the Feast of our Lords Ascension, saying the Letany, the Ciii. and the Ciiii. Psalm, with the Church-Wardens, and other that accompany him, in the perambulation of your Parish? and when the perambulation is ended, doth he go into the Church with them, and read unto them divine Service and one of the Sermons set forth and appointed for that purpose? 10 WHETHER doth your Preacher before his Sermon use a Prayer of his
own private intention? or doth he only exhort the people so pray for Christs holy Catholick Church, the Kings Majesty &c. as is prescribed in the 55 Canon? And doth he once every month at least, on the Lords day, read di∣vine service both morning and evening, and likewise administer the holy Sacraments publickly, in his Surplice and Habit, with other Rifes of the Church, in manner as is prescribed by the Book of Common prayer; accor∣ding to the late Act of Vniformity? 11. DOTH he preach unfeigned faith and obedience to Gods holy Com∣mandments, Submission and Loyalty to the King and his Laws, together with true Christian Plety and Charity among the people? And hath he not at any time to your knowledge, or as you have been sold by others that do know it) preached any false, heretical, seditions, or schismatical. Doctrine in his Sermons, whereby the people may be led into any Sect or Faction a∣gainst the peace and unity of the Church or Realm? 12. IS there any Lecture preached in your Parish? Is he who preacheth it (one or more) allowed so to do by the Bishop? Doth he before his Lecture read the publick Service of the Church appointed for that day by the Book of Common Prayer? At the reading whereof doth he wear a Surplice? when he Lectureth doth he use the Ecclesiastical habit appointed for all Ministers of the Church? Doth he administer the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper twice in the year at the least, according to the prescript form of the publick Liturgy? And lastly doth he before the preaching of his Lecture constantly observe the Form of Prayer which is enjoyned him in the 55 Canon of the Ecclesiastical Constitutions? 13. DOTH your Minister endeavour to reclaim all Popish Recusants and other Sectaries (if there be any such inhabiting within your Parish) to the unity, obedience and true Religion established in the Church of England? Doth he prepare and present the youth of your Parish to be confirmed by the Bishop? Doth he admit any of them to the holy Communion, or to be Contracted in Marriage, or to be Godfather or Godmother in the admini∣stration of Baptism, before they can give an Accompt of their Faith and Religion, according to the Questions and Answers contained in the Church Catechism? Hath he admitted any woman to her Thanksgiving after Child∣birth, before she hath done her Penance, if her Child was born or begotten out of lawfull Matrimony? Doth he presume to marry any persons in pri∣vate houses, or such as being under the age of 21 years having not the con∣sent of their Parents or without the Banes first published on three several Sundays or Holydays in your Church or at any other hours than between 8 & 12 in the forenoone unless he hath a licence or dispensation to the contrary? 14. HATH your Parson or Vicar any other Ecclesiastical Benefice, Pre∣hend
or Dignity? Doth he reside upon his Living among you, or how long in the year is he absent from it? Hath he a Curate to assist him in his Mini∣stry, and what Stipend doth he allow him? Is that Curate an able, learned and discreet person, admitted by the Bishop to serve in your Church or Cha∣pel? And doth he serve in any other Church but your? 15. IS your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, a man studious of inno∣cency and Sanctity in his life? of a sober, chaste, unblamable and religious conversation? Doth he refrain the Company of ungodly and vicious per∣sons, such especially as he excommunicated for their obedience or pravity ano loosness of life? Is he noted to be a frequenter of Laverns or Ale-houses? to be an ordinary Gamester, or Hunter, or a Common Swearer or intem∣perate drinker? a riotous or disorderly person in any kind whatsoever? Doth he wear his hair of a moderate and comely length? Is his Apparel grave and decent, in fashion and in colour such as is enjoyned him by the Ca∣nons of the Church? Doth he not imploy himself in any Mechanical Trade, or servile labour unbesitting his sacred Office or Ministry? And is there any other in your Parish, who having been heretofore ordained a Deacon or Minister, hath relinquished the exercise of his holy Orders, and now in the course of his life beareth himself as one of the Lasty, and not as a Minister of God and the Church? 16. DOTH your Minister or Curate wilfully refuse or delay the time to baptize any Infant that is in danger of death? and if the Child be baptized in private, and doth afterward recover, is it brought into the Church, and the baptism of it there certified to the Congregation according to the Form prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, and the Administration of the Sacraments? Is there any Child past his Infancy, or other person of more years through your Ministers default, yet remaining unbaptized among you? And doth he in the Administration of that Sacrament, admit any Pa∣rent to be Godfather or Godmother to their own Children? 17. DOTH he in the presence of your Church-wardens write and record in your Register Book the names of all thepersons baptized, married and buryed within your Papish from time to time, together with the names of their Parents? and doth the subscribe his own and the Church-wardens or Overseers names to every page of that Book, yearly transmitting the copy of those christnings, marriages and burials so subscribed into the Bishops Registry? 18. WHETHER doth he suffer any that are enjoyned to do their publick penance in the Church, in the face of the Congregation, to perform the same privately, as in the Vestry, or otherwise at other time when the Zongre a∣tion is not assembled?
TITUL. IV. Concerning the Parishioners. 1. IS there in your parish any person who is commoly known or reputed to be an Heretick or Schismatick? any Papist, Pres∣byterian Familist, Anabaptist, Independent, Quaker, or o∣ther Sectary that refuse to come unto the publick assemblies, prayers or services of the Church, or that make profession of any other Re∣ligion than what is established in the Church of England? and if there be any such what are their names? 2. IS there any person in your Parish, who by common fame, report or vehement suspition hath committed adultery, fornication or incest, or any receiver and harbourer of such incontinent lewd persons in their houses? are there any Comon drunkards within your parish, any that be usual swearers, or blasphemers of Gods name, or any that are noted to be railers, unclean and filthy talkers, or any sowers of sedition, faction, and discord among their neighbours? 3. DO any of your Parish imploy themselves upon the Sundays or Ho∣lydaies in their bodily and ordinary labour? or do they permit their servants so to do? Are any shops kept open, or wares sold? or do any Vintners, Innkeepers, or other Victuallers and sellers of Beer or Ale, suffer any per∣sons to tipple or game in their houses upon those days? 4. DOTH every person inhabiting or sojourning within your Parish duly resort unto your Church or Chapel, upon every Sunday and Holiday apoin∣ted for divine service? Do they then and there abide quietly with reverence, order, and decency, during all the whole time of Common prayer, preaching, or other service of God there used? And are there any among you that come only to the preaching, and not to the Common prayers of the Church? 5. DOTH every person at his entrance into the Church reverently uncover his head, and so continue all the time of divine Service and Sermon, untill his departure thence? Do they all reverently kneel at the Prayers, and stand up when the Creed is said, and when the Gospel is read, making due reverence when the name of our Lord Jesus is mentioned? Do they joyn with the Clerk of the Church in answering at the Psalms, Hymns and other parts of the Service, as is appointed for them? 6. ARE there any in your parish that refuse to send their infant children unto the Sacrament of Christian Baptism in your Church, there to be bapti∣zed publickly, unless in case of urgent necessitie and danger, when the child
may be baptized at home by your own lawful Minister, after the form and rites appointed in the Liturgy? Or do they send their children to be bapti∣zed in any other Parishes, or after any other form, or by any other Mini∣ster abroad? Or do they keep them unbaptized any longer time after they be born, than the Church alloweth in the rules prescribed for the administra∣tion of that Sacrament? And are there any Infants or more aged Children in your Parish that be yet unbaptized? 7. DOTH every housholder in your Parish cause their children and ser∣vants duly to learn their Catechism, and to give an account thereof unto your Minister, as he shall require it of them openly in the Church upon Sun∣days and Holydays, as in the Book of Common-Prayer is appointed? And when thy are well instructed in that Catechism, are they sent or brought to the Bishop at fit and convenient times to be confirmed? 8. IS there any person in your Parish who being 16 years of age, and well instructed in Religion doth not frequently receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or at least three times in the year, of which Easter is al∣wayes to be one: Do they leave their common seats and draw near to the Communion Table when they are to receive that Sacrament, all decently behaving themselves and humbly kneeling upon their knees in honour of our blessed Saviour, whose precious death and passion is then set forth and re∣membred by the Church? 9. DOTH any in your Parish refuse to receive that holy Sacrament from the hands of your own Minister, or repair for it to other Parishes, and Mi∣nisters abroad? Or are there any strangers not being of your Parish, that forsake their own Churches, and usually repair to yours for it? 10. HAVE you any among you that be denounced and declared excommu∣nicate for any disobedience or crime committed by them? How long have they been so excommunicated? And do any others of your Parish keep socie∣ty with them before they be reconciled to God and the Church? 11. ARE there any living in your Parish who have been unlawfully mar∣ried contrary to the laws of God? or any that being lawfully separated and divorced have been married again, the former husband or wife still living? Or any that being lawfully married, and not separated or divorced by course of law, do yet live a sunder, and cohabit not together? 12. ARE there any married-women in your Parish who refuse after their safe delivery from the peril of Child-birth, to come and make their publick thanksgiving to God in your Church, as they are required to do by the Book of Common Prayer? And when they come so to do, do they come decentlie veiled and make their offerings according to custome? 13. ARE there any belonging to your Parish who refuse to pay their du∣tie for Easter offerings to your Minister? Or any that refuse to contribute, and pay the rate assessed upon them for the repair of your Church or Cha∣pel, and for the providing of such books, furniture and ornaments, as be re∣quisite for the performance of all divine offices there?
14. DO any refuse to bury their dead according to the Rites of the Church of England? And are there any Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your parish that be yet unproved before lawfull authority? Or any Goods administred without a due grant from the Ordinary? Did any dying in your Parish or elsewhere leave any legacy to your Church or Chapel, or to the use of poor and needy persons among you, or to any other pious and charita∣ble put poses? What were those legacies and how have they been bestowed? 15. IS there any Cospital, Almshouse or Free-School founded in your pa∣rish? And is the same well governed and used, according to the foundation and Ordinances thereof? 16. DO you know, or have you heard of any Patron or other person in your Parish, having the presentation or gift of any Ecclesiastical benefice, who hath made gain thereof by presenting a Clerk or Minister to it upon any bar∣gain, either for money or pension, or lease, reserve of Tithes or Glebe, or any part thereof, or upon other Simoniacal compact whatsoever? 17. IS there no strife and contention among any of your Parish, for their Pews or Seats in your Church? And whether have they erected any Pews in your Chancel or elswhere in the body of your Church or Chapel, without leave and licence from the Ordinary? 18. KNOW you any person or persons that have presumed to brawl, fight or strike one another in your Church, or in your Church-yard? And if any such be, what are there names? 19. Whether have you any prophane persons, who shewing thereby the little regard they have to the house of God, make water against the Church walls, or use other unseemliness about the same? 20. Whether have you any Inn-keeper, Vintner, or Alehouse-keeper, who in time of divine Service, entertain any one either drinking or ga∣ming?
TITUL. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons. 1.HAVE you belonging to your Church or Chapelry a Parish Clerk aged 21 years at the least? Is he of honest life and Conversation? and sufficient or able to perform his duty in reading, writing, or singing? Is he chosen by your Minister, and doth he duly attend him in all divine Ser∣vices at the Church? Doth he wear a Gown when he so attendeth, and a Surplice over it, if heretofore the Custome hath been such among you? Are his wages duly paid unto him? or who with-holdeth the same from him? 2. DOTH he or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Pa∣rish) diligently look to the doors of your Church, that they be locked and ope∣ned at due time? And doth he keep you Church or Chapel clean from noy∣some dust, cobwebs, litter, straw, or any other annoyance? Doth be toul or ving the Bells at the due accustomed hours before the beginning of divine Service morning and evening, that the people may be warned to come unto the Church? And when any person is passing out of this life, doth he upon notice given him thereof, go and toul a Bell, as hath been accustomed, that the neighbours may thereby be warned to recommend the dying person to the grace and favour of God.
TITUL. VI. Concerning Curates, School-masters, Physicians, Chirurgeons and Midwives. 1, IS there any Curate or Minister imployed under the Parson or Vicar of your Parish? Is he admitted and licensed to serve in that office by the Bishop of the Diocess? Doth he demean himself soberly, gravely and religiously in his place? Doth he instruct the Youth of your Parish in the Catechism appointed them? Is he diligent in visiting sick persons, examining them in their Christian faith, exhorting them to works of Charity, if they be able to do them: to make resti∣tution where they have done any wrong, to remit all injuries that they have received, and to ask forgiveness of God, and all others whom they have of∣fended? 2. DOTH any man in your parish practise Physick, or Chirurgerie, or any woman the office of a Midwife without approbation and lawfull License of the Ordinary. 3. DOTH any man keep a publick or private School in your parish, but such as be allowed thereunto by the Bishop or his Chancellor? Doth he teach his Scholars the Catechism of Religion, set forth by Authoritie? Doth he cause them upon Sundaies and Holi-daies, orderly to repair to your Church or Chapel? and see that they behave themselves there quietly and humblie, during the time of divine Service and Sermon?
TITUL. VII. Concerning Church-Wardens and Sidemen. 1, ARE the Church-werdens of your Parish yearly and duly cho∣sen by the joynt consent of your minister and Parishioners, or one of them by your Minister, and the other by the Parishi∣oners? 2. HAVE the former and last Churchwardens, given up their due Accompts to the Parish and delivered up to the succeeding Church wardens the moneys remaining in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or Chapel, by Bill indented? 3. DO you the Church-wardens and Side men take diligent care, and see who of your Parishioners be absent from the divine Service and Sermon in your Church or Chapel, upon Sundaies and Holidaies? And if you find any to have absented themselves without a sufficient cause, do you by War∣rant from some of the Iustices of Peace, levy of them by way of distress up∣on their goods the sum of 12 pence for every such day of their absence accor∣ding to the Act of Parliament in that case provided? And do you distribute the several sums so levied among the poor of your parish, according to the Law? 4, DO you note them that come late to Church after divine Service is be∣gun or depart before it be ended? Do you suffer none to stand idle or talk together in the Church-porch, or to walk in the Church or Church Yard, during the time of prayers, preaching, or other Sacred Offices? 5. DO you suffer no misbehaviour or disorder to be done by men, women, or servants or children in your Church or Chapel? Are you carefull that none of them sit, lean, or lay their Hats upon the Communion Table? Do you permit no Minstrels, no Morisdancers, no dogs, hawks, or hounds to be brought or come into your Church, but set your Sexton to keep them out, that the Congregation and the Minister performing divine Service, or prea∣ching his Sermon, may not be disturbed by them? 6. DO you against the time of every holy Communion apppointed in your
Church or Chapel, provide a sufficient quantitie of fine white bread, and of good Wine, according to the advice and direction given you by your Minister for the number of Communicants? 7 DO you cause all Preachers (coming from other places to make Ser∣mons in your Church or Chapel) to subscribe their names the same day they preach, in a Book provided for that purpose, together with the name of the Bishop that licensed them to preach in this Diocess? and do you permit no other to preach? 8. HAVE you the Churchwardens and Sidemen now sworn to give in a true answer unto all these Articles of Inquirie in all their several Titles, had a sufficient time to draw up your presentments, and therein consulted or intreated your Minister for his faithfull assistance? FOR know you assuredly, that as the true discharging of your Office, is the chief means whereby publick Disorders, Sins, and Offences in your Parish may be reformed and punished: So if you wilfully refuse to present such crimes and faults as either you know to have been committed, or otherwise have heard of them by pub∣lick fame; That in such cases, the Bishop and his Officers are to proceed against you, in their Ecclesiastical Courts, as in Cases of wilfull omission and Perjury. THe Minister of every Parish may joyn in Presentment with the Church-wardens, and Side-men: and if they will not present, then the Ministers themselves being the persons that should have the chief care for the suppressing of sin and impiety in their parishes, may present the crimes aforesaid, and such things as shall be thought to require due reformation. Can. 113. There must be several presentments made to every several Article. FINIS,
