S3627 51784670 175074
A short REPRESENTATION Performed before The Lord Generall MONCK. AT GOLDSMITHS-HALL, Tuesday, Aprill 11th. By three persons, An English-man, a Welsh-man, and a Scotch-man. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Morgan, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1660.
A short Representation. OFFICER. HOW now Friended whither are you crowding so fast? Pray get ye back a∣gain and wipe your shoos? Who invi∣ted you I wonder? If y'are a hungry, stay till the Scraps come forth, which will be about four or five hours hence. Englishman. Pray good man Jack kold my staffe, be good, in your Office. Sirrah, We come to see the General; we have as much businesse with him as the best of 'um all that has invited him hither. Officer. Hee'l hear no petitions to day. Englishman. Petition, we come not to Petition, Friend, he has done our businesse without a Petition already. Officer. He had much to do I warrant, when he did your businesse. Englishman. Friend you need not be so Angry; we come not to defraud you of the least bit, that you intend to carry home to your Wife, for her pro∣vision till the next quarter Feast; For give me leave to tell thee, we have been as good House keepers as some of your Masters, and kept better men then thou to wipe our shoos, & now I hope we shall do so gain. Officer. You are sufferers then in the times. Her's one I warrant whose Catt has dy'd with eating
a poysoned Ratt. Her's another who's two Ducks and one Drake used to sleep at his beds head, and he has now lost all by the Maledictions of the old witch his Neighbour. Her's another had but one torn Shirt, which was stollen by a Gypsie as it hung upon a Hedge a drying, one Saturday in the Afternoon. And as for your part Good-man Prate a pace what have you lost I wonder? your Dogs Leather Hedg∣ing Gloves I warrant, or some such precious piece of Treasure. Englishman. The fellow would fain be witty be∣fore the Masters of the Company. Alas! it would stand thee in little stead had we a mind to Retort; but that is not our businesse. We are come to make our General Merry; for making us merry. Sirrah, we have been at charges for a Pawet, and the Fidlers, and therefore I tell thee we will see our General, and sing him a song and give him thanks for his care of us all. Welchman. Sirrah if her will not let her see her Sheneral, and sing her a fine song, which her ha pay'd her share for the making, her will preak her pusee poie's pate. Officer. I care not for your songs, you come not here unlesse I know better who you are. Englishman. Friend I am a Cheshire man, who had lost my tenure of a good Farm for siding with my Land-Lord Sir George Booth; but I now have got it again, thanks to our General. Welchman. And her pe Shentleman of Wallis, and her lost her create fortune for her creat loofe to her creat Land-Lord Sir Thomas Middleton; but her have cot it a cain. her thank her cood Sheneral.
Scot. In troath noow they had gotten een aw; & aw for becose Ise ha sarved my gude Loard and Maisser the KING. But whare be those muckle traitors noow? introath friend wee's come for nething else but to garr the General take notice of our loove, tell him for his muckle paines and care of us and of aw the Kingdom. Officer. Well, stay there, and if the Generall will be troubled with your impertiaencies, ile give ye notice. Englishman. Now thou speakst like an honest fel∣low; dost heare? if thou canst but get us in, wee'l give thee six pence a piece. After a little pause the Officer returns. Officer. Wel, if your Song be good, you may come in; but be advis'd of that; for if it ben't you'l be soundly soundly laught at; and for your Poet, tell him from me, if he come off basely, the Company will not give him a brass token; and so you I lose your Credit and he his labour. Englishman. To the Tune of, The Grecian Army. No more good people, talk no more Of what the Champion did of yore; I care not a pin what stories forge Of Bevis or of Great St. George, Who Dragon did slaughter To get the Kings fair daughter For his wife; Which was truly And most duly The bravest thing he did in his life.
Scotchman. To the Highlanders New Rant. Nor I'se ne care at aw For Kiuntry man St. Aundrew, Although he ware as gude a swerd As ever muckle man drew; For though he did redum The Ladies fair and breeght Yet had the swains bin still But for gude Willy's Leeght. Away then, Stay not, What gare's us be silent? Wee'l feast our Monk, though now it be high Lent. Welshman. To the Tune of, Fortune, &c. Nor for our old St. Taffie to I care, Who slew a mighty shyant without laughter; Yet for th'excessive pains he tooke that tay, Fullfast He sleeped seaven whole years after. Englishman. To the Tune of, What you please. But our St. George hath set us free From a base Rumps bold slavery Poor England now shall bleed no more; Welshman. And Wallis sal pe as her was before. Scotchman. The War in Scotland first did swagger, But there first ends, Jemmy put up thy dagger. To the Tune of, The Grecian Army You base Excisemen and Commitee's as before. That swaggerd over Towns and City's,
(While the sad Ploughmen plough'd in grief, And yet poor Swains had no relief,) Must now go down And stoop to th'abused Clown; For like the Sun In his glory, In his story, Monk is resolv'd not to be out don. Scot. To the Tune of, The Highlanders New Rant as before. A Out out away Phanaticks, Who ken not what yee'd have; Your Plots be aw discover'd The Nation to enslave; Our Cities now ne mere shall pay The hire of their Fetters; Ne mere shall Major Generals Now rant it ore their betters; For Monk's come, That Monck Whom all men prize, To heal up all our past Maladies. Welshman To the tune of, Fortune. And now her tosted Cheeze, her eat and Sing, And freely drink a health unto her King: Ap Thomas ap Middleton give me thy hand For now our Sister Chester's Walls shall stand.
Chorus. To the Tune, Q. Dido. Brave Hero, then in thy brave rage Proceed, which hath rais'd up our Age, To say you were from Heaven let down To give the wronged Heir his Crown, For well the wayes of truth you take The ballance even now to make. All our long differences end Already to a setled end For which we now must all agree To give the stile of just to thee. Bequeathing unto, to after Story The care of thy unblemish't Glory. FINIS.
