W168C R234907 52529360 179221
A Pleasant new SONG, in Praise of the Leather Bottell Shewing how Glasses and Pots are laid aside, And Flaggons and Noggins they cannot abide, And let all Wives do what they can, 'Tis for the praise and use of Man; And this you may very well be sure, The Leather Bottel will longest endure: And I wish in Heaven his soul may dwell, That first devised the Leather Bottel. To the Tune of, The Bottel-makers Delight. GOd above that made  things, the Heavns, the Earth, and all therein, The Ships that on the Sea do swim, to keep Enemies out that now comes in: And let them do all 'tis for the use and  of man, And I wish in Heaven his soul may dwell That first devised the Leather Bottel. Then what do you say to these Cans of Wood, in faith they , and cannot be good; For when a man he doth them send to be filled with Ale, as he doth intend, The bearer falleth by the way, and on the ground the liuor doth lay. And then the Bearer  to an and swears it is long of the Wooden Can▪ But had it been in a Leather Bottel, although he had fallen t all had been well, And I wish, &c. Then what do you say to these Glasses fine? yes, they shall have no praise of mine; For n a cony they are set aswe are met: Then if you ce to touch the Brim don  all therein; Yf your  fine the  Wine: a young man But had it been in  L Bottel nd the , then all had been well. Then I wish, &c.
The Second Part to the same Tune. TH what do you say to these black pots three? tr, they shall have no praise of me, For when  his wife falls at strife, e, in faith in their life; T  the Pot both, are to  Broath. Th  the o be  both  doth spill; But  other day for  so nly away: But  Bottel, , the other have hld; And  till their hearts did ake, no harm would take. Then I wish, &c. Then what  the Siver Flagons fine? tr of mine For hen a Lord he doth them send to  he doth nd; The , b it s  and gay: ars he  Flaggon and man, There's ne  man or Grom but with his Leather Bottel may come. Then I wish, &c. A Leather Bottel is good, Far better th Glasses or Cans of Wood, For when a man is  in the Field, Gsse  Pots, no comfort will yield; Th  er  him by, he  he is dry, It  and comfort the brain, this  refrain. Also he  o do But  néer ld beer: At meet, Likewise the merry Hay-makers they, when as they are turning and making their In Summer weather, a good bottel full then will do  no harm▪ And at noon-  sit tem down; to drink in ir bottel of Ale nut brn▪ Then the L ▪ We co for t  hot with the heat  un▪ Then I wish &c. Also the Leader, Lader, and the Pitcher, the Reaper, Hidger, and the Ditcher, The r and the Raker d all ther  flocks is  fall, And his But I  part You I will  my Leather Bott Then I wish, &c. Thus you as it is d with  full ll, Though   of it  mall▪ et t a Lord, Er but at a Bottel doth take t For when he is huntig of he often doth wish for  of Béer; Likewise the mn t w , a Botel of Beer doth oft do him good. Then I wish, &c. Then when this Bottel it doth grow old; n will good liquor no longer hld, Out of the side you may take a clout▪ d yur shooes  ty are out▪ El  upon  pin it will rve  in▪ As Linges, for young rs must have such thin Then I wish in Heaven his soul may dwel, That first devised the Leather Bottel. Iohn Wade FINIS L P for R. Burton at the Horse-Head in West-Smithfield.
