P2093 [ocm]11244234 204983
Mercurius Verax: OR THE PRISONERS PROGNOSTICATIONS For the Year 1675. Wherein are Prophesied Several TRUTHS of very great Moment, yet to come to pass: Which, he that contradicts, let him have a care he does not find them true by EXPERIENCE. By the Author of the first Montelion, and Satyr against Hypocrites.— . LONDON, Printed for R. Cutler. 1675.
The Explanation of the Almanack. HAving on the upper part the Months, and under them the figures for the days of the Month, from 1 till 31. under them your Domi∣nical Letters, and in the lower part the Letters for the days of the week, from Sunday to Satur∣day; on each side you have the year of our Lord from 1660 till 1687. on each side them is your Dominical Letters. Now to know your day, first, find out your year, next your Dominical Letter against that year, which letter find in the lower part of the Almanack, and the letter un∣der this is the day of the week for your obser∣vation for the whole year. Only every Leap∣year you have two Dominical Letters, which you must observe, the first for January and Fe∣bruary, and the next for all the year after. IN the year 1660, you find the letters AG. A di∣rects you to Saturday for January and Februa∣ry, and G. to Sunday for all the year after: so that you find the first Saturday in January is the 7 day, and under that Saturdays for that Month, and un∣der February 4, which are Saturdaies for that Month: But in March you must observe G. which directs you to Sunday, so that the first Sunday in March is the fourth day, and so you reckon forward. April and July, the first Sunday is the first day of the Month, and so of the rest. In the year 1661. you find your Dominical letter F. which directs you to Monday, which is your Observation for that year, and so you find the rest: and when you are at 1687. you may begin again.
A perpetual Almanack. Do∣min let∣ters Year of our Lord Apr Sep. Jun Mar Au∣gust May. Ja∣nu∣ary.     July Dec   Nov * *       Feb.   Oct. * * A G 1660 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 4 D F 1 5 C E 2 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 6 B A D 3 7 G C B 4 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 8 F A 5 9 E G 6 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 1680 D C F 7 1 B E D 8 29 30 31 * * * * 2 A C 9         3 G B 1670 G F E D C B A 4 F E A 1 5 D G F 2 S M T W T F S 6 C E 3 1687 B
General Judgments on the Year 1675. SOme Men took a great deal of Notice of the Year 1666, perhaps more than they needed; and therefore we have thought fit to take as much Notice of the year 1675. We do find Mercury in a plaguy dull humour, looking like a Fellow without Monye: Many Astrologers are of opinion that he had over-wrought himself or over∣drank himself the night before; whatever be the Cause, it portends most mischeivous Events, especially the Breaking and Un∣doing of many sorts of People, more espe∣cially among those two Degrees called the Gentry and Commonalty of the Nation. For when men begin to find themselves in debt, then they Ecclipse themselves, of which there will be many to be seen in our Horri∣zon, but of that more hereafter. Never does a man come to have his worth known till then, for a Serjeant or a Bayliff shall dig him out of the Earth, with as much Diligence
as if he were the Oar of Mexico; and ne∣ver ceases till he has hid him again in some obscure place or other, never to be found, but, by chance, like a Pot of old Roman coin: But the duce is in that fullen piece of Forma∣lity, Madam Astrea, who having the scales of the World in her own hands, will notwith∣standing neither keep publick nor private Fortune equal; which makes many a man cry the Devil rot him, if he ever he had such cru∣el Fortune in his life, to see Dice run against him as if they were in open Hostility with his Patrimony. And yet the bewitched Cox∣comb will never give off till his Estate and his Cloak lies both in the Lumber together; poor Squire in Cuerpo, stript out of his means, as the Countrie-man calls it, as a man would uncase a Rabbet. This scabby hu∣mour, like the Itch, runs up and down the City, abounding with the Off-spring of the Gentry, with more furie then the Sicilian fire overran the Country about Messina; so that in every street there are scarce any other Lamentations to be heard, but of the ill Hus∣bandrie of the Masters, the Prodigality of Servants, till at length they fall into the Common shures of Povertie, Fleet, Kings-Bench, Counters or Ludgate; where they will never leave their old wont neither, but play at One and thirtie for Farthings rather
than stick out. 'Twas well Juno, the Devil of a Goddess for Envy and Emulation, was made none of the Planets, and yet, by the Sequel of Influences, either she, or some o∣ther as bad as her self, has, a vengeance, great power in the Skie; most probable to be that Jezabel Venus; for women are so out∣ragiously madd to see one Neighbour finer then another, that many men are forced to pawn their Consciences, as well as their Credits for one story of Lace more upon their Wives Petticoats: As if women thought mens fancies did not climb fast e∣nough without such a Love-ladder. But how can these Women think to thrive? for no sooner are their husbands in the Climm, but reflecting upon the cause of their Sor∣row, they curse 'um to the pit of Hell, for two causes; first, because they will never come neer them, after they have suckt their Counter tills as dry as their Bones: second∣ly, when they doe come, 'tis always with Taunts in their mouths, and so gay withall, that they do but the more enrage the Credi∣tors that sees them go so fine with their money. There is another most malevolent As∣pect, very active in the notching the Credit of some that would be thought Alder∣mens fellowes, men that make a great
noise upon the Exchange: Which is the reason that this year many shall be seen to fall from the Pinacle of their Countrie-hou∣ses to a Lodging in the Rules at three shil∣lings a week: but there is a great diffe∣rence between those that are gathered to their fathers and these dead men in law, for the one carries nothing along with them, these will let nothing that they have got slip out of their clutches; these Prison-Pismires are such as have laid aside all their Credit for the Reputation of being diligent provi∣ders against the winter of their misfortune. Some think the Conjunction of Mars and Venus to be a great Enemie to the Prosperi∣tie of these men; for that they plodding only how to get Estates and cheat their Cre∣ditors, grow quite regardless of Love and Honour. Yet some Astrologers there are that shrewdly suspect Cepheus to have a fin∣ger in the Pie, because he sits in such a mu∣sing Posture in his groaning Chair: though some say, Men are now grown so knowing in practical Knavery, that they need nothing of his celestial Theory to make them more expert. Others believe that Fortune being a Whore her self could never endure any that were grown old and had left the Trade. Others believe the Influ∣ence not so fatal, while the propitious Con∣junction
of other men's Estates in their own hands, in Mortgage, contributes so much to their own Happiness Yet shall their Credi∣tors think the Stars too favourable, and curse them as bitterly as ever Parson cursed Me∣roz. What shall the poor Stares do? the Creditors curse them for being too kind, the rich Debtors curse them for not being kind enough: Thus ye see the Stars of Heaven, as well as the Stars upon Earth, are subject to Scandal and hard Words, and hard Usage: Nay, and if Mortals could but reach them, you would find their glittering Spheres as much battered as the Windows of Van Put∣ten's House in Holland. But what malitious Planet that is which pesecutes the Poor jour∣ney-men Taylors, Weavers, Coblers, Tin∣kers, Butchers, and the lower Tribe of Ma∣sters, most Astrologers are at a stand to dis∣cover; some say, 'Tis Aquarius, a certain son of a Tankard-bearer, translated into the Zodiac for giving meate, drink and lodging to some poor Poet. If it be he, he is as testie as Justice Overdoe, and as great a Pretender to Reformation; for much about this time you will find abundance of that sort of Cattel, before mentioned, suffer un∣der his Mittimus, meerly for their extrava∣gant Propensity to Putt and Nine-Pis. These men at length become the Gibbeonites
of the Prison at the devotion either of the Constables of the Counters, or the Stewards of Ludgate, or else make Skewers in the Common side of the Kings-Bench, born on∣ly to shew the little dffrence between Men and Beasts; only, the one can speak, the o∣ther not, unless there be something more of Addition then what Nature infuses. You may be sure such sulphurus Matters, as Deb∣tor and Credior, can never meet but strange alterations of Air must ensue, which is the reason of those dsperate thunder-claps to be heard every day in Guild-Hall.—Hang him Dog, I lent him my money out of my Pocket.—Cursed Curr, I only was bound for another, and here the Son of a Whore sues me to Execution.—No, I'le have no more mercy on him then I'de have on the De∣vil.—Let him rot in Goal and be poxt.—I'le see him damn'd ere I'e pay him a groat.—I'le make him sht as small as a Mouse—By this light, I owe the Rogue not a arthing.—He's a cheating Dog, and I'le prove it.—Hey, Clerk, Where is my Execution?—Where's my Judgment? Never such a forsworn wretch up∣on God's earth—Be sure to lay the Rogue fast—A rough and stormy season truly; but such is the Nature of the Clymate nei∣ther
do we see any Position of the Starrs likely to remedie it. Should we foretell the death of some Ci∣ty-Serjeants and Guild-hall Attorneys, 'tis a thing we might do very safely, and 'tis very probable to come to pass: But what a∣vails the ceasing of one Plague when ano∣ther follows in the neck on't. Could we Pro∣phesie that no more of those places should be sold, we might then foretel a great Re∣formation, and the return of a fair glimpse of the GOLDEN AGE. But this o∣ther Prediction of ours shall most assuredly come to pass by reason of the terrible influ∣ences of the Dog-Star upon that sort of Cat∣tel, that these Fellows shall swallow many a fair piece of the King's coyn, which they have as little right to as the man in the Moon. But what remedy? complain—and they'l tell their Superiors as Gusman hath it in his first Chapter, That they had not their Offices for nothing, but paid soundly for them, and therefore must lick themselves whole out of other mens necessities. Prudently there∣fore the same Gusman avers out of Aristotle, That the greatest wrong that can be offered to a Common wealth is the sale of Offices. Many Causes this year shall be tried, and the wit∣nesses shall swear point blank to the truth, but the Jury men shall find quite Contrary.
Neither do we find that the Corruption of some Talis men will cease so long as this world endures. We are afraid some Talis man or other is crept into the Skie, by the help of some Astrological Under-sheriff or other, to make all this Mischief: Whom to suspect we cannot devise, unless it be that sneaking fellow call'd Auriga or the Carter, probably some Middlesex Farmer: of which there are some of them, formerly well sed and well drenched, that for a Wager shall whistle Law at the Plough tail with ere a Northfolk Dumplin of them all: I have seen of these Cattl appear among the Ju∣rie men that are truly returned, just as in Job we find the Devil appearing among the An∣gels before God: and there are those that have them alwaies ready, according as they shall be bespoke, as good Farriers have al∣ways store of Horse-shoos by them, to fit all sizes of Hoofes. So that Plaintiff or Defendant need not be beholding to the Stars to know his good fortune, if he have well consulted these Soothsayers. But who the Devil dubb'd these, forlorn dregs of Mortality, the clip'd Knights of the Post? Astrologers are at a Stand: some will have Proteus to be their Father, because of the several Long-lane shapes and dresses that they appear in; for they are sometimes
Divines, sometimes Country Gentlemen sometimes Physicians, sometimes Mer∣chants, sometimes Serving-men, as the thing to be sworn to requires them to be in Of∣fice. Astronomers will allow them no room in Heaven, for that Perjury is the only Crime that is punishable among the Gods: There∣fore, saith Tostatus, they are an Apparent Ar∣gument for the Excellency of Man above Angells; Coruptio optima est pessima. There∣fore are men so much the more Excellent than Angels, by how much they, the mere corruption of Mankind, are worse then De∣vils. These men, with the Epicureans, place their chief Happiness in this World, coun∣ting the meanest Conveniences thereof great Blessings; such as Pots of Ale, and sixpeny Cuts of Ram-alley Roast beef: With the Sadduces they hold the Mortality of the Soul, otherwise they would never sell their Salvation so cheap; half a crown a time, come as often as you please. Yet are they of great use among a certain Generation of Vipers called annointed Knaves. When an annointed Knave comes with these finishing Tools of his to compleat a Tittle, there is no resistance, the case is made so plain: then shall you see without Fryar Bakon's Art, the strange Motions of Terra firma out of
one Family into another: Mountains, with∣out the help of Faith removed out of one man's Possession into the Possssion of ano∣ther. If you aim at the life of a man, they put down all the time, observing poysons of Ethiopia, they'l doe your work so gentelely and so legally, that you get Repute by the Prosecution. They'l swear, that such a one lying asleep, they saw his soul go out of his mouth booted and spurr'd, take horse, ride to such a place, do such a Murther, commit such a Felony, or act such and such Treasons. Now because (as Boccalini saieth) that it is so hard a matter to punish a false oath with∣out discouraging a true one; such as rob upon the High-way, and take but 10 shil∣lings from a man, shall be hanged; and these sons of Perdition that strike at the root of Life, Estate and Fortune, shall only loose their Ears, which they value no more than Esop's Cock did Diamonds: Pieces of flesh, which they hold, made in opposition to the great Maxim in Philosophy, That Nature does nothing in vain, as being of no use in the body of Man. 'Tis good to fight with Silver weapons, for then thou shalt overcome all things, saith the Greek Poet: Which is the reason a true Suborner is never without a Guard of these Janizaries at his heels, especially in Term▪
time. These are they that so cordially pimp for the Devil, as if they thought him to be Disposer of all Inheritances; as Lord of the World. They have made a Feoffment of their Souls with Livery and Seisin to Satan, only taking a short Lease back again. And therefore are resolved to make all people they have to deal withall turn Tenants to their Landlord. If a Councellor or Attorney chance to take their Fee, what villanies must he not conceal? what Treacheries, what Forgeries is he not bound to be privy to? what defences must he not make o injustice and wrong? what, the worst of actions must he not strive to palliate, daub over with the fucus of forced Eloquence, quite contrary to the dictates of either Reason or Consci∣ence? Those that have calculated their Na∣tivities, banish them from the Societie of men, as the most dangerous and treacherous persons in the world; and wonder, finding it so much threatned by the starrs, that no more of them are hang'd; there being no Crime in the world that more deserves death. About this time many significations derive themselves from Mars, who is Au∣thor Bellorum. Now he being in one of his greatest Dignities with Mercury, such a Conjunction portends many strifes and ani∣mosities among men, for a fiery Planet in a
sign of the same Triplicitie, receives an additi∣on of violence to its own intemperate nature. This is the reason of those swarms of igno∣rant Solicitors, and worse then ignorant At∣torneys, whose multiplication would prove a greater plague to this Nation then Vermin to the Egyptians: therefore among the well regu∣lated Common wealth of the Lacedemonians Law suits were not heard of. And well did Charles the 9th of France, who, to prevent needless and numberless Suites of Law, or∣dained that whoever commenced a Suit of Law, should deposite such a Sum with the Judge, to receive it back, if his cause were good, or forfeit it, if the same prov'd frivo∣lous. Not worse did James of Arragon who banished Semeng Rada a great Pettifogger for his being famons only for quirks and wiles in Law: But better did Galeatius of Millain, who hanged another for his excel∣lent Art of multiplying suites. Surely such bands of Locusts, might be better emploied then in the Ruin of the Poor and Needie, whose Cries why they do not call down Showers of Brimstone and Fire upon these impious Miscreants, when some Casuists have not been able to answer, it has made them totter in their Divinity? But what is the matter that our A∣strologers keep Hercules so close mu'd up
up in the Skie, when we have so much need of him here upon Earth? Here is one more to make up his Labours a Bakens-dozen, that will more renown him than all his o∣ther twelve: Nay, let him bring Theseus too; here's work enough for them both; for there be a sort of Augean Stables about this City, whose Keepers never cate Less then two poor folks at a meal, more cruel than Diomed that fed his horses with human flesh; more inhumane, more merciless than the great robbers Sciron or Pityolanthes, more terrible than the Lerenean Monster, should they be broyl'd roasted, gridled, sing'd, ba∣ked ten thousand years in Purgatory, they would be as sooty as when first put in. But Cruelty seldome goes unrewarded, and such is the Happiness of these fellows, that they seldom last above a Pope's Reign, be∣ing generally poysoned either with lim'd, sack or stumm'd Claret, in less then five years. Saturn's a melancholy sign, and who can hinder him from being as froppish and as humer some as he pleases upon his own day; which is the reason that there be some Citizens that can as well be hang'd as keep out of the Nine-pin Houses in Moor Fields on a Saturday, to be out of the sight of those ghastly apparitions that haunt their Ghosts at the heel of the week. Poverty
and Necessity the Gods of the Andreans, that could stop the mouth of Themistocles, can∣not appease the wrath of a City Creditor; the Proverb reversed, Dunn upon the Devil. whose emptie mony bagg, twisted about his hand, is as killing as a Gorgon's head; and therefore 'tis well the poor man is out of the way he's only practising the sports which are to be his only Recreations in a short time: and what a kindness it is for a man to be removed from the cares and labours of this world to the sweet pleasures of drin∣king and kettles? 'Tis well these Despera∣do's in Estate are not so strong as Sampson; for they would not then put their Landlords key under the Door, but take away key house and all. What abundance of Tra∣vellers should we meet upon the road with Houses and Shops furnish'd? And what Landlord, seeing a man standing upon the sea∣shore with his house upon his back, swea∣ring he would send it to the bottom of the Ocean, but would come to any composition? Besides they were out of the reach of the Law, for there is no Statute in Polton a∣gainst removing of houses, so a man Carry them whole without breaking: But the li∣mits of fate are certain; the Cobler cannot go beyond his Last, nor a man beyond his strength; there was but one Nisus, one Her∣cules,
one Sampson, the first two never arre∣sted that we read of, and for the latter how he paid off his Creditors we very well know. Therefore now a days 'tis better for debtors to fall to their Prayers, beseech, entreate, lie, flatter dissemble, swear, forswear, set an In∣strument to work with the wise, such tricks as these, Sint semper studiis arma parata tuis. If these will not prevail, expect no other deliverance but as Daniel got out of the Lyons Den, or Jonas out of the Whales belly.
January's Observations. THE Weather is very cold, and Chari∣ty far more cold. The womens Bene∣volence flows all into the convention Channel. Their husbands bosomes hard fro∣zen like the weather, not to be thaw'd by all the steams of Plum-broth and Plum-Pye that make such mists in their Kitchins; On∣ly the Cellar man, in hope to be pai'd at one time or other, and partly out of the Le∣cherie they have in cozening and cheating with false measures and nasty Tobacco, is at length contented to let his dear Euridices, his Beer and his Brandy take a little air out of his Infernal regions. But the hot strum∣pets leave such violent claps behind them in the Pockets of the poor Prisoners, that no Aqua fortis cats so violently into a fob as they do. Only the Cellar man has one Re∣cipe to stop the violence of the Gonorrhea, by crying in a Lion-like tone, I'le trust no more. Yet men that are pickt up in the Holydayes have not so much reason to complain; for though they fare not so well as they might abroad, yet they are sure to be kept from surfeiting where they are, surely 'tis a hard case that such Enormities are winkt at, that
where poor men ought to have most, best and cheapest, there they have the worst, least and dearest of all things. Now the reason is such that all the seven wise men of Grece could not have given the like; because the Master Keeper lets his Cellar at a Rack rent, because he himself has paid so dear for the Custody of his Den: A strange kind of Chymistrie, however it came to be allowed of, that a man should be permitted to pur∣chase an Iron-barr'd Limbeck, to act con∣trary to nature, while he makes it his busi∣ness all his life to extract something out of nothing, and having reduced men to no∣thing out of the Caput mortuum of their pe∣risht Estates, to make himself somthing: who could have thought A Jailor had been such a Caldean Magician before?
February's Observations. THis Month many men shall be car∣ried over to the Kings-Bench, with Habeas Corpuses; a piece of sheeps skin, that would make you believe that beast to be the most suttle and cruel in the world: Truly 'tis a beast of a strange Kid∣ney after death, and as we are apt to believe, the only beast that cries quit for quo with his Devourer, man: by and by devouring him alive for feeding on his dead carcase before: wicked Conspiracy between the silliest of Creatures, the sheep and the Goose, to be so sharp in their revenge: which makes men seem the greatest Sots in nature to be made such Fools of, by Geese and Sheep. Thus are the cunning foxes carri'd away by the violence of a Sheep-skin into the Hesperiant Gardens of Southwark, where, though there are no Gol∣den Apple Trees growing, yet they shall find many Lions waking for their Security. Some say that the Prisoners themselves are changed into Golden Appletrees, which so long as they bear fruit, the Lyon is as gentle as a Red Herring, but if they wither and grow dry, they are presently cut down and made fuel for the Common Goal. Nay your two
Janizaries, your Brace of guardian angels will forsake you for want of a little Chamber rent: Otherwise Polyphemus himself is civil enough, and will be content to have his own eye put out for a while, while Ʋlysses es∣capes under the belly of his Golden fleece. Now under what Planets the Tipstaves and Waiters were born, we cannot well conje∣cture; we believe Mercury, though not as he was a god, but a Gusman. They are a sort of Vermin that believe not only the Moon, but all mankind to be made of green cheese, so like Rats and Mice do they alto∣gether live and feed upon it. They are clearly of Horaces Opinion, or at least seem to have been his Scholars in this one particu∣lar, for they measure the credit of a man, and repute of his Virtues, according to the length of his purse, and depth of his chest. This month the wandring Planets of this Re∣gion have Liberty, by their Rules, to bolt out of their burrows up and down into the City, and laugh at their irreligious Cre∣ditors.
March's Observations. BUt now 'tis Vacation, Every man to his Cage, No budging without the Territo∣ries of S. George. Room enough a-conscience for the holy Exercises there performed, Dice∣ing, drabbing, drinking. Venus is very Powerful here, but Bacchus much more, being indeed the very Baal Peor of this place. As for the stars of the first Magnitude, you shall find them at the Leg or the Golden Lyon; but all must not be such, for then what would the lesser orbs of Alehouses do for the Com∣fort of their enclining Influences. But, quoth the Creditors, What tydings does your hea∣venly Post bring yee concerning the pay∣ment of our Debts? not a tittle by Jove. No my dear friends, this is the Land of Oblivion. Not a quartern of Brandy but is an Antidote against Sorrow, not a pipe of Wine, or a bar∣rel of Beer, but was perfect Letye. In a short while they forget you, in a long time you forget them. Alas, should all men pay their debts, Some would have nothing left, and others would have all; there would be no flux and reflux of Fortune, should the Tide run all one way, no loss aswel as again, and cheating would have too great an inco∣ragement
should it alwaies prosper. Prove that ever, in any age of the world, all men paid their Debts, and we will entreat the starrs to let ye have it so again. But do you think to alter the course of Nature for your humours? Having received this sad news from the heavenly Intelligencer, the Poor Creditors are as various in their Humour as the weather. The Mercer shakes his head and cries, I'le spend five hundred pounds before I'le be thus trapann'd. The Milliner cries—Hang't give us t'other Cup of Sack 'tis well 'tis no worse—by my soul the Gentleman seemed to me to be such an honest man, that I would have trusted him with all the goods in my Shop. The Poor Taylor holding his hands under his Arm Pitts, well quoth he, I know as cunning a fellow as any is in England, and if there be ever a trick i'the Law, Begarr, I'le make him smoke for't. Ad's foot he ows me beside for above a twelve months Lodging.—But a Pox a my Wife she is so willing to entertain handsom Gentlemen.
April's Observations. THE Semstress melts into tears like the Month, and cries, He might have bin more kind to her, she was sure she was none of his back friend—'Twas a most ungentleman like part to undo a poor wo∣man in both senses. But let them all say or doe what they will, Prisons are like the Well in Derbyshire, that turns the tenderer sub∣stance of Iron into Stone, so when a man is once put in prison, his heart becomes Petri∣fy'd to that excess, so that neither the soft words of a flattering Creditor, nor the most sharp and piercing execrations of a passio∣nate one, can make the least impression there∣in. Now Astrologers, unless they can have the Goodluck to lie with their Mistresses, being generally very poor, and great Borrow∣ers, make a Dispute, whether a man ought to be compell'd against his will to pay his Debts or no? Saturn a Sage Planet and a great Law-giver among the Latins, was positively in the negative: for, saith he, If according to the Maxime of the Law, no injury can be done to him that is willing; then it follows, that all Injurie must be done to him that is unwilling: now what greater Injury can be
done to a man, than to compel him to pay Money against his will, whether he has it or no? Again, no man was ever compell'd to lend mony; what reason then why a man should be compell'd to repay it? Other∣wise lending of Mony seems a kind of inven∣tion of man to trapan his fellow creature, to lend him money that he may afterwards make him his miserable slave and vassal and triumph over his Calamity. Then up stept Jupiter, and said, There was no reason, that that man who imprison'd the body of his Cre∣ditor should be paid one farthing of his Debt, though it were to the ruin of the Creditor's wife and family. For, quoth he, There can be no greater Mischief done to a man than to ca∣ptivate his body, and deprive him of his di∣vine priviledge of Freedom; he then that in∣tends the ruin of another, ought to have the same ruin intended, to himself: and he is wise that expends in Charity at home what'ere he has, rather than relieve his perishing Adver∣sary.
May's Observations. THey that deny Prisons to be Baudy-Houses are as much mistaken as 'ere they were in their lives, and may as well de∣ny the Seven Planets; or, that Venus was translated to the Sky for being a Nunn and not a Whore: Surely the greatest Commenda∣tion to a Prison, is, that it renders Matrimony most savoury, where the pleasures thereof are most stoln: but it most extreamly com∣mends their Charity one among another, for lending their chambers to their fellow Priso∣ners. For which some alledge the lawful∣ness of Matrimony; others, that are for the more noble way of Pimping defend them∣selves by the example of Heliogabolus who was wont to lend his Baths and Wen∣ches to his friends and acquaintance when e∣ver they desired it. And to tell you the truth you will find so little of Mortification among them, that they are generally of Solon and Aristotles opinions, that Whores are not onely useful but necessary in a well instituted Common-wealth, such as generally all Pri∣sons are, especially Ludgate, and the Fleet. Corporeal Recreations, they crie, Mitigate corporeal punishments. Neither was it e∣ver
recorded among them, that any one that was ever put in ever pray'd himself out. And some have observed that on Black-Fry∣ers side, where you may hear them as duly at Sternhold and Hopkins as at their morning draughts, and when their devotion is lou∣dest yet that here their boxes are always emptiest.
June's Observations. COmets and Ecclipses are generally the forerunners of strange Alterations in the sublunary world. But they were never yet so luckie as to foretel humanity in an un∣der keeper; Not all the Influences of Sun or Moon, constellations or single starrs could ever alter their unalterable dispositions. Men before, but coming to that office, meta∣morphosed on a suddain into Tigers, Wolves and Canibals. They may strut in fine clothes, fat with feasting on the forbidden fruits of extortion and selling unlawful libertie at such unlawful rates, that Nero could do no more when he gave more then Parthia was worth to the Parthian King to teach him the Art of Necromancie, though what will a Prisoner not do, that has it? what will he not expend, to conjure down, and appease the evil Demon that so torments and haunts him worse then the Ghost of Agrippina? Yet if any of them would be so kind as to melt in∣to Mercy and Honestie we would certainly have a Cabal of Astrologers to place him in the Sky. What a miraculous thing would it be to see a Christian Officer shining in the room of a heathenish constellation? The Jaylor in the Acts fall down at the feet
of his two Prisoners, when he saw such a ter∣rible Habeas Corpus come from heav'n tore∣move them. But it is to be feared; had those Prisners bin here now, the Earth might have shook as well as the Prison, 'ere it could have shaken the heart of an English Petty Tyrant, that since the cannot alter them one way, they are resolved they shall be as unalterable another way; for by the unanimous consent of the whole host of Hea∣ven, never any one of them, from the highest to the lowest ever did or shall die worth a groat.
July's Observations. 'TIs fair weather and therefore get ye gon to the Fleet, and there behold the no∣ble Art of Chese-bowling; Angels, Board∣end and Game:—Two pieces o'the Game; a piece the End,—Five to one o'the Cast,—A pleasing Noise for Credi∣tors to hear! But who can help it—for these are your Trustee-men that have laid up their Estates in Lavender, and must have their Recreation, not to be confin'd to hu∣mours, though humours confin'd them. And thus you see, if men can keep their Estates what your Capias, and your Latitats signifie. If you have a mind to walk into their Cham∣bers you shall there find them as merry as Lords; some at dice, some at cards, some drinking, some roaring: and, you must know that if the Clerk be one that knows how to spread his bread and butter with his thumbs, 'tis not all your Art can keep 'um within the walls of the Bowling-Alley, or gate either. But have a Care of out-running the Constable. For when all's gon there's no more to be had: They'l sooner trust their Souls with the Devil, than a Prisoner with six-pence. If after you have spent all
you can live upon mouldy Proverbs of good Husbandry, old Sentences of Repentance, or enumerating your kindnesses in Prosperity to the Letter men, you may. And therefore endeavour to be one of Solomon's Sons, and keep Company with none of them. Have a care of lying too much out of doors upon Security, for 'tis but a scurvy thing to be vi∣sited in kindness twice or thrice a Month by Clericus in libro, and his two Gog-Magogs, with rugged cudgels and grimm faces, when the end is only to milk and spunge. Otherwise you may blame the stars when your own folly becoms your ruin: For if Prisons must be, and men must be arrested, it is the greatest Argu∣ment in the world, for men to play the knave, and when they find themselves to begin to sink, to keep something for Self-preservati∣on. Extremities will happen to all sorts of men, as well good as bad, and therefore they determine best, that best determine for their own safety.
August's Observations. HE that thinks that Larks will fly roast∣ed into his Mouth this Month, will be deceived, and therefore let every man look about him diligently to his Business, and keep out of Prison while he is out. 'Tis Harvest time, and therefore be sure to reap the Be∣nefit of good Advice out of other mens harms. If a man has a Creditor that is over∣cholerick, let him not be too hasty, for 'tis time and straw that mellow Medlars. Some are of Opinion that there is neither Love nor Hunger in Prisons, because the Stone walls are so seldom broken, but there's another reason that secures them, for both Lover and Hungry person are so continually ti∣red with breaking of their Oaths, their Faith, their Vows, Promises and Words, that they have neither time nor strength left to perform any other exploit. He that in an Hundred pounds worth of Law, finds a half peny weight of Love shall be a very happy man. But he that finds a true friend in his Adversity shall be far happier: when thy Adversary makes use of a Lawyer, do you make use of a Lawyer and a half. He that has brought his Noble to Nine-pence, let him
never spare at the bottom, and when he has quite thwittend his Milpost to a pudding prick, let him in the Full of the Moon go and hang himself; least Poverty and cold Wea∣ther take him napping together. He that has bit upon the Bridle, let him strive to make silver with his Teeth, and endeavour to recover himself by faring hard.
September's Observations. THis Month the gods being met in Council, where there is also present, the great Judge Rhadamanthus, Advocate general Minos, and Eacus one of Jove's learned Council. Themis makes her Com∣plaint that finding such a Reformation in our Architecture, she would fain have re∣turn'd to the Earth again, but that she was so disturb'd with the Weekly Clamours in the Common-Hall, that she was forced to retire: Rhadamanthus urged, That though some Cities might have freedom to have the Law among themselves, yet that the Alga∣zils and Paltrie Lictors had no permission to buy and sell the Law as they pleas'd, to make Combinations among themselves a∣gainst their Clients; to let go Judgments by Default, to take Exorbitant Fees, with an hundred more of the same Nature. Eacus urged that Courts fill'd with the loud Ec∣cho's of brangling and litigious Boyes and imperious Catch-poles, had too irreverent a Resemblance of a Court of Py-Pouder: Mines urg'd that there was an Office to which the Character of Noctes atque dies belonged: the Sinks and Common Sewers
into which all the Malice Envy, Rancour and Hatred of inveterate People spend it self. Where the Tenter-hooks of Oppression al∣wayes are in such publick View, that Man, Woman, or Maid can hardly pass by Wood∣street or the Poultry, without being catcht∣hold of. Where men sit at receit of Injury, and mourn at the Tranquility and Peace of Neighbours.
October's Observations. THis Mouth Themis appears again be∣fore the gods, for Astrologers say, There are Terms in Heaven, as well as upon Earth: Rhadamanth urged that men did ill to undertake the Defences of trivial and im∣modest Causes: that it was their Duty to tell their Clients the truth of their Causes, and to dehort them from Contention, rather than to encourage and exasperate people already by the Ears. That it was unusual to see Hominem solenni legis linteo velamine decoratum crouching to Inferiours: That it was not seemly to see Gentlemen hawking after the trivial defences of Baudery or infa∣mous Scolding; looking about as greedily after their Prey, as the Turks, on set days, gape for Mahomet. Pluto, alwayes feed in bad Causes, urg'd that they had paid large Sums for their places. But old Saturn ca∣sting a Sardonic smile upon him, call'd Pluto, Poltron and Bocca di Porco; for, said he, There is nothing arm's a Purchaser more with defence of unjust Dealings, than money given for an Employment, which makes Petty Courts, where Law is made to be like the Bush, to which while Sheep repair for
shelter, they are sure to loose a Fleece. Then Minos urged his Complaint, you may guess against whom, The very sweepings of the Nation, who after three or four times Break∣ing, thrust themselves into Varlet's Offices, to torment others, as they had been tormented before. But would men from daily Expe∣rience discover what Tricks they play, what Leiger-de-main they use, what juggling there is among them; it were an easie thing, by the Assistance of the Stars, to tell their For∣tunes, and prognosticate their Removal from all the publick places of the City, where their Attendance might be rationally dispen∣ced with.
November's Observations. THere shall be great Bickering in the Country about Under-sheriffs places, and there's Fifty pounds odds, according to the Humour of Venus; and then it goes hard with the Country Prisoners: for is it not Reason the poor Country-slaves should pay, when their Keepers petition for Relief? But they that buy dear must sell dear: and therefore 'tis a strange thing, how blind some people will be, for though they have a Writ in their Pockets, and the person walks just under their Noses, yet they cannot see him for their lives: which proceeds from a wonderful Conjunction of Sol and Luna in Palm of the Right hand. The Station of Sa∣turn in Sagittary foretells the Failing of ma∣ny Country Farmers: and their Credit is no sooner fly-blown, but the Magot-Bayliffs, are at their Tailes immediately. Now the poor Country People knowing no difference between Fiery Trigons, and Fieri faeas, Ca. Sa. and Ca. Dra. Excom. Cap. and Mar. in Sag. Take all to be Conjurers or Astrolo∣gers; especially when they finde them so truly Calculating the Fatal Destiny▪ of their
Estates; But which are best Conjurers or Returna Breviums they cannot say, But the Stars are just, for the Year's no sooner out, but they meet either with the Pipe Of∣fice, or Hell: where the first Punishment is to lie ten thousand years in the Sweat of their own Bayliff's toes.
December's Observations. SOme Charity is intended this Month by well disposed Persons for the Relief of poor Pris'ners in several Places: and some few of the Richer sort shall send Baskets of scraps to the poor people: the refuse of their pub∣lick Tables pretending it to be Charity. But Theseus and Piritheus denies it so to be: swearing by Pluto and Cerberus, that it is a Frantick Relick of the Number 666. to call it either Benevolence or Charity, for they say, That it can be no Charity to send the Orts and scambled Mammocks of a super∣fluous Table, that they knew not what in the world to do with else, especially when there is never a Bone that has not been su∣pervised and diligently corrected and amen∣ded above three or four times by the most elaborate Stomacks of the place. To tell ye the Truth on't, what strange Constellations did rule the Charity-basket in 74. we are not well able to say: however 'twas worth the seeing to take an Observation from thence, of the Dimensions of some mens Benevolence. Certain it was, that year was very severe, which caused many poor men to blaspheme one of the most noble Vir∣tues.
Charity ought to flow franck and free from the Kitchins of Publick Magi∣strates; their Scraps and Mammocks is no more than what the poor senseless Animal expects for his Service, and claims as his due. He that will be Charitable must Give, Give his own, and that which is wholesome and con∣venient: So that, he that only sends from his superfluous Banquets the Orts and Frag∣ments of other mens Contributions, may have the Honour to give Admittance to the Poors Basket, but never get the true Character of a Charitable person: for she is a most chast Vertue, and not to be adulterated by fictitious Imitations and Ostentations of Re∣alities. But what need so much Charity; when all the Prisons have their Foot-Posts running from place to place with Boxes and Petitions for the sake of Jesus Christ and the Good Time: But truly there are so many Heresies and Sects that care neither for Christ, nor his Good time neither, that the Trade of Begging for Christ's sake is hardly worth fol∣lowing now a dayes; and all Helps are lit∣tle enough, especially, when ye consider, That 'tis not a small thing that must main∣tain a proud Master and his Wife to boot.
ANATOMY of the Body. Ale and Head & Brains Brandy. Cravatta Neck & Throat Louzia, Short-pot Arms & shoulders Long-pot. Cursed Breast & stomach Mundungus Aurum Heart & Back Potabile. Clean sheets Bowels & Belly Fetherbeds. Thread-bare Reins & Loins Gowns. Gonorrh. Secret Members Fetida. Balneum Thighs Marie. Rub and Legs a good cast. Briba Feet Cerberum. Rules for Husbandry. SOw the seeds of Dissention from the first of January to the last of December. October, January, April, May and June. If thou hast a cunning Creditor to deal with, Set a Knave to catch a Knave, for those Months contain the usual Terms of the year. In Aprill and September gather thy Rent, and if thou hast a good Crop, make good use of it, for 'tis the best Flower in thy Gar∣den. At Mdsummer shear they Tenants
with new Leases, and at Michaelmas cut thy Coat according to thy Cloth. At Christ∣mas, when thou hast got Money in thy Poc∣ket, 'twill be good pruning of Taylor's Bills. In January, February and December, being idle Months, sow all thy wild Oats: In March, if thou hast a good Stock, set up for thy self: then be a good Husband, and thou shalt reap well for thy self. Have a care of letting Coneys burrough in thy Shop-book, 'twill be hard Ferreting them out again. Make Hay while the Sun shines; but have a care of thrusting thy Sickle into another man's Corn. Have a care, in a dear time, of parting with thy Hay, unless thou hast good store of Oats for it. He that has an expensive Wife, let him lop off her super∣fluous extravagancies at the beginning of the Year, least they grow in a short time past his Reach. Hearts-ease is a rare Flower, keep good store of it in thy Garden. And as for Flower gentle, a good Husband would not be without it that hath variety of Deal∣ings in the world. Ragwort, a Weed, keep it out of thy ground: But for Herb-grace, keep it all the year long if thou canst.
Eclipses. AN Eclipse is the Interposition of a Stone Dublet between a Man and the Street. When a man is first arrested and carried to the Hen and Chickens, or Rose and Crown, (to the unspeakable Scandal of the Law, at the Expence of 2 s. per night, for onely lodging, besides the continual Visits of Ser∣jeants, who, (like Physitians) seldome goe away empty) this is called a Half Eclipse. When a Man is hurried from thence for want of Money, into the Compter, or by Duce, to Ludgate, or elsewhere, by Hab. Corp. this is a Total Eclipse. Sol, or Man, may be eclipsed an hun∣dred several wayes; Women, or Luna, are not so generally e∣clipsed, and then they must be either Maids, Widdows, or sole Traders. Of both these Eclipses there will be some thousands this year, one with another.
But they shall be only visible in the proper Horizons, or Jayles where the Eclipsed Bo∣dies move. Yet some of these Eclipses shall become visible in Ethiopia, Persia, China, Barbado's, Virginia, and other remote parts, being such as have made escapes, or else withdrawn themselves by Connivance out of the Rules. Of the Houses of the Planets. January. HE that in Prison wants both Fire and Chink, Where had he better be, than there d' ye think? You'l say in Hell—for there's both heat and gold; Not so, for that's as hot, and this too cold. February. But better were he to be Stallion tame, To some (like Messalina) swinging Dame: For then exhausted, breaking Arm or Legg, For Ale and Capon he at length may beg.
March. Taylors trust not in March, or if ye doe, Be merciful like April, never sue; For March of April borrows, but nee'r pays, Yet April ne'er brought Action for her Days. April. Fathers must die; and then in happy hours, Just like the Month, their Heirs rain golden showrs: 'Tis for the Month, quoth they, to wash the Earth, Our tears are salt, and therefore little worth. May. Like to the Fields, young Gallants now ap∣pear As brisk and gaudy as the springing year. Their golden bags shine in their Tropick hight, Who ever then could think it should be Night. June. The Portion's coming, Fill the t'other quart, So is the Girl, powder on't, there's the smart: But hang't, as long as there's Cash i' this life, A Kennel of Whores is sawce for a Wife.
July. Squire, do you want another thousand pound? You may command it, Squire, on your own word:— I know your Father well, that's under ground, And therefore while it lasts, near spare my Hoard. August. Squire, 'Tis twelve Month now, since first, I lent; And men are mortal, pardon my intent, I only do't for something, Sir, to show; Not to make use of, Heaven above doth know. September. Sir, I've an Execution against ye—how— And ne'r arrested—We can't tell—'tis so— What's to be done?—Sir, here's a House hard by, A piece in hand—wee'l keep you privately.
October. What have ye seen your Friend yet? no—the Serjeant's mad— Y'are here so long—a Crown—and I'le perswade, There's one more Writ—We knew't not by my Soul; Another had it, we could not controul. November. Has the Dog serv'd me thus? to stay's no pur∣pose: Get me an Attorney, I'le have an Harpus Corpus; I'le sing i'th Bench a Boat, a boat, And I'le see the Rogue hang'd, 'Ere I pay him a groat. December. At length the man in Execution dyes, Like Tavern Guests, that reckning has de∣fraid; Ʋp comes the Drawer Death, and smartly cryes, Y'are kindly welcome, Gentlemen, all's paid.
The usual Fairs in England. At Layton-Buzzard, on St. Martin's day. THis Fair is altogether for Fools, viz. Those that bring their Hogs to a bad Market; those that buy and sell, and live by the loss: Those that have a mind to purchase false Heraldry, and St. Martin's Gentility. For Jaylor's Honesty. Prison-Cellar-mens Pride. Turn∣keys Knavery, Prisoner's Idleness, Shop∣keepers Prodigality, Prentises Falshood, Gentlemens Beggery, Gamester's Treachery, Chancery Suits, Jury-men's-Consciences, Phy∣sitians Ignorance, Pothecaries Learning, Cre∣ditors Mercy, Serjeants Piety, and Souldiers Religion. At Zeale in Devonshire. On Valentine's day. FOr Holy Sisters, mendicant Preachers, Schismaticks of all sorts and sizes, mu∣sical Parish-Clarks, Needy Curates, rich
Queristers, godly Fidlers, Ceremonious Quakers, humble Dancing Masters, Trusty Chamber maids, and chast Whores: Seve∣ral Wares are likewise here to be sold, as Foxe's Works, Naylor's Last Will and Testa∣ment, Durants sweet Sippets of Consolation: New Lights of Four i'the pound, Geneva Coif's and cross-cloths, set forms of night Dis∣course among the Brethren. For Shoos that will tye of themselves: For Looking-glasses with Fancies ready set, as if Butter would not melt in their Mouths. Cordials for weak Speakers. Barrels of Pickled Non-sence for Strong Holders forth. Opiums to procure Repentance, Wash balls for sin; and many more Trinkets of the same nature. At Euill in Summersetshire, on St. Judas's day. FOr Knights of the Post, Kings Bench-li∣berty Fleet-Oaths, fobb'd City actions, Sheriffs-court pleadings: King's Bench, Fleet and Compters Offices. Caps for the Memo∣ry made of Prisners skuls that dyed in Exe∣cution; for Dispensations, for Perjury, and in brief for all sorts of Knaves in grain.
At Maiden▪Bradly in Wiltshire. FOr Crack'd Virgins, Expensive Wives, theevish Nurses, Portionless Matches, riotous sons, undutiful daughters, Claps, Go∣norrhea's and Suburb-Quacks. At Dunstable in Bedford shire. FOr all sorts of Cattel, as Bull-pated Country Pettyfoggers, Goatish Clerks, Bear-Bayliffs, Bore-Serjeants, Lyon-like Plantiffs, Sheepish Defendants, Fox-like Conveyancers, Litigious Asses, Dromedary Proctors, and Pack-horse Promoters, Fox∣skins for Scriveners, and Badgers-sur for Usurers. Horn-Fair, at Charlton in Knt, on St. Luke's day. STallions of all Sorts, Coachmen, and Gentlemen-Ushers for great Ladies; Monkeys and Island-Curs for private Uses, Licences for Poligamy; Cures for crack'd maiden-heads; Remedies for weak Backs, Complaints, Excuses and Pretences for all
sorts of Women; treacherous Midwives, Nurses for Bastards at small rates. Forms of Bonds for putting off Children. Speedy helps for Barrenness, Cloaks for Adulteresses; with twenty more Knicknacks of the same Nature.
FINIS.
