P1519 [ocm]12184426 197044
A perfect RELATION OF The taking of the Towne of Preston IN LANCASHIRE, By the PARLJAMENTS Forces under the Command of Colonell Sir John Seaton on Thursday the ninth day of February, 1642. As it was certified by some Gentlemen of re∣pute in the same County to a Member of the House of COMMONS, with the names of those that were slain. Together, with very good nevvs from CHESHIRE. ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Let∣ter be forthwith printed and published. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the Middle Temple. Febr. 16. 1642.
A perfect Relation of the taking of the Town of Preston in Lancashire, &c. Good Sir, OUr due respects premised, I have of∣ten mentioned a Designe, but now praised be God, there is one acted, the happy successe and victory the Lord of Hosts hath given our Lancashire Forces: Upon Munday last Sir John Seaton (the Major Generall) marched from this Town, attended with Serjeant Major Sparrow, Colonell Holland, Cap. Booth, Serjeant Major Birch, with them three Foot-companies, & as many from Boul∣ton, all these came to Blackburn, upon Tuesday night, thence marched along
with them, four or five Foot-companies of Blackburn Hundred, under the com∣mand of Captain Nowell of Mearely, and other Captains towards Preston, to∣gether with two thousand club-men up∣on VVednesday night, and betimes the next morning they fell upon the Towne couragiously, and after about two hours fight they entered it, Capt. John Booth first entered, behaving himselfe most bravely, there was a great strife between Collonell Hollands company and Capt. John Booths which should first have en∣trance; The Major Generall behaved himself gallantly at the end of the Church∣street, where the entry was made; our Musquiets beat them from their cente∣ryes and from the Steeple. There dyed of the Popish party, the Major of the Town, (Master Adam Morte) who kil∣led
one of the Collonells men with push of his Pike, but afterwards lost his own life for it, together with his son, & also M. Radcliff Hoghton Captain of the horse (and brother to Sir Guilbert Hoghton) Serjeant Major Purvey (lately come out of Jreland) and the Popish Doctor, Dr. Westby, with two or three Lievtenants and others more of quality are likewise slain, and divers others which I saw were mortally wounded, and to some procured Surgeons, Sir Guilbert Hoghton escaped by flight to Wigom, and what more I can∣not tell, Captain Farrington and Captain Preston are brought Prisoners yester∣night: old Master Anderton of Clayton (their great Popish commander) is taken, Master George Talbot, (Sir John Talbots son) Master Richard Fleetwood, Master Blundells, Mr. Abbott, Mr. Mawdesly,
two Thomas Hoghtons, Captain Hoghton, (Sir Guilberts Nephew) Ralph Shorrock, John Hylton, and divers others of mea∣ner qualitie, above two hundred, and your Cousin Master Townly of Tovvnly escaped narrovvly. My Lady Hoghton, my Lady Gir∣lington, and Mrs. Townly vvere also ta∣ken as prize: VVe tooke three pieces of Ordnance, a murdering piece, a great number of Musquiets, and many horses vvith tvvo or three colours, and divers vvere pillaged to a purpose, fevv friends have suffered to any value; there vvere but tvvo Barrells of povvder found in the Tovvn, VVe had only three or four common Souldiers, not an Officer slain on our side, vve gave the enemy no lei∣sure to anoy us vvith their Guns our en∣try vvas so quick, and the execution done
was most with the sword: all the Companies except Captain Nowells stayes there, and I thinke does intend to Garrison that Town; the fruits of this successe are a large contribution out of the adjacent parts for maintenance of our forces, and an interuption of the passage from Newcastle to Chester and Shrewsbury, of what further concern∣ment it is to our Countrey I need not relate to you, and in what sort it will be good for the Kingdom you are able to conceive; Upon our fasting and praying on Wednesday last, God hath given us this victory. Deo detur Gloria. From Chester very good news, Master Lee of Aldington hath left his home, his Tennants, Friends, and arms, are now for the Militia, they beat our new Earl and all those Popish ones eve∣ry day in some place, driving them from hold to hold, and killing with good successe: I pray you thanke God for us, and pray we may pro∣ceed with successe, and that we may heare good news from your parts; which shall be the dai∣ly task of Your loving friends to serve you. Manchester this 10th of Feb: 1642.
You are desired to hasten the money, and what other supplies you can. Major Sparrow denyes all hath been spoken in his commendation, he hath wholly surprized and taken the good affections of all our Coun∣try Gentlemen who are Captains, whereof I am right glad, he acted his part in this, and the con∣triving thereof very well, nor do I know that a∣ny man was defective in his duty, but all very couragious. The Ladyes and Gentlewomen of note found here, are guarded. 14. Febr: 1642. IT is Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Letter bee forthwith Printed and published. H: Elsynge, Cler: Parl: D: Com. FINIS.
