R550b 816.m.16[29] R225198 99885926 188530
Reasons humbly offered to the Consideration of Parliament, against the passing of a Bill, Intituled, An Act for the better Preservation of the Wood in DEANE-Forrest, so far as it relates to the Inclosure of the Moorish Land, called Wall¦moore. I. BEcause many of the Free-holders within the Perambulation of the said Forrest, whose Habitations are adjoyning to Wallmoore, and whose right of Common there is undeniable; as also many other Persons who time out of mind have enjoyed Common of Herbage there, will be greatly prejudi∣ced, and many of them who now live well, if Wallmoore be Inclosed must inevitably be ruined, and necessarily fall upon the Parishes adjacent for maintenance; which will be an insuperable burthen to the Hun∣dred of St. Brevill's, in which there are above Forty Families (that borders upon Wallmoore, and have no other Common within four miles of them,) that will be great sufferers if the Inclosure desired should be per∣mitted. II. The Inclosing of the said Lawn is contrary to the main scope and intent of the late Act of Parlia∣ment, Intituled, An Act for the Increase and Preservation of Timber within the Forrest of Deane, and for the Inclosing of 11000 Acres thereof, which expresses that such ground shall be Inclosed as is most apt and meet to produce Wood and Timber for the future benefit of the Kingdom, and may be best spared from the use of the Commoners. For, first, This Act declares this Lawn altogether unfit for the producing of Wood or Timber. And secondly, This Wallmoor cannot be spared from the use of the Commoners, without the grea∣test mischief to them imaginable, sending them above five miles for Common, who have it now lying at their doors, and taking from them more in value by Inclosing this 250 Acres than the taking away of 1000 Acres in any other part of the Forrest (more proper to answer the design of the former Act) will do. Besides, there are the Free-holders and Tenants of the Manour of Rodleigh, who have undoubted right of Common in all parts of the said Forrest. And although Prima facie the Inclosure of Wallmoore seems only to concern a few borderers thereon, yet duly consider'd it will appear prejudicial to the whole Forrest for above 1000. head of Gattel, as Horses, Oxen, Cows, &c. now kept upon that Moor, will be thrown upon the Forrest if Wallmoor be Inclosed. III. It is conceived altogether unnecessary to enclose the said Lawn for the uses in the Bill mentioned: For that the Act for Inclosing the 11000 Acres hath in express words made Provision for defraying the Charge of making and maintaining the said Inclosures, And the Provision thereby made is sufficient for ever (if duly ordered) to raise 150 l. per Ann. for the uses in this Bill mentioned. There being vast quantities of old de∣cay'd Wood and Timber (no way fit for Shipping), that prudently managed and carefully cut by degrees every year, will easily raise the money desired by this Bill without doing any prejudice. IIII. There is some Reason to suspect a design of some Persons to make a private advantage of this Inclo∣sure desired. For that this Lawn (when Inclosed) will be worth at least double the Rent of 150 l. per Ann. Intended to be reserved; besides, will raise money to Answer all the Charge of the Inclosure. And it would be very hard to take from the Country 400 l. per Ann. to Answer the Charge only of 150 l. Per Ann. Upon the whole matter, It will be somewhat severe upon the Country if after 11000 Acres of their Common is enclosed by their Consent for a National good; the same Parliament (that took Care such Inclo∣sure should be with least prejudice to their Common) should now by a subsequent Act without their Consent take away the best of their Common: especially, I. Because the same is not fit for Timber which was the end of enclosing the said 11000 Acres. II. Because it is supposed the full 11000 Acres is already enclosed, were the enclosure measured by the Pole measure. III. For that there is a way already provided for Answering the Charge of Maintaining the Inclosures. IIII. If there were not such provision yet is there no necessity of Inclosing Wallmoore; for there are other Lawns within the Inclosures made (to wit) in Kannop, Wttewood and other places, on which no Timber will ever grow, which if separated would raise the 150 l. Per Ann. desired, without prejudice to any mens right of Common or the Kings Inclosures.
