R1940b c.112.f.9[11] R231206 99888591 195816
Rose's Balsamick ELIXIR. THis is the most Noble Medicine that Art can produce; it's incomparable Virtues being such, that it gives or restores to Nature what's wanting, and takes away what's hurtful; in so much, that 'tis scarce possible that a temperate Man can want his Health, that makes use of this my Physical Secret. It cures all defects of the Sto∣mach, Lungs and Bowels, and helps the Wind and Stone Colick in a most wonderful manner; as also the Jaundice, Dropsy, Scurvy, Rheumatism, and all Obstructions of the Kidneys and Ʋreters, and dissolyes and brings away Gravel plentifully: And for Yound Women, it helps all that are troubled with the Green Sicknss to a Miracle, bringing to them what's convenient, causing a healthful Countenance and a lively Humour, keeping the Spirits in true Temper. It quickens all the Senses, and gives Life a Vigour even to Old Age: It is so great a Restorative, that for Consumptive Persons, there is not such another Preparation in the whole World; and indeed to speak in few words, if it be taken out of a Fever, I know not how any Distemper can do an Injury, it opening and strengthning all the Faculties of the Body, giving immediate Relief in Stitches and the Pleurisy, and cures all Wounds, both inward and outward. It prevents the Small Pox, being taken once or twice a week most infallibly; for no Malignity must or can inhabit where this is present, in Man or Womans Body. And after all, give me leave to inform you of one or two Vir∣tues more, which are these: It cures the English Frenchify'd, beyond all the Medicine upon the Face of the Earth; for it removes all Pains of that kind in 3 or 4 Doses in∣fallibly, and so proceeding for a small season, makes any Man tho' as rotten as a Pear, to be as sound as a Sucking Lamb, and who ever trys it on my word, shall have just reason to thank me, as well as pay me. Experience will tell you more than I can say, in the praise of this my Balsamick Elixir. It cures the Palsie, or shaking of the Hands to admiration, and all pains of the Limbs, if it be of a considerable time stand∣ing; and whoever trys it for any of these Causes, will never be without it ready in their House. This Elixir is best in the coldest time of the Year to be taken. I have also a Preparation that takes away all Pimples and Redness of the Face to ad∣miration, never failing, and is an extraordinary Medicine for the Eyes; it makes the Skin of the Face smooth, and without Wrinkles, and preserves the Complection; it helps all Breakings out, let it proceed from what Cause soever. I likewise help all defects of the Eyes, and have an Eye Liquor that takes away all imperfections of the Sight, and not only preserves it, but strengthens those Spirits and Parts which give you Sight; and takes away any Spot on the Eye at  or twice Dressing. I have also an Infallible Cure for the Piles, Ʋlcer, or Fistula in the Fuament. I cure all sorts of Fluxes of Blood in Man or Woman to admiration: And have a Plaster that cures all Inflamed Breasts, giving ease to a Miracle; and cures the Rickets and Worms in Children, with a Pouder that purges very finely without Gri∣ping. And as I have set no value on any thing here mentioned, you may be better satisfyed if you please to come or send to me, at my Lodgings at Mr. Hamptons a Joyner, in Hewits-Court near St. Martin's Church in the Strand.
