S119C_VARIANT 99833524 207913
MODERATION'S COMMENDATION, IN A PARABLE. Wherein is set forth the Life, Death, and Resurrection of MODE∣RATION; Together with her Nativity, Country, Pedigree, Kindred, Character, Friends and Enemies. Moderation shall revive. Extremity shall cease. Disobedience stoop to Reason; all end in Peace. London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns neer Mercers Chappel in Cheapside, 1674.
TO HIS HONOURED FRIENDS T. E. J. B. and H. S. ESQUIRES, The Translatour wisheth all Health. Gentlemen, I Find this follow∣ing discourse was written many a day ago by Hesychius
Pamphilus, in the native Language of Feliciana (a Language peculiar to that Island.) And because there are not many Copies of it, and the Language it self not much understood, but by such as have been bred and born in that Island, or have travelled thither, I thought good to translate it for the common benefit or delight of our Coun∣try-men.
The Story is not long, and in some things parallel to our present times, there∣fore did I judge the Tran∣slation more seasonable. If any reap either benefit or delight by reading of it, I reckon my pains more then requited. And for your selves, Gentlemen, if you shall please to own it as a testimony of singular re∣spect to you (after that to the Publick) I shall super-add
that to the other En∣gagements upon him, who is, Gentlemen, Yours to serve you, N. S.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. TO the Courteous or Curious Reader, all Moderation. The like to all by-standers,
Hearers, Examiners, and Censurers of this discourse; and but one thing more, viz. To make this your Mode∣ration known to all men, ('tis Apostolical) that with whomsoever you converse, you commend, promote, pro∣pagate and countenance it; then have I as many Licen∣sers (as I need;) so many Rea∣ders, so many Licensers, who though they subscribe not to the Letter, yet do concur
with the Spirit of this Trea∣tise. Then what happy Times! no more Swords, but Plough-shares; nor Spears, but Pruning-hooks; then no more jars, divisions, dissenti∣ons, schisms, or heart-burn∣ings, but the voice of the Turtle shall be heard in our Land, and the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace in the Church. Then shall you not need to enquire where Feliciana
is, we shall have it here: Est hic, est Ulubris, animus si te non deficit aequus. Nor yet to enquire what this Hesychius Pamphilus was, for I can promise for him, being in my younger dayes as well acquainted with his Spirit and Temper as any one. That he was one who would not willingly of∣fend any one, no not the worst
Sons of Disobedience here spoken of, but to desire they might all be reduced to the wisdom of the Just: And that by Disobedience here described, he meant not any who in controverted Points do soberly and peace∣ably dissent, Omnes hic veniam peti∣mus{que} damus{que} vicissim. But only such as are di∣sturbers
of the Civil Peace; and for such, Moderation her self hath not a word to say, but hath in readiness the weapons of her warfare, to revenge all such Disobedi∣ence. Nor did he in speaking of Extremity, Politicus, or a∣ny other, intend any reflexi∣on upon any particular Per∣son or Persons whatsoever, but had the same design with the wise Tekoitess, who
fetcht about a form of words, in a Parabolical strain, only to reduce the Lords banished, and to pre∣vent the putting out the Coal of Israel, the Sacred Coal of Religion and Peace. Now Reader, if thou carest neither for Hesychi∣us, nor Pamphilus, nor the Translator neither, if thou art but for Moderation, I have enough, and shall love thee, and thank thee, yea,
give thee the publick thanks of the Nation. And then have a Com∣mission to invite thee to a meeting with some of Mo∣derations Friends, to con∣gratulate her up-rising, and the hopes of her Churching in due time, where we shall be merry, and more then that, thankful; and the Dishes we shall provide are but two great standing Dishes; the one, the largest
that can be, of the greatest thankfulness to Almighty God for his Mercy; and the other, as near that as may be, of heartiest thanks to his Majesty, for his Gra∣cious Indulgence, and Roy∣al Clemency; and after both, one sober draught in a friendly Cup, called Po∣culum Charitatis, which we desire may go round the whole Nation.
Now, Reader, go on, or farewel. Thine N. S.
THE HISTORY OF MODERATION. CHAP. I. The Country, Pedigree, Parentage, Kinred and Acquaintance of Moderation. MODERATION, how∣soever she hath of later dayes lived obscurely, as a Stranger to most Nations of the Earth, and altogether unknown
to not a few, is descended of a very an∣cient and honourable Family, famous for their Piety and Loyalty; She came out of the holy Land, was born at Arimathea, of the most Honourable Family in that City, and of the Sena∣torian Dignity. A Family which brought forth more Saints then all the world be∣sides; all the holy Prophets of old, and the blessed Apostles, sprang out o it; and very near in bloud she was, and intimately acquainted with those ma∣ny Worthies famed in ancient Story whose Race is almost wholly worn out since, to wit, famous Ʋrban, Pudens Clemens, Justus, Aristobulus (an excel∣lent Statesman and a Privy Councel∣lour) Aristarchus (a great and gra∣cious Prince) and Fortunatus a happy and experienced General) Saints a in the Primitive Calender: As als with those of her own Sex, the Lady Dorcas, the Lady Elect, and her Siste Elect (whose names I do not now re¦member) so well known, and so muc honoured by the beloved Disciple
and Saint Lydia, Saint Priscilla, Saint Damaris, Saint Tryphaena, and her Sister Saint Tryphosa, and Saint Claudia (sup∣posed to be our Country-woman:) But all of them unquestioned Saints in the first Primitive Calender, before any of those were Canonized, whose names fill up our present Calen∣ders. Many great Personages besides de∣sired acquaintance with her, and some claimed Kinred of her; as first the Lady Pilate, but it was afar off, who privately sent word to the Lord De∣puty her Husband, sitting President in he High Court of Justice (as then alled) that he should in no hand pro∣ceed to the condemnation of the Pri∣oner then at the Bar, whatsoever hould come of it, though he lost his place upon it. And King Agrippa, who was much urther off, who though he fouly dis∣iked the bandying against Moderation, et he spake but one word, and that ut faintly, in favour of the cause, and was but almost perswaded to counte∣nance
it. Doctor Gamaliel was th nearest of the three, and spake more i her behalf, to stop the further prosecu¦tion against her for a time, and so di help her out. But Tertullus the Sollicitor, was a pestilent Adversary (whether, as o said, Avaritiae magis quam maliti causa, I will not determine) and spent all his Oratory and Rhetoric to make her as black and odious as could. The place of her birth was Arim¦thea (as I said before) and is the san with that which was called Ramah old, where was the first Academy Divine Students, and the ancient Colledge that was for the sons of t Prophets, whereof Samuel was Pres¦dent; and the self same City, where b¦fore him Deborah, that renown Princess, and first Queen Regent, ke her Court. There was she born. Her Fathers name was Seignior Gr¦vity: Her Mothers, Matron Sagac (a Woman of few words, but gre understanding.) And a happy Co¦ple
they were, and of ancient and ho∣nourable Extractions. Gravity's Fa∣ther was a Grandee of State, an Ho∣nourable Privy Counsellor, lived and dyed at Arimathea, his name Joseph, whose Genealogy may be fetcht from the Second Adam, it was so high, so holy, and so ancient; his Father Ben Hagios, sirnamed Bar-Jonah, he the Son of David, he the Son of Abraham, he the Son of Noah, he the Son of Enoch, he the Son of Seth, he the Son of Adam the Second, he the undoubted Son of God, and the first-born of every Creature: He it was that in open Court, when that first High Court of Injustice was set to arraign and condemn the most Innocent Person that ever was, and their Sacred Soveraign besides, the Lords Annointed, perswaded and pres∣sed, with all his might, to stay that bloudy Sentence from being pronoun∣ced and executed, which, as he then told them, might sooner be repented hen recalled, and would set all the Na∣tion a bleeding; and when he saw he
could not be heard, he entred his Pro∣testation, arose from the Bench, and withdrew with much detestation from their Assembly, with whom h would not have his Honour united nor his Loyalty and Conscience stain∣ed. Sagacity's Ancestors were Church∣men; some of them had been presen at the first and best Synod that eve was called together, met purposely fo Accommodation, where all unanimousl voted no Imposition of things burden¦som to Conscience, and agreed to pa a very few Canons, enjoyning onl some things necessary, whereby th Peace of the Church was then happi¦ly settled. The Children did not at all degene¦rate from their Parents, but as the had been vertuously brought up, s they lived together as sweetly, no being married till of full age, an good understanding; and as their Fa¦thers had been, each of them, th glory of their respective Professi¦ons, so were the Children th
glory and joy of their Parents. But it happening after a certain time, that Persecution wasting on the one hand, and desolating Armies on the other over-running all, their Native Country grew too hot for them to abide in: Therefore were they forced to seek out some more safe and quiet habitation; and having travel∣led many Countries, but finding no such, where they might quietly settle, they came at last to a certain Island, called Feliciana, by others corruptly, Elysiana; an Island nearest the Ae∣quator of any other, yet not under the Equinoctial line; that being an errour which our times have corrected, the just Aequator not being where dayes and nights are of equal length, but where the Inhabitants minds and spi∣rits are equally affected each to other, therefore by some called the Aequi-animal, or Aequi-amicitial line, by others the Aequi-scriptural line, more easie to be found in the new Coelestial Globe, then in the old Terrestrial; there did they plant themselves and
their Family. A very fertile Isle it is and seated in a most temperate Clime there being no extremity of heat or cold; blessed with a happy Govern∣ment and Laws, squared many o them to a Conformity to Divine Pre¦cepts, others suited to the condition o the people, in order to publick good No where is a Deity more honoured a Prince more beloved, a people mor happy, and peaceably disposed. Then they usually live to a great age, and i much health and plenty, and dye no till they are full of dayes. The tem∣perateness of the Clime may be easily conjectured, if you consider the scitua¦tion of it, it being seated just in th very middle Degree of Latitude, and in the very utmost and most remote degree of Longitude from the Meridi∣an of Rome. Thither, I say, came this Family, and there seated themselves, and there had they the Children which they had, of whom we shall speak; whose History being many a day ago written in the native Language of that Island, is
here transcribed and translated out of the Original, for the benefit or delight of our own Country. CHAP. II. Of the two Brethren of Mode∣ration. THe Parents had but a few Chil∣dren, though they lived long to∣gether, to a great age; never had but two Sons (and they Twins) and one only Daughter, of whom this Dis∣course chiefly relates. The name of the elder was Philodike, or Love-Ju∣stice, a rare Patriot, and excellent Statesman: of the other Philotheos, a true friend to Religion, and as eminent a Clergy-man. They were Twins, as I said, and so alike, that you could not know the one from the other: Both were nur∣sed
by their own Mother Sagacity, o like feature, stature and disposition alwayes bred up together, equally be¦loved of their Parents, and (whic is rare to be found among Brethren i these dayes) no emulation or unkind¦ness in the earth, but alwayes inti love and firm agreement to their dy¦ing day; whatsoever pleased or di¦pleased the one, did the same to th other; they both joyed and grieve together, liked and disliked alike, by strange and rare simpathy of natur and affection: They lived both to b good old men, and dyed both toge¦ther, immediately after their Siste Moderation (even the self-same Day and all three buryed in one and rh same Grave. The Mother, if she might have ha the name, would have had the elde called Philotheos, and bred a Divine because her father was so; but he Husband perswaded her, and she pre∣sently yielded to have the younger s called, adding withall, that it could be no disparagement to him, to have th
elder called Philodike, for otherwise, said he again, it were but small honour or comfort to me, to give the name of Religion and Love to God, if there were not first had a respect to Justice and Righteousness. But it made no matter which was which, for not only their age, habit and complexion were alike, but their disposition too, so that you had not been much mistaken, or at all called them out of their names, if you had called either of them Philodike, or Philotheos; for Philodike, the Lover of Justice, was as true a Friend to Reli∣gion as Philotheus himself was; and Philotheos, the Lover of God and Re∣ligion, was as much for Justice and Righteousness as his Brother was.
CHAP. III. The Birth and Breeding of Mo∣deration. THey had but one Sister between them, her name was Moderation (born to her Parents when they were well in years:) And she bred up at home, and nursed by her Mother Sa∣gacity, who, with Seignior Gravity the Father, had instilled into her the chief Principles of Religion, Morality and Prudence, and she so apt and appre∣hensive withall, to conceive and re∣tain (whatsoever she heard or read was all her own presently:) And besides it was observed in her, she would oft ask such Questions, and make such Queries, to understand the reason of things that seemed high, or doubtful and obscure (but still things
pertinent and serious) as was to be wondered at in a Woman, and of her age especially: Neither did she ever trouble her head about Niceties and Impertinencies, that it was verily con∣ceived she could give as good satisfa∣ctlon in most points of Religion and Practice as most Divines; and in mat∣ters of Prudenee, and right State-Po∣licy, few Statesmen could go beyond her: So that it was said, of all hands, of her when she was young, that she must be married, either to some emi∣nent Statesman, or Churchman, for she would make an excellent Wife for either, and accordingly it fell out, for she was married to two such, one after the other, as you will hear a∣non.
CHAP. IV. Of Experience, Aunt to Modera∣tion, her Husband, Children, Character and Employment, and how Moderation was bred in her School. I Might have informed you also, that Sagacity had an elder Sister, called Experience, a very wise, know∣ing and vertuous Woman, and she liv∣ed to a very great age, in so much as she was commonly call'd Old Experi∣ence: But she had gone through a world of troubles as ever any did (inward and outward) for many years, much sick∣ness, many crosses in the world, yet would she still say, all were for her good. And the least was not in her Hus∣band, to whom she was married very
young; his name Philantos (he loved himself, and cared for no body else) a great Gallant he was, and newly come of age, and of a fair Estate; but a wilfull and heady young man he was, and must not be contradicted nor counselled neither: He would never hearken to the advice of his Wife Experience till all was gone; He was many times hasty and unkind to his Wife besides, when any thing had crossed him, and this was a great cut to her. But at last she, by her wisdom and fair carriage, wrought a great change in him; so that people would often say, See by Experience, what may not a wise Woman bring a bad Husband to in time? The Good Gill may mend the Bad Jack. She had by him many Children, three Sons, and as many more Daugh∣ters: The three Sons first, whose names were, Philedonos, Misoponos, and Asotos, all three too like the Fa∣ther. Philedonos was all for play and his pleasure; a dainty and delicate youth
he was, and his Father had spoiled him, by making a very Wanton of him and he must be a Gentleman becaus the eldest. Misoponos was put to a Trade, but deadly lazy Boy he was, very dull a learning, and hardly brought to settl to any thing, or stay with any Ma¦ster. Asotos was worst of all, a prodiga vain he had in spending whatever h could wrap and rend, and good at no¦thing in the Earth but stroying. When many saw these young Lad and beheld their carriage, they sai it was not for nothing that that Pro¦verb was raised, Experientia Mai Stultorum, that is, Experience is th Mother of Fools. But all three at la having well smarted for their folly and being well taught by their Mo¦ther, Dear Experience (she took a wor of pains with them first) they wer much reclaimed. But her Daughters proved all sin¦gularly good. The first was Proba¦tion; she had endured much, an
had been exercised with many temp∣tations. The second Patience, a very meek, quiet and submissive a Creature as lived, never murmuring, fretting, or discontented. And the third Diligence, a mighty active and handy body, and so willing and desirous to please, as you never saw the like. These three she had pretty thick one after the other in her younger dayes, and stay'd a fair while ere she ad any more; in so much that many hought she would have had no more Children: And all these three ent through much hardship; you might, if you had looked wishly on hem, have discerned somewhat of Care in their very Countenances, for he Mother had been under several roubles all the while she went with hem; And they had all of them a
spice of Melancholy, and were trou∣bled with the Hypocondriack wind, which they after rubbed out, and then grew very healthful, and lived all o them comfortably. After these three, Probation, Pati∣ence and Diligence, were a little grown up, she had three other goodly Chil∣dren: Hope the first, after her Confi∣dence, and last of all Assurance: These she had not so thick as the other three, but she stay'd a fair while be∣tween Hope and Confidence, and some∣what longer ere she had Assurance These three last made Experience a joyful Mother, and crowned her late dayes with much happiness, and they were as happy for their part in their Mother: Tender Children all thre when young, and had never grow up, if their own Mother had not care∣fully nursed them: But when grown, they were of an excellent Complexi∣on, and rare Constitution, ever health∣ful, and so chearful, that they wer never known to have an ill day, o
look with a sad Countenance: Nay, the Mother never had an ill fit all the while she went with Hope, Confidence and Assurance, as she had formerly had with all her other Children: Yea, it is thought she lived the longer for them; and they were such good Chil∣dren, and so tender of their Mother, that they eased her of all troubles, so that she was never troubled with any earthly business after, but lived as if she had been in Heaven already, no Creature in all the world so happy as she. Her wild Husband Philautos, hav∣ing now made away all his Estate, and his Wives Portion too, was at last fain to live upon his Wives care and ains; and she maintained him and all her Children very comfortably. She taught a School, and was excel∣ently qualified for that Employment;  mighty judicious and solid Person he was; a great and diligent Obser∣er she had been of whatever memo∣rable
matters she had read, or had oc¦curred in her time: She was univer¦sally read, I suppose, in all Historie whatsoever, Ecclesiastical or Civil Ancient or Modern; she had all th Chronicles of the Kings of the Lan and all the remarkable Accidents ar Occurrents that had happened in the several Reigns, ad unguem, besid what she had furnisht her self with her own Collections and Observa¦ons for many years; and she had most rare memory. She could tell you by variety Examples, and plenty of Instanc what had made Princes happy or u¦fortunate, what would make a Co¦monwealth flourish or decay; w would raise or ruine a Family, w would settle or disturb the Churc peace: In a word, you could har put that to her, which she could satisfie you in; she could tell y who, or what, was like to thrive miscarry; what Match was like prove well or ill: And her Judgme seldom failed.
She had an Aphorisme, which was frequently and familiarly in her mouth, and call'd it an infallible Ma∣xime, by which you might ghess at what was future by what was past, which, she said, she had from the Pen of a matchless Prince, a man of the deepest insight, and greatest wisdom and observation in the world, and was this, That which hath Been will Be, and there is nothing new under the Sun. With her Moderation had much of her breeding, besides what she had had put to her by her Father Gravity, and her Mother Sagacity; and careful she was to treasure up her Aunt Experi∣ences Aphorismes and Dictates as so many Jewels of Gold; yea, in every matter of moment she would still come and advise with her Aunt Experience, to her dying day, for she long out-lived Moderation. Moreover, Philodike and Philothes, the two Brothers, were wont, at every
breaking up at School, to come an spend their time with her; yea, afte they had been at the University, the would often come and visit her, an they thought their time well spe while they were with her: Th would often confess, they had lear that from her mouth, which th might have looked for long enoug in their Books, and not have m withall: Yea, when they were a¦vanced to that greatness, whereof shall tell you more anon, they wou familiarly come to her for advice a counsel, and this made the one so ha¦py and accomplisht a Statesman, a the other a Divine. She had not, as was thought some, much of Learning or Lang¦ges, knew none but her Mothe tongue: But she had read most of t Writings of the Divines, and of t Histories of her own Country o and over, and had them perfect: A she did constantly back her Prece with such choice and pregnant Exa¦ples,
that made such impression in her Schollers, as that her Dictates were look'd upon as Authentick Demon∣strations, or Probatums at least; and Ipse dixit was never more current in the old Philosophers School, then ipsa dixit, or Experientia docuit, was in hers; yea, Experientia docuit went for currant Authority all the Land over. Very famous she was for the great good she did in teaching, and indeed she excelled all other School-masters and Mistrisses whatsoever, so that she was by some, for a singular Gift she had in teaching above all others, by way of Honour and Eminency, styled, Experientia Magistra Stultorum, Ex∣perience the Mistress of Fools, because where none else could do good of them she could; but by most she was styled, Magistra Sapientum, the Mi∣stress of the wisest. But to be sure all were the better that came under her Education and Instruction; and this was an Observation that was general∣ly
taken of her Schollers, That they alwayes were better Livers, then those who had been taught only by Book. Moderation was bred up in her School, as I said, and profited much, was the most plyable Scholler she had in all the School, and therefore she took the more delight to discourse with her, read her many a long Le∣cture: She would sometimes take her in private with her into her Closet, and say to her, Moderation, thou art my near Kinswoman, I love thy very name, I would there were more of it; and next to my three youngest Daughters, Hope, Confidence and As∣surance, so necessary to my Salvation, I love thee as well as any Child I have, and above any other mortal Creature whatsoever; thy name and nature being so full of benignity and beneficialness to all mankind, because so full of charity, which brings us Mortals on Earth to the nearest affi∣nity with those Immortals in Heaven;
and should I ever have another Daughter, I would call her by thy name. Moderation, I will tell thee what I have observed, and know to be most certain; Thy Ancestors have been blessings to Mankind in all Ages, and in whatsoever Coun∣tries they have lived, have honour∣ed God, preserved Peace, secured States, prevented Commotions, suppressed Insurrections, united Hearts, strengthened Hands, con∣firmed Love, rooted out Discord, countenanced Piety, cherished Loy∣alty, protected Innocency, settled the Church, secured Religion, pre∣vented Schismes, extirpated Here∣sies, enacted wholsom Laws, esta∣blisht Commonwealths, enriched the lower World with the highest blessings of Heaven, Peace, Joy, Ʋni∣ty and Concord, and with the best of earthly blessings, Love, Friendship, Plenty and Prosperity. Oh! how good and joyful it is, to see Brethren
dwell together in Unity, cemente together with the Spirit of tru Christian Moderation! Let me advise thee, my Child said she, to hearken to old Experi∣ence; If thou lovest thy life, an desirest to see good dayes, refra thy Tongue from evil, and thy Li from speaking guile; eschew ev and do good, seek peace and ens it: follow Peace with all men an Holiness: Be sure thou follow hi who said, learn of me that I a meek and lowly: Get that meek an quiet Spirit, which is said to be so great price with God: Hono the King, obey Principallities a Powers; speak evil of no man, mu less of Dignities; clothe thy s with humility, meekness and ino¦fensiveness; and be sure to reme¦ber thy own old short Lesson, I thy moderation be known to all me be not high-minded, envy no ma greatness; study to be quiet, and do thy own business; fly, as t
most dangerous disease, and most in∣fectious Pest to a State, that itching and bewitching evil, called Polyprag∣mosyne, in our Language, pragmatical∣ness, the fatal break-neck of many and many: Avoid Contentions, de∣test Schismes; conjure down by faithful prayer, self-denial, and all other honest means, that evil spi∣rit of Division, Censoriousness and Superciliousness: Mark them that cause Divisions and avoid them: Have no commerce with wicked∣ness, and the rebellious sons of Belial, those of a fiery and turbulent spi∣rit; in no hand meddle with them who are given to innovations and change; pray for all, and do good to all, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty; learn to bear and forbear: whosoever saith a Confederacy, say not thou a Confederacy, but let inte∣grity and uprightness preserve thee; remember him, who watched over himself, when he saw others watch∣ed over him, that they might not
take him tardy in any matter of the Kingdom: and who then will harm thee, if thou followest that which is good? But if thou meetest with trouble when thou doest well, re∣member who said, it is better, if the will of God be so, to suffer for well doing then for evil, and whose Le∣gacy that was, In the world you shall have trouble, but in me peace: But be sure you never suffer as an evil doer, or busie-body in other mens matters: then trust in God, and take his promise, and Experien∣ces testimony to it, He will never fail thee, nor forsake thee, but make thy righteousness shine as the light, and thy innocency as the noon-day: Then Moderation thou shalt be a happy Woman, blessed in thy life, and more blessed in thy death; blessed in thy coming into the world, and more blessed in thy going out of this world into a better. This, and much more to this pur∣pose, did Experience say to Moderation,
and the like precepts she gave to all her Schollers. And when Philodike and Philotheos came to visit her at any time, she would be lessoning them the best she could, and she would say to them, You are young, and I am old, I have seen many changes, I hope you will see an happy settlement; I have lived to see an end of Wars, I hope you shall never see an end of Peace; I have lived privately, be∣ing a Woman, and of many sad try∣als, you are hopeful and likely young men, and it may please God so to bless you, as that you may be called forth to publick Employ∣ment, and if ever it shall please God to raise you, remember you are not born for your selves: Labour to be as good as great, more to please God then men; more to mind the pub∣lick good then your private inte∣rest: First seek the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof; next,
the happiness of this Kingdom, and the welfare thereof; next to the Peace of God, and a good Consci∣ence, prefer the Peace of Church and State, without which you can nei∣ther have nor keep the former; nor make nor cherish Parties. Drive on no Interest or Design but the publick good; contend for nothing but Piety, Sanctity, Unity and Charity; oppose and detest no∣thing so much as Irreligiousness, Prophaness, Pride, Division and Revenge; fear God, honour your Soveraign, love your Country, pray for the Church, then shall you be blessed of God, protected, and, it may be preferred by your Prince, and beloved of your Country: Remember that old never failing Oracle, that Experience hath ever seen made good, Them that honour me I will honour, and they that de∣spise me shall be lightly esteemed. And last of all, let me charge you, in whatsoever place you may be set,
that you never forget your Sister Moderation; whom she held all that time in her hand, and there we now leave her at present, with her Aunt Experience.
CHAP. V. Of Philodike and Philotheos bred together. Philodike's Profession, Character, Advance∣ment, Death, Burial and Epi∣taph. NOw leaving Moderation and he Aunt Experience together, we will return to Philodike and Philo∣theos, the elder Children; While they were young they were bred to∣gether under the same Tutors and Teachers: Towardly and hopefu Children both (the forwardest Schol∣lers in all the School) learning the same Authors, and performing the same School-Exercises, and profited so much, that in a short time (being well fitted first) they were sent to
the Ʋniversity, where both were taken much notice of for their extraordina∣ry diligence, early rising, and some∣times late sitting up at their study, and their great proficiency. There when they had taken their several Degrees (which had been conferred on them, not out of favour, but merit) Philo∣dike removed thence first, to the Inns of Court, where he was none of your young Gallants, that brave it in rich Apparel, as if they came thither meer∣ly to see and learn fashions; but a close and hard Student he was, dili∣gently examining and enquiring into the Reasons and Grounds of the Law, and diving deeply, and piercing tho∣rowly into the more knotty Intrica∣cies and profound Mysteries of his Profession; to which having so well attained, he was called to the Bar, and in short time became famous for his practice; a most courteous and af∣fable Gentleman he was, of a quick apprehension, clear head, firm memo∣ry, free expression, and excellent good language, and above all, very conscien∣tious
as to his Clyents and their Fees (great or small) he looked not so much at Clyent or Fee, as at the Cause, and that not whose it was, but what it was. He was afterwards, by many steps, advanced to be Lord Chief Justice in the Island Feliciana; which Dignity he did more honour with his worthy carriage, then the place did honour him; there was he commonly styled, the Incorrupt Judge, and the Poor mans Advocate. And after that, his Prince taking further notice of him, he was taken in to be one of the Privy Councel, and had the Great Seal committed to his custody, and so he continued to his dying day; living in the high favour of his Prince, and dying in the love and honour of his Country. Never was Great Patriot more ge∣nerally lamented, and his Funeral Hearse more loaden with Encomia∣stick
Elegies, then when he was buri∣ed. One Paper I snatcht, which had at the foot of every Tetrastick this for the Burden; translated out of the Original, thus it may be ren∣dered; Mourn, mourn for Philodike: Pray, pray God send's more like. And upon his Monument this Epitaph engraven. Here lyes Great Philodike, of Gra∣vity descended, And Matron Sagacity, so much com∣mended; The Glory, Peace, Welfare, Pillar of the Nation, He serv'd God, Prince, Country in his Generation, Brother to Great Philotheos and Moderation.
CHAP. VI. Of Philotheos, his Profession▪ Preferments, Character, Lif Death, Burial, Epitaph. PHilotheos, as the Mother desire was bred a Divine, and stay much longer at the University, till was accomplisht with all Endo¦ments requisite for a Church-ma And being of great note there for good life, solid preaching, and dep of learning, he was presented by worthy Patron to a competent L¦ing, whereto he went, and was th constantly Resident, never had Plu¦lity, preached painfully, did v much good, kept Hospitality, ma Peace among his Neighbours (if¦ny were at variance) brought Parish to a great measure of kn¦ledge
in Religion, and to a general good Conformity. There had he dyed incumbent, had not his Prince, hearing of his singu∣lar worth, promoted him to a Bi∣hoprick (that Government being hen in use in that Island, and so had been time out of mind) which though he accepted, he was not yet at all changed from what he was before, nor ifted up above his Brethren, but con∣inued his former constancy in preach∣ng, became a Pattern to his Flock in Doctrine and Conversation; a great ncourager of Learned, Orthodox, painful, pious and peaceable Mini∣ters; nor did he more strictly en∣uire after their conformity to the Church, then to the Scripture-Ca∣ons. In a word, he so gave himself to Reading, Exhortation and Doctrine, nd the other duties of a worthy Pa∣or, so fulfilled his Ministery which e had received, as a good Steward of
the House of God; and one he wa besides, that so well ruled his ow house, that had he lived in the Primi¦tive times, he might have been ac¦counted a second Timothy, or in la¦ter times, he might have been calle another Jewell: He also dyed full o dayes, and was much lamented And upon his Hearse many a s Elegy was fastened, and one mu longer then all the rest, had at t end of every Verse this Burde supposed to be made by the same A¦thor, and translated into English, th it runs. All weep for the death of wort Philotheos; Most pray, that the World become now Atheos. And upon his Monumene this E¦taph inscribed.
Here lyes Philotheos, of Church-men best, Him the good will follow; God mend the rest: Moderation loved him, he Modera∣tion: His death fills all with sad lamenta∣tion.
CHAP. VII. Of Moderation her Virtues and Character, her two Ene∣mies. ANd now to return again to Mo∣deration: Her two Brothers, while living, being of such eminent Quality (as you have heard) you would not think that their only Sister Moderation could want preferment, or sit long without many fair offers for a Great Match, and many such she had: But though she was a Lady of a most amiable Aspect, and compleatly accomplished, yet did she never affect Curiosity in her Dress, nor Costlines in her Apparel (though very decent and comely;) and upon that account partly, some of the Gallants, who had heard much of her fame, wisdom and
vertues, and had begun to court her, fell off again, and could give no other reason for it but this, that they feared she had so much of her Father Gra∣vity in her, as was not sutable to their youthful and frollick humours. And indeed she had a great resem∣blance both of Father and Mother; Her Father Gravity she resembled to the life in her composed Countenance and Gesture, and her Mother Saga∣city for all the world for her speech, prudence and temper of spirit; so full of serious consideration, and so judi∣ciously circumspect, as not to take up every thing upon vulgar estimation, and common report, but duly exami∣ning and deliberately weighing every thing still, as was to admiration: And the truth is, her two Brethren, Philodike and Philotheos, even in their highest Dignities, held it not below them to advise with Moderation, but in difficult cases especially, they would be sure to consult with her, because she had had more of her breeding
with their Aunt Experience then themselves: Neither did they ever repent their hearkening to her, for they still found, by Experience, that her counsel was alwayes safest; she was a Woman of a deep insight into matters of concernment for Church or State, and was never known to be byassed by interest or private passion (as most an end others are) but alwayes warily foresaw what was like to be the issue of things, and accordingly she advised what was most for publick good. She was universally beloved of all, above any mortal Creature, and had no Enemy in all the World, save only two, Extremity and Disobedience. Extremity hated her with all her heart, though she had never given her any cause: And Moderation hated Disobedience with a perfect hatred (and blame her not) she had just cause.
CHAP. VIII. Of Extremity, her Pedgee, Cha∣racter, and Enmity to Modera∣tion. EXtremity was descended of an Ancient and Noble Family in Cilicia, sometimes a famous Province of the old Roman Empire; Her Fa∣ther Saul the second, sirnamed Hyper∣zelotes, a man known far and near, whose education had been choice, proficiency incredible, parts great, abilities rare, travels many, in his life alwayes irreprovable, and in his way very devout: In his younger dayes he had been of a hot and eager spirit, a Proto-persecutor of the Proto-Martyr Steven, but as he grew elder he grew more mild and moderate; and as he changed his harsher name of
Saul, into a softer, Paul, so was he quite changed in his disposition from Hyper-zelotes to Hyper-philadelphotes, and was turned into another man, as Saul the first was for a while, but he for ever. He had been once of that Opinion, that no sort of men ought more se∣verely to be Animadverted into, and dealt with, then such, who in the least dissented from the Religion and Rites of their Forefathers; and would but Authority pass Acts severe enough for suppression of such by Banishment, Bonds, Imprisonment, or death, he would be the man that would see them put in execution, which he also did, judg∣ing it the best service could be done to God, or his Church; thereupon he haled many into Prisons, and com∣pelled them to abjure, recant and blaspheme, or suffer and dye. But after he was (I say) quite of another mind, and became the most complacent and complying Person in
the world, and held with Moderation as much as any: Now (he said) what was his gain before was now his loss, and what he formerly esteemed his glory, he looked on as his shame: Cir∣cumcision was no more with him now then Ʋncircumcision; both nothing to the new Creature, to faith in Christ, to the keeping of the Commandements of God. He could condescend and com∣ply so far now, as to be made all things to all men, so it were to further the salvation of any. His Daughter Ex∣tremity was begotten by him in his younger years, as he was travel∣ling to Damascus, before he had been better catechised and instructed by Ananias. The younger dayes of the Daugh∣ter, were an imitation of the Fathers younger dayes, who observing, in those unsettled times that had been in Felici∣ana, about that time when there was no King in Israel, and every man did what was right in his own eyes, that many distempered Humours, even to
a plain Delirium, if not Distraction, had pestered both Church and State, thought it high time to awaken Au∣thority, to revive former severity, with some further addition too, to curb Moderation; and being passio∣nately zealous to prevent any Rupture in the Church, before many other Disorders in the State, would have all brought into an exact Unifor∣mity. It fell out also unhappily, and much to the prejudice of Moderation, that some of those Sons of Disobedience, and Grand-children of Belial, had much about that time, or not long be∣fore, broke out into an open Rebelli∣on, and made seditious Commotions, when all were in expectation of set∣tlement in the Island; and not long after a bloudy War was commenced, between that Island and some other potent Neighbours in the adjacent Islands: And Extremity, zealously watchful, and prudently sollicitous, to preserve common Peace at home, held
a suspitious eye over Moderation and all her Actions, as mistrusting she had underhand countenanced the former, or corresponded with the latter; both which (God knows) she was far enough from, constantly praying for publick Peace, and the prosperity of the Church and State; yet could not Innocency (as yet unknown) secure poor Moderation from many a harsh Censure and bitter Taunt. Then would Extremity twit Moderation, and charge her with disaffection, and often hit her in the teeth with the miscarriages of others, that she had nothing to do withall; and would be saying, you must go a way by your selves, and be wiser then all the world; and had I power in my hands, said some (which was well they had not) I would make Moderation pack, or change her note. But afterwards, to the great sa∣tisfaction of all, upon a through ob∣servation, (I will not say a better
information) Extremities prejudice against Moderation was abated, and afterwards became perfect Friends, as we shall say anon.
CHAP. IX. Of Disobedience, Moderation's only Enemy, whom she hated, her Pedigree, Character, and vile Posterity. DIsobedience was the other Enemy Moderation had, and her indeed did she as much hate as Extremity did her, and much more justly, for her many wicked pranks and practises a∣gainst both Church and State, yea, against all humane Society. She was a Woman of an ill feature, and more untoward nature; descend∣ed of an infamous and stained Family, yet very ancient; she was the Daugh∣ter of old Belial, and that by a strange woman; she was of a shrewd and sub∣tle
wit, mis-shapen countenance, mon∣strous in her birth (being born with teeth in her head, came laughing into the world, with a Coal of fire in ou hand, and a Sword in the other) o hollow eyes, and looking asquint ver ill-favouredly; besides, by a fall in th Cradle, she had her back broken, an wry-neckt ever after: Nature ha branded her for a prodigious Carryon She was twice married, first to Sheba the Son of Bichri, an old Incendiary and head of a seditious Crew; an after he had lost his head, she marrie with Elymas the Sorcerer, who deal with the black Art, an utter enemy t all Righteousness, and as full of al subtilty, malice and wickedness, as hi Brethren the Jesuites could wish, o his Father Beelzebub could make him and he was fittest for her, for it w shrewdly suspected, they had bee naught together before. She was a Woman too too fruitful, and had by both her Husbands a ma∣ny lewd, vicious, and graceless Chil∣dren.
Her first Husband openly taught the Art, and invented the Instruments of Rebellion, was the first that blew a Trumpet of Sedition against his Soveraign; and it is thought she set him on: She had instructed her Chil∣dren in all the wayes of Impiety and Disobedience; a Roman Catholick she was, and therefore sent some of her Children beyond-sea; some were Students at Doway, some at Lovayn, and one she sent to John of Leyden's Colledge at Munster: They were great Proficients all in the Arts, and very forward to propagate those Principles taught by the Hebrew Doctor Abad∣don, the Greek Professor Apollyon, and the Latine Dictator Filius Perditionis; for some of them understood all Lan∣guages; men of working brains and restless spirits; a viperous Generati∣on, tearing out the bowels of whatso∣ever Nation bred them; skilful to di∣vide, destroy and supplant; the only Enemies to Monarchy and publick Peace; they have set their heads and their Agents awork to destroy Kings,
blow up Parliaments, burn Cities, lay waste Churches, to divide between Prince and people, to make or in∣crease parties, and their last end is to bring in the Abomination of Desola∣tion. The Children by the later Husband were the more by far, and of several Complexions and Dispositions, as i they had not been by the same Father and Mother; yet were they their na∣tural Children, and had somewhat o both in them, for both were notorious for all or any manner of wickedness imaginable, neither barrel better Her∣ring; and the Children like them, no∣thing came amiss to them, so it were bad enough; such a Generation fo swearing, staring, drinking, whoring, ranting, roaring, quarrelling, fighting, filching, stealing, cutting of Purses, and cutting of Throats, as was not in the world again, fearing nor God nor man, slighting Laws, Statutes Penalties, Stocks, Pillory, Prison▪ Gallows, Death, and Hell too, as it
they had been the Spawn of the old Leviathan, of whom it is said, he is made without fear; the Mother, for the Childrens sake, was called Mysti∣cal Babylon, the Mother of whore∣doms and all abominations in the earth. Some of her Children are professed Atheists, and deriders of all Religion, of the Sadducean Heard, believing nor Angel, nor Spirit, nor Heaven, nor Hell, regarding nor Law nor Gospel: Some again she hath taught and train∣ed up to be the Inventers of new coined Oaths, prodigious Blasphe∣mies, and worse then hellish Execra∣tions, and Preterplu-Satanical Impre∣cations, out-daring Gods Justice and Patience, and dastarding Satan him∣self, yea a whole Legion of Devils, not one of them once saying Dammee, but all Let us alone, I beseech thee tor∣ment us not. Sure enough their damnation lin∣greth not, who draw sin thus with
Cords, and damnation with Cart-ropes, and say, Let the most High make speed, that we may see him, and make hast, that we may know what Hell is▪ This I know, that when these wretch¦ed Souls are excoriated, and shall bu begin to feel those torments, they wil presently relent, and change thei note, either seemingly to say thei Lords prayer, Let us alone now, an torment us not, or to say their ow backward, Lord Ʋn-Dammee. Others again are the Masters and Professors of the Liberal Science o Carowsing, and prescribe the rules and method of drinking round by numbe and measure, till it be without either number or measure. Others are devising new Games at Cards and Dice, and new wayes of cheating by them. Out of this Family, as once out of tha monstrous Palladian Beast, came ou tose that set Troynovant afire; or out
of this Pit came those swarms of Lo∣custs, Drunkards, Gamesters, Whorers, Epicures, Luxurious and Riotous per∣sons, who darken the glory of Felicia∣na, and besides the devouring their own patrimonies, devour the fat and the best fruits and wealth of our Land. All these called Disobedience Mo∣ther, and were looked upon as hers by all that knew them, having the lively Image of the Beast in their foreheads; others had it in their right hand, set on by the right hand of Justice; o∣thers had it in their Noses, by drink∣ing too freely of Madam Porne's Cup; and others had a brand all their Face over, by tasting too oft of their Sister Crapula's Bowl; but all spake one Lan∣guage, which was the Language of the Beast (used by no Nation, Civil or Barbarous, but themselves) every word an Oath, or a Curse, or pro∣phane Scoffe and Jest at Scripture and Piety, or a Belch of Baudery, which some called a corrupt or ba∣stard
Hellenish, but others, who had more understanding, said, it was pure and perfect Hellish Language. I should have told you also, that Disobedience, after her second marri∣age, kept a common Inn (otherwise a common Stews.) And as Experience, Moderation's Aunt and best Friend, kept her School, so did Disobedience, her worst Enemy, set up a School to increase her comings in; but with this difference, that all were made the better (even the worst) that came under her hands; so all were the worse (even the best) that came under the hands of Diso∣bedience. Many a fair estate was soon made away there, and many a hopeful per∣son utterly undone and quite marred, that came to be acquainted with her, or any of hers. She had six Daughters, to whom
she committed the carrying on of her Trade. The Eldest was Madam Porne, a Woman of person proper and handsom enough, but otherwise more common then proper, migh∣ty gallant in her Dress and Ap∣parel. The Second Donna Spatalosa, a very lascivious Wanton and inticing Creature. The Third Mistriss Crapula, a fowl Beast, all Belly and Guts. The Fourth Bold Anaideia, a confi∣dent and brazen-fac'd Slut, a Shame∣less and impudent Carryon. The Fift Donna Olympia, lately come from the Holy Mother-See, where she had practised the same Art, with much success, for many years. The youngest Damosilla Blan∣dula, a mighty fair-tongued,
smiling, and bewitching Crea∣ture. They lived all under the same Roof, and had their several Offices, their Lodgings are within, or over one another. Blandula, the youngest, was to sit at the door, and watch and espy who went by, and what Passengers wer fit to be called in; them would she invite to come and make choice of a Room, and tell them what Entertain∣ment was to be had in the House: Being entered, she conveys them pre∣sently into Donna Olympia's Lodging, who, for her self, was richly adorned with Jewels taken out of the Triple Crown, and her Room was hung with the rich Hangings she had brought out of the Vatican. After a short stay there, and a Col∣lation given, and the Curiosities view∣ed and looked over (that came from beyond Sea) among which were
certain Beads, and Medals, and some Images of our Lady and other Saints, and a fair Crucifix, she desires them to go up stairs to Mistriss Anaideia's Lodgings; Her they found at her Glass, curiously curling her Locks, and spotting her Face, with her na∣ked Breasts, and her Chamber all round hung with many a lascivious Picture. If then any one startled, and thought they had seen enough, and craved leave to return, they would all three tell them, there was more to be seen above, and they must not re∣fuse to go up one short pair of Stairs and taste of their Sister Crapula's Cup; It was a Gilt Bole of old and clear Circe, a Liquor, whosoever once tasted was turned into a Swine at the second draught; then they would of them∣selves desire to go on and see all, and to behold Donna Spatalosa; She was preparing Bracelets made of her hair, and mixing Potions for Guests, that she had expected, and she came bold∣ly
and saluted them, offering them the courtesie of the House; and tells them, they must not refuse to visit their eldest Sister, Madam Porne, whose Room would give them more content, then all they had yet seen; There sat she on a stately Couch, in rich array of Silk and Crimson Satin, all daubed with broad Gold-lace; her Face new painted; she was old and wrinkled, but her paint made her look as fair as a Rose and a mixture of Lilly; a fair Room it was indeed, hung with the richest Arras; and you would wonder to see what a Cupboard was there of Plate, and what a fair Prospect into all the Fields and Gardens round about: She pre∣sented them by the hands of her wait∣ing Gentlewoman Eutrapeleia, a smi∣ling, merry and witty young Wo∣man (all Jests and mirth) with a Venus Glass of Wine, and some costly Sweet-meats: But under the Balcony was a close Trap-door (discerned by few) over a deep Ditch and narrow Pit, called Avernus, into which, after
a few short Amorous Embraces, she was wont to throw her Guests head∣long, with the help of her Sisters, after they had first stript them of all they had about them, and they were never heard of more: Few, or none, that ever I heard of, that came once into Madam Porne's Clutches, ever came back again, or were seen alive, but sometimes a naked Corps was seen floating on the top of the Ditch: Only one escaped once, as Lot out of Sodom, to make the relation of their Entertainment; and he said, it was almost as great a miracle as his was; for he was fain to steal out at a back∣door, which he found locked, but putting forth all his strength, he burst it open, and then came down a nar∣row pair of Stairs, very steep and dark, which few were able to find, and so got away, resolving never to come more there; for said he, had I stayed longer, or attempted to go back the same way I came, I had certainly been snapt: He would ever after call them, the six fatal Sisters, and would warn
all his Acquaintance not to come near them. But enough, and too much of Diso∣bedience, and I fear I have troubled the Reader, with this long Discourse of her and her Children, and their wick∣ed pranks; and no wonder, for it is this Disobedience that hath troubled all the World, troubled both God and Man. To return therefore to Moderation; the wayes both of the one and other Litter she could not chuse but detest; and for the latter breed, she never had so much as her name called in question to favour any of them; but when any of the former Race broke out into Rebellion, she could not help it; but watchful and jealous Extremity would have some hard thoughts of her, as if she had been an Abettor, whereas she was never so much as privy to any of their Designs, and whensoever she came to hear of them, was as forward as any to declare
against them, and to give her best assi∣stance to suppress them; and whenso∣ever any of the Sons of Rebellion and Disobedience were taken, and did re∣ceive condign punishment, she did heartily rejoyce, as having no such enemies of her own in that defiance, as those that were enemies to God, to the King, to Religion, and to her Coun∣try.
CHAP. X. Of the Pedigree and Progeny of Politicus, no great friend to Moderation. I Could give you a Relation of a third Person also, that lived in the midway between Extremity and Mo∣deration, who was no sure friend to Moderation, yet can I not call him an enemy neither. His name Politicus; and a meer Politician he was; no body could tell of what Religion he was, neither fish nor flesh; as he loved not Moderation, so he cared not for Ex∣tremity; he hated Disobedience indeed to the very death, and was for that much to be commended.
He came of the Ancient Roman Race, Gallio his Grand-father, and Portius Festus his near Alliance: Poli∣ticus was no bad Member in the Com∣monwealth, though none of the great∣est Friends to the Church nor Church∣men, at whose Revenues he would sometime have a fling; no Recusant, much less Phanatick; scarce good Protestant, but of the Epicene Gen∣der. He was a conformable, quiet and peaceable Subject, and many wayes useful and serviceable, being an ex∣treme good natured man, ever loyal to his Prince, and true to his Coun∣try. In times of Peace he had a Com∣mission for the Peace, and was in Au∣thority, and singular good service he did, and kept his Country in quiet and good order, executing Justice between man & man, & now & then he would put down some notorious ill Ale∣house. In time of War he had a Com∣mand,
and kept his Souldiers in good discipline, from Robbing and Plun∣dering, as severe as Tamerlane: But he never troubled his head about Re∣ligion. If God Almighty had created man for no higher end, then to live in Ci∣vil Society, and to mind the things of this inferiour world, and this present life, there had been no better man then Politicus. But in as much as man, created in the Image of God, hath (as a more excellent nature and being then other Creatures, and more noble Endowments, so) a more excellent and higher end, viz. to seek, know, serve and worship God, and at last come to enjoy him, and have Commu∣nion with him; and that Religion and true Piety is the only way and means to attain that end, and that there is another Country to be looked for after this, He was much to blame for his coldness and indifferency in mat∣ters of Religion; many thought him little better then an Atheist in his
heart, though his life not much faulty. He never exprest much zeal or re∣gard to Piety, nor was he ever known to go to prayers by himself, nor much to look into his Bible: A piece of Tacitus, or Livy, or Machiavel, he would sometimes discourse of, and their Observations he did seem to rellish, as well as any in the Books of Moses and the Prophets: And for Seneca, and his Epistles of Morality, he did, in his Judgment, prefer them above, and did take more delight to read them, then all Saint Paul's Epi∣stles of Divinity. Several Children he had, both Sons and Daughters: His Sons, he gave them all a taste of good Lite∣ature, and gave them the breeding nd education which was fit for Gen∣lemen.
His eldest Son was bred a Courtier, his name Honorius. The second a Souldier, called Cap∣tain Eupolemus. The third a Physitian, who tra∣velled France and Italy, and took his Dgree at Padua, his name Temera∣rius. A fourth he bred a Merchant, his name Doosus. And the youngest he made a Schol∣ler▪ and a vain in Poetry he had, his nme Gelasius, a marvellous witty and pesant Gentleman he was, full of his Jocues and merry Conceits, that he made all the Company mirth where∣evr he came. Civil Gentleme all, but of the Fathers Religi∣on. His eldest Daughter he named H¦nora, her great Grand-mother w
a Lady of Honour to Queen Ber∣nice. And her Sister Phantasia was wait∣ing Lady to her Highness Drusilla, much about the same time, in re∣membrance of whom he called his se∣cond Daughter by her name. And the third was Madam Eula∣lia; she could sing and dance rarely well, and had her French and Italian very perfect, and was well read in forreign Historis, yet had never read the New Testament over twice in all her life, nor the Old Testament so much as once. Eudoxia, the youngest, was the tallest and hansomest Woman of them all; an absolute Beauty, and of so rare a temper you could never an∣ger her, and of so gracful a deport, that she took all persons: Hd you seen her at Church, which was but seldome, you would think you saw a Saint; would you be serius at
other times, she would be serious; would you be pleasant, she would be as facetious. Goodly Ladies they were indeed all four, and as great Gallants as were either in Court or City: But to tell you how they spent their time, and what was their employment, would be a strange story to tell our Grand∣mothers, were they alive again, and much more strange to the old Christian Ladies that lived longer before them: Their morning was all taken up with Dressing, Painting, Powdering: The afternoon usually spent in Visits, or a Play-house; and at night a Pack of Cards: These were the Books they were most read in, and had them more in their hands, then either Bible, Ser∣mon, or Prayer-book; and indeed all of them did more frequent the Play-house then their Parish-Church, the Prayer-house, and were more attentive there then here: Twice or thrice a moneth was fair to come to Church; but at a Play three or four times a
week was ordinary: To Church they came to see and to be seen, and that usually when Sermon or Prayers were half ended; but to the Play-house they went to learn, and came in with the first, and staid it out without tedi∣ousness, as never thinking a Grace or Sermon too short, or a Play too long. Rabbi Ben-Johnson was highly in their Books, and they more versed in his Writings, then either Rabbi Ben-Syrach, or Rabbi Solomon. But in as much as Politicus was no profest Enemy to Moderation, but wisht her as well as he did Extremity (he cared for them much alike) we will let him go, wishing that the State may never have cause to fear any Ene∣my more, nor the Church and Religion need a Friend less.
CHAP. XI. Of the Marriage of Moderation, her two Husbands, and Children by them. NOw to return to the Marriage of Moderation. Her Brother Phi∣lodike would fain have brought her to Court, and have her married to one of his own Rank, a Privy Counsellor of State, as knowing full well, how much more good he might do, being assisted by such another Privy Counsellor in his own Bosom. But her Brother Philotheos was earnest for a Church-man, his old Ac∣quaintance, bred with him in the same Colledge, and his Chamber-fellow (somewhat his Junior) Doctor Eu∣sebius,
and now also settled near him in a competent Living; a Grave and Reverend Minister he was as any in all the Country, an Orthodox and able Divine; to him the motion was no sooner made by the Brother, but he presently embraced it, both in re∣spect of her singular Vertues, and of the Allyance to her Brethren. Soon after they were married, and most happily they lived, beloved of all the Parish, and honoured of all that knew them (Gentry, Clergy, and others;) but long she enjoyed not that happi∣ness, for her Husband, being a sickly man, and worn out with his Studies and painfulness in preaching, was ta∣ken away, to her great loss, and grief of the Country, and she left a sad Widdow, big with Child, of which she was after delivered, whom she called Settlement; as sweet and hope∣ful Child as ever Woman bare, had he lived, but he dyed in his Cradle. After some good space of time, her Brother Philodike desired she might
be married to a Statesman; and he was intimate with an Honourable Privy Counsellor, whose name was Philodemus; to him be recommended his Sister, and to him she was married, to his great contentment, and of all the Court besides: He lived not long with her neither, being aged when he married her, and left her with child again of Twins, who only lived to be christened: They were two Sisters, as lovely Babes as was ever lookt on, their names, Peace and Plenty, who dy∣ed soon after their Father.
CHAP. XII. Of the Trouble and Grief of Mo∣deration: Her last Will: Her Heir: Epitaph. ANd being now a Widow again, as seldom one Cross or grief comes alone, both her Husbands, Eu∣sebius and Philodemus (and the Chil∣dren by them) being dead, who would suffer no injury to be done her while they lived, they so dearly loved her. It fell out afterwards, that some of her envious Neighbours, who bare her no good will before, though she never did them the least wrong, would be offering her many an af∣front, and ready to pick any Quarrrel with her.
A poor Widdow is ever like the gap broken in the hedge, soon trodden down; and old Friends now were grown Strangers, and, which went nearest to her heart, her two Brethren, who were wont formerly to support and countenance her in every thing, that was just and reasonable, were now under a Cloud: Philodike for appearing in a Cause, wherein Inno∣cency had been opprest had he been silent (as his Grand-father Joseph and his Uncle Nicodemus had done before him) incurred the displeasure of some great Ones, who procured his troubles; and Philotheos for being now and then somehat plain, and a litt smart in an Use of Reproof; at both which she was inwardly grieved in her mind (and they being under restraint, or else keeping their Cham∣ber by reason of their Age and Infir∣mities) though she had learned to endure any thing, and was never for∣ward to stir or move in her own pri∣vate Cause; yet when she saw her two Brethren concerned in point of
their Honour and Reputation, and th Publick more in point of welfar, she could not for her life sit still, bu presents an humble and modest Peti∣tion in their behalf, which was but this, that they might come to a fair hearing; and when matters should be rightly understood, if they were found Offenders, she desired no favour for them; she desired no more, and expected, at least, she might have been called in, and spoken to, or her Peti∣tion read howsoever: But when no admittance could be obtained for Moderation, and instead thereof Taunts and Reproaches sent after, and told withall, that if she moved any further she should be secured (her old friend Extremity was then Door∣keeper, and to be sure would do he no good office, and she it was gave th answer, and it is thought of her ow head:) Moderation took it so  heart, that she never joyed her se after, nor had any delight to go a∣broad, but lived retired in her private Lodgings, and gave her self to her
Devotions, and not long after departed this life. The news whereof no sooner came to the Brothers hearing, but it struck them to the very heart, that they both of them departed the self-same day, not willing to out-live their Sister Moderation. Never was the like heard of by all Relation, that two Brothers and Sister should all three dye in one day (but they had loved most entirely, as if they all had but one Soul) and they were all three buried together in the same Grave, the same Grave it was, wherein Eu∣sebius and Philodemus, the two Hus∣bands, and Settlement the Son, and Peace and Plenty the Daugh∣ters of Moderation, had been laid be∣fore. Now was both Court, City and Country full of Lamentations for the death of three such eminent Persons; neither were the two Brethren more lamented, then was sweet and all-contenting
all-pleasing Moderation; only Extremiy rejoyced extreamly at the death of Moderation; and Dsobedience rejoyced as much at the death of Philodike and Philo∣theos. Philodike was most lamented at Court by the Grandees, Sage States∣men and Patriots, for his grave ad∣vice and equal administration of Ju∣stice, whereby the general Peace of Feliciana was preserved. Philotheos was most lamented by the Clergy, and such as were learned, and able to judge of his Elaborate Tracts, his Solid and Learned Ser∣mons, and his great Prudence in Ec∣clesiastical Affairs, whereby the Cause of Religion, and the Peace and Ho∣nour of the Church, had been main∣tained and preserved. But as their names were above the understanding, so was their worth above the cogni∣zance of the Vulgar.
But as for Moderation, all knew what she was well enough; all Feli∣ciana had heard and talked much of her all the Island over; as good a Subject as could live under a Prince, a true Daughter of the Church, and a Mother in Israel; and bewailed she was both in Court, City and Country, by Man, Woman and Child, young and old, simple and gentle, because all understood she had no interest but the publick good, and desired favour and protection only for such, as should be judged worthy to live in any well-governed State in the World: And the more lamented she was, because she dyed without Issue, and left none of her name behind; yet being sick, and knowing she was now near her end, she made her Will, and sent for a Kinswoman of hers, named Repen∣tance (a Kinswoman once removed) younger sister to Consideration, dead before, and her she made her adopted Child, and sole Heir and Executrix; who so sadly took her death, that she was not only Close Mourner at
the Funeral, but went in mourning to her dying day, and could never get Moderation (dear Moderation) out of her mind. Never was the Lady Dorcas more lamented, and her recovery more de∣sired then was this Ladies: And very remarkable it is, though it be against the Religion professed in Feliciana, to put up any Prayers for their best Friends when dead, yet did all pray for Moderation when she was dead and gone, and the most Religious, the most heartily of all others, and so do to this day; yet not for the resting of her Soul, but for her return or Resur∣rection, of which they have a stedfast belief and full expectation, grounded on an old Prophecy, whereof I shall tell you more anon. And seldom did any come near her Tomb, but they bedewed it with their Tears, over which, as I remember, was En∣graven in a Latine Character,
Heu placidè obdormit Veneranda Matrona Moderatio novam expectans Resuscitationem aute novissimam Resurrectionem. And under it was this Epitaph, written in that Country Lan∣guage, Here lyes Intombed Matron Modera∣tion, True Friend of the Church, Joy of the Nation; Her worth to few was known Ʋntil that she was gone: No Issue great or small, This the saddest of all. All ye friends that look on, Pray for Moderation. Long may she not stay, let the next Generation See out of these Stones rise a New Moderation.
And to see what good Prayers can do! Not long after, when you would have thought she had been quite consumed, Moderation did revive, and her Spirit did return, yet not into the former Corps (that had been too great a Miracle for this latter Age to believe) but as Moses Spirit was once transfused into se∣venty others, so did her Spirit return, and was transfused, and did enter into many more, and made a happy change in them; They were now so many new Creatures, which made the Author, and many others, sing in the words of that famous Ver∣ser, Jam nova Progenies Coelo dilabitur alto. There dropped down from Heaven high, Of Mankind a new Proge∣ny.
Yea, and which was the wonder of all, and you will hardly believe it, even Extremity her self was chan∣ged, and endued with another spi∣rit, as the next Chapter will inform you.
CHAP. XIII. Of the wonderful change wrought in Extremity, and the occasion and means of it. BEfore I make an end, I shall tell you what became of Extremity and Disobedience: Extremity made a happy end, repented, reformed, and dyed comfortably; Disobedience lived obstinately and dyed miserably, and who could look for other? Extremity, as I told you before, was the only Enemy that Moderation had in all the world, and had hated her extremely while she lived; and she the only Person that rejoyced, and indeed she insulted at her death.
But this Enmity lasted not al∣wayes; for, as God would have it, within a few years after Moderation's death, Extremity fell into a fit of Sickness, and a happy Sickness it was to her, (her Extremity was Graces Opportunity) she was sore handled: An ordinary Disease it was not, but she was in great extremity and pain. The Physitians, who were sent for, were at their Wits end, when they saw her: They perceived her trou∣ble lay deeper, and concluded, by all Conjectures they could make, it was some inward trouble or grief oppres∣sed her: And being much pressed by them, to declare whether it were so or no, she confessed at last it was so in∣deed, and that she was much trou∣bled in her Mind, and could get no rest. It was about her former course o life, and her many sins; especially sh said, one thing lay heaviest upon he
above all others, which they were long ere they could get out of her; yet she was observed by them that watched with her, sometimes, be∣tween sleeping and waking, to mut∣ter to her self, and they could over∣hear her now and then, and her talk was of Moderation; and many times she would start of a sudden, and look agast, and bid the By-standers look a∣bout, and tell her if they saw any thing; and sometimes would ask them, if they saw not Moderation there. Once she lay, as in a Trance, and seemed to them to pray and call upon God for mercy: At another time she would cry out of her self, and her former miscarriages, saying, Ah! vile Extremity! Ah! sinful wretch Extremity! Ah! cruel Ex∣tremity! And once she told one of her Maids, that Moderation had ap∣peared to her in her sleep, all clothed in white, and with a smiling Counte∣nance asked her, what reason she had to be so bitter an Enemy to her, who had never done her wrong in all her
life? and now she was dead continu∣ed her Enmity to her Friends: Told her, she was sent to admonish her to repent, and amend her wayes, then should she be a happy Wo∣man. This did much run in her mind, and she would often say, O! that Moderation were alive again! All the World should see, I did not so much hate her before, as I should now prize and love her. She would often wish also, that Eusebius or Philotheos, the Husband and Brother of Moderation, were now alive, that she might manifest what respect she bare them, and that in her distress she might ease her mind to them, and receive some comfort from them, which she thought was not possible for her to have, but from the hands of some of Moderation's Friends.
Then she began to make enquiry, what able and discreet Divine there was, to whom she might unbosom her self: And was told, there lived not far from her, a choice and prudent Minister, named Agathophilus, one well experienced in Cases and per∣plexities of Conscience, and one mighty tender in dealing with a troubled Spirit (a chearful and com∣fortable old Man he was, and a great cherisher of every Spark of good, were it never so little) and for that he had his name given him. Extremity had never been acquaint∣ed with him before, although they lived not far the one from the other (nor indeed with many other strict Divines, whom she had looked upon, for the most of them, formerly, as a company of Soure and discontented persons) for him she presently sends, and he came immediately, and she at first sight of him was ready, some∣what like Cornelius to Saint Peter, to
rise off her Couch and fall down up∣on her knees to him. He asked her how she did? what was her grief? She confessed she had been a grievous sin∣ner, and had much offended; but one thing there was, which she had hitherto concealed, but now she would hide nothing from him; one thing there was, that troubled her more then all the rest; she had been a bitter Enemy to Moderation; and now she saw plainly (the Evening of Sickness is the Morning of Light) that she had been much mistaken in her, and feared she had much to an∣swer for her uncharitableness; she had alwayes looked upon Moderation with an evil eye, as if she had been the vilest Creature alive, and thereupon had hated her to the death; but now she was quite and clean of another mind, and did think she was as good a Soul as lived, and the most inno∣cent, and saw that she was a better Christian then her self; wishing, with all her heart, that when she dyed, she might change places with Modera∣tion;
and were she now alive again, she would shew her all the love was possible: This and much more she confest, and the Tears gushed out when she mentioned these things; and oft-times would lift up her eyes to Heaven and pray, God forgive me my bitterness against Moderati∣on. And another thing she charged her self withall, which she thought made her more inexcusable, and she said, she had never thought of it till in this her sickness; and that was this; she had been formerly under the hands of cruel Oppressours, and could not help her self; and indeed she had had hard measure, but it was not from the hands of Moderation, nor any of her Friends, who could only pity her, and were troubled to see it; but by other hands as extreme as Extremity her self: Schollers have a saying, One extream is most opposite to another: But then she had promised, and made a solemn Vow, that if ever she should
come out of her sufferings, she had learnt to pity sufferers while she liv∣ed, and should never countenance Vi∣olence again; yet since she had been in that good condition she now en∣joyed; and Moderation she acknow∣ledged had not been backward to con∣tribute her best assistance for hers and the common benefit; she had both forgotten Moderation, and her own former Vows and Promises: And here she burst out into Tears a∣fresh. Agathophilus seeing her in such an Agony, fell to comfort her, yet told her, she had been much to blame for her former Violence; but seeing she was now so true a Penitent, and so changed in her mind, as she declared, he bad her not fear, her case was no wayes desperate; and to confirm her, he told her further, that in his Ex∣perience he had met with the like be∣fore, and could give her many Scrip∣ture Instances.
He would not tell her of Manas∣ses (he said) and what he had done, yet found mercy, for his Case was quite beyond the Line, and Eccentrical to her Relation she had made. But he could tell her of divers of no mean Quality, whose Names and Stories are no wayes blemished by it, that had been drawn aside sometimes as she had been: As Darius, a Me∣dian King; and Ahasuerus, the Per∣sian Emperour (some part of whose Story is recorded by a Sacred Pen) whose good Natures had been wrought upon, by the sollicitation of some mis-informers, to pass some Acts, severe enough, against some of Moderation's Ancestors; yet upon further enquiry and satisfaction, gave a check and stop to further pro∣ceedings, repealing those Acts, and receiving into highest favour such as, by mis-representation, they had been whetted against; nor was it ever
imputed to them as a note of Incon∣stancy, that they had rescinded such Acts, but is the brightest Star of Glory that shines in their Sto∣ry. And for your Father, Saul the Second (said he) of ever blessed Memory, that famous Saint and Martyr, I need not tell you what the former part of his Story was; somewhat like yours, by your own relation: But he had been outra∣gious when time was, not only hunting Moderation out of house and home in her own Corporati∣ons, but persecuting her and her followers into strange Cities; yet did he not only find mercy, but for his memorable change and Pie∣ty, afterwards hath his Name set down among the first Three. He was content to take the Taunt of Heretick at the hands of Tertullus, and of a Mad Phanatick at the hands of
Festus afterwards, he was so much altered. The like, I trust, said he, will befall you, whose former dayes, by your own confession, have been like his, that your last end will be as his also; and if you continue in this good mind, you will hereafter come into the same estate he is pos∣sessed of; for which purpose I shall ever pray for you, and, if you please, am now ready to pray with you— which accordingly he did before they parted. She was not a little comforted and settled in her mind, after her discourse with Agathophilus; and soon after she mended apace and recovered, liv∣ed many a day after, and made an hap∣py end. And to testifie the reallity of her change (not long after this ill Fit she proved with Child, and when
she had gone her time she was de∣livered of a Daughter, and would have her called Mitigation, her elder Daughter being dead a little before, whose name was Violence, and upon her Death-bed she made it her last Request, to some of Mode∣ration's Acquaintance, that her Daughter might be brought up with their Children, and if she lived to be bestowed in marriage, it might be to one of that Family, which she desired above any thing in this World, as being verily perswaded, God had a blessing in store for that Family, then should she dye in peace. And so it came to pass as she de∣sired, for Mitigation was marri∣ed to a near Kinsman of Moderati∣on's, called Philallelos, the loveli∣est Person in the World: He was all Love, and nothing but Love, and so much his name signified when it was given him, and he made it good.
And now can it not be expressed, what joy this Marriage caused all the Country over; for by this means, those two great Families, of Extre∣mity and Moderation, were united, which, while at enmity, had divi∣ded and distracted all the Neighbour∣hood. Of the which memorable Sickness, Repentance and Recovery of Extre∣mity, and her change, and the Mar∣riage of her Daughter, one made this following Verse, which though a plain and homely one, I thought fit to have inserted. Extremity was sick, and hard it is to say, In what extremity Extremity then lay, Troubled much in mind about Mo∣deration, Whom she had pursued with much Indignation.
Extremity recovers, and a while after Into Moderation's Stock marries her Daughter. They being made Friends, the World was well amended: Mitigation survives, Extremity is ended.
CHAP. XIV. Containing a digression of the Author. I Am not ignorant, that many will look upon all this that hath been said of Extremities Sickness, trou∣ble in mind, and Repentance, to be but a Story, no more then Modera∣tion's rising again. I shall not go about to impose upon any man a be∣lief of what he dislikes, but leave every one to think what he plea∣seth. Only it is certain, that Philallelos and Mitigation made a happy match, and many there were that gave them Joy, and wisht they might live many
a good day together, and have many good Children between them, and hoped there would be much more Love among all the Neighbours, then there had been for a while be∣fore: And, whencesoever it came, it was observed there was a fresh breathing of a Spirit of Love all o∣ver the Land, as if serene Zephirus had blown away all the former Storms and Clouds, and presented Men with a milder Air to breath in; and the content that most had in their hearts and their hopes, were legible in the chearfulness of their Countenances. But what the secret causes of this alteration and recon∣ciliation between Extremity and Mo∣deration were, is too deep a Mystery for Hesychius Pamphilus to pene∣trate. Only I shall relate to you, what were the several Conjectures of several Persons, who would, as they pleased, assign their several ap∣prehensions, which might produce this happy effect.
First, This is not to be concealed, that the Inhabitants of Feliciana are a people above any in all the World beside, next to the Word of God, given much to the observation of Divine Providences; and they hd taken notice, that after some hard dealing with Moderation, many dis∣asters had befallen that Island (which though it were too high presumption to give the rea∣son of, yet is it but piety to take notice of) as the Apparition of some prodigious Comets, which a∣mazed the Spectators, and were seen in that Island (whether one and the same, or two, or three) for about six moneths together, fol∣lowed with a sweeping Pestilence, which took away an hundred thou∣sand out of the Capital City; and the same City, the year following, consumed with Fire, for the great∣est part of it; and during all this time, a chargeable and doubtful War with potent Neighbours, con∣suming
what Lives the Pestilence had spared, and what Treasure had escaped the Fire. Dreadful and a∣mazing Judgments all. With the pious sense whereof, many of the Islanders being duly affected, began to reflect upon themselves, as sometimes the Patri∣arks did, in a day of their distress, and said, Are we not guilty con∣cerning our Brother, because we saw the anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear? Others there are, that, next to the Goodness of God, ascribe it principally to the Native and large-hearted Clemency and Prudence of the Prince; who having observed how patient and silent Moderation had been under her Tryals; and moreover, when some unquiet Spi∣rits had been formerly stirring at home; and during the time of that
War, that was then afoot with the Neighbours abroad, Extremity it self could not find the least de∣fection in Moderation from her wonted constant Fidelity. There∣upon the prudent Prince said to his people, as formerly another Prince had said to his, concerning the Fa∣mily of Jacob, Behold, these men are quiet and peaceable, let them dwell in the Land, and trade therein; behold, the Land is large enough, let us make Marriages with them, and take their Daughters in marriage with our Sons. Others again said, it was no more but this; the good hour was come, wherein God would bring Modera∣tion out of her Troubles, as he had done Joseph, who had lyen in disgrace under some foul Accusa∣tions, till the time that his Word came, the Word of the Lord had tryed him; then the King sent and loosed him, the Ruler of the peo∣ple,
and let him go free: And the rather, because he had been in∣formed by some about him, that he had skill in opening Divine Re∣velations, and might be of great use in preventing a (spiritual) Fa∣mine. Others again, that it had been with the Daughter now, as it was with her Father Hyperzelotes, both in his first and last: Time and im∣mediate inspiration from God, had wrought this blessed change in him; who, after his intemperate zeal spent against Moderation, became now her great Friend, Patron and Advocate, and then the most glo∣rious Champion for Truth, Piety and Charity that ever was, and a most Eminent Instrument of good to the universal Church; after which, it is observed by a Sacred Pen, Then had the Churches rest in all Judea, Samaria and Galilee, and were edified, and, walking in
the fear of the Lord, and in the Com∣forts of the Holy Ghost, were mul∣tiplyed. And in all the Churches, where Tidings came of this blessed change, They glorified God in him. The like was now done in all Feli∣ciana. Howsoever it was, and whatso∣ever may be thought the cause, it becomes not Pamphilus to deter∣mine; but all remembred, what a Blessed, Peace-making, and Great-Ʋniting-Monarch of a famous Island, had given for his Motto upon his Coin, A Domino factum est illud, & est mirabile in oculis nostris: This was the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes: who had united Kingdoms, formerly divi∣ded, and at enmity; and said, the like had befallen them; and there∣fore desired God might have the whole glory and praise ascribed to him.
Only this is certain, nothing could have been done more to the general satisfaction of the sober sort of Men in the Island, to raise up their hearts in the highest praise of God, and to the greatest measure of thankfulness to so Gracious and Prudent a Prince, and to the cementing of Christian Love and mutual good Affection all the Island over (only Disobedience was much discontented; and look∣ing scornfully out at a Window (as Michal once, when all Israel were in their highest joy at a great Festival) and shook her head:) So that Is∣rael of old did not more rejoyce, when the King had brought the Ark out of a private House into publick again, and appointed it a fixed Sta∣tion; or when the Son of the same King had newly Dedicated the holy Temple; it being set down in their sacred Stories, that both these Prin∣ces blessed their people, and they were again blessed by their people: And the conclusion of the Story of the
latter was this; after his Devotions ended, He sent away the people, and they blessed the King, and went into their Tents, joyful and glad in heart, for all the goodness the Lord had done for David his Servant, and for Israel his People.
CHAP. XV. What became of Disobedience and her Children, they being quelled and reduced, what a happy World followed, ac∣cording to an old Prophe∣cy. NOw, when we shall have dis∣patched Disobedience out of the way, our work is at an end; we shall therefore tell you what be∣came of her, now there was no o∣ther Enemy to be suppressed; And would we could say, she came to the like good end Extremity made: But it was never likely.—
She was not of like Temper and Spirit as Extremity was, ever to be touched with any sense of Honour or Conscience. Extremity was of a Generous Spirit, and Noble Education, and ever bare a true Love to her Country; only too too passionate. Disobedience, on the other side, was of a dogged, surly and unqui∣et Spirit; nothing could please her, neither could she well tell what she would have, only fretted at the times, and her own private con∣dition. But now those great Families of Extremity and Moderation being united and allyed, there was no fear of any considerable disturbance Disobedience could make. And to make sure, and timely to prevent any mischief that any of the Chil∣dren of Disobedience could hatch or
devise, Extremity and Moderation's Friends agreed, with their united Forces to fall upon them: And they being within a short time after up in Rebellion, it was the Lot of a Party of Extremities Forces to give the first charge, who scattered the body, and took some of the chief Heads, and made them Examples; and Moderation's, with their Party, took some others: And both agreed, to the terror of the rest, to send them bound to their Father Absa∣lom's Oak, drawn backward in his Chariot by his Mule, whom when she carried thither, and had left them safe hanging by the head, be∣tween Heaven and Earth, upon a three-forked Branch (the Wood devou∣red more that day then the Sword) the lightened Beast went away from under them, leaving them hang∣ing. Some of the rest that were taken stragling, were made to go on Pil∣grimage
a foot to the Oak of Refor∣mation, a Tree which had formerly done good service on like occasion in the dayes of their fore-fathers: And because this Tree was some∣what higher then the former, they were fain to climb, or else to be lifted up to it, and presently af∣ter, the kind Earth, to rid the World of them, opened, and they were swallowed up with the Congregation of Abiram. The Heads being taken off thus, the rest submitted, and fell to hard Labour; all save a few de∣sperate ones, who seeing they could do no more good on it (others call it mischief and wickedness) fled the Island: Only some (too many of them too) of the latter brood of Disobedience, the Hectors and To∣ries, the Drunkards, Whoremon∣gers, and other vicious persons, remained sculking in Corners, and harboured in wicked houses, whom
it is hoped, the good and whole∣some Laws of the Island (for there are no better any where) and due execution of them, may, in time, reduce from the evil wayes of their Mother Disobedience; then no Na∣tion in the World more happy, and may well be called Feliciana, or Eli∣siana for ever. But already all Storms were scat∣tered, and an happy Calm follow∣ed, and there seemed to be a new World: The Island was settled, Armies disbanded, every Man sate under his own Vine and Fig-tree, eating, drinking and making merry, as in the older World, or in the Halcyon and Golden dayes of Solo∣mon's Reign, rejoycing, that Mercy and Truth, Righteousness and Peace, Extremity and Moderation, had kis∣sed each other: And the Primitive times did seem to be returned, wherein they did eat their meat with gladness and sing eness of heart,
praising God, and having favour with all the people, and the Lord added to his Church dayly such as should be saved. And all good Men pray∣ed, long may Extremity and Mode∣ration be friends, or rather, no more Extremity, but alwayes Modera∣tion. And then many could remem∣ber, there had been an old Pro∣phecy, which their Fathers had told them (foretold many a day agone by a holy Man) which was now fulfilled, and was to this effect. Moderation shall Revive, Ex∣tremity shall Cease, Disobedience stoop to Reason, All end in Peace. The Envy of Ephraim shall cease; Ephraim shall not envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim.
Te Duce, siqua manent sceleris vestigia nostri, Irrita perpetua solvent formidi∣ne Terras. Virgil. Glory to God in the highest, on Earth Peace, and good will amongst Men.
Moderations Receipt, (taught her by her Aunt Experience;) Soveraign to cure any Distempers in the Church, especi∣ally inward in the Bowels; as also of excellent vertue against a Rupture. BLest Soul! she taught how to secure The Church. 'Twill do, if put in ure.
A Pound of Piety she singles, As much of Charity then mingles: Zeal bruis'd with Know∣ledge next she takes, (Two Pugils a rare Compound makes) Then tops of Prudence, and the Pith Of Elder Faith, Stale Truth, therewith
A good handful of Hu∣mility, Some mild Forbearance, Ʋnity In Matters Mayn; Opini∣ons New, Leaves, Roots and Stalks away she threw; And to make sure it shall Digest, Loyalty sweetens all the rest.
THE Outlandish Names IN THIS DISCOURSE ENGLISHED. ABaddon, and Apol∣lyon, Names giv∣en in Scripture to Satan, signifie a Destroyer.
Agathophilus, a Lov∣er of Goodness or good Men. Anaideia, Impudence. Asotos, a Prodigal or Riotous person. Avernus, a Lake put for Hell. Blandula, a fair spo∣ken Woman, or a Flatte∣rer. Ben-hagios, an holy Son.
Bar-Jonah, the Son of the Dove. Crapula, Drunken∣ness, or Excess. Circe, a Witch, whose Cups turned men into Swine. Donna Olympia, a Roman Lady, who lately managed all Affairs for the Pope, at the Court at Rome.
Donna Spatulosa, a lascivious Lady. Dolosus, Subtle, or Crafty. Eulaleia, a well-spoken Woman. Eudorla, Comeliness, or making a fair shew. Eupolemus, a good Warriour. Eusebius, a Godly person.
Eutrapeleia, Jesting, or Merriment. Feliciana, an happy Island. Gelasius, one given to Laughter. Hyperphiladelpho∣tus, one exceeding loving to the Brethren. Hyperzelotes, exces∣sively zealous.
Misoponos, one that hates labour and pains. Phantasia, Pomp, or Gallantry. Philautos, one that loves himself. Philallelos, one that loveth others. Philedonos, a lover of pleasure. Philodemus, a lover of the people.
Philodike, a lover of Justice. Philotheos, a lover of God. Porne, a Harlot. Probation, Tryal. Temerarius, Rash, or venturous. FINIS.
