S3158 [ocn]688636404 212074
The Shepherd's SON: OR, The Faithless Nurse. Containing a Royal Frolick between King Edward the Fourth, and his Nobles, at Westminster; as you shall find in this following Ditty, taken from ancient Writings, for the Satis∣faction of the World. To the Tune of, Tho Royal Foxrester. Licens'd according to Order. woodcut of portrait of king woodcut of a man with boy and woman with girl I Come not to sing you a sonnet of lies, Which every fanciful Man can divise, Nor any strange rodemantadoes in tune, Concerning the wonderful world in the moon. No, no, I will tell you a story of truth, King Edward the fourth in his flourishing youth, He many a fancy was pleased to try; Here's one you shall hear, if you please to draw nigh: Behold, he was one of the frolicksome Kings, Who often discours'd of the causes of things; Amongst his true Nobles of honour and worth, Said he, should we take a young Boy from the birth, And keep him in silence for twice seven years, Where never no language may sound in his ears, To teach him to speak any words more or less; I wonder how then he himself wou'd express? Said one of the Nobles, He'll blate like a sheep; Another reply'd, that true silence he'd keep: With that, said K. Edward we'll bring up one mute, And so by that means we shall end the dispute. And if I shall live while the time's at an end; To him I will prove an infallable Friend; For then to a Tutor or school he shall go, Good learning upon him I'll freely bestow. The Son of a Shepherd they soon did procure, And likewise a Nurse, who was free to endure The silence of living, to pleasure the King; And vow'd to be faithful in every thing. King Edward near Windsor a place did provide, Acradle, and all things convenient beside, To cherish the Infant out of his own purse, And none was to enter but Madam the Nurse. She was not confin'd, but had freedom to go Abroad in the Town, for an hour or so; But ever when back to the Child she did come, She must be more silent, the none that was dumb. No manner of words in the least must she spake, When out of the crable the Child she did take; Or when at the breast it was sucking it's fill, Because of the absolute tryal of skill. The King he enjoyn'd her the same to observe, Said he, If the least from your duty you swerve, Then during my reign, I will keep you confin'd, And therefore your business consider and mind. But if you are faithful, and true to your trust, Here's forty broad pieces I'll give you at first; Besides I will settle one hundred a year Vpon you, and therefore go on without fear. She vow'd to the King she wou'd never neglect, Performing her duty in ev'ry respect; Therefore with the Infant she strait did repair, To keep it according to promise with care. This silence the Nurse did observe for a while, But as the Childgrew, it was subject to smile, And tooe in her lap, as the same she undrest; O then with sad sorrow she'd beat on her breast. The trickling tears from her eyes they wou'd fall, To think that she must not say nothing at all To please the young Infant, yet nevertheless, Sometimes in sad sorrow, these words she express: King Edward has many a foolish thing done, And this, I declare, amongst others is one: This did she repeat as it sat on her knee, At length the Child got is as perfect as she. Now, now when the time was expir'd, we find The Child it came into his Majesty's mind; Who sent for him then on a Festival-day, Amongst all his Nobles, both gallant and gay. When into their presence the Youth he was brought, All knowing right well he was not to be taught; With longing desires they waited awhile, At length he did make the whole company smile. He nev'r see so many before in his days, Quoth he, when his voice he began for to raise, King Edward has many a foolish thing done, And this, I declare, amongst others is one. The Nobles they laught, and the King with the rest, He cou'd not forbear, but must smile at the jest; But oh, the poor Nurse, with a trembling fear, She cry'd out, My ruine, my ruine is near. The King he look'd then with a terrible frown, And said, By my honoured Scepter and Crown, You ought to be punisht according to law, Because that my word did not keep you in awe. The Nobles then present her pardon obtain'd, And so for the time that his Majesty reign'd, She lived in plenty near Westminster-hall, Not far from the sign of the Lion and Ball. The King of the Youth took particular care, To bless him with learning, no cost he did spare; And when all was done, as in writings we hear, He settled upon him three hundred a year. LONDON: Printed for C. Bates, at the Sun and Bible, in Pye-corner.
