12885 99839623 4062
THE TRAGI-COMICALL HISTORY OF ALEXTO AND ANGELICA. Containing The progresse of a zealous Candide, and Masculine Love. With a Various Mutability of a fe∣minine affection. Together with Loves Iustice thereupon. Written by Alex: Hart Esq. LONDON: Printed by B. A. and T. F. for Nich: Vavasour, and are to be sold at his shop in the Inner Temple neere the Church. 1640.
TO THE REA∣ders IN prece∣dent times when elocu∣tion with poesie joy∣ing
their rivall, Ju∣ned, Jnvention be∣dicious wits, with their workes were patronized; And Historicall fictions received favour in the royall Palace of greatest Princes: so hereditarily de∣scending from the Poets are in these our times applauded,
and delightfull to the considerate and true apprehensive Reader, they cher∣rishing a young and studious Muse, in future hope of nobler issue, not cropping her by untimely censures ere shee display her Autumne progenies: for noblenesse with vertue mixt, gives
the true lustre of a studious worke, when Clouded ignorance malings the best in∣scription. Therefore presuming on this maxime, I am bold to present vnto the worlds eye this booke, which hath served a prentiship vnseene, since it was pen'd; And now at my com∣ming
into England it desires to depart from his fellowes and to be set vp in print, craving pardon for all his faults, and to be made free by your kind acceptance. Which shall oblige me yours, ALEX: HART.
TO HIS RESPEC∣ted Friend ALEX: HART: Esquire. FEtch me that quill, that first writ Ho∣mers stile, Dipt in the standish of Poetick Oyle, With which I'le fixe on Gold thy ample praise, Whose lustre there from death, thy Fame might raise, Had I Mercuriall eloquence (O then) I'de figure thee, the Mirrour now of men!
Hadst thou Carrous't from Helicon a draught, Or from wits spiced cup with Muses quaft; Or hadst thou sipt of Aganippes Fount, And after walk't vpon Parnassus Mount, Or had thy eares ere heard brave Arcas voyce Philamelon like peculiar thee his choyce, Or had there beene presented to thine eye The bubling brooke where gold-plum'd Peacockes lye, Whence sweet Himelon and harmonious sound Skales Azure Skies with Echoes from the ground, Hadst thou beene blest so farre as to have seene
Joves Daughters trace in the Pierian Greene, Whose comely Tresses of dishevel'd haire In dangling downe, each one rich jems doth beare, Or hadst thou ever view'd the Delphicke Rocke The Lawrell bore, and worne Apolloes socke, Had'st thou I say such favours but received I deeme thou hadst wits of all wit bereaved, Besides what more perform'd had thy brave braine That thus hath wrote in such unequall straine, Which cherish still that thy immortall Fame, May live augmenting honour to thy name,
When thou art dead, that after age may see The ample worth, that first did spring in thee. Thine to command A. H.
IN LAVDEM HƲJƲS LIBRI Carmen Enco∣misticon. COme hither Homer, wher's thy sacred quill? Learned Minerva now declare thy Skill; Come thrice three daughters of immortall Jove,
Now sound your glorious Trumpet from above Of never dying fame, Blazon these lines With golden Caracters, lest Envies shrines Detract the splendor of their noble fame, And Carping Momus verifie the same; But why doth my vnlearned Muse dare sing Thy noble workes, with her vnpolisht string? So long as Learning and the learned live, Thy workes to thee Immortall praise shall give. Ad Authorem. O Cor Dulce viris! certè tibi fama perennis,
Nomen ab ornatu, convenienter habes. Ad Lectorem. Candide, si cupias insignia gesta porentum Praelia seu technas cognoscere quaeris amoris Gest áque si ducum quaeris monumenta{que} regum; Omnia sunt isto plenè contenta libello: Perlege tunc istum librum; via plana petenti, Cujus finis honor, quia fine reportat honorem. JA: NETLEY.
TO THE BLOS∣some of Poetry ALEX: HART, Esquire. BEE studious still, thy worth I will admire, In spight of Foe thy fame must still aspire Vnto Immortall glory, and renowne. For thou must weare brave Clios lawrell Crown, O Paradox that fifteene yeares so young, Should lay such plots as from thy muse hath sprung!
Acute you genious Poets of our time, Ye' and lost your wits, before they come in prime, Leave of your Bacchus rimes and rowse for shame, What shall a Child bereave you of your fame: Yet doe not staine with imputations quill This tender youth that's innocent of ill, He needs not care, Apollo's Armour hee Beares on his brest from pen-shot keepes him free Thine what his owne, B. W.
TO HIS LEAR∣NED FRIEND, ALEX: HART Esquire. WHo ere thou art, kind Reader, view'st this booke, A wonder rare drop't from a youths first quill, Whence gravest wits for patterns faire may looke, And with's inventions quaint whole volums fill.
What's riper age is likelie to bring forth, Let them be Iudges who Parnassus hant: Sure such will cherish earely budding worth, And praises ae ne're let his vertues want. The Admirer of your vertues W.M.
THE HISTORY OF ALEXTO AND ANGELICA, OR Loves Meta∣phor. IN Grece there dwelt many Noble men, a∣mongst the which there was one named Alexto, a Lord of great account and eminencie, who was reve∣renced and honoured of all
strangers aswell as of his dome∣sticke people, and those which did inhabite about him, not for the largenesse of his Patrimony, or the greatnesse of his possessi∣ons (though they were such as his neighbouring Peeres could not equalize) but the foundation and originall of his extolments sprung from his grave, judicious and matchlesse counsels, which so liberally he would extend on all sorts: And also for his chari∣table Almes and benevolences, with which hee plentifully would store, succour and che∣rish those, which were in adver∣sity. But to our intended discourse. This grave Senator had a Sonne who bearing his name, disagreed not from his properties, but punctually had his Fathers he∣roicke
inclinations, which made him as happy as meritorious, and was no lesse honoured of all men, then the limits of his de∣serts did reach unto: whose daily practises were to excell each man in courtesie: but as he was not too much selfe-conceited, nor too lofty minded: so were not his thoughts fixed on any base or unworthy object, for they were as magnanimous as he nobly borne, which alwayes did aspire unto the height of vertue, and no sooner sought but attained unto. For the come∣linesse of his pourtraiture it was unparallel'd, yet had Venus lived in those dayes, she would have said that her Adonis did exceed him far: who, in my judgment, was not worthy to beare the title of this young Grecians name.
But now as touching his fea¦ture and Physiognomy the co¦lours of this my Rurall pencill is to sable to him and figure him in so liberall, lively, and ample sort, as the genius of the judicious Reader may conceive: And also fearing that in heraul∣dring forth his worth, some Demosthenes interrupt mee as did Aesehines the Orator: who being sent from Athens to King Philip of Macedon at his returne from the Court to A∣thens, he much commended and extold the exquisite beauty of PHILIP, with his admirable e∣locution and excessive bearing of drinke. The which being related in the audience of De∣mosthenes, hee presently checkt Aesehines, saying, that he made a woman of Philip for his beau∣ty,
a babling Sophister for his eloquence, and a spunge for his retaining of liquour. But now this young ALEXTO, was the onely joy and comfort of his Aged Sire, who having a desire to have his Sonne experi∣enced in Martiall Discipline, and also not ignorant for the cour∣ting of amorous Damozels, he sent him to Athens to bee edu∣cated in both, and also for his Comrade he sent one Sandrico, a mans Sonne of great worth, and no lesse valiant, then his owne Sonne, for Sandrico's Courage was apparently mani∣fested, and also proved most eminent. But in short space these two undanted spirits were landed at Athens, where not altogether so joyfull for their safe arrivall, as
for the good society of each o∣ther, to whom they linckt their fidelity in a fraternall vow, and bound their friendship with such a Gordian knot, as the Asse was fastened to the Tem∣ple of Apollo with. But after they had spent some few yeares in Athens, the Thra∣cian Emperour began to over∣runne Greece, which stood in need of the ayd, power, and assi∣stance of these two Champions Alexto and Sandrîco. And speedily they were sent for home, for the succour of their aged Sires. In which warres they performed excee∣ding rare deeds of Chivalry, whereby they became the only blossoms and mirrours of those times: for still the honour of each day did adorne their Crests.
But the acting of their exquisit feates, to the no small amaze∣ment of each spectator, in which behold how retrograde fortune proved, that these two uncon∣troled Greeks, became captivated by the arrivall and verball re∣port, which the shrill Trumpet of fame triumphed through all the Army. Which was of the exquisite feature of the Roman Lady An∣gelica, of whom t'was said, that if all the Goddesses were com∣posed in an Vnion, they could not equalize her, the citation here of each particular of her unparalleliz'd worth, would appeare too tedious. Only con∣ceive this, that the report which flying fame did demonstrate, did still solicite the Eares of young Alexto: insomuch, that it was
deepely rooted in his heart, and the fruit which sprung from thence, was his daily squared sighes, whereby he was altoge∣ther disabled to negociate his Martiall affaires. And thus was he enamoured of her whom his eyes were never blest with the prospect of; yet daily did hee surfeit by the excessive quaffing of the nomination of her name, and did as much adore the same, as Pigmalion did the senselesse Portraiture that he carved, on which he so much doted, that he made it his bedfellow. But all this while, we have not treated of the vexation and perplexity which Sandrico su∣stained: not that hee was in∣tangled or captivated, by the amorous report of the terrestiall Goddesse. But his griefe and
disability proceeded from the pensivenes, which he perceived his friend Alexto to be in. And as he could not conceive the originall from whence it sprung, so would not ALEXTO relate unto him, and divulge the cause of his internall griefe, which was apparantly descryed by his externall hew, and me∣lancholy gestures, yet poore Sandrico was not so well read in that loving Philosophy as to conceive the nature of his un∣usuall passion, for he was more fitte for the Tents of boyste∣rous Mars, then the Temples of amorous Ladies. So likewise was ALEXTO before he was intrapped with the snare of affection: But alas! there is no heart so sove∣raigne good, but Love can make simple.
And so it fell out that one time above the rest, Sandrîco came into the Tent of his noble friend ALEXTO, and falling into a deepe discourse: at the Cata∣stroph & period of each sentence, Alexto would still close them up with such a sigh, that it would seeme to rent and cleave in sunder the rafters of his Tent. At which Sandrîco laying fast hold upon that occasion, began to importune and request him by all the permanent and unfai∣ned friendship, that so liberally he had and did shew on him, that hee would not conceale any longer that in obstinacy, which might prove his utter ruine, but reveale it unto him, whereby it might be a mitigati∣on of his distresse, vowing to
participate of the same, and also to lend him the propagation of all his future and faithfull en∣deavours. Have you beheld how Iris struts when as her Mantel's spred? Or have you mark't when as Sol riseth with his radiant beames, he doth disperse the misty Foggs and unsavoury va∣pours, which were obscured in the concavious places of the earth? Even so the true paterne of perfect friendship, which SANDRICO spred upon A∣LEXTO partly disperst the sable Clouds of that his present calamity. For when Birds sing early, it doth betoken a faire day, but when the Sun-shine garnishes it, it prognosticates a shower▪ but after a storme comes a calme: so after ALEXTO had
turned over the Volumes of numberlesse sighes, he unfolded his mind unto SANDRICO in these words. O unhappy J! Warres have their ends either houre, or death, the Scilian pooles by sufficient helpe, may be drawne dry, the Talitian tree in time did wither, the Stoiticall floud did drowne the usurping Ty∣rant. But Love, O Love! Thou hast no period, neither can J bring thee to a compromise delay to thee, is the unhappy Headsman, that holding mee, neither saves nor kills, but leaves me to languish in a bur∣ning frozen zone. Sandrico being attentive, by this understood, that an amo∣rous passion had creep'd into
him, and thus began modestly to chide him. Oh quench these smothering sparkes, lest suffered they grow to a perpetuall flame, and like the Amazonian Cell, scorch all that doth approach it nigh, and at last with Mount Aetna con∣sume it selfe; But (Oh my friend) let the Buckets of thy undanted courage, draw forth of the noble Well of thy under∣standing so much reason; as to quench this unmartiall Agony. Let not thy brave, heroicke mind, stoope unto so base and ascivious a lure fit for none but Panicall rusticks, that never were trained in the Trojan Warres, whose whips & prongs are Speares and Lances; Hay∣cocks, Shields, and Targets, and blew Bonnets, Crests and Hel∣mets,
I blush at thy thoughts, and could take pleasure to deridefan∣cie: were it not in thee, but now J see the Poets did well, when as they first fained Cupid, that disloyall Sycophant to be blind. For had he seene thy worth, hee never durst attempt a shaft, as thus rovingly hath light upon thee, the which repulse, and send backe againe in as many pieces about his Corpes, as there be sands in the Lydian shores: for what's his bolt only headed with a voluntary desire, and feathered with a quicke consent, which is shot from a bow of Jdlenesse. Then rowse up thy disordered senses, and remem∣ber the Souldiours Phrase; Dulcior est Mors quam Amor. Aristotle, Socrates, Nay, hadst thou taken Lectures from Mer∣cury, and studied all thy life
time for Poems, to feed the vari∣able incredulity of these insati∣able Dames, either they would banish thee, as Caesar did Ovid, or condemne thee to dye in the height of their displeasure. As for beauty (their chiefest pride) it is but Times flower which as it is delicate, so it soone withers; for it is like the Colours which Phidias drew, which seemed admirable, and to the view most excellent, but did vanish and impaire at every aeriall breath. You know that VENUS the Matron of them all was faire, the sooner to make a wanton, also HELEN the Mir∣rour of our Grecian Land, but aske Troy of her qualities. Therefore when as you have runne through the Alphabet of praising fictions, as in saying
Worthiest Mistresse, my service lyes prostrated unto your ac∣ceptance, the which if you please to command, I shall think of none other happinesse, but in the accomplishment of the same. Or should'st thou figure thy Mistresse, as the Poets did Venus to ride in a Golden Chariot, drawne with silver breasted Doves, or as Iuno with golden plumed Peacocks: At the last, when as they are satisfied by drawing the day of extol∣ments, they will seeke to place thee amongst the starres, as Ʋe∣nus did Pythagentes, for a Flat∣terer, a very lofty seate but low in reward, and this is the com∣mon course now a dayes of our Grecian, and Roman Damosels. Therefore use no physicke but
the consideration of these, which forth of the seriousnesse of my love to thee, I have beene en∣boldned to relate. After Sandrico had made an end of this discourse, Alexto be∣gan to answer him, as followeth, My dearest Sandrico, had Dio∣nisius but ten Platoes to tell him truth, he had not erred, A∣gamemnon wish't but ten such as Nestor, to vanquish all his Enemies at Phrygia, and to set our Greekes at liberty: But thou art both a Plato and a Nestor, unto me, thy counsels are both true and good: But alas! my heart is filled with such an amo∣rous passion, that it admits no attentivenesse unto thy friendly advertisements. Yet J must con∣fesse, I have heard that a womans love is like the river Tedocheus, which
being tasted unto some, it proves venomous and banefull, but unto others as their daily nutriment: Or as the Macedo∣nian Image, which unto some Champions at the triumph there, it would cast amorous glances, and on others disdain∣full lookes and frownes. And also as on the Saxtenion Mount there was a Castle inchanted by the Necromancer Bastellotus, wherein he caused to bee tortu∣red his faire Polidarca, for her cruelty towards him, at the En∣try of which he had placed a Brasen Bull, a fierce Dragon and hellish furies: These were Guar∣dians whereby none could vanquish nor unloose, but onely he, which was the Mirrour of Rome, for all perfection. Al∣contiodes and hee finished the
Inchantment. Then O Sandrico, suffer mee to try my fortune, which perad∣venture may prove as these have, and why may not I with Calapassus take a turne in Dancing with Ióves Daughters in the Pierian Greene? Tush, tush, said Sandrico, remember thy owne speeches, wherefore did Bastelotus cause Pilodorea to be tortured, but for her cruelty towards him, and may not thy Mistresse prove as marble hearted? Also, remember how long Lodovicus was enamoured of the Lady Dantrissea, and how un∣faithfull she prooed unto him; As also when he dyed, he desired that his heart should be shewed unto her, wherein she perceived her owne similitude, as transpa∣rent
as an object is by the Suns reflexion in a Chrystall Mirror, yet she regarded it not, but esteem'd it ridiculous: But should thy Mistresse prove so marble-hearted, I would become Santeticus, causing her to be in∣chanted in that sort, as hee did Dantrissia, for being the death of his friend Lodovicus. First, he caused her to be pla∣ced in a boyling Caldron a∣mongst furies, with the portrai∣ture of his friend Lodovicus in her view, holding his blee∣ding heart in his hand, whereby shee should also gaze on her own dissembling Phisiognomy, and on Lodovicus front was engraven in Capitall letters this motto. Thy base dissembling face, did cause my death,
Thy flattering Tongue, makes this to bleed on earth; Torments I did sustaine in life for thee: And now in Death thus tortured shalt thou be. Secondly, her nutriment was the excrement of Toades, Adders and Serpents, which was dish't in the naturall Scull of Lodovi∣cus, served her by Satyres which were her attendants, with strange deformed beasts. In this sort she still remained which is too good for all such disloyall Sycophants. But my Alexto, if this amorous conceit doe but once creepe into thee, I doe much dread the successe, for thou, that art for beauty like the faire Romans Paramour, for Wisedome like Vlysses,
whom Circe could not inchant, for Courage like a second He∣ctor. Then seeing thou art adorned with all these graces, bequeath not thy selfe, and it, unto so foo∣lish a passion, which allowes nothing excellent, but what it likes, for it shadoweth beggery, in Crates, whom Hisparata thought, and esteemed rich for his love, but contrariwise, Pal∣perea accompted Croesus a poore fellow, because she disli∣ked him. Then yeeld not thy selfe to this fancy which is alto∣gether in extreames, and admits no reason, for thou at he from whose mouth flowes melody, more enchanting then the Si∣rens▪ And in thy lips the Muses make a new Parnassus, and thy head containes the subtilty of Aristotle.
Remember also thou art a Warriour, whose undanted cou∣rage, was never yet quail'd by any, neither forraigne Foe, nor home bredenemy. For the name of noble ALEXTO is sufficient to vanquish Troopes of armed men. After Sandrico had used all the skill he could to perswade his friend ALEXTO from the entertaining of his new fancie Alexto began thus to answer him. My deare Sandrico, as the wounded Deere wringeth forth teares, and as the Myrtle depres∣sed yeeldeth gumme, so by the deepe impression, which J have conceived of faire Angelica's beauty, my sighs leade mee ca∣ptive to picke up a mourner in the time of my owne teares: besides, my SANDRICO,
the Gods should doe nature too much wrong, if they should place an Adamant heart in a Chrystall face, therfore twit me no more with Vesta, for Venus is she who can chastise Angelica though she did glory in beauty, as Narcissus, who stooping to kisse his owne shadow in a brooke was immediately drow∣ned therein; Besides Lucina is a Goddesse which must be im∣ployed, for marriage is honou∣rable, and to live unmatcht it were a wrong to nature. The Phoenix when shee is nigh her end, builds her neast with all sweet spices, and odoriferous perfumes, as close unto the Sunnes reflexion as she can, whereby at her decease his splendidious and Radiant beams should revive a young Phoenix
forth of the Ashes of the olde deceased one. But Sandrico should either man or woman dye without the propagation of Issue, their Cha∣racters and resemblances, could not be left behind, but by a dead substance as Dostitetius was, whose portraiture was car∣ved ere he died by the cunning Artist; therefore I say Love is Divine, and Marriage honoura∣ble, especially to those that are the paragons of this terrestriall Paradise. Also when as the Demetriall King esteemed of Love, as the Barbarian King did of gold wch he sent as presents to his Ene∣mies, Venus curst him out of her Temple, wherefore he was hated of all, and thus hatefully dyed. And when Rossilius would tast
no fruit but such as grew in the Gardens of Hesperides, neither then any Colour content his eyes but such as was stained by the Maureticall fish; that is, he could affect no Damozell but shee, which was accompted the terrestriall Goddesse of the Thra∣tion land, named Dionela; and because he was loyally affected to her, Venus suffered him to marry her, and when as she lackt the assistance of Lucina, Diana also came vnto her, and at the birth of Dionella's son the God∣desses rained Pearle, Iupiter gold▪ Mars trained his warlike Legions in the Aire. This was to signifie that where loyall affecti∣on is, the Gods rejoyce tryum∣phantly, Also when as Doves are matcht young they never sever but by death, so Vines grafted be∣ing
sprigs they seldome part, but they decay. Sandrico perceiving that Alexto would still Crosse him, he thus begun againe; I perceive that thy head is not barren of Sophistry to prove this thy Ar∣gument of loving Philosophie: but suppose (my friend) that thy Autumne showers come too late, and cause not thy Crop to prove. Besides, a woman will say, she hath but one heart, as the Heavens have but one Sunne, but none can finde how many tricks and false imaginations are observed and shrowded in that one heart of theirs. Then looke before you leape, and walke not where no footing can be found, seek not to clime Olimpus before you consider the altitude therof
neither barke with the Wolves of Cirea against Endimion. Settle not too much affection before you know how to be re∣quited, but I perceive that is true which one relates of a certaine person which was so ravished in his amorous and fond Contem∣plations, that he had the Image of his Mistres so imprinted in his thoughts that he seemed al∣waies to converse with her, and performe with her all those ac∣tions which lovers vse to com∣mit in imbracing of their loves, so you Alexto grow almost de∣sperate for her, whom you have not seene: Alexto perceiving Sandrico spoke vnto the pur∣pose, he speedily thus answered him. Prethee Sandrico honour me so much as to beare me com∣pany vnto Rome; where J will
try my fortune with Angelica, and if she prove not so amorous as I am loyall, I will more ex∣claime of her then Doronus did of our Grecian Army, to which request Sandrico consented, per∣ceiving there was no repulsion but▪ Alexto would try his for∣tune with the Roman Lady An∣gelica hee gave his consent to travaile with Alexto. In which Journey Alexto began thus to passe away the time. Worthiest Sandrico, beau∣ties arrowes are so sharpe, and the darts that flye from womens eyes so piercing that the choisest Armour cannot repulse either of them, no not the Corslet which Vulcan made for the Didonian Champion, for it pierceth deeper within the tender brest of an Amorous Lover then Canon
Shot in plancke, for shot, either it passeth through or stickes, but when Love makes battery, if it enters not the de∣fendant it teares the plaintiffe in a thousand peeces. It's also like the Amazonian Armour which being shot at the King of Phrygia it was repulst in such sort by Magicke Art, that it brake about the Eares of Stonatus, who shot it, that it killd him and five hundred of his resolute Warrirs; Or, it hath resemblance vnto the fire∣balls and Thunder-bolts which Iove sent at Mars, the one lighting on his Helmet, and the other glancing on his Shield, were returned with such fury, that the bolts stroke Xantusissius (loves kins∣man) dead, and the balls had
well nigh fired Iove himselfe out of his throane. So nothing could extinguish the wild-fire which well nigh burnt the Ca∣stle of Silotus, but the Milke and Juice of the Stabolian Tree. So neither will nor can a∣ny thing asswage the fervent anguish of a Loyall Lover, but the true acceptance of the beloved; For what spoke APOLLO, hee whose skill in compounds and simples excee∣ded all mens (for Galen and Hip∣pocrates, were not worthy to carry his Drugs, when as an Amorous passion crept into him) hee said, Hei mihi quod nullis amor est medicabilis herbis; Besides, Love, that Divine passion, if it bee over rash dealt with, it burnes dim, and
dyes like the Forge of Dedalus. But if it be moderately treated on, it will quickly flame with consent like Arnalian sparkles which smothering lay, but being leisurely blowne were soone fired. But my Sandrico if my faire Angelica would looke vpon me as the affectionated mother on her smiling Infant, or with such an amiable countenance as Do∣ranelia did on Stoltius her con∣stant lover, who rushed into the battaile at Phrygia, resolutely resolving there to dye, or to set at liberty his faire Mistres, who after a tedious conflict with ex∣pence of blood and the close pursuing of his enemies, was almost brought unto the period of life, but casting his decaying eyes about, speedily received
such strength and fresh Courage from the feiture of his beautious Love which did so replenish his empty veines, that in short time he subdued his haughty Foes, and brought them to submissi∣on▪ even so an amorous glance from Angelica, would revive my drooping heart, which is in a fierce conflict for her sake, and is almost vanquisht by death, his deadly enemy. But ô Sandrico, doe but con∣sider what Love is; for as there is no cut to vnkindnesse; so there is no haughty spirit, but that the quintessence of Love, can chastise with Celerity. For great Alexander stood affrighted at the Amazonian beauties, Hector in the midst of his battaile against Alezanto when as hee saw the Empresse
Claria hee instantly was ama∣zed, and sustained the Ago∣ny of a Tartian Ague, letting his Lance drop from his Mar∣tiall hand, suffering himselfe to bee disarmed, vnhelm'd, and Captivated by his Foes. I feare, quoth Sandrico, that this fiction of praising Love will not last long, for the Nightingale hath but one May in twelve moneths, and whereas thou hast surfet∣ted by quaffing the poysoned Cup of bitter Love, thou shalt finde the reward in the bottome thereof, to bee but the dreggs of thy counter∣feiting Mistresses hate; yeeld not too much to the impo∣tency thereof, for you know not with how much gall and
bitternesse the hony of Love is tempered with. Est melle & felle foecundissimus: Be∣sides, a woman hath as many minds as the Alphabet hath letters, for the distinction of their fancies are like the diffe∣rence of their faces, for A∣ristes said, that his Alderia had two kinds of faces, the one dissembling to please him, the other lasciviously to enter∣taine a friend; also they are meerely compos'd and made of vanity which makes them prove so light. For Phylistis waighing his Mistresse in the ballance of equity; found the longer hee kept her the lighter she was, and as the Marble drops teares against every storme, so a woman will faine wee∣weeping
vpon every slight and light occasion; but that is, be∣cause they would be thought of as tender nature and constituti∣on as their skins be extold for whitenesse. All this while Alexto was very attentive, and was almost perswaded in the same forme to raile against his Mistresse ere he was arrived at Rome to try her, but by this time you must con∣ceive they are somewhat nigh, and to make short, Alexto thus began to answer him. I suppose (said he) that you Sandrico was brought forth Minerva-like and not by a woman; for if a woman had bin thy mother, thou couldst not thus fervently have railed against their sex. Tush said Sandrica, Avicenna said. Hominem posse produci
naturaliter ex terra, if you will not beleeve a woman was my Mother, imagine mee to bee brought forth of the Earth; Be∣sides, I am no Scholler vnto King Lewis the sixt, as in lear∣ning that sentence which hee taught his Sonne; saying, he needs no more Latin but this: Qui nesci dissimulare nescit vivere; and though truth gets foes, and flattery friendship, yet I will not sooth thee vp in that which I know is banefull, also I point at no one particular Dame, neither include all in ge∣nerall, but I speake of the disloy∣all and inconstant ones: there∣fore no vertuous dame will be outragious but onely in reading what I have said, and viewing the picture which is here drawn find it to beare resemblance un∣to
themselves, such may dart ve∣nome at me that are stung by the worme of Conscience. But let me say▪ what I will, thou provest regardlesse thereof, and with Rocardus King of Phrisland being by Wolfranius perswaded to be baptized, having one foote in the Font, the other out, ask't Wolfranius where went the most part of his pre∣decessors that were not baptized, to Hell, said Wolfranius▪ instant∣ly Rocardus drew his foot forth of the font, saying. Rectius est plures quam pauciores sequi. Extremities and dangers which I relate vnto thee of Love, and what wrong men have sustained yet thou art the more enamou∣red thereof; by that time San∣drico had made an end of his dis∣course they were arrived at Rome at a Port named, Porta Venetia;
the which Port was adjoyning to the Palace of the beauteous La∣dy Angelica: In which they ha∣ving arrived, Sandrico for the better satisfaction of his friend and himselfe, begun to enquire and demand of the Inhabitants what they could informe him concerning the heroicall incli∣nation of this Roman Goddesse, and whether that her feature was transparent vnto that which the shrill Trumpet of Fame had blazed in such an unparallelized sort, whose worth by all relatiōs they found rather to be under∣valued then exceeded, at which Alexto's itching eares were still seduced to soft attentiō, wch rapt him in such an extasie of pleasure that he could remaine silent no longer, but pulling Sandrico by the Arme, burst forth into this paradoxicall speech; ô my San∣drico,
he that by the change of For∣tune mounteth higher then he should, must arme himselfe with patience to descend lower then he would, as they are not happy which are poore and deformed, so are they not fortunate that are over happily endewed with the ornaments of Nature, and largenesse of temporall possessi∣ons and patrimonies. Sandrico seeing him so passionate could no longer refraine, but inter∣rupts him in his intended dis∣course. My deare ALEXTO over the greatest beauties hangs the grea∣test ruine, I could wish thee to be wise, for the study of wise∣dome is the readiest ruine of griefe and vexations, the coun∣sell of friends doth asswage and mitigate present perturbations,
and also prevents the future ig∣nominy of perilous dangers, but I confesse counsell in trouble giues small comfort when helpe is past cure; besides, where for∣tunes beames shine not propiti∣ous, diligence doth little availe nor doth it mitigate instant ca∣lamities, but me thinks the cause being your owne, doe but re∣move that and of necessity the effect must follow, then Me∣dici cura teipsum, tu bene cog∣noscis morbis artem{que} medendi, then seeke a speedy remedy lest thy contagious wounds fester thy whole body; but alas, of all creatures Man is the most apt to fall, because being stroken with love, he vndertakes the greatest actions; for as I have told thee, doe but consider what this fancy is, a Map of misery, a world of
torments seducing man into a labyrinth of irrevocable tor∣tures; but Alexto interrupting his friend Sandrico, made reply. When the heart is environed with oppression then the eares are shut up against all good counsell: for perplexed hearts live with teares in their eyes; yet oft dye with mirth in their lookes; security banisheth dolours, but feare hinders gladnesse; for griefe is a friend to solitarinesse, foe to sobriety and heire to desperati∣on. But, O Sandrico, what doth it availe if the mind be generous, the body Warlike, the Joynts pliable, and active, all the dis∣positions inclined to heroicall and magnanimous actions; if he that taketh Armes be vnfortu∣nate; But indeed, assiduall pro∣sperity is more hurtfull and ob∣noxious
then adversity, in that the one may be more easily born then the other forgotten. Curtius reports, that Darius in his flight drank puddle water polluted with the dead Carkas∣ses, he at the drinking thereof reported, that he in all his pre∣cident Jollity never drunke li∣quid substance, that was more pleasant, and delightfull vnto his Palate: The reason was, be∣cause when he was at the height of fortune, he vsed to drinke be∣fore he was a thirst. So also Ar∣taxerxes who in a pitcht bat∣taile was forc't to surrender the honor of the day to his Enemies, whereby he betooke himselfe to flight, in wch he being destitute of corporall sustenance & nutri∣ment, could purchase nought to sustaine nature but dry figs and
browne bread, at the receipt thereof he made a long narrati∣on: In which he vowed that such pleasant food did his lips never touch till that instant: then my Sandrico, those be but false joyes which are not inter∣mixt with teares, perils and di∣sturbances, for necessity and tri∣bulation are the first steps to ho∣nour, thereby a man comes to know himselfe; therefore let vs derelinguish this discourse, and consult how wee may become spectators of that superexcellent creature. Sandrico perceiving that it was to no purpose any longer to discourse with him, vntill he had glutted his longing eyes with the resplendant rariety of Ange∣lica's peerlesse feature: where∣fore he counselled Alexto for to
walke into the Pallace to behold the Lady of his affections, vnto this proposition ALEXTO con∣sented, so both together went there, where no sooner entred but they found this beautious crea∣ture sitting in State adorned with vnparallellized habili∣ments, the splendor of which being accompanied with a Saint-like feature gave such a glorious lustre, as that it seemes vnto Alexto that some Comet had beene beneath the Roofe, the superexcellent Lady was accom∣panied with divers heroicke Peeres and Nobility, which re∣sorted thither because of the Justs and Turneyes, which were to be performed at a speedy so∣lemnization. But as I said, Alex∣to's sences being Captivated at the suddain vnequalized object,
he being in this traunce begun somewhat to rave, breaking forth into extreame passion, cry∣ing with a loud voyce (in yon∣der throne is fixt Ariadnes glit∣tering Starre, for tis no terrestri∣all Dame, no mortall wight, but an immortall creature, and su∣preame Goddesse) but ere he could proceed any further San∣drico clapt vnto him and paci∣fied his outrages, advising him to lay hold on that occasion, and to prostrate himselfe vnto the Ladies acceptance; the which he willingly imbrac'd, and approa∣ching vnto the Lady Angelica, doing her much homage and re∣verence, as he supposed befitted so high a person, framed his speech unto her in this ensuing forme. Renowned Paragon, you
whose illustrious feature needs no silver sockets to adorne and beautifie the Golden pillars of your unvalued worth; then why should I with Metaphoricall phraise adorne the feature of your Authentick selfe. Which nature cannot paralell? Ile there∣fore leave the propagation of such praising fictions vnto the trifling Tymers of our age, whose Courtship doth in flattery con∣sist; For should I herauld your Divine presence in such obscure sentence to bee illuminated by the lustre of your all-concei∣ving Genius, it would not onely make my imbecillity the apparenter but conduct mee to a labyrinth of fond con∣templations; for as an Eye in beholding of the Suns reflection twinkleth with the lids: so the
rayes which shines from the E∣bon arches of your browes, hath not onely caused mine eyes to be beauty blasted, but leades me Captive vnto your royall per∣son, where like the Salamander I request my assiduall aboad. ALEXTO still running on in this sort of Rhetorick the audi∣ence of wch did not onely drive the noble spectatours to a non-plus, but each one seemed to be an Orator and to Simpathize his comely gestures and Court-like behaviours: and as for San∣drico, he through the extasie of Joy that he received therat; sup∣posed himselfe to be elevated into the Orientall region Pal∣pasus. But as for Angelica in her faire face, a comely blush with an ashy pale did strive for supe∣riority.
But have you beheld when as the silver fingred mor∣ning doth appeare, shaking her plumes from whence pearly drops doe fall? Or have you seene the blushing of the East, when glittering Phoebus doth begin his course, who lifting up his Globall front, from Cin∣thiaes glittering palme doth wash his face in Thoetis chry∣stall lap. Even so this Goddesse did descend her Throne, taking ALEXTO by his Warlike palme, bespake after this man∣ner. Heroicke Knight, for your gesture speakes your owne, had but your Oratory the At of perswasion aswell as of Capti∣vating, I by a thought of fond conceit, should imagine my selfe, that which your fiction hath strove to figure mee,
through the which I with Pau∣linia should adore the shadow of my owne feature, if J were as you would make me, your Rhe∣torick had abus'd my meaning; then worthy Sir, seeke not to praise beauty, when desert can∣not equall the limit of rea∣son. But since Fortune hath con∣ducted you unto our Palace, I shall request your stay untill our Triumphs be ended, and that you depart not without the ac∣knowledgement of your further service, and also with my liber∣ty. ALEXTO hearing this com∣fortable speech, thus replyed, fai∣rest of creatures; he were un∣worthy to clime the height of prosperity, that should volunta∣rily
fall into desperation, and let me be anatomized to lesse then nothing, if J deceive your good opinion. With these and such like dis∣courses they spent the time untill Supper was ready to bee served, at which she caused Alexto to be placed as her oppo∣site, whereby amorous glances past on both sides: and as for Sandrico he was as joyfull thereof, as if he were a sharer in his friends present happinesse: but while Supper time lasted, there began a demand amongst the Nobility, wch should first en∣ter the lists in the morning, but being they could not decide this controversie between themselves it was proffered to the Lady Angelica to define the same,
shee having the disposing did command ALEXTO the first entrance: he no little glad thereof seem'd loath, yet willing to accept so great a favour, but he soon perceived a murmuring amongst the nobility, and not without just cause, that a stran∣ger and Forraigner should dis∣possesse them of their right, and honour which did appertaine unto them, by reason thereof he requested of the Lady to be ex∣cused, and to surrender that favour which she had imployed upon him unto some nobler person, whose deserts might exceed his. The Lady entring into con∣sideration with her selfe, did place it, though unwillingly, of the Lord of Montulus, unto the which all the rest willingly did
agree, and as for the next places they did accord amongst them∣selves: by that time they had brought this unto a compremise Supper was ended, where after some pastimes, Bed time did approach, where each one was conducted, but Alexto and Sandrico were most sumptu∣ously lodged next unto the Ladies Chamber, to which they were some part of the way con∣ducted by her owne person, then leave being taken, and sweet rest bequeathed on both sides, the Lady departed, and they entred their Chamber, the which they found so garnisht with unestimable Jems, and adorned with such gorgeous hangings, that it seemed rather to entertaine some Monarch then their persons: but the
doore being closed and none resident but themselves, ALEX∣TO began to burst forth as thus. O fortunate starre that thus propitiously hath smiled on me, and adorned me with the beams of unestimable favour, in suffe∣ring this Correspondent amity betwixt Lady Angelica and my selfe! Shee now have I beheld which is the onely Phoenix of this Terrestriall Paradice, and sole Mirrour for natures orna∣ments, Sandrico was strucken dumme, and was loath to answer in some space, being in an out∣rage with himselfe for his precedent abusing the Feminine sexe before he had knowne any
just cause thereof, and here, ju∣dicious Ladies, humbly craves your forgivenesse, and so doe I being much perplexed with my selfe, that my penne should be enforc't to cite his outragious blasphemies. And thus he turnes unto A∣lexto in Angelicaes presence, thou diddest seeme to exceed Cicero the most eloquent of all Oratours, canst thou now in as ample sort figure her comeli∣nesse? ALEXTO replide, that nothing was so easie, or perfor∣med with such facility; and thus he began. Now doe I love that never lov'd before, And for requitall largely will implore;
Ingag'd I am, but to so faire a Dame Since the Creation Nature could not frame: First, in her growth shee's like the Cedar tall, Slender as Ewe, or flourishing Laurall: Her blush to Phoebus may bee equaliz'd; This is the Dame that hath my heart surpriz'd: Her front is like unto the new falne Snow, Not made for frownes, and wrinckles scorns to shew, Her eyes exceed rich Caesars Westerne Iem's, Shining like Pearles on the Angelica's Stem's, For from those eyes shines such resplendent grace,
As if some Soveraigne had beene in place. Her lips are like faire Rubies, and within Her teeth, they seem'd as if they Pearles had beene: Her necke in view like polisht Ivory, She seemes like Venus, or a Starre in Skie; There Ebbs, and flowes forth from her Silver brests Sacred perfumes, as't were the Phoenix neasts This Diademe is not worth lesse but more Then Caesar found beneath the Westerne shore. Now my Sandrico how likest thou this description? Is it not punctually? It is most exquisite
answered Sandrico; and after these and such like speeches sleepe did begin to fasten on them both, whereby they re∣signed the rest of their discourse untill the morning that they did awake, unto which rest weele leave them being loth to disturbe them any further, and returne unto the Lady Angelica, who being in her bed could take no rest, but still her Genius conceived an apparition, which seemed to be the pourtraiture of Alextos countenance, thus was she still perplexed, being greedy to be satisfied of his Parentage, then did she conceive him to be noble, by reason of the rare perfections that shee had conceived in him: these things being considered by
her, she resolved to conceite nothing of him, untill she had viewed his feates of Armes, which were to be performed on the Morne, and with this reso∣lution she betooke her selfe to slumber, but all in vaine, because she could not shake off her new conceived fansie: but being she is desirous of rest, wee will leave her to enjoy it, wi∣shing her her hearts content, and all other Ladies that are in her case, and because silence possest them all for this present we will request your patience to the morning. Which being come, the Lady▪ ANGELICA was the first that was awake, for she was most perplext in mind; Alexto and Sandrîco were
still secure in a sweete slumber, for ALEXTO had received so much pleasure over night at those unestimable favours, with the which the Lady did adorne him, that he had turned all his precedent despaire into hope of a good successe. But by this time ANGELICA had beautified her Corpes with her sumptuous and gorgious Vestments, accompanied with her amiable lookes, she went forth of her Chamber and des∣cending into the Hall, where the Nobility did attend and ex∣pect her approach, in which she was no sooner entred, but saluta∣tions being given on both sides, she ascended her chaire of State, where we leave her in discourse with the Nobility, and returne unto Alexto, who by this time had a vision, the which gave him
to understand, that they all were in readinesse to enter the lists, onely expecting his comming. At the departure of this Vision he leaps out of his bed awaking his friend Sand. telling him that they had over-slipt their time. By the wch you must conceive they could have no great discourse, but the time they had for ye clo∣thing of them, in which Sandri∣co thus began; Noble Alexto, you last night undertooke to enter into the lists, as one of the knts of Angelica, in which my pray∣ers shall be that you may return victorious, gaining the honor of the day & that triumphant glory may adorne thy Crest, for by the atchieving of this heroick action in the sight of the vertuous Lady, it will either procure▪ thee thy hearts content, or make thee Loves vassaile for ever, if once
condemned to dye in the hate of her displeasure, and at thy return if prosperous, we will conclude in what sort to reveale the nature of thy apparant passion unto her soft attention. By this time they both were ready, and comming down into the Hall, the time was at hand of their departure into the Lists, each one (doing his duty unto the Lady) tooke their places after the Lord Mon. who over night was assign'd the first that should enter. So the Lady with the rest of her attendants of exquisite beauty descending from their seats, and being ready to take places, Angelica requested Alex∣to to conduct her▪ the which he was not unwilling to imbrace, in the meane time Sandrîco went to prepare his Horse and
Martiall accoutrements, which were prepared for that exploit, ALEXTO having placed the Lady for her prospect, and doing her reverence, taking his leave, she tooke a Scarfe, that was most sumptuous to behold, imbrodered with Pearle and Gold, the which she caused to be tyed about his Arme, wishing his happy successe and assiduall prosperity; for she seemed much enamoured of him, but cautious lest he should conceive any thing thereof. But how much joy Alexto conceived of this unestimable favour, I want the power of expression, therefore resigne that to the learned judgements, to conceive of. But in this extasie Alexto came unto his friend Sand. relating to him in briefe
what had happened betweene the pierlesse Lady and himselfe, at the audience whereof Sandri∣co conceived no small content: but because ALEXTO would not be accompted prolixious, he mounted his fiery Steed, being accompanied with his friend, and by that time, the rest were placed, and after reverence done unto the Lady, he entered the lists, causing his horse to corvet in that ample sort that he asto∣nisht each spectatour. And you must conceive if the Lady was enamoured of him before, how much more was she now surprised by his matchlesse actions. But the Trumpets warning unto the first encounter Lord Montulus and Sasetus a Persian Knight met in such a full Carreere, that
Sasetus strooke Montulus out of his Saddle upon the Crupper of his horse, But Montulus loath to passe by without clai∣ming quittance with him, strooke so outragiously on the breast of Sasetus, that his Lance shattered in pieces, and nimbly clapping into the Saddle again, meeting so furiously together, dismounted Sasetus tumbling him and his horse unto the Earth, so Montulus passed by not being further indamag'd, but Sasetus seeing himselfe foyled, especially in the presence of the Lady Angelica, unto whose acceptance his assiduall devotions were bent, imagining that it would have beene his perpetuall disgrace couragiously drew forth his owne Sword, be∣ing on his feet, sheathed it again
in his owne bowels, uttering these words, Thus nobly will J dye, rather then live dishonou∣rably▪ This unexpected stra∣tageme proved an astonishment unto each Spectator, but especi∣ally miraculous unto the Ladies: but after some pacification, and the cause of this outrage being fully related, it was very well approved of both by the Ladies and Nobility, whereby the Justs did still proceed which other∣wise had dissolved. But had not Montulus beene animated and recomforted by Alexto & others, he had surely endangered him∣selfe for very anguish and griefe that so noble a Spirit should fall by his feeble Arme. But having recollected him∣selfe, he was ready to encounter with the next that made against him.
ALEXTO as yet was loath to encounter with Montulus un∣till he had overthrowne most part of those Knights there pre∣sent, imagining thereby that Montulus should be exceeding∣ly extold of each spectator, and that the Ladies would affirme that he was the choisest of all Europe, for Kingly Knight∣hood, and when as Montulus should be adorned with these favours, he would instantly en∣tertaine to just with him, being fully assured that having recei∣ved one amorous glance of fa∣vour from his Mistresse eye, he should be able to dismount and captivate Montulus, and so re∣gaine all honour unto himselfe. But as he was hāmering, and contemplating of this matter, his friend Sand. perceiving no
Knight prepared for the next encounter, doing reverence unto the Ladies speeded towards Montulus, and encountered with him so furiously, that he broke his Lance upon the Hel∣met of Montulus in such outra∣gious sort, that fire flew forth of his Beaver, at which Montulus being much amazed, supposed that Iove had sent a Thunder∣bolt upon his Crest, that did so startle him. But meeting both againe, Montulus being in the height of his fury, and holding himselfe perpetually dishonou∣red, gave Sandrico such a re∣combendibus upon his brest, that beate him of one side of his horse, but he speedily recovered himselfe, ALEXTO meeting of him imbraced him in his armes vowed to be revenged.
But by this time Montulus had recovered himselfe, & was fitted for the next encounter, the which was entertained by Alex∣to, who doing reverence unto the Ladies, making his pampered Courser flye, as if he scorned to be control'd, and meeting with Montulus in a full Careere bore him unto the earth with his Saddle betwixt his leggs, causing his horse to tumble on the other side, but Montulus broke his Lance upon the brest of Alexto who passed on his course still so upright, as if that none had en∣countered with him, the which caused such a generall applause, as if he had bin some demy god. But because Alexto should not vant long of his prosperous suc∣cesse, some of these ts. which were there present, & much en∣enraged
at his actions set forth together against Alexto being 8 in number, all which he recei∣ved very nobly, but to their small comforts▪ for the first two he run through with his lance, tumbling them from their hor∣ses to measure their length on the ground, the third being with him ere he could unsheath his furious Sword, he lifted up his Martiall fist, and stroke such a ponderous blow upon his Crest, that he laid him breathlesse up∣on the earth, making his brains flye about his horse heeles. Then drawing his bloody weapon, with which ere any rescue was made, he had bereaved three of the other five of life, and left the other two sore wounded the which spectacle caused no little admiration to ye beholders.
But the Ladies being sore af∣frighted, forsook their seats, and Angelica being accompanied with her train entred the lists as Juno among the Gods, to nip this early quarrell in the bud, as also fearing further outrage. But A∣lexto no sooner perceiving her but leapt from his horse, & fal∣ling on his knees presenting un∣to her acceptance his weapon, and uttered these speeches. Iudicious Lady, I have here cō∣mitted a hainous fact, unbesee∣ming your presence, and indeed beyond the limits of expression, that speedily requires a just pu∣nishment, except your partiall censure quit my imbecillity in the perpetrating therof, for like a malefactour, I expect a cōmi∣serating Sentence from your blessed lips.
Angelica seemed to sympa∣thize this his passion, & to parti∣cipate of his griefe, and taking him by the hand raised him from the ground, and refusing his Sword, said unto him, most valiant Knight, your actions me∣rite fame, deserving to be recor∣ded in Hectors Register for a perpetuall memory, which may survive after Ages: I grieve to behold the outrage and uncivill affront that you have sustained in my presence, but every of them have sustained their just deserts from your Martiall hands for their presumptuous fact, with these and such like words she freed Alexto, requesting that the Corpes of the deceased Knights should be honourably interred, but especi∣ally Hesetus to be entomb'd in
her owne Chappell with a sump∣tuous monument over him, the charge of which being commit∣ted to certaine nobles there ex∣tant, she with ALEXTO and the rest departed into the Pallace where she entertained them very royally with Musicke and pa∣stimes for the space of three or foure dayes. But ALEXTO was not content therewith, but still did watch opportunity for a private discourse, but still his intent was frustrate, the Lady Angelica, on the other side was as much perplexed for the same opportunity. But still Alexto's heart did consume, yet was he fixt and constant in the determination, which is the Nepenthe which who so drinketh of, forgetteth all care and griefe, for Agrippa
reports that nothing in ye world sooner remedieth sorrowes then constancy. Thus ALEXTO con∣tinues though much perplexed, who was counselled by Sandrico to write a Letter vnto Angelica, he promising to be the bearer thereof himself, to which Alexto condiscended: for Sandrico thus animated ALEXTO; Thou know∣est, said he, that Ladies delight in praising fictions, as hearing their beauties extold though vn∣deserved; and againe Poetry, is a second nature to make things seeme more exquisite then they were first framed by nature; for as the Seale leaveth the impres∣sion of his forme in wax; so the learned Poet engraveth his passion so lively in womens hearts, that the hearer also is almost transformed into the
Author. But should I practise in poesie vnto her, quoth ALEXTO, I dread of an ill successe. Tush, said Sandrico, faint-hearted Lawyers are not admit∣ted to put in plea at the barre of Love. A cowardly lover with∣out hope shall never gaine faire love with good fortune, besides sadnesse is the punishment of the heart, but hope the Medicine of distresse; for, it is a pleasant passion of the mind which doth not onely promise us those things which we most desire, but those things also which we ut∣terly despaire of. But for all Poetry, quoth A∣LEXTO, give me Oratory, for it is the spurre to Armes: for the eloquent Oration of Isocrates was the first Trumpet that gave Philip an Alarum to the
Asian warres, which Alexander his Sonne without intermission ended. But I must confesse unprofi∣table eloquence is like Cypres-trees which are comely in alti∣tude but bare no fruit, and bab∣ling Orators are the theeves of time compared to empty vessels, which give a greater sound then those which are full, but a dry thirsty eare must be therewith watered. Eloquence grounded vpon reason is able to content and satisfie the hearing. In this discourse we will leave them & returne to speake some∣what of the Lady Angelica, who though she was so superbious, yee like a Faulcon she could stoope to a goodly Lure, for she much admired their prolixity from her, which drew her to
contemplate with her selfe what Jesture she might have to sur∣prise ALEXTO, who was her vowed vassaile, though vnbe∣knowne vnto her. But at last she calling vnto mind his speech vnto her at his first approach, which did somewhat mitigate her passion, Imagining thereby that he was enamoured of her, and also hoping that he would make the first assault, of which she was desirous, though mo∣desty was her hinderance. Jn these contemplations we leave her and returne to Alexto, who had pend poeticall Verses for his Lady and Mistresse delivering them vnto Sandrico for to pre∣sent vnto her, and these are they Worthiest of all could I thee equilize,
To any shee that might thee paralize In rusticke sort then should my rurall quill Herauld thy fame, resounding forth it still. Yet fairest Dame I deeme youle not disdaine To  these rough hewne lines whose meaning's plaine. Then by your favour Lady, I presume; To cast my selfe beneath your Sacred plume. I homage must if you a Goddesse were But now a frowne from your blest brow I feare, To figure you like Venus t'were vnfit, Shee was disloyall, beauty blasted it;
Or say, that you resemble Helen's face Compar'd with which 'twould but impart disgrace, For Troy doth know her qualities so well, That penn's can't write, nor tongues have power to tell: Yet thus, Ile say, Arabian Odours sweet, Distill from your faire cheekes, deare love to Greet; Lady know this, by knowing which know all, Your Servant proves obedient to your call. Now after Sandrico had perused thē, he very well esteemed there∣of, promising to deliver them, which he performed some two dayes after, finding a fit oppor∣tunity both for time and place
at the receipt whereof, the Lady knowing from whence they came conceived an inward and vnspeakeable Joy but dreading to be perceived by Sandrico shrowded this extasie beneath the vaile of discontent framing her gesture correspondent vnto the sterne aspect of her visage, made this answer. Dares he presume a Goddesse to behold, Or spot that brest, that's beautifide with Gold? Dares he the Gods in battaile to provoke▪ Or from darke Hell, the furies to Invoke? But what dares hee, or dares not for to doe That thus doth dare send lines vnto our view.
Shee willing to proceed but fearing that her sharpe answer would vtterly repulse his for∣wardnesse, & yet loath to seeme Captivated at first; thus went on. Sir, I know not how to accept these lines, because I deeme them to proceed from presump∣tion and arrogancy; and because I favoured his person in the lists, he imagins me enamoured of him, but his hopes foole him, if so he deemes; or have I showne him some other extraordinary favors that he should thus abuse my vertues meaning? But I per∣ceive he reacheth me to be cau∣tions, and circumspect in all my actions, confining my lookes vpon imoveable objects, lest others with himselfe misdeeme them.
Sandrico perceiving her still to proceed, emboldened himselfe to interrupt her thus. Thrice illustrious Lady, his perpetuall service is offered to your Divine person; for at your feete he casts the hope of his worlds happinesse, uniting the remainder of his life therewith: for he, and that little, all nature endowed him with, lyes sole at your disposing. Then seeing you are the first Starre that ever seduc't him to study Astronomy, let him not perish by the reflexion of your ingratitude, seeing he is loyally affected towards you. The Lady Angelica fearing to be entrapped, requested his vnwelcome absence, adding that by his lines she perceived no forcing effects; besides, that she
had vowed Chastity, and that a Monarch should not cause her infringe her former passed vowes to Vasta. But turning aside, she said, she must give her conscious tōgue yt lie; for though a Monarch should not, yet Alexto could. So pulling a Jem frō her Ivery neck, freely presented it to San∣drico requesting him to pacifie his friend, and so away she past & Sandrico returned vnto his friēd Alexto. But Angelica seeing she had Alexto at a bay, vowed to keep him off to try his constancy and a while to triumph over him while he was in Captivity. But by this time Sandrico had met with ALEXTO and re∣lating vnto him what answer he received from the beautious Lady, which caused ALEXTO to fall into a second desperation. But Sandrico shewing him her
favour recomforted him to send a second Epistle. My ALEXTO, said, he it is na∣turall for women a while to dis∣pise that which is offered, but death to them if they be denyed of their demands. And he that looketh to have the purest Chri∣stall water must dig deepe; and he that delighteth in sweet Mu∣sicke, and Madrigals must straine Art vnto the highest: So he that seeketh to win his Love, must not spare labour nor feare hazarding his life; for Birds are trained with sweet Calls, but caught with long nets, so lovers are insnared with faire lookes, but intangled with disdainfull eyes. Then let me be the bearer of another Epistle, for he that gathereth Roses must be content to prick his fingers, and he that
would conquer a womans affec∣tion, must not be repulst by sharpe words, and the wisest sort of them are commonly tickled with selfe love. Come then, lay hold of my advise, for it is better to pre∣ferre the stedfast counsell of ad∣vised policy, then the rash enter∣prise of malapert boldnesse; for as a Cameleon hath all Colours save white; so a flatterer hath all points save honesty. I wish thee to proceed as if the subject was my owne. I never found thee otherwise, answered Alexto, but it is an easie thing for a man being in health, to give good counsell to another that is Sicke, but with such facility the Sicke man can∣not follow it; but Ile write once more ere other exploits Ile try.
The Letter. ILlustrious Mistresse, I never desired to be so good a Scholler as to learne to love in Cupids Schoole, whereby I should attain the courting of beauty with flat∣tering phrases or hypocriticall Complements, whose oyl'd tongu'd Metaphors so lavish in themselves, do warble. But could the dumbe speech of silence re∣veale the nature of my apparent passion, or were it engraven in Capitall Letters in my front, whereby the vulgar view of jea∣lous eyes might peruse the se∣crets of my Love, then were this inscription needlesse, but since not▪ then equall your inward per∣fection with your outward ex∣cellence,
for your apparent beau∣ty hath rob'd me of my heart, and either I must accuse you of the theft, or be accessary to my utter ruine, and for your sake Cupid hath taught mee what restlesse passions are in Love, but fearing my laborious pen, should prove too sad an Orator. I restlesse rest, vntill I fully rest. Yours, or not his owne ALEXTO. This he having Sealed, enclo∣sed a rich Jewell therein, gave it to▪ Sandrico to present vnto the Lady, the which he most wil∣lingly imbraced and at a conve∣nient time delivered it her, from whose hands she joyfully kist the contents ere she had peru∣sed the inscription, and well noting each particular, with a
modest blush returned this an∣swer, presenting Sandrico an unestimable pearle wherein was carved her portraiture; deliver this vnto thy friend whereby in∣gratitude may not be objected against me; I had rather have a personall appearance then this dumbe apparition. Sandrico vnderstanding her meaning prolōged not time, but with much celerity posted vnto ALEXTO, who expected the sen∣tence of discontent, but percei∣ving his friend with such a smi∣ling countenance as the affecti∣onated sire on his studious child; demanded what newes. Sandrico answered, he had brought him the loadstone of perfection, and so delivered to him the J em, telling him, that he should not omit that occasi∣on,
but diligently prosecute that proffered opportunity, which was throwne him from the Lap of fortune, which certifying him also where he should finde the Lady in her Bower. ALEXTO not having liberty to gratifie Sandrico's diligence, departed with much expedition vnto the private walkes where he found the Lady alone, melo∣diously playing vpon a Lute, warbling there vnto an amo∣rous Ode, but she no sooner per∣ceiving him come, but laid aside her Instrument, and discending from her Bower tooke him by the hand, being hardly able to dissemble her passion without apparence thereof, for it is their imbecillity not to retaine their affection long without demon∣stration vnto the affectionated,
but she thus begun to excuse her selfe. Worthy Knight, I little sup∣posed that your eares should have been auditors of my vnci∣vill Ode, but let us mount up yonder owen & contemplate a while for I received two Epistles from you, the which being exa∣mined; I conceive thereby that an amorous passion hath possest you, the mitigation of which you affirmed to be resident with∣in the Center of my bre, but I know not how to impose the assurance of my affection on any Knight, because Lovers oathes are like fetters made of Glasse that glister faire, but couple no constraint; besides love maketh a man that is naturally addicted unto vice to be endued unto ver∣tue, forcing himselfe to be ap∣plyed
vnto all laudable exerci∣ses, that thereby he may obtain his loves favour; as also coveting to be skilfull in elocution that thereby he may allure her, and to excell in Musicke that by his melody he may intice her, to frame his speech in a perfect phraise▪ that by his learning he may perswade her. So that which is defective in nature▪ nurture perfecteth and the one∣ly originall of this vertuous in∣clination; is Love. Beautious Lady, answered Alexto, a roling-stone containes no mosse, and a fickle headed lo∣ver wāts no cause of mourning. There are wanton lovers, Lady, I must confesse, whose lascivious eyes are like the darts of Cephalus that where it hits, there it deepe∣ly wounds; But my meaning
is loyall, affection permanent and both prostrated vnto your Divine acceptance. But noble Knight, answered the Lady, young yeares make their ac∣compt onely, of the glittering show of beauty, the mind of a young man is momentany, his affections sicke, his Love vncer∣taine, and his fancy is fired with every new face, and as young Willowes bend easily, so greene wits are intangled by every new fangle. But by your favour Madame, replyed ALEXTO, Cupid allow∣eth none in his Court, but yong that can serve fresh, and wise that can talke, faithfull to grati∣fie, and valiant to revenge their Mistresses proffered injuries. And as they that cānot suffer the light of a Candle, can much worse
abide the brightnesse of the Sun: So they that are troubled and damnified by each small trifle would be much amazed to beare the weighty matters which are contained in Love. For the passionate, Lover if he saile love, is his pilot, if hee walke, love is his companion, if he sleepe, love his pillow: pure love never saw the face of feare, pure loves eyes pierce the darkest Corners, and pure love attaineth the greatest dangers. Otherwise, faire Lady, had I not presumed in this abrupt sort to present vnto your soft attention the true coppy of my perplexed heart, for as Mountaines that have too much heare of the Sun are burnt and Valleys having scarcity thereof are barren, but such places as continue in a
meane, are most fruitful; Even so gracious Lady▪ pitty your distres∣sed servants, who hath no happi∣nesse, but in the beames of your favour. Now the Lady Angelica waigh∣ing ALEXTO's griefe: by the perplexity of her owne heart, imbraced him in her Armes, utte∣ring these words. Where the knot is loose the string slippeth, and where the water is shallow there no vessell will ride, then here deare Knight, take heart and hand with as true a zeale and perfect love, as thy amorous heart can desire to be requited with. Now was Alexto satisfied be∣ing confirmed thereof by seve∣rall imbracements, in wch they spent their time, vsing ye toying sport yt lovers cōmonly commit,
but time being at hand of that their present departure, whereby they requested each other that that might be the place of their daily meetings, which was defin'd to be morning and eve∣ning. And so she deprted into her chamber, and Alexto to find forth Sandrico being big with Joy; vntill he had revealed his proceedings vnto his friend, who at the hearing thereof was on a suddaine so surprized, that he presently burst out as thus. Now by the greatest of my name I am possessed with an ex∣tasie of joy to see the pernament affections of the loyall Lady so well concur & Simpathize as Ri∣vals to thy best wishes, for now could I blesse my selfe to think yt fancy should be so extravagantly predomi∣minant
over mee as to lead me into a labyrinth of fond Con∣templations, that I should urge thy goodnesse to beleeve their sexe to be implacable, hard hear∣ted Monster that I was; faire Angelica thou sole possessor of Europes choisest rarities, I have uttered blasphemy against thy goodnesse, and the member with which t'was perpetrated may never accent drop from thence; nay, may it cease to stirre within his roofe, vnlesse it be dipt in oyle of warre by loves right hand, wherby with polisht phraise as t'were from some Mer∣curiall wit, and by your good∣nesse lycenc't then let it warble, and with Philomelian notes drown the groves sweet harmo∣ny, may it pierce the skies and make the Gods attentive, nay
force their Echoes to th'applause of Feminine loyalty, that the Lower world may stand af∣frighted to the rapture, and if J cannot attaine unto this ample manner of blazing vertue, hea∣venly Angelica Metamorphose me to lesse then nothing, and may your more then Saint-like sexe conspire to afflict me as you please. Then replyed Alex∣to, where's wit and policy, where are ye documents you would in∣doctrinate me with? I cannot choose but smile to thinke that my Tutor is captivated. Not captivated, nor in Love, said Sandrico, but my rash abu∣ses unto the sexe so undeserved∣ly committed, for which I'le con∣jure up my wits, and raise my Genius within the circle of this
Globall head of mine, to limbe Angelica with poesie as thus. To his Genius. MOunt vp my Genius, aptly seeke to raise A Roman Dame unto a Goddesse praise. Limbe forth her feature, and display her race, Figure her amply in her active grace. Call not to ayd the Dryades or Satyres, High topt Nymphs, or Joves Time measuring Daughters: These are too common, and so hacknes'd they To Poets, abortive brats, therefore not may
Be here Corrivall in this Scene of thine, Which must be guided by a hand divine, Invoke the Gods, and call the Heavens for ayd, Vesta shall homage, Diana be dismaide, When imitable Art shall here make knowne This Magazen, whose merits enrich her owne, Flame blazon, and reciprocally touch Each lineament of nature, and thinke much Heavens should not echo unto each shrill voyce, That heraulds vertue, and makes her thy choice. Now by my honour, said A∣lexto, thou hast invoked thy
Genius in more then common Phraise. Tush, replyed Sandrico, this is but a florish, commanding my Genius servile to my will, while thus I herauld forth her fame. Ʋncloud the Ebon arches of thy browes Wherein two Suns are thron'd, which Heaven allowes: The curious Spinstry of thy tresses dangle With radiant Pride, thy Lovers to intangle, And from the superficies of thy face There flow Arabian Odours which doe grace, The Gods which they imbrace, as chice perfumes
And silver pride, doe fanne it through their roomes: Two rowes of pointed pearle, thy teeth resemble, From thy blest Paps, the nutriment of Heaven. Because such twins and pretty Hilloeks round With Azure veines on Goddesse are not found; The straight proportion of thy slender waste Invites the Gods to bee by them imbrac't, And thy faire hands might I presume to kisse No more I'de aske, 'tis too too heavenly a blisse, 'Cause my o're greedy lippe I feare would leave Some deepe impression, or it selfe bereave.
Of happinesse: I dare no further runne, My unexperienc't Muse commands me shunne. To flatter any but keepe time, and place For she is timorous I should disgrace Her modesty: if from the wast I fall, To treat of lower parts I heare her call, Plead then Angelica thou art the cause Makes me thus rude, and to forget her lawes. On my life, thy pardon is gain'd, said Alexto, and thy Ge∣nius hath nobly seconded thy will. Whilst they were thus dis∣coursing, and walking towards the Palace, Alexto perceiving
Angelica comming from the walkes, cryed out to Sandrico, ô unexpected happinesse! From yonder heavenly Bower my co∣met shootes towards me, 'tis my Angelica, let us haste with active willingnesse to prevent her nim∣ble steps, lest the earth growes too superbious and plaines her furrowed front by her Saint-like footing on it, propitious morne betide my heavenly Love, their glorious Canopies protect thee still. I congratulate thy Love, an∣swered Angelica, and no lesse doe my best wishes returne to thee, and thy noble associate, and with my lips I seale my vow on thine, but prethee tell mee, what giddy humour drew you here so soone, J would have stolne on you as
unawares to both, but your too curious eyes prevented my in∣tent; I kisse thy bounty, love, and may it ever flow with such sweet goodnesse towards me, said ALEXTO, then said Sandrico it was this pleasant morne, but more especially to gaze upon your place of residence, Alexto being desirous to participate of your Odorous breath, lest the Gods should surfet by the gen∣tle winds dispersing of it, and so bereave him of his happinesse, ANGELICA vowed that some poeticall fury had possest San∣drîcoes brest, which ALEXTO verified, desiring her to witnesse how well his morning Muse had cloathed her excellency, so soone as Angelica had perused the precedent lines of Sandricos, she merrily answered, that if she
were not linked in affection to ALEXTO, she could become a∣morous of him, but Love, said she, opportunity will not smile upon us with conveniency of longer time, lest my present misse should prove the unhap∣py hinderance of our quotidiall meetings, but here before thy friend, I vow my selfe as reall thine as thy chaste thoughts could wish me, and ere one mouthes Sunne should through the Zodiacke runne Hymen shall celebrate what our pligh∣ted faiths engage us to, Me et te Sola mors separabit. With that ALEXTO imbracing her in his armes, thus answered. Hic est verus amor; qui nos conjun∣git in unum, Et ligat aeternâ mutua corda fide; and as our lawes require, for the ampler
gordianizing of the vow, give me an amblet of thy haire, to tye, a true Loves knot, ANGE∣LICA answered, he that was owner of her and hers should not be denyed in his request: and so soone as she had presen∣ted him a trace of her haire, she proffered to depart; but ALEX∣TO requested her longer stay untill he had gratified her boun∣ty. So tying her haire betweene them in a true Lovers knot, she put it on his wrist, and Alexto sung unto her as followeth. Though that my wrist doth weare An amblet of thy haire;
Yet my heart doth beare Such Correspondency, That of force, No remorce, But thou still must lye Incloseted by mee, Thy portraiture must be The hourly blisse I see, So amply is it plac't, That my eye, May descry, By what my heart is grac't. A Salamanders urne, Within whose flames I burne, The ashes I returne To thee a Sacrifice: 'Cause my heart, Thy nobler part Much highly doth it praise.
Here may you see the brest Of him that cannot rest That is with Love possest By sighs anatomiz'd yet must bee subject to thee Thou hast him so surpris'd. Commiserate my zeale, In which I doe reveale, (Ere it further steale) A Love Recipocrall, Which I owe and bestow At thy Command and call. Be not Marble-hearted, Ere I am departed Let my boone be granted: Repentance comes too late at the Dore I implore Since 'tis the will of fate.
If all this cannot move Thee to grant him Love, When as he doth remove Thy teares cannot prevaile, In thy prime Vse thy time And fond passion quaile. Were thy Love a fleeter And a common greeter Of affections meeter, Then thou might'st disdaine. Since not so, as you know, Ease his tortured paine. Inconstancy to thee As chiefe of his degree He's vowed for to be Be not implacable for of none but thee one Is he now pregnable.
If badnesse by his visite He did ere solicite, May he alwayes misse it; His chaster thoughts doth scorn To undoe Him, or you, So in Hell's flames to burne. For all that he requires, And by his hopes desires, For to allay his fires Is a chast imbracing: For you know, You doe owe, Affections interlacing. Yet had Hymen but once done, Those rites we will not shunne, Till then I mourne, I burne, And am afflicted still, But ô no, 'Tis not so. Cause I shall have my will.
Peace Warre, where ere I be, The last I am sure to see: Because I war in peace for thee, Then Prayers still be made For vs both, That were loth, Vertue to have betraid. Whē Death shall close mine eye, Thy bracelet then shall lye As deepe inclos'd as I, Let Writers vent their wit For thy sake, Which I take, Death parts not me and it. After Alexto had thus ended, it pleased Angelica's fancy very much, she making a reiteration of all her precedent protestati∣on: unto him, vowing what ere she perpetrated; sprung
from that which was enacted in her brest, so with much amorous daliance as befits Lovers to disport time with, they with a very willing unwillingnesse, for that time parted, where we will leave her entring of her Palace, and ALEXTO and SANDRICO to their accustomed Cham∣ber. You have heard of this their severall meetings, and how lo∣vingly they accorded together, but fortune proved her selfe en∣vious, as to mixe his present joyes with perpetuall sorrowes, for ere the time was totally ex∣pir'd, the Duke of Aragon arri∣ved at the Palace, who was very nobly entertained by the Lady and her attendants, but to cut off prolixity, he became her Sui∣tor, and so fervently, that no∣thing
could repulse his forward∣nesse. The Lady being mightily perplexed thereat, knew not how to demeane her selfe, for faine she would, yet loath she was to condescend, because her vowes were passed to Alexto, and the Worme of Conscience turning round, did solicite her ares with the sting of Me∣mento, thus betwixt feare and hope or rather falshood and dissembling, she remained the most part of a day, but at last considering with her selfe, ALEXTO was but a Lord, the other a Duke, who was esteemed a potent Monarch, she con∣cluded utterly to renounce ALEXTO, and to enter∣taine the Duke into her favour,
and studied with her selfe how to accomplish it, without the impeachment of her honour: at last she resolved not to make a perfect semblance of rejecting him at first, but by degrees re∣quiting his amorous glances with coy and disdainfull frowns, and to repute his modest imbra∣ces lascivious claspes. With this resolution shee went to meete the affectionate ALEXTO, who expected her presence in the Garden, musing at her long delay, but when hee perceived her comming, he a∣rose from the banke to meet her proferring imbracement, she re∣fusing it, answered that, that was Childish play, and fitter for Rurals, then these of their degrees, at which ALEXTO
much marvelled, little concei∣ving her drift and policie therein, yet had he no great cause to admire, because Plato reports that the ferventest mind may be changed betweene Eve∣ning and Morning: besides how could truth be expected to lye in falshood? But ALEXTO rowsing his decaying spirits, thus answered. Lady is your Love like your beauty, both fading like a Rose in June? You said a sliding knot was soone loose, and that Lovers vowes couple no constraint, but like fetters made of glasse, that glister much but speedily breake; your ge∣stures make your words appa∣rant, yet in your vowing you gave mee heart and hand.
I meane no other-wise (quoth she) unto you, if ever I marry your selfe shall be him that shall Crowne my browes with a lau∣rell wreath, why said Alexto, the time of our marriage is limi∣ted, and is almost expired. With this discourse they spent their time▪ Alexto urging her still to remember her pro∣mise, in so much that Angelica flung forth of the Arbour very much discontented, Alexto after her requesting her stay and further conference, she neither returned, answered nor look't, but shrowding subtilty beneath the Maske of anger, went her way, leaving Alexto solitary to himselfe, who stayed not long but went to Sandrico, who was the mitigator of his
distresse: and no sooner did he meet with him, but he thus be∣gan. To a man in misery, life see∣meth too long, but to a worldly minded man living in pleasure life seemeth too short. Plinie reports, a detestable life removeth all merit of ho∣nourable buriall, for it is a Pil∣grimage, a shadow of joy, a glasse of inflrmity, and the per∣fect path-way to Death: for Phi∣lip King Alexanders Father falling upon the Sands, and seeing there the marke and print of his Body, said, how little a plot of Ground is Na∣ture content with! And the life of man fadeth like a sha∣dow, yet doe wee covet
the whole World. Sandrico all this while re∣mained astonish't, little dee∣ming his Lady was the originall of this his distemprature, but thus interrupted him? What unexpected stratagem hath thus perplext thy mind, condenc't your understanding exil'd your judgement, betrayed your spirits to disquiet passions, and leading your selfe captive to fond contemplation! O my Sandrico, answered Alexto, the pinace of my affection is like to sustaine Ship wracke on the waves of her inconstancy: shee begins to disdaine mee, whom formerly she loved, the World seduceth the eye with variety of objects, the Sent with sweet
confections, the taste with all delicious dainties, the touch with soft flesh, the body with precious clothings, and all is but the inventions of vani∣ty. Tush, said Sandrico, admit she doth forsake thee, as 'tis im∣possible, never grieve therefore, for that griefe is best digested, that brings not open shame, but now you have no such cause of mourning, then cease these bri∣nish teares. Tis true, said Alexto, Homer so spoke, but what answered Seneca, we shall sooner want teares, then cause of mour∣ning in this life, and GRE∣GORY said teares crave com∣passion, and submission de∣serveth
forgivenesse: but I an∣swer thee as Solon, who, burying his Sonne, wept bitterly, being requested to the contrary, cause his teares were in vaine, for that cause I weepe the more (quoth he) because I cannot prevaile by weeping. Come, come, said Sandrico, to weepe for toyish love thou dost impare thy worth; cease then this, which is the very common Embleme of dissimulation. For its common in the eye of a strumpet & like heat-drops in a bright Sun-shine, and as much to be pittied as the wee∣ping of a Crocodile, and perad∣venture thy Mrs. dropt angry words to try thy constancy, and might act this with the counterfeite Tragedians of
Smyrna, who lifting up their bloody hands to the skies, and their eyes stedfastly fixed on the earth, cryes Coelum, meaning the Heavens; Come, come, thy Lady is Loyally affectionated towards thee to my knowledge; then answered ALEXTO, she did disdaine me that I should touch her lips and at her depar∣ture she gave me not a word, but went away in silence, I like not this Muta Eloquen∣tia. SANDRICO then mi∣strusted the worst; but to hear∣ten on his friend; thus replyed, perhaps more eyes were pre∣sent then your owne, and that she might feare, or she gave you some private signe by which you might vnderstand her mea∣ning, and peradventure you did not conceive thereof; for
Caesar writ vnto his Captaines per notas by markes and notes, lest his letters should be vnder∣stood by his souldiers, and Tar∣quin the proud was sent vnto by his sonne Sextus, to know what he should doe by the Ga∣bians, he brought the messen∣ger into a Garden and with his staffe, Altissima papaperum capita decussit, the messenger wondered at the strategem, but Sextus vnderstood his Fathers mind. So hee might give some private note and passe away si∣lent. Then answered ALEXTO, I like not such notes to write as Demetrius did on Sand, or as Pythagoras did on glasse, nor as Damaratus on wood; therefore what wilt thou advise me to do, to answer her dumbe jesture?
Sandrico requested him to write some amorous lines vnto her in courting sort, and he would pre∣sent them. ALEXTO condis∣cended thereunto and writ as ensuing: Thy Corall lips and Rosie Cheekes, my deare, They were the flame that fired mee so neare; In troth they were, nay more, they are indeed The glowing Coales that first this fire did breed. Thy eyes also doth wound me in such sort I feigne them not, my sighs may well report Worthyest of all, that seem'st so lovely faire, Reject me not, nor cause me to dispaire.
You are the onely motive of my paine, Then let me not of cruelty complaine; But give releefe, for little dost thou know How much for thee, I fettered am in woe: Pen's cannot write, nor rightly tongues declare That fervent Love, which to thy selfe I bare. Whereof, alas! my yong spirit quaft so deepe, That drunke with Love my reason falls asleepe; For I whom Fortune now hath blinded so Did ne're till now the Art of wooing know: Then pitty me, for it lyes in thy will
My loathed life either to save or kill; Let this suffice, for all the world may see; The fault's not mine 'cause thou hast wounded mee. This being done, he delive∣red vnto SANDRICO, who willingly imbraced it promising to present it, and while he is a seeking of the Lady, we mee∣ting with her first, will treate with her a while, who remaines not much discontented though for a while she seemed so, for she was sorry that she had bin so rash with ALEXTO, yet glad that she had so quickly repulst his forwardnesse, and in stead of being in the armes of Alexto, she was imbraced by the Duke
of Aragon, from whose lap she had no sooner arose but she met with Sandrico, who presented her the Letter, the which shee received, but not so friendly as she was wont, and breaking it vp perceiving it somewhat large, tore it in peeces saying; she scorn'd to peruse such tedi∣ous Epistles, and in rage she flung away ere Sandrico could answer her a word, who was amazed to see such a suddaine alteration, then assuring him∣selfe, she had forsooke ALEXTO for ever, and very sorrowfull bearing the Dolefull tydings in his front, returned vnto him, declaring what had happened. At which ALEXTO fell into a grievous transe, but be∣ing somewhat recovered bursts
into this Lunatick speech. Contorted locks of furies I could teare, Kick Hercules from damned Acheron, And make the triple-headed bandog roare, Pluto confront within his letty throne, And sinke curst Charon in his ferry boate, Teach me Narcissus-like who in a brooke, To kisse himselfe, himselfe there hath forsooke. Teach mee with Dicas still in blood to weepe▪ And with Philistus waking alwaies sleepe: Let mee with Dropsie thirsting Astus drinke,
The poyson'd stuffe that ran from Nero's sinke, Or quaffe that potion which Agata made When he suppos'd Alphonso was betraide: If neither drinke nor quaffe, then let me sup My fatall draught from Alexanders Cup; with Philotus to a Dungeon hye, Where Ile remaine still in obscurity; And with Bassacus never more behold Sol's radient beames, transparent to the Gold O! that I were a Basiliske, that I Might venome her, or else unvenom'd dye:
Let me worke spite on her, as Antoes did Conjuring her still in her tortured Bed Put m' on a Robe that may consume to bone, This flesh of mine, in tombe me in that stone Where Petius lyes in the Elizian greene, Who died for Love, and lives there to be seene; It is a woman that hath wrong'd me this, And curst me now when I expect a blisse. Then SANDRICO answered, flye not with APOLLO after DAPHNE; DIANA hath more Nymphs as faire, and yet not so coy, use Love, yet wrastle
with Cupid and hold him as a Boy, consider as she is faire, so she is cruell, and as she is well featured so she is perjured, the curious Herbalists measure not their Plants by their Colours but by their properties, the La∣pidaries value their stones not by their outward hew, but by their secret vertues; for a Dia∣mond with a Cloud is cast into the Gold-smiths dust, then let Lillyes wither on the stems, and weare violets both in heart, and hand, the one is faire but vn∣savory; the other blacke but sweet and vertuous, but have a care lest the impression en∣gender some exorbitant passi∣on in thee. I could repeate many that have beene per∣plexed by the heroicall passion of Love, but these one or two
shall suffice to prevent the e∣normities that may ensue, if you proceed in these franticke fits: for there was one LOCUSTUS that had beene served in the like manner, as the Lady serves you, on which he grew franticke, and meeting a friend of his, requested him to be his second: his friend condiscen∣ding. Locustus carryed him to the Church of St. Marke, at which time the Duke of Ve∣nice was resident, who assoone as this Doterd saw him, he cry∣ed out to his companion, see there is he with whom I have the quarrell, Let vs set vpon him, pointing to the Duke, and if hee had not beene resisted by the Guard, he had committed the outrage; And the distempe∣rature
of Ajax first sprung from Love, of whom wee reade in our Grecian Fables; by this and the like discourse he had so well quailed Alexto's passion that he fell into a fine slumber, but presently starts and being againe awaked, he begun to call to mind the fantasie that had possessed his braine in that his slumber, and thus cry'd out, O SANDRICO, I have dreamed that ANGELICA is married. Tush, answered SANDRI∣CO, that I cannot beleeve, and credit no dreames; for they be fables, and commonly fall out by contraries, as they appeare; for HAMILCAR Generall for the Carthagenians, laying Siege at Ciracusa, an Image
came to him in his sleepe, tel∣ling him, that hee should the next night sup as Conquerour in Siracusa, and sup there he did, but as a prisoner and Captive by the Siracusians, and not as a Captaine by his Carthagenians; the like did JULIUS CAESAR, the night be∣fore he was slaine, he dreamt that he was sitting by Iupiters seate, but suddenly he fell flat with his face on the ground; therefore wee must not cocker our Genius and flatter our selves with what we conceive in such illusions. But, said ALEXTO, mee thought there was great Tri∣umphs at the solemnization thereof, and that hee and di∣vers other Nobles were pre∣senting
of a Masque and daun∣cing. Be it so or not, how shall wee come to speech with AN∣GELICA? Why, said Sandrico, pen an∣other Epistle, and I vow to thee she shall read it, or Ile ingrave it on her brest, and at the back side of the walkes thou shalt be placed, and while we are in par∣ley, hasten to us whereby wee shall decide it, and not letting of it hang in suspence any lon∣ger. ALEXTO condiscended, and went to study, whereat we leave him to speake with the Duke of Aragon, who was with the Lady Angelica, and after divers of his Courtings, shee thus begn to answer him; Re∣nowned Duke, shame and in∣famy waites at the heeles of vn∣bridled
desire, for as lust, is an Enemy to the purse, a foe to the person, a Canker to the mind, a Corrasive to the Conscience, a weakner of the wit, a besotter of the senses, and finally a mor∣tall bae to all the body. So you shall finde pleasure in the path-way to perdition, and lu∣sting Love, the Load-stone to ruth, and ruine. The Duke protested he meant verily to make her sole owner & governour to him and his, if she would but requite him with her lasting affection: she pro∣mised him, so he would vtter∣ly renounce all suspition, and as having no cause given by her so he would not lay hold on e∣very frivolous occasion where∣by
Iealousie might proceed; for I will relate a jealous hu∣mour, and the ill conveniency thereof, said shee, and thus she begun. A jealous man is suspitious ever more, judging the worst; for if his wife be merry, hee thinketh her immodest; if so∣ber, sullen; if pleasant, incon∣stant; if she laugh, it is lewd∣ly; if she looke, it is lightly; So he is still casting beyond the Moone, and watcheth as the crafty Cat over the silly Mouse; for if the heart be once infected herewith, his sleepes are broken and dreames prove vnquiet, the whole night is consumed in slumber, thoughts and cares, the day in woe, vexation, and misery: besides, my Lord, the
jealous man living dyes, and dying prolongs out his life in passion worse then death, none looketh on his Love but (su∣spitious) sayes, this is he that would be Corrivall in my fa∣vours; none knocketh at the doore, but starting up, hee ima∣gins them to be the messengers, of fancy; none talkes but they whisper of affection; if shee frowne she hates him, and loves others; if she smile it is because she hath had successe in her Love, lookes she frowardly on any man, she dissembles, if she favours him with a gracious eye; then, as a man possessed with a phrensie, he cryeth out, that neither fire in straw, nor love in a womans lookes can be concealed; Thus doth he live restlesse, and maketh love,
that is sweet in it selfe, more bitter then gall: consider this my Lord; for should you per∣petrate the like, it would make a woman wanton, if she were borne to Chastity. But by this time ALEXTO had pen'd his Epistle, therefore we will leave her subtilty pro∣ceeding in her Rhetorick, there∣by yoking the Duke vnto her servitude, and returne vnto him, who was reading what he had writ vnto Sandrico; and this was it. Shall I be stab'd with Ponyards of disdaine, Or languish still in my obscurest paine? For in my heart thy worth is firmely fixt,
My groning sighs with teares are intermixt; As Spiders webs hold fast the silly Fly: Intangled so, by thy faire selfe am I: Why planted I Hearts-ease, and Rue must gather, As I did sow, I should have reaped rather: This is a Paradox beyond reliefe, That I in anguish should prolong my griefe. After SANDRICO had per∣used these lines, without inter∣mission hee prosecuted the de∣livery, knowing the Lady frequented the walkes in the Coole of the day, and thi∣ther being both come, though
unseene, yet they saw the Lady ANGELICA imbraced by the Duke of Aragon, to whom she had newly contracted her∣selfe. ALEXTO being conveni∣ently placed, Sandrico vndan∣ted proceeded towards her, where she starting vp from the Dukes lap demanded the Ori∣ginall of his abrupt intrusion, SANDRICO said, Lady you must and shall peruse each sylla∣ble enclosed here, delivering her the Letter, at which the Duke begun to storme, but she having her trickes briefer then her Pater noster, soone pacified the Duke, telling him, he was a gentleman Sewer to a kinsman of hers, from whom she did not much desire to be
solicited, so craving pardon, and his patience, discended the Mount and read what was in∣closed. SANDRICO demanded her an∣swer, why that I am otherwise provided, quoth she. With that ALEXTO did approach, vow∣ing not to be so satisfied, at whose comming she did su∣staine an Agony which more tortured her, then if grimme death had seized each part; then said ALEXTO, Lady will you falsifie your vowes, she replyed, that she never made any, and demanded his witnesse, I have none said Alexto, but Sandrico and your owne conscience; o∣therwise, wherefore did you vse mee so respectively, retai∣ning me into your favour, why,
as my servant shee reply'd, for that was your first request at your entring of my Palace, and so I have counted of you and ever will, if you bee resident with me. Lady answered SANDRICO, you are false and disloyall, you are like the Mandrake apple, comely in show, but banefull in taste, and for your ingra∣titude, you are worse then the Serpent, who hath venome to annoy others, but not himselfe. And then ALEXTO begun, La∣dy is this equity and justice? O no; For Justice consists of Eight parts, Friendship, Con∣cord, Godlinesse, Humanity, gratefulnesse, faithfulnesse, and vertuousnesse, but you have neither; for it is the badge of
Vertue, the staffe of peace, and the maintenance of Honour. O that I were but some Sorcerer as Cyrce, who altered the shapes of Men and Women, to Beares, Wolves, Lyons, Asses, Apes and the like; whereby I might make some metamorphose of thee, if your Sexe were not worse then ours! Wherefore doth Serpents engender in your Reines, and Toades in dead mens skuls; and so fare you well, said Angelica. ALEXTO seeing himselfe ut∣terly cast off, was desperate, but SANDRICO perswaded him as followeth: Hee that bruiseth the Olive tree with hard Iron fetcheth out no oyle but water, and he that pricketh a proud heart with perswasions draweth out
nothing but hate and envie; therefore let her goe, as better lost then found; for Aristotle reporteth, that a Virgins heart is like a Cotton tree, whose fruit is so hard in the Bud, that it soundeth like steele, and be∣ing ripe putteth forth nothing but Wooll. O, said ALEXTO, that I could with Aristotle throw my selfe into the Euripus, saying. Quia te non capio tu me capies. Be not wilfull said Sandri∣co, to destroy thy selfe; for many happen to dye by chance, whose causes are unknowne and ob∣scur'd; many by Infirmity, whose causes are apparent, ma∣ny by age, whose causes are pre∣sent,
but some dye neither by chance, Infirmities nor Age, but dye for want of grace to live longer. Shall I kill her then, said A∣LEXTO, O no, quoth SAN∣DRICO: how frequent is it, that such men have beene fre∣quented with horrible fantasies and imaginations, which come into their heads both sleeping and waking. So Thierie King of Italy be∣ing a Goth by Nation, after hee had slaine Symmachus and Bo¦tius his sons, as Procopius re∣ports, it seemed to him that hee saw in the head of a Fish served on his Table the face of Sym∣machus in a horrible shape and fashion, knitting of his browes Gogling of his Eyes, biting his
lip for very anger; the conceit thereof so perplext the King, that he fell sicke and dyed; this is the usuall course of mur∣therers Then replyed Alexto, thou art a Plato unto me, and I like Dionisius abstaine from much tyrannie by thy good counsell, then let her live like the Dame in the triumphs of Olympus, for every Owle to spend a whoope at. And Ile be warned never to fall into such folly againe, and learne that lesson which Socrates taught his Schollers, which was Reminiscere. And nothing sinketh deeper nor cleaveth faster in the mind of a man, then those Counsels which he learned in his Child∣hood, which I will with Augu∣stine say, Antide me Semen Iu∣venes,
and well note what I have sustained by a trothlesse woman. But had I tooke thy ad∣vice, Sandrico, this had not happened; but as Cipresse trees, the more they be watered, the more they wither, and the oft∣ner they be lop't, the sooner they dye, so vnbridled youth, the more it is by grave advise counselled, the sooner it fal∣leth to confusion. But if youth blush nor at beauty, and car∣ry not Antidotes of wisedome against flattery, folly will be the next Haven▪ he shall harbour in. Experience lets mee know so much; for as the strong bitter∣nesse of Aloe takes away the sweetnesse of Honey, so evill workes destroy and take away the praise of good deeds.
As Wine in Plato's opinion is the daughter of verity: so Love, in Iamlicus censure, is the fruit of Idlenesse: For So∣phocles being demanded what harme he would wish to his E∣nemy; he answered, that hee might love where he were not fancied; Ile therefore discribe what Love is. For Love's indeed a fury fetch't from Hell, Making thoughts Metaphors where it doth dwell; With Morpheus dreames such alwayes are possest, Hunting with sighs to keepe themselves at rest: Love's a madnesse, a restlesse agony,
Which makes the Eyes two fountaines never dry: It is a harsh, and vncontrold desire Which makes men burne, and live in Cupid's fire, Then why, say I to burne in Cupids fire, When none that's wise need's care for Cupids ire? Hee is a Child and feares Diana's rod, At which he stands as Mars to Venus stood▪ But Venus vnto Love was ne're a nurse, Alas, Love's kept by Fancy, which prov's worse, Fancy breeds Love, Love then breeds doubts and feares, Ingendring thus, till it's exprest with teares:
Doubts are as perillous as the quick Sand, And feare makes Lovers in amazemet stand; These are the Rocks where Loves Boat's cast away, Making men live, to dye with their delay: But what is fancy, when it is defin'd, Why Love, and fancy, brings men to be shrin'd; Her Chariot is of a Silke-wormes head, The Silk-wormes silke within serves for her Bed: The wheeles whereon, this Chariot doth runne Are of the motes discovered by the Sunne: Her Nimble whips the fore-rib of a Spider,
Two Gnats doe draw and one is the out-rider: This buzzing runs within a Lovers braine, Making their vitals stupified with paine. Cleobulus meeting with his sonne Ireon solemnizing the Ceremony of marriage, gave him in his hand a branch of Henbane, meaning thereby that the vertuous disposition of a wife is never so perfect, but it is enterlaced with some froward fancies, but Ile only define what ANGELICA is, my Sandrico, and so leave her with franticke Love. Catch me a Starre that falleth from the skie
Cause an Immortall Creature for to die, Drive with a wand back Neptun's flowing Seas, Saile through this Center to Antipodes; Call time againe, and hasten future things; ay nutriment the Easterne Bird us brings; Say that Phoebus is fixed in his course, And from the skies wee have but small remorse; Infuse long life into a breathlesse Creature. Say that wee are made but not by Nature▪ The winged messenger stop his Careere, And bring a Satire vnto humane feare▪
Say Acheron is light, and Hell's not hell, But a vast Chaos for Salvages to dwell; Say Jove ne're thundered Mars his sword ne're drew, Venus no wanton, these are all as true, As to find faith in faire ANGELICA's mind, Apparent 'tis that such proves never kind; But them Ile leave vnto their owne designes, Desiring fates, to turne mens amorous minds. No sooner had ALEXTO ended, but on a sudden he was all surprised; each Limbe was dis-joynted and sought to sepa∣rate
themselves as strangers to their fellowes; But Sandrico cheering him vp, desired him to be frolike still, this suddaine Agony (said hee) prognosti∣caters, be it bad or ill, welcome the will of Fates, we are both armed to stand the hazard, and with each other participate what fortune shall alot vs: but whilest they were thus dis∣coursing, they perceiving AN∣GELICA's Squire comming from the Pallace posted to meet them, for so ANGELICA had cunningly contrived, the time being expired of her appointed marriage to the Duke of Aragon, and to give a full period to A∣LEXTO's further solicitation of her love, sent him a Letter to this effect.
Noble ALEXTO WHat Antipathy Na∣ture could produce, in an affectionate way was still thy owne, and not to make thee proud thine then, is mine now, I relent and crave pardon for my arro∣gancy, for Love hath made a Changeling of me now, and lent mee wings to top the highest plume of amorous conceits thou soarest withall within this houre, meet me at the Temple where Hymen shall marry vs, forget, forgive, and beleeve what thou seest. ANGELICA.
ALEXTO at the reading of the Letter was very much sur∣prized with an extasie of Joy, and presently sent his Picture vnto ANGELICA, returning this answer; I send my selfe, because my selfe will not bee absent, and presently after himselfe with his friend, went towards the Temple, and comming somewhat nigh they beheld ANGELICA with all her traine, and Hymen leading them towards the Temple, but supposing them to bee Goddesses; looke, quoth SAN∣DRICO, if my thoughts prove not strangers to my wish, you Gods, are come on purpose with Masques and revelling to celebrate thy nuptials.
I had thought, quoth A∣LEXTO; our marriage should have beene privately solemni∣zed, but since it is their wills to have it publiquely kept, Ile not contradict it, but comming nearer into the Temple, they beheld ANGELICA comming towards them Arme in Arme with the Duke of ARAGON as from the marriage; with that, ALEXTO burst out into a great fury, cryed out. Were my Eyes invited witnesses to testi∣fie against themselves their Masters ruine? What shall I doe, SANDRICO? Shall I with a Ponyard give a period to their dayes of Ioy, and make their grave serve for their wed∣ding Bed? Restraine thy fury, aid SANDRICO, put off this
discontent and let a Masque of pleasure veyle thy face untill they are over past us. But ANGELICA comming neere them, gave them kinde Salutation, and thus begun: Lords you are both welcome to revell with us, J doubt not but you wish us Ioy; your goodnesse towards us was ne∣ver lesse, but for you Alexto, I present this favour, weare it for our sake; giving him backe his owne Picture with a wreath of Willowes about his necke, and so ANGELICA past away towards her Palace, leaving ALEXTO in his raging fit, but being somewhat comforted by the good perswasions of
Sandrico, ALEXTO was perswaded to goe into the Tem∣ple desiring Sandrico to ac∣company him, where he might devoutly offer at faire Venus Altar the best of his devotions, and there exasperate his griefe in hope her Goodnesse would revenge his wrongs, the which being done, hee desired SAN∣DRICO to accompany him to the Palace, and beeing resolved not to bee any way dismayed, but fortune fru∣strated their determination: for before they had gone halfe the way, they met with an aged Palmer of whom they demanded what newes at the Palace, to whom hee bitterly lamenting, inform'd them that the faire ANGELICA
who was made this morne a happy Bride, when in her Pa∣lace shee was thron'd, a buz∣zing horrour did possesse her eares, and nothing else was warbled by her Tongue, but her ALEXTO, which she so often reiterated, that it caused a present astonishment to the honourable assembly, and in this franticke fit away shee runne, and the Duke after her, but getting vp into the battlements of the Pallace, then casting her selfe from the walls, crying out, Into thy Armes, I come ALEXTO, and so with the fall was battered all in peices. Then with pro∣testation loud, the Duke vowed to be revenged on ALEXTO, and is at present in pursuit of
him, but no sooner had the PILGRIM ended his story, but the Duke presented him∣selfe in person, and after di∣vers defiances betweene A∣LEXTO and himselfe, they en∣countered each other, in which the Duke receiving his mortall wound, speedily resigned his breath, at which ALEXTO crying out, the Gods were just, and have at full reven∣ged my injuries; and now, SANDRICO, let vs hast away, there be certaine Jewes in the west part of India called Espi, who will eate no Flesh, drinke no Wine, nor vse the com∣pany of any Woman, and thi∣ther let vs goe. SANDRICO condiscended
and so they tooke their jour∣ney, in which wee wish them happinesse. FINIS.
