14690 99844843 9689
THE Pleasant Walkes OF Moore-fields. Being the guift of two Sisters, now beautified, to the continuing fame of this worthy Citty. Printed at London for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold at the Signe of the Sun in Pater noster Row. 1607.
To the Right Worshipfull, the Knights and Aldermen of this Hono∣rable Citty of London. THose sweet and delightfull walks of More fields (right Worshipfull) as it seemes a Garden to this Citty, and a pleasurable place of sweet ayres for Cittizens to walke in, now made most beautiful by your good vvorships appointment, hath embol∣dened me to search for the true antiquity thereof: and furthermore to satisfie the desires of many, I haue giuen here a true light of the late glorie doone vnto the same: and withall briefly set downe a fewe notes of ancient recordes, of their beeing a kinde of morish ground in times past, and by whome, and in what maner they were brought to this beneficial vse, togither with manie other Honors done to this citty, If your vvorships vouchsafe to thinke vvel of my la∣bors, I attaine my vvished hopes: So ending I com∣mit you all to the ioy of your ovvne harts. By your Worships to be com∣manded. Rich: Iohnson.
The pleasant walkes of Moore Fields. The Speakers names in this discourse, a Coun∣trey Gentleman, and a London Citizen. Gentleman. THis Citty of London (sir) in my mind both for antiquity and scitu∣ation may challenge glory with a∣ny Citty in the World. Cit. Most true (sir) for it is re∣ported, that Brute lineally descen∣ded from the Demy-god Aeneas, son of Venus, daughter of Iupiter, about the yeare of the world 2855 and 1108. before the Natiuity of Christ, builded this cit∣ty, and named it Troynouant. But in processe of time K. Lud, not onely repayred it, but also increased the same with faire buildings, towers and wals, and after his own name called it Luds towne: and by corruption of spéech, it is now called London: which king lyeth buried at a gate in the West part of the Citty, which hee likewise built in the honor of his name, caling it Ludgate. Gent. Since that time (I perceiue) in euery Princes raigne it hath bin much beautified: but of all pleasurs that contents me, these swéet walkes of Moore fieldes are the chiefest, and the causers thereof deserue much commen∣dations.
Citi. Those be the worthy Aldermen and Common-counsell of London, who seeing the disorder vsed in these fieldes, haue bestowed this cost, and as occasion requires intends further to beautifie the same. Gent. In so dooing, they purchase same after Death, and much pleasure to posterity: But to what vse are these Fieldes reserued? Citi. Only for Cittizens to walke in to take the ayre, and for Merchants maides to dry clothes in, which want necessary gardens at their dwellings. gent. By whom was these fields giuen to the citty? Cit. Marry sir by two mayds, the only daughters to Sir William Fines, a knight of the Rhodes, in the time of Edward the Confessor: who dying, left these Fieldes of Fines-berry after his owne name to his two daughters, Mary and Katharine, who refusing the pleasures of this world, betooke themselues to a deuout kind of life, and be∣came two Nuns in the Monastery of Bedlem: wher ha∣uing spent their daies in the seruice of God, at their death gaue these aforesaid fieldes to the Citty of London, for an ease to the Cittizens, and a place for their seruants to dry clothes in, and likewise builded the two Crosses, the one at Bedlem gate, the other at Shoredich. Gent. These walkes (Sir,) as it seemes, beares the fashion of a crosse, equally diuided foure wayes, and like wise squared about with pleasant wals, the trees thereof makes a gallant shew, and yeelds vnto mine eye much delight. Citizen. They may well, for the like border of trees are not at this day in al the land again, for they be in num∣ber within these walles two Hundred, foure-score, and eleauen, beside those other standing west-ward without, to the number of some foure or fiue and thirtie. Gent. I haue heard that many of these trees doe carry proper names? Citiz. According to the planting thereof, they doe:
and those which I remember so called, now stand on the the west side within these walles, the first of them at the corner of the middle walke west-ward, was first of all placed by Sir Leonard Hollyday then Lord Maior: the next on the corner north-ward at the steppes comming downe, by a Captaine, being a Gentleman of good repu∣tation: the third by a Citizen, and Sonne to Sir Leonard Hollyday, which standeth next to his Fathers trée. There standeth néere vnto that, a trée called the two brothers, planted by two little boyes, and sonnes to a Citizen here in London, there is likewise a trée called the thrée sisters, by the name of thrée maydens that set it, and another the thrée brothers: there is a trée likewise on the north-west corner, which I saw set vp (called Stubs his trée) by one Christopher Stubs, one of the principal Porters of Black-well hall, a man well beloued, and of good credit. Many others were set vp by our Citizens, which I thinke néed∣lesse to speake of, nor tell of the bountie they shewed to the worke-men, at the planting of these same trées. Gent. The charges hereof shew their liberall mindes, and no doubt but this field will be maintained time out of minds in as good order as it is nowe kept, for what you Citizens meane to giue glory too, neither cost nor care can be wanting, But I pray you how many Akars may this plot of ground containe? Citiz. Marry Sir, within the walles some ten Akars, which was so measured out, and by a Plough made leuell, as it is now, a thing that neuer hath béen séene before to goe so néere London. Gent. But why are these stockes of wood here proui∣ded, with such a huge chaine of yron lockt to the wall? Citiz. Onely as a punishment for those that lay any fil∣thy thing within these fields, or make water in the same to the annoyance of those that walke therein, which euill sauors in times past haue much corrupted mans sences, and supposed to be a great nourisher of diseases.
Gent That beares good reason, and the maner of this punishment I like well, and pitie it were, but it should be maintained, for it is one of the best things that euer your Citie bestowed cost vpon. Citiz. The cost hereof they regard not, and the more they bestow hereon, the more honour they tye vnto our Citie, and the causers of these walkes hath deserued high commendations, making their posterities famous by these their déeds. Gent. It séemes they intend a further grace to these fields? Citiz. Their purpose is not fully knowne, but surely their intents are inclined to bountifull procéedings, as I heare, the building of certaine houses for shelters for mai∣dens hauing their clothes lying there a drying, if at any time it should chance to raine. Gent. All England may take example, at your Lon∣don Citizens, who not onely séeke for their owne bene∣fites▪ but striue to profit others, shewing themselues good common-wealths men, and as they be called the Fathers of the Citie, so be they cherishers of the poore and succour∣lesse. Citiz. If I should shew you the charitable déeds, of all our Citizens now liuing, as of those in times pass, from one kings raigne to another, I should fill a large volume with antiquities: but I will briefly touch but onely such as concernes this our discourse of these walkes of Moore∣fieldes, and things pertinent to the same purpose. Gent. But I pray you shewe me sir, haue they neuer bin otherwise vsed? Citi. Yes that they haue, for time is often the ouer∣thrower of lawdable customes: for Halles Chronicle set∣teth downe, that the inhabitants about London, as Isling ton, Hogsdon, Shoreditch and others, before the raign of Henry the eight, had so enclosed these fields, with hedges and ditches, that neyther the young men of this Citty
might shoote, nor the ancient persons walke for pleasure in these fields, but that either their bowes and arrowes were taken away, or broken, or the Citizens arested for walking, saying, that no Londoner ought to go out of the Citie, but in the hye wayes. This so gréeued the Londo∣ners, that in the sixt yeare of King Henrie the Eight, a great number of the Citie, assembled themselues in a morning and a Turner in a Fooles coat, ran crying the∣rough the Citie, Shouels and spades, Shouels & spades, by which meanes followed so many people, that it was a wonder to behold, and within lesse than thrée houres all the hedges about the Citie were cast downe, the ditches filled vp, and euery thing made plaine, such was the quicknesse of these diligent workemen, after this the fields were neuer more hedged in. Gent. The Citizens I perceiue euer carried gallant mindes, and to this day (I sée) they continually striue to beautifie this famous Citie, for what faire summer houses with loftie towers and turrets are here builded in these fields, and in other places, the suburbes of the Citie▪ not so much for vse and profite as for shewe and pleasure, be∣wraying the noblenesse of their mindes. Citiz. Many of our ancient Citizens sir haue far more worthyer dispositions, and chiefely delights in the repay∣ring of Hospitals, and building almes houses for the poore and therein employ their wits, spending their wealths to the common commoditis of this our Citie. Gent. You speake but truth▪ for London Cittizens are the Lawes mirrour for charitable guifts: but of all other stately buildings neere vnto these fields, this beares the greatest shew, called Fishers folly. Citiz. It is sir, a verie faire house indéede, large, and beautifull, incompast with many walkes and gardens of pleasure, builded by one Iasper Fisher, frée of the Gold∣smithes, late one of the sixe Clarkes of the Chancerie, and a Iustice of peace, it hath since for a time béene the Earle of Oxfords place: our late Queene hath lodged
there, and now it belongeth to Sir William Cornewallis. Gent. This house (as I haue heard) being so large and sumptuously builded by a man of no greater calling, was mockingly named Fishers Folly, and a rime hath beene lately made of it, and others the like (not farre off builded) in this manner. Kirkebyes Castle, and Fishers folly; Spynylas pleasure, and Megses glorie. Citiz. Indéed of such like houses builded by Citizens, men will report their pleasures, but if I should speake of the true glorie of our Citizens, Gresham house, with the Royall Exchange, builded by one man: Whittington Col∣ledge, Newgate, part of Christ church by another with diuers other monuments which I omit, as the charge of London bridge, builded at the first by two Sisters of Saint Marie Oueryes, and such like: but of all other me∣morable déedes maintained to this day by our Citizens, there is thrée which deserue immortall commendations, the Orphants Court in Guild hall, where couetous exe∣cutors are preuented, Christs Hospitall, where fatherlesse children are well brought vp, and the prison of Bridewell where vice is iustly corrected. Gent. Thrée things in my minde that your Citizens winne heauen by, but for what Offenders is that Bride∣well chiefely reserued? Citiz. For  persons: as vagabonds, and for those that are obstinate, and will not liue in the feare of God, but abuse their bodies with lewd vices, as whoredome, and such like. Gent. That place I thinke néedlesse sir to speake of in these walkes, therefore I pray you shew the of the anti∣quitie of this Monasterie of Bedlem where these two cha∣ritable sisters were buried. Citiz. The Monasterie (now ruinated) was builded by their Father Sir William Fines the chiefe owner of the rich Farme of Finesburie house, the which to this day
holds priuiledges of good estéeme. Likewise here in Bedlem is now scituated an Hospital for the cure of distracted peo∣ple, which in former times about the yeare 1246, was founded by Simon Fitz-marie, one of the Sheriffes of London, of the same house and kindred, naming it the prio∣ry of Saint Marie de Bethlem, after the elder of the two Sisters, to which King Edward the third graunted a pro∣tection, but after in the time tune of King Henrie the 8. in the beginning of his raigne, there was one Sir Walter Gennings one of the Kings Chamber, who being distract of his wits got helpe in that place, by the meanes of that holy Prior, in regard of which King Henrie at the suppres∣sion of this religious Monasterie, gaue it to the Citie for Hospitall for that vse, the Chappell whereof was ta∣ken downe in the raigne of Quéene Elizabeth, and houses builded there by the Gouernors of Christs Hospitall in in London, and now in this place, people that be distract of wits, are by the suite of their fréends receiued and kept, but not without chargers to their bringers in. Gent. Here is Sir, as it seemes a burying place walled in with bricke, which surely is, the deuotion of some cha∣ritable Citizen. Citiz. It is sir for in the yeare 1569, sir Thomas Roe, Marchant taylor, and Maior of this Citie, caused to bèe inclosed within this wall, about one akar of ground, be∣ing part of this Hospitall of the Hospitall of Bethlem, this he appointed for a burying place, as an ease for such Pa∣rishes in London, as wanteth a conuenient ground with∣in their Parishes. The die his wife was there buried (by whose perswasions he enclosed it) but himselfe borne in London, was buried at Hackney. Gent. But now sir, let vs returne by the walke néere this Ditch fide, where I am willing to vnderstand howe those fields came so beautified, being in times past, as I haue heard, a Fen or moorish kinde of ground. Citiz. To begin first, after it was giuen by these two
sisters to this Citie: I find that in the time of William the Conquerour. it was continually in winter, as you say, a great Fen or moore of water, stretching all along betwixt Crippie-gate and Bishops-gate, but not in such good man∣ner as it now doth, for all these whole fields of Finsburie, from Hollow well to this place. was a wast and vnprofi∣table ground a long time, so that in the raigne of Edward the second, it was let to farme for foure Markes by the yeare: but in the yeare 1415, the 3. yere of Henrie the fift, Thomas Falnet Maior, caused the wall of the Citie to bée broken toward this Moore, and builded here the posterne called Moore-gate for the case of the Citizens, to walk this way vpon caus (as was thē) towards Isllington, Hogs∣don & such like. Moreouer, he caused the ditches of the Ci∣tie, from Shoreditch to Houndsditch and so to this Moore ditch along by Bedlem to bee newe cast, and clensed, by meanes whereof this Fen or Moore, was greatly drayned and dryed: so shortly after it grew such hard ground, that Raph loselin Maior for repayring the Citie wall, caused this Moore to be searched for clay, & here in this place brick to be burnt. Gent. But sir, here is stones set vpright, what is the meaning of them? Citiz. Marry where they stand, tunnes vnderneath the common shore from a spring called dame Annis de Cleare called by the name of a rich London widow, called Annis Clae, who matching her selfe with a riotous Courtier in the time of Edward the first, who vainely consumed all her wealth, and leauing her in much pouertie, there drowned she herself, being then but a shallow ditch or running wa∣ter, since which as I said before) turneth by sluces arched ouer, all along by these stones here standing: which sluces or bridges was made in the yere 1512, by Roger Atchley Maior, who likewise caused the grounds to be leauel∣led, as they were this last yeare, by Sir Leonard Holli∣day Maior, and the other worshipfull Aldermen his brethren, whereby these fields were made something
more commodious, but not so pleasant and drye as now they are, for many times they stood still full of noi∣some waters, which afterward in the yeare 1527. was by the meanes of sir Thomas Semor, Mayor made dry, who repairing the sluces, conuayed the sayd waters ouer this Towne Ditch, into the course of Wall-brooke shoare, and so into the Thames, and by these degrées was this Fen or Moore at length made maine and hard ground, which before being ouergrowne with flags, sedges, and Rushes, serued for no vse, since the which time, all the further and higher grounds beyond Finesbury court, haue beene so heightned with leastals and dung, that now thrée Windmils are set thereon, the ditches being filled vp, and the bridges ouerwhelmed. Gen. But now I pray you let vs walke backe againe to Moore gate, & go into this narrow lans called the posterne, betwéene Moore-gate and Criple-gate, because it hath at either end a doore to be shut in the night season. Cit. This is a posterne belonging to Criple-gate so cal∣led long before the conquest, only to kéepe night-walkers out of the subberbs, but now I haue named Criple-gate, I thinke it not amisse to shew the antiquity thereof, and why it was so called at the first. Gen That would I gladly vnderstand, for I haue heard diuers reports thereof. Cit. I haue read in the history of Edmond King of Eng∣land, written by Iohn Lydgate. Munke of Berry, that when the Danes spotled part of his kingdome, a reuerent bishop of this land, caused yt body of king Edmond martyr to be brought frō S. Edmonds bury to London, in at Crip∣plegate, a place saith he so called of cripples begging ther, at which gate (it was saide) the body entering, Mirracles were wrought, as some of the Lame to goe away, praising God: This Gate was sometimes a Prison, whereunto such Cittizens and others as were arested for debt, or common trespasses, were committed, as they be
now to the Counters. This Gate was new builded by the Brewers of London. 1244. Gent. This hath much contented my desires, and con∣sidering it is yet far, to night I will request you to turne back into the walkes, and there to discourse of further an∣tiquities. Citiz. Withall my heart Sir, I cannot spend my time better. Gent. Then I pray you tell what course (Sir) hath this common shoare thorough the Citty into the Thames. Citiz. This Citty in old time, (as I finde it recorded) was deuided, the one halfs from the other, which is East from West, by a faire brooke of swéete Water, which ran frō these fields thorough this wal into the riuer of thames, which diuision to this day is maintained without charge, which water is called Wall-brooke. The course frō hence runneth directly first to Saint Margrets Church in Loath∣bury from thence from the lower part of the Gracers hall, about the East of their Kitchin, vnder Saint Mildreds Church, somewhat West from the stockes Market, from thence thorough Bucklers-bury, by a great House built of stone and Timber, called the old Barge, because in times past, Barges out of the Thames were rowed vp so far in∣to this brooke, on the backeside of the Houses on Wall-brooke stréete, which streete taketh the name of this saide brooke: then by the west end of Saint Iohns Church vpon Wall-brooke, vnder Horshee bridge, by the West side of Tallow Chandlers Hall, and of the Skinners Hall, and so behinde the other houses to Elbow lane, and by a part thereof downe Gréenwitch lane, into the riuer of thames, this is the right course of this water, which of olde time was bridged ouer in diuers places, for passage of Horses & men as need required: but since by ye means of increase∣ment on the bankes thereof, much annoyances bee done therein. But at length the same by a common consent of this Citty, was arched ouer with Brick, and paued with
stone equall with the ground whence it passed thorough: and is now in most places builded vpon, that no man may deserue it, and therefore the trace thereof is hardly known to the common sort of people. gen. Now I pray you let me know how this vaute or Ri∣uer is made cleane, considering so much Channell durt runnes therein. Citi. Where these stones stand as I said before, there is a long hollow Cesterne or shoare arched ouer, reaching into the Citty, into the which once a yeare, as it is the custome of our Citty, to sée it made cleane, there entereth diuers labouring men, with Links and Torches lighted, with a Taber and a pipe, or other such Mellody, that the Merchants, whose Uautes and Houses of offices stand ouer, may hear them, and by such meanes they may know what is amisse, and wanteth mending, and still when this busines is effecting, the owners of those houses spare not for cost, which they giue downe at the Grates as they passe along. Gent. This is a good order, and an incouragement to such an intricate businesse, but to let that passe, and shew me the antiquity of your Aldermens going to the Ser∣mons to the Spittle, neare Soreditch in Easter wéeke, which in my mind is a most memorable custome. Citi. First to shew you the first antiquity thereof, that place was in times past an Hospitall, commonly called Saint Mary Spittle, builded by Water Browne, Deane of Paules, in the yéere 1197. first named by him Domus Dei, but at the suppression of Abbies bring surrendred to King Henry the eight, it was valued to bee worth yéerely 478 pound, wherein was found (besides the ornaments of the Church) and other goods belonging to the Hospital, a hundred and fourescore Beds well furnished for the re∣ceate of poore people, for it was an Hospitall of great re∣leefe: but now touching the custome why thrée Sermons be made there in the thrée Holydayes of Easter wéeke, I
finde that in the yeare 1398. King Richard hauing procu∣red from Rome confirmation of such statutes & ordinan∣ces as were made in the Parliament, begun at Westmin∣ster, and ended at Shrew▪ bury, he caused the same confir∣mation to bee read and pronounced at Paules Crosse, and at Saint Mary Spittle in the Sermons, before al the peo∣ple: Phillip Malpas, one of the Shriefes in the year 1439. gaue twenty shillings by the yéere, to the thrée Preachers at the Spittle. Steuen Foster Mayor in the yeare 1454. gaue forty poundes to the Preachers at the Spittle and Paules Crosse: I find also that the said house wherein the Mayor and Aldermen doe fit at the Spittle, was builded for that purpose of the goode, and by the executors of Ri∣chard Rawson Aldermen, and Isabell his wife in the yeare 1488. Likewise in the yeare 1595. the Pulpet being olde, was taken downe, and a new set vp, the Preachers face turned toward the South, which was before towards the west: Also a large House on the East side of the said Pul∣pet, was then builded for the gouernors and Children of Christes Hospitall to sit in, and this was done of the goods of William Elkins, Alderman lately deceased, but within the first yeare the same house decaying, and like to haue fallen, was againe with great cost repated at the Cittyes charge. And now héere is to bee noted, that time out of mind, it hath béene, and is a lawdable custome in London, that on good Fryday in the after-noone, some especiall learned man, by appoyntment of the Bishops, hath Preached a Sermon at Paules Crosse treating of Christes passion: and vppon the thrée next Easter Hollydaies, Monday, Teusday, and Wednesday, the like learned men, by the like appointment, haue vsed to preach on the fore-noones at the saide Spittle, to the same effect, and then on low sunday, one other learned man at Paules Crosse, to make rehearsal of those foure former Sermons, either commen∣ding or reproouing them, as to him by the iudgement of
the learned Deuines was thought conuenient, and that done, he was to make a sermon of his owne study, which in all were fiue Sermons in one. At these Sermons so se∣uerally preached, the Mayor with his breathren the Al∣dermē are acustomed to be present, in their violet gownes at Paules, on good Fryday, & in their Scarlet gownes at ye Spittle vpon Monday, and Teusday, on the Wednes∣day in their violets, and on Low sunday in their Scarlets againe at Paules Crosse, which is vsed to this day. Gent. These are lawdable customes, but haue your Aldermen no place to sit in at the Spittle, if it should chance to raine. Cit. There is prouided for the Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffes, a faire house of two stories hie to sit in, and in the lost ouer them, where the Bishoppe of London, and o∣ther Prelates were wont to sit, now stand the Ladies and Aldermens Wiues in a faire window, where they may likewise sit at their pleasure. And this is all the anti∣quity, that I euer read of the Spitle Sermons. And now (sir) considering the tediousnes of this my long discourse, I will reuiue you with a few verses, writ in the honor of London. Londons Description. That famous off-spring of downe raced Troy. King Brute the Conqueror, of Giants fell, Built London first, these mansion Towers of ioy, As all the spacious world may witnesse well, Euen he it was, whose glory more to vaunt, From burned Troy, sur-named this Troynouant. This name, if that antiquities proue true, Full many yeares in Maiesty she bore, Till princely Lud did christen her anew, And changd her name, from that it was before,
So kingly Lud did shape a second frame, And called this Luds Towne by his princely name. Luds-towne it was, and yet is tearmed so, But that for briefenesse, and for pleasant sound, Few letters of that name it doth forgoe, And London now, which was once called Luds-Towne, Thus Brute and Lud, London parents were, Since fosterd vp by many a royall peere. But since that time, fiue conquests haue insewd, And all saue one, beene glutted with red goare, Yet nere were London streets with bloud imbrewd: Yet still retaind the state it held before, Such was her beauty, and the victors pitty, That spard their swords, from spoyling this faire Citty. From her first founders, thus hath she increased, Fauord of those, the Diadem aduanced, Scarce with their deaths, their large diuosions ceased, Yet by their deathes, her better fortunes chanced, As one gaue place, and left what he intended, The next successor what he found amended. One famous King, this Citty doth indew, With wished freedomes, and innimities, The next confirmes, augmenting it with new, And graunts more large and ample liberties, And thus faire Londons members strongly knitteth, When Kings adorne what fame and honor fitteth. From Lud vnto King Iames, thus London fared, Sacred Monarcke, Emperour of the West, To whom the world yeeldes none to be compared, By Londons loue thou art heere earthly blest, Mirror of mankind, each lands admiration,
The worlds wonder, heauens true contemplation. Long mayst thou liue faire Londons wished blisse, Long mayst thou raigne great Britaines happinesse, Liue, raigne, and be when there no being is, Triumphant ouer all that wish thee lesse, In earth ador'd with glorie and renowne, In heauen adorned with an Angels crowne. Of Londons pride I will not boast vpon, Her gold, her siluer, and her ornaments, Her Gems and Iewels, pearles, and precious stone, Her furniture, and rich habilliments, Her cloth of siluer, tissue, and of gold, Which in her shops men dayly may behold. What mynes of gold the Indian soyle doth nourish, Within the secrets of her fruitfull wombe, London partakes it, and doth dayly flourish, Ordayn'd thereto by heauen, and heauenly doome: All forraine Lands whome maiestie doth mooue, Doe still contend to grace her with their loue. What Ciuill, Spaine, or Portugale affordeth, What Fraunce, what Flaunders, or what Germanie, What Creet, what Scicile, or what Naples hoordeth, The Coasts of Turkie, or of Barberie, The boundlesse Seas to London walles presenteth, Through which all Englands state she much augmēteth. If Rome by Tiber substance doth attaine, Or Euphrates to Babylon brings plentie, If golden Ganges Egypt fils with gaine, The Thames of London surely is not emptie, Her flowing channell powreth forth much profit, For Londons good, yet few knowes what comes of it.
Thus by the bounty of imperious mindes, Furthered by nature with a noble floud, Proud wealth, and welthy pride, braue London findes, Nor wants she not, that bringes her gaine and good, Within her walles there lyeth close concealed, That wealth, by tongues can hardly be reuealed London hath likewise foure tearmes of law most fit, The foure fould yeare in equall parts deuide, In which the Iudges of the law do sit, Depending matters iustly to deside: The poore mans plaint, and eke the rich mans cause, And sentence giuen by righteous dooming lawes. First of the foure, fresh spring doth intertaine, The second is, in sweating summer plast, The third, With windy haruest doth remaine, And freezing Winter, doth delight the last, When these times come, and Courts of law vnlocke, Tis strange to marke how men to London flocke. These be the Bees, by which my being is, England the Orchard, London is the Hiue, Their toyle, her tryumph, and their fruit her blisse, When most they labour, London most doth thriue, The lofty Courtyor, and the Country Clowne, By their expence, brings London rich renowne. And thus from all sides doth much substance flow, By Thames, by tearmes, by Sea, and by the Land, So rich a masse, whole kingdomes connot shew, In this estate faire London still doth stand, Foure-piller, tearmes, and Thames be the fift, Which tane away, then farewell Londons thrift. Gen. By these verses Sir, you haue highly honored your
city, and no doubt but therin haue bin many worthy Citizens which hath thus brought her glorie to this height. Cit. The Citty of it selfe Sir, is the most Noble, Po∣pulous, and richest in all the Land, for it is most glorious in manhoode, furnished with munitions, insomuch as in the troublesome time of King Stephen, (when it was not halfe so populous) it hath shewed at a Muster, twenty thousand armed Horse-men and thrée score thousand foote men, seruiceable for the wars. Moreouer, the Cittizens hereof, wheresoeuer they become, bee regarded before all other Citizens, both for ciuilitie of manners, attire, com∣panie, and talke. The women, or rather Matrons of this Citie, resemble the verie modest Sabine Ladies of Italy. Gent. Now, I pray you sir, discourse the gallant minds of some of your Citizens in times past, for I haue séene many records of them, and such as bee most memorable. Henrie Picard Maior. 1357. did in one day sumptuous∣ly feast at his owne charge 4 Kings, 3 Princes, and one Quéene: which was, Edward the third King of England, Iohn King of Fraunce, Dauid King of Scots, & the King of Cypresse, then all in England: the blacke Prince, his Princesse, and the Dolphin Prince of France, with many other noble men, and kept his Hall open for all commers to reuell and dice in. Iohn Barnes Maior 1371, gaue a Chest with thrée locks and a Thousand Markes therein to the Citie, to be lent to young men vpon sufficient suertie, or vpon pawne. Iohn Philpot Maior 1378, hiered at his owne charge 1000 Soldiers, to defend the Land from the incursion of the enemie, so in short time his hiered  tooke many sea Rouers with fiftéen Spanish Ships laden with great riches. William Walworth Maior 1381, most valiantly with his owne hands slew the Kebell Wat Tyler, for which hée was knighted in the field, and the bloody Dagger giuen to Londons armes, to his great honour and praise.
Richard Whittington thrée times Maior in the yeare 1421, began the Schoole of Christs Church in London, he builded Whittington Colledge, with Almes houses for 13 poore men, and diuine lectures to be read there for euer, he repaired Saint Bartholmewes Hospitall in smith field, he glazed and paued part of Guild-hall, hee builded the West gate of London called Newgate. Iohn Allen Mercer, Maior of London, one of the Coun∣cell to King Henrie the Eight, he deceased 1544, and he was buried at Saint Thomas of Achars in a faire chappel by him builded, he gaue to the Citie of London a rich col∣ler of gold, to be worne by the Lord Maior for euer: hée gaue 500. li. to be a stock for Sea coale for the Citie, his Lands purchased of the King, the rent thereof to be giuen to the poore in the wards of London for euer. He gaue be∣sides to prisons, hospitals, lazer-houses, and all other poore in the Citie, or two miles about verie liberaily too long to be recited. Sir Thomas Gresham Mercer 1466, builded the Royal Exchange in London, and by his testament, left his dwel∣ling house in Bishops-gate stréete, to be a place for rea∣dings of the seuen liberall Sciences, allowing large sti∣pends to the readers, and certaine Almes houses for the poore. Thus haue I made a briefe of some of our worthy Ci∣tizens, and their charitable actions, some done in their liues, the rest left to their executors, I haue heard some of them hardly (or neuer) performed, wherefore I wish men to make their owne hands their executors, and their eyes their Ouerséers, not forgetting this old and true prouerbs, Women be forgetfull, children be vnkinde, Executors couetous, and take what they finde: If any one aske where the Legaes became: They answere, so God helpe me, he died a poore man.
There is now liuing one Master Doue a Marchant-taylor, hauing many yeares considered this old prouerbe, hath therefore established in his life time to twelue aged men Marchant-taylors 6 pounds 2 shillings, to each yere∣ly for euer; he hath also giuen them gownes of good brode cloth, liued through out with bayes, and are to receiue at e∣uerie thrée yeres end the like gownes for euer. He likewise in charitie at Saint Sepulchres Church without New∣gate, allowes ye great bell on euery execution day to be to∣led till the condemned prisoners haue suffered death, & also a small hand-bell to be rung at midnight vnder newgate the night after their condemnation, and the next morning at the Church wall, with a prayer to be savd touching their saluation, and for the maintayning thereof, he hath giuen to Saint Sepulchers a certaine summe of money for euer. Gent. This is my minde, it is a charitable deuotion, and deserues eternall praise, I haue much béene delighted not only in these your walkes, but also in your pleasant discourses, which now we are forced to end, by reason of the night drawing on. Therefore I humbly take my leaue. FINIS.
