14918 99855882 21390
A Chronycle with a Genealo¦gie declaryng that the Brittons and Welshemen are li∣neallye dyscended from Brute. New¦ly and very wit∣tely compy∣led in Me∣ter.
The preface. To the hyghe and moste excellente Prince Edwarde the six, Kynge of Englande, Fraunce and Irelande, and in yearthe the supreme heade of the Churche of Englande and Irelande: Arthur elton wys∣sheth continuall peace, hel∣the of bodye, and pro∣sperous successe. AS the worthy, prudent Se∣cretary In those daies, named Danucius Wrote volumes large, of, famous memory Onely to prefer, and make glorious The name of his Lord, called Aurelius Thinkyng it sinne, rebuke and shame Out of his boke, to seclude his name. ¶ Eucolpius, euen in like case Preferred, Alexander Seuerus Whiche in his tyme, so worthy was The Romain Tato, with Citus Liuius Aduaunced the name, of easar Iulius Thus one after other, their time Did apply To that entent, good fame shuld not dy. ¶ Euen so most mighty, and gracius prince
Under support of your benigne grace, I mindyng sleuth, vtterly to conuince As most vnworthy, folowyng their trace Your redoubted father, in euery lyke case For to aduaunce, my wittes will frame With the most worthiest, to set out his name ¶ After shall intreate, of his magnificence His lawes, statutes, his Ciuil ordinaunce His mighty powre, his wonderfull prudence His iust iudgemētes, his rightfull gouernāce Namely to speake of very true substance His graces lawes, most godly deuised Lately into Wales, to vs there commised ¶ With a certayne true comparison Whiche was most worthiest, of Antiquitie The Romains, with their foundacion Ether the Brutes, with their posteritie And of their Cities, the soueraigntie Which of them twayne, shuld other surmoūt London or Rome, as after shall recount. ¶ With an extract, or a Genealogy Conueiyng his, and your most noble discent As auncient Aucthors, putteth in memory From the fyrst age, to this time present Accordyng to their myndes, & true iudgement Who wrote the same, in time long paste To that intent, it shuld indure and last. ¶ Consideryng the high magnificence Of your father, most clerely did shyne
Passing al other, in princely excellence None to be compared before his tyme Al men perceiue, your nature doth inclyne To amplify the same, more out at large Surmoūting the steps of your fathers stage ¶ In whom consisteth, our confidence Our hope, our trust, our consolacion Wherin nature, sheweth an euidence Accordyng to our expectacion To folowe the same, by inclinacion With your mother, most gracious Quene Whose vertue plaine, in your face is sene. ¶ Thus God of his deuine myght Hath indued, your most noble maiestie As appeareth to euery mannes syght Whose incomperable dexterstie In learnyng, hauyng a soueraigntie Passyng all other, by reporte of name Consideryng your age, this is the fame. ¶ The procedynges, of yournoble age Doth vs encourage, your subiectes trewe Well perceauyng, your verteous courage Most godly stories, for to insewe Which doth insence: my hert doth renewe To dedicate, this vnworthy litell boke Unto your highnes, therevpon to lake. ¶ Whiche was begon, in your fathers time Unto whose highnes, I minded the same But death alas, his life did vptwyne
Before I coulde my purpose well frame Preuenting al thinges, but his worldly fame Whiche may not passe, wither, nor yet decaie His famous report, indure shal alway. ¶ O ye infernal systers of the darcke nighte With Cerberus in Hel, as Poetes doth fain Of all nobilitie, the quenchers of lighte Whose crueltie, no wight can restrayne Ye cut the thred, ye parte in twayne The life of man, without respecte The poore ye spare, the noble reiecte. ¶ Cursed be ye, ye doughters of Hell Whiche are in number, counted but three Cloto, Lachesis, and Atropos the fell Ye might haue spared, your crueltie A littel tyme, of our felicite Untill our king, most noble of corage Had proceded into moo yeares of age. ¶ What I haue written in sentence playne In laude or prayse, of your father dere Unto your highnes, let it remayne As though it did, to your grace appere Written of your selfe, as matter clere With no lesse zeale, obedience and loue Then duetie may obserue, increase and moue ¶ I do confesse, and this is trewe If Cato the sage, or prudent Tully With their fyled tonges, and sentence new Were here again his grace to magnify
As they dyd the Romains glorify Yet shulde they not, as in this case Worthely geue prayse, vnto his grace ¶ All thynges remembred as of my parte Most humbly desireth, your noble grace With constant wyll, and faithfull heart To pardon my boldenes, foly and trespace Consideryng alway, as in this case That euery trewe heart, inforced is To rendre his loue, duetie and seruice. The ende of the preface.
The Chronicle of the Brutes. IN the Golden tyme when al thynges florished As it were, by deuyne pro∣uidence And that nature in manne was stablished. Hauyng reason, wisdome and science By gifte of the high magnifycence To vnderstand, determine and knowe The Heauens aboue, and the earth alowe. ¶ Then the wyse, sage and auncient By great industry and diligent laboure By sobre respecte and great aduisement Made lawes, statutes, with other good order Man to stablyshe, onely by fauoure Them to conducte, sauely to bryng Unto knowledge, wisdome and learnyng. ¶ Thus by politike moderacion Without rigoure, or cruel ordinaunce Prynces notable, of intencion Hauyng poure and mightye gouernaunce Established lawes, by discrete purueyaunce Onely theyr subiectes, to keepe in awe Dreadyng God, and fearyng his lawe. Such Princes, kinges & famous Emperors
Of duetie ought to be magnified Not onely as worthy Lonqueroures But as men with grace nutrified Whose actes are worthy to be specified Enrolled vp with golde pearle and stone Registred in a boke, them selfes alone. ¶ Like as the Romains wyse & circumspect In tyme long past, their fame to aduaunce All notable thynges, as in effecte Made by statutes, or Liuill ordynance Registered was, for a remembraunce Their Senate onely to magnify By fam' report, as thei thought thē worthy. ¶ The Romaines most commended Leasar The Troians Hector the famous knyghte The Percians, great Alexander The Grekes Achilles, for manhode & myght The Larthagiens, to maintain their righte Affirmyng Hanniball, their lodesterre Thus euery one, his tyme dyd preferre. ¶ And we Arthur most worthyest of all Ought to remember, in our fantasy Passyng all other, in deedes marciall Like Mars him selfe, shinyng in glory In his triumphes, conquest and victory As the story of him do the recounte All other kinges in his time dyd surmount. AS that tyme is past, and worne out This tyme present, we must put in vre
That in time to come, there be no doute But that this tyme, that time may assure For time once past, is without recure Wherfore this tyme, let vs intende The time to come, may this time cōmende. ¶ Let the Romains, aduannce their Leasar The Troian Hector, their famous knyght The Percian their great Alexander The Greke Achilles, for strength & myght The Larthagiens, to maintain their ryghte Onely preferryng, their Hannybail Yet haue we one, passyng them all. ¶ Whiche we ought of duety and reuerence Most humbly, his grace to magnify Salute in heart, worde and sentence Somwhat of hym to exemplify I meane our kyng, most famous Henry Our naturall Lord, our supreme hed Most renoumed, and most to be dred. ¶ Lyke as Lato, the prudent counceler Wrote volumes large, of famous report Prynces notable, onely to preferre Among the Romaynes, vertue to supporte Whose example, is to our comforte Folowyng the same, vice to confounde Thus of our dutie, surely are we bounde. ¶ Wherfore I wyll my pen aduaunce Mekely thereto my selfe incline With most dilygent attendaunce
Directyng my style, this present tyme In worde and sence, straight as a lyne With Rome, Carthage, Thebes & other m As farre as the best, his fame to goo. ¶ Lyke as Phebes, in the midday spere His radiant beames, moste pure and bryghte Illustreth out, bothe freshe and cleare Persyng the dewes, by force of might I illuminyng all maner of syght Comforting frutes, flowers earbes & grasse So doth our king, al other kynges passe. ¶ I wold to Chryst that my edicion Accordyng to my iudgement Myght take effecte, like my intencion In thynges condyng worthy or equiuolent Unto his grace, this tyme present Then wolde I, the truthe declare Which am inforced with termes rude & bare ¶ Yet neuerthelesse, my inwarde desyre Without any more loquacitee Greatly I seke, as reason doth requyre For to approue, his noble maiestie Of all other kinges, to haue the soueraintee As sonne and ayre, to lusty dame nature Resemblyng her person shape and fygure. ¶ I dare alledge, as in this case That nature sought, tyme oportune When she first formed, his noble grace Onely by respecte, of gentell Fortune
All other causes, for to contune Assured to gether, by promise bounde That in his parson, no faulte were founde. ¶ Thus hathe nature, by great aduisemente With circumspecte deliberacion Full lyke a Goddesse, pure and excellent shewed her powre, and mighty operacion Nothyng reseruyng, at his creacion Whiche myght his nobilitee aduaunce Unto his byrthe she gaue suche attendaunce. ¶ With strength, beawtie, and semelynesse She hath amplyfyed his courage Most renoumed, for gentlenesse Therin he hathe so great aduauntage Passyng all other, his parentage Thus by report, preferred is his name Intitled in the boke, of worthy fame. ¶ Gentelst of Gentyles, grace to recure Like Alcibyades, that famous knyghte Of Athenes prince, their party to assure Alcibiades of Athenes. So is his grace, most gentelest in syghte Whose inwarde respecte, iudgyng a ryghte A prynce of nature, that gentle is Of faythfull subiectes, can neuer mysse. ¶ For like as gentlenes, doth playne appere Onely by naturall inclinacion In countenaunce, in speache and cheare So dothe the loue, and hearty affection Exclude all maner of contencion
Causeth subiectes, them selfes to endeuer Where gentlenes is, in loue to perceu. ¶ By his gentlenes, our wrōges ar redressed By his gentlenes, our loue made pardurable By his gentlenes, the truth out expressed Our heartes are made sure, and veritable His gentlenes is so resemblable That al thinges to him, he doth accumulate Whiche to gentlenes is appropriate. ¶ So that his grace, passeth all other An euident thyng for to declare There reigned, neuer suche another His subiectes to kepe, preserue and spare Wherfore we may in this compare All most one thyng, as in degree His gentlenes, to mercyfull pitie. ¶ For that lande dominion or regiment That hathe a prince, of gentell nature God hathe promised, long stablishment In loue together, they shall indure Wherfore in this, let vs assure Sith gentlenes commeth of gyft deuine Let vs to gentlenes, our heartes incline. ¶ Thus are we bounde, plainly to expresse His gentlenesse, onely to discure conseruyng our wealth, and whole redresse By his grace, lately put in vre Of his lawes, nowe are we made sure Among the mountaynes hilles and vales
Now is it England, somtime called Wales. ¶ And further in this to reporte Accordyng to his mercifull yousage Our abusions onely to transporte Hath deuised with his counsayl sage Wales to conducte from all bondage Brefely to conclude, this to vnderstand Priuileged we ar, with the lawes of Englād ¶ Like as Minos, that famous kyng Somtime raignyng, in the land of Crete Minos king of Crete Full renoumed for science and connyng Founde out the lawes, most holsome & swete Grounded on reason, with vertue replete Ministryng them, as a iudge royall Among his subiectes, by deedes equal. ¶ Prouidyng before, in his aduertence None shoulde declyne, as in this case For lacke of knowledge, and experience So ready he was, their welthe to purchace Thus of his liuyng, and bountifull grace Preparyng in tyme, them to aduaunce Onely by lawe, and Ciuil ordinaunce. ¶ Though he wer a kyng, with scepter and To execute right, nothig disdained (croune For all his fame, his princely renoume In iudgement sate, his domes vnfarned Loue nor hate, his person constrayned But like the deserte, as then did appere
His sentence gaue, with right princely there. ¶ Methamorphosios, there may ye se Of Mines the princely gouernaunce Also of Scille voyde of all pitie Her father slewe with cruell veugeaunce Onely of Minos, to haue acquaintaunce And he agayne like a ryghtfull kyng Gaue sentence plain, her dede condempning. ¶ For to affyrme and brefely conclude Our partie in this, fully to sustayne Unto Minos with lyke similitude Let vs aduaunce, our kyng and souerayne In all thynges that dothe appertayne Unto Justice, or good gouernaunce By lawe, reason or Ciuill ordynaunce. ¶ Was there euer yet, any prince liuyng In Chronicle, story, or sentence playne His noble grace, in this resemblyng Or common welthe, for to sustayne Or for our sake, vndertoke suche payne As dothe his grace, this present tyme Us to preserue from damnable cryme. ¶ Howe far were we, out of oure way For lacke of Justice and good gouernaunce Was there euer any, before this day Kyng or prynce, of suche remembraunce Us to instructe, by lawe or ordinaunce Wherby we myght, our foly redresse Till now his grace, the truthe to confesse.
¶ Whiche by study, and diligent laboure Most circumspectly, herein aduised For to reforme, our olde behauiour His gracious lawes, to vs hath commised To the entent we shulde not be supprised By bondage inforced with crueltee From olde customes, set vs at lybertee. ¶ We must of force, the truthe confesse We cannot well, our selues excuse Our deedes playnely beareth witnesse Of our folly and great abuse Olde customes had, lothe to refuse Surely at the fyrste, howe they began Not pleasyng to God, nether yet to man. ¶ For among al, some customes we had Whiche before God were intollerable As I suppose, all men beyng sadde Will graunt it, trewe and veritable A thyng vniuste falce and flexable Though some affirmed their customes sure By Charter Riall, euer to indure. ¶ Some Lordes no doute had great rialtie Conserued by kinges, in times long past In Forest and Chace, hauyng libertie But not their subiectes, to spoyle and waste By colour or craft, suthe meanes to caste Them to kepe in thraldome and bondage Where they ought, no dewtie nor seruage. ¶ Yet some there were, by way of exaction
Under pretence, of suche rialte By craft, and subtill collusion Onely to deceiue, the porealtee Affirmyng vnder suche libertee All men to take, that there shoulde passe Out of their way, to fine for their trespasse. ¶ A lacke that suche ingratitude In mannes mynd shuld be comprehended A poore man, beyng destitude Oute of his way, nothyng offended The oppression, before entended Compound they must, be it right or wronge Or els inforced to some pryson stronge. ¶ Suche was the custome, without defence Playnely to yelde, or money to pay Foly it was, to speake of indigence For ready money, wolde then a away (And further) some dothe report and say, They must agre, and be at a poynt As the Foster wold, or els lose a ioynte. ¶ Worthy Edippus the famous yōg knight Which was so lusty, and freshe of courage ppus of b So strong, so hardy, so full of myght Had neuer so dredefull, a passage Nor in the lengthe of all his voyage Founde none so monsterus a beast In mountayne, wodde chace or forest. Spynx the serpent whiche was so odible So monsterus, so fearefull to see
So fyerse, so cruell, and so terrible Deuouryng all thyng without pitie Was neuer so full of crueltie Men for to spoyle, for siluer or golde in story founde, that euer was tolde. ¶ This Edippus with full pure entent Goyng towarde Thebes, that famous citie Of aduenture met this cruell Serpent Uppon the mountayne, called Phocie Of his manfull, Magnamitee There he slewe this monsterous beast Sttyng the countrey, and Thebes at rest ¶ But our Edippus, refuge and Champion Our comforte our ioye and heares solace Our noble, most famous of renoune Our kyng most worthiest that euer was Onely by prudence, hath brought to pas A thousande hath slayne, as in effecte Whiche of suche cryme, by force wer detecte. Our mountains, our wodes, ourchases gret From suche exactions, are made full playne No raucnous prayes, now can they geate They must of force, their fury restrayne They may no longer, suche purpose attayne There is no helpe for their refute But leaue their custome, and olde pursute. ¶ There shall no crafte, nor yet colusion No fayned tales, no falce pretence No colour, deceipte, or adulacion
Be taken nowe for their defence Lyke as they are, suche lyke recompence So that the truthe shalbe defended When the vniuste shalbe condempned. ¶ Hathe not his grace, of his mere goodnes Moste pryncely, our causes to renewe Brought vs from all wrongfull dures Suche abusions, onely to subdew And further all offenders to pursewe Hathe stablyshed vs by prudent purueiaunce Them to Chastise, for their misgouernaūce. ¶ Hercules the strong, and pereles knyghte uses of  or E∣. Of whō the Poetes, so muche dothe faine Had neuer more vertue force or myght Then hath our kyng, Lorde and soueraygne Yet dyd he wonderfull thinges attayne In his conquest triumphes and victory As the stories of hym do the specify. ¶ Busiris Antheus and Gereon Of Egipte, Libie, also of Spayne All thre kynges by succession Can witnesse this story playne Diomed in Trace, as kyng did raygne Cacus Nessus and Cerberus the great Also the Lyon, and the Bulle of Crete. ¶ Abcor the Serpent, odious and blacke Most outragious wylde and sauage The monsterus messe, of Archades lake deuouryng all thynges in their rage
Hercules with most knyghtly visage Slewe them all, suche was his grace None might wtstād, his knighthod to deface. ¶ These tirantes great, by odius cryme Accused were, of thefte and robbery Bryngyng the countrey, vnto ruine Spoilyng the people, of malice and enuy Delityng in murder, and tiranny Whiche caused Hercules, maugre their wyll Them to betray, and after to kyll. ¶ Here must ye note, marke this ryght well As Diodorus, affirmeth it playne Also Sainct Ierome, likewyse doth tell How that there were, Hercules twayne Whiche were ryght noble, stories be playne But Hercules, named Egipcius Was he that dyd, these dedes meruaylous. ¶ Not Hercules, called Alcides Whiche the Greekes, so highly do commend Sonne of Iupiter, this is douteles To whose powre he myght not extend Who euer wyll the cause defend Loke in the fifth boke, of Antiquities Of Birosus, the Ethimologies. ¶ As in a treatise, lately compyled After my simple, and rude deuice As auncient Aucthors, hathe comprysed In time long past, right famous and wyse Whiche to set forth, I did enterpryse
Where ye may see, of these nobles twayn For the cōmon welth which toke most payn. ¶ Of this Hercules, Called Egipcius Came the notable, and famous lignage Downe to Troy, and so to Brutus Unto this day, with all the surplusage To our most noble, ryall of courage Henry the eyght, elect by grace deuine Of the same discent, stocke blud and lyne. ¶ Whiche onely nowe, for our redresse With like vygoure, and manfull myght As a kyng, of wisedome perelesse Consideryng all thynges of ryght Suche tiranny hath appealed out of syghte By his royall powre, and heart most cōstant As at this tyme, to vs is apparaunt. ¶ Where are become, these tirauntes great So insaciate, of their desyre Whose auin some time, no man could set So raged was, their mortall yre Who durst denay, what they did require To burne or spoyle, all was one thyng Suche was their vse, custome and liuyng. ¶ The trewe man abrode, he might not pas But must of force, with them compounde Like as they wold, geue more or las Or els they wolde, his wealthe confounde With some distres, to beate or wounde His cattell steale, or goodes to spoile Thus wolde the Thefe, the true man defoe.
¶ yf they were taken, as seldome was sene They wolde alledge, for theyr defence The Lord of the soyie myght them redeme And of this roialtee, with them dispence Suche was their vse, and vyle pretence Paiyng therfore, their fine accustomed From all daungier, to be franchysed ¶ The partie nothyng herein suffysed Must nedss of force, his wrong sustayne Goddes people vtterly despysed The trewe man the losse, the thefe the gayne Restitucion none should they attayne Fiue pounde and a peny, paid for the fyne The Thefe goeth quite, for fault and crime. ¶ And yet alas, one custome we had Whiche as I thincke, all grace dyd expell I suppose neuer none halfe so bad Ingendred in the pitte of Hell The pryce of a man, was knowen to well Yf he ware layne, the paiment should be Lyke as he was, in byrthe or degre. ¶ O custome vnkynde, causer of distresse Whose terrible plage, infecteth the Ayre Mannes lyfe with murdre, to represse Consideryng Christ, mannes solle to repayre Became man, of a Uirgyn fayre Onely for loue. man to redeme Alas that man, with murdre shuld be sene. ¶ Murdre of truthe, is intollerable
Murdre before God, calleth for vengeaunce Murdre to man, is abhominable Murdre to nature, is a defiaunce Murdre to lyfe, is a discontinuance Murdre to grace, is playne a rebell Murdre at the first, began sure in Hell. ¶ This was our coūtrey brought in defame Sclaundred and noysed, for our outrage All trewe men of this reaported shame God knoweth who had the pylage The poore man, but small aduauntage The Thefe his pleasure, on mountayn & hyll Yf he had money, myght walke at his wyll. ¶ Thus the slaunder ranne far abrode All most to our greate desolacion As thoughe we all had ben of one accorde No diuersitee in their opinion Suche was the rumoure and communicaciō No thyng reseruyng in their iudgement Betwene a Thefe and the Innocent. ¶ And thus full ofte, we bare the blame causeles, of truethe nothyng offended Nor by consent, worthy of infame Yet by report we were suspended As though we had, therto intended Idelnesse was cause, as in effecte Why we were had in suche respecte. ¶ Oh thou vicious Sardanipall i{us} Sarda∣all. The beginnyng of slouthe and Idlenesse
Whose example all welth dooth appall Delightyng in synne and wretchednesse With surfeites great, the body to oppresse Whiche brought in thefte and robery Murder, riote, also aduoutry. ¶ Who list the story, to accompte Shall well perceiue, in sloth and idlenesse other before the, thou didst surmount Thy vicious life, beth full witnesse She was thy lady and chiefe mastresse To whom thou didst, thy self abounde Whiche was the cause thy person to cōfoūd ¶ For Arbachus, of vertues respecte cou Arbachu As a prince of excellent wisedome Did thee manace, chastice and correcte For thy froward, abhominacion Idlenesse was cause, and occacion Why thou vicious Sardanapall From thyne estate, had so greate a fall ¶ For like as verteous businesse Inuenteth thynges right laudable So doth riote and idlenesse Increase mischenes intollorable One thyng marke, whiche is veritable Put idlenesse, clene out of ve For custome all moste, turneth to nature. ¶ Note where idlenesse, doth oft remayne Fare well all verteous businesse For idlenesse, inflameth the brayne
And bryngeth in newe fanglenesse Sequestrith the herte, from all goodnesse And aldre last, note this for euer God from man, it doth cleane deceiuer. ¶ Idlenes, caused our abusion By idlenes, increased our infame Till now of late, by politicke reason Of our kyng, moste gracious of name Whiche hath brought vs into a new frame So that we fele, by worldly businesse There commth gayne, and moderat richesse ¶ Thus hath our wise worthy Arbachus Suppressed our foly and customes rude Lausyng our hertes, to be desirus To folowe the sage, multitude Idlenes vtterly to Laboryng abrod, our fode to gete Leuyng by our handes, and bodely sweate. ¶ To digge and delu, to eare and sows To graffe or piant, in rough or playne On mountayns hie, or vales lowe Litle we force, for labor and payne So that we maie, our wlth attayne Tenderyng so muche our businesse That we forget, the vice of idlenesse. ¶ For where of truthe, with vs late past Bothe corne and fruie, was scant and bare Our countree voyde, laie halfe in wast I dare allege, and surely declare
Now at this tyme we maie well spare If there should chaunce, a tyme of nede With corne and cattaile, our neighbors fe ¶ And thus daily, we do preuaile In our increase, bothe cataile and corne Thankes be to God, all is quoche quaile The chaffe the wedes, a waie are shorne Neuer so well, sens we wer borne Our countree made playne, and habitable Whiche semed before, irrecurable. ¶ And further, of his benyng grace Through his moste mercifull assent Our commune welth, for to purchace Hath remitted, of pure intent Two thousande markes, of yerely rent Before paied, in siluer and golde Taxed emong vs, of customes olde. ¶ Yet hath our Troian, most mighty emye Planted vs, with prudent Latons (roure o be our president and gouernour Associate with noble Sipious With diuerse mo, of high discressions For to augment, our common weale Graunted by comission, vnder his scale. ¶ In sundery partes, for our redresse As did some tyme, the noble senate Consules prefectes, of greate sadnesse Dictatours full famous, of estate Decemusres, wisedome to approbate
rauersyng the countries rounde aboute Where suspecte persones, wer had moste in- (doubte. ¶ To that intent, our ciuility Wer not suppressed, for lacke of gouernance Nether is inforced, by tyrrany But redused, to a Ciuile substance Accordyng to the vse, and continuance Of Englishe lawes, in tyme long past Wherof we bee now, made sure and fast. ¶ Thus charge vpon charge, daily doth in- Unto his grace, in maner importable (sewe Inuentyng lawes, and statutes newe Gentill and softe, by meane tretable To thentent, it should bee pardurable Emong vs for euer, this is the meane Uncorrupted to kepe vs pure and cleane. ¶ Thus a kyng of vigilant respecte Sheweth vnto vs, this constant loue As a father, in this effecte Tenderyng his childe, vice to remoue Without rigoure, our foly doth reproue Caryng not for treasure or expence But to withdrawe, the cause of our offence. ¶ For to compare, and brefe te tyme Accompt all stories, that euer was Inforce your self, thereto to inclyne Rede where ye list, your tyme to pas And ye shall not finde, that euer there was A kyng of better remembrance
His subiectes to kepe, preserue and aduance. ¶ Reken Lesar, with his triumphes all Alexander, Hecto, or Achilles Edippus, or worthy Haniball Minos the Iudges, or greate Harcules Or yet Arbachus, of knighthod pereles Let theim come all, their vertue to declare Yet shall thei not, with his grace compare. ¶ For these princes, these conquerors great Set their mynde, and full attendance Countrees to subdewe, & kyngdoms to geate Onely by strength and mightie puysance And some again, to take their chance Ieopard their persones, to get theim a name As beastes wilde, to make theim tame. ¶ And thus thei wrought all by fantasy As fortune list, the party assure To win or lose, put in ieopardy Hap as it would, all inaduenture Goodes, landes, life, body and treasure But those kynges, are moste to be commēded Frō vicious life, their subiectes hath defēded. ¶ As our noble, and moste famous kyng Appoyncted by grace, of the deite Moste circumspecte, in ouer lokyng His subiectes to kepe, in a conformite One lawe, one kyng, one deuinite One faithe, one hope, one erudicion One mynde, one will, and one intencion.
Neuer none like, accompt the tyme Sens Brute, our first progenitoure Borne by dissent, of right noble lyne Beyng prince, kyng, and goueronure Unto our parentes, chiefe protectoure Through whose manfull magnanimite Thei wer deliuered, from olde captiuite. ¶ As famous auctours, moste seriously With a sincere opposicion In tyme long past right willyngly By a louyng emulacion Onely for our, eriducion Hath related, as after shall insewe More exactly, matter constaunt and trewe. ¶ Some what herin, doubtles am I moued For to expresse, my fantasy Not of impacience, muche greued But that some, hath iudged wrongfully As in reproche, of our country Deniyng playne, moste noble Brute Our antecessor our stocke and our frute. ¶ A boke of late, there was compiled By Polidorus, in Italy borne idorus. Nothyng to vs reconsiled But rather written, in hatred or scorne Yet shall we saie, if he had sworne We Welshmen, with hym shall compare For olde antiquities, the truth to declare. ¶ His slanderous stile, to exterminate
Reiect, auoyde, and cleane put a waie Whiche is so subtle, and intricate Thynkyng therby, our fame to decaie None will so reporte, I dare well saie Hauyng wit, reason or intelligence Other to iustice, myndyng aduertence. ¶ Not contented this to deny But would of force, our name appall Cleaue to extincte, out of memory As though we wer, reiectes of all Knowyng not, our discent naturall From whence we came, nor of what lyne Us to infame, this is his cryme. ¶ Me thinke of truth, to muche ye erre In your reproche, spoke of disdain Affirmyng plaine, in tyme of warre We Welshemen, no honor to attain Nether yet in peace, trewe to remain Your barberous wordes, backe doth reboūde To your infame, all thynges doth sounde. ¶ It is vnmete, a man of your age Accompted sadde, wise and discrete So violently, abrode to rage Matters to penne, whiche is vnmete With wordes vntrew, with termes onswete Or thynges deny whiche auctours olde In tyme long past, bothe wrote and tolde. ¶ Who shal but thinke, your sentence light As thynges in vain, to none effecte
Wordes of reproche, spoke again right Menne should abhorre, and cleane reiecte To breue my tyme, this is theffecte Your slaunderous wordes, affirmeth plaine To rise of ire, hatred or disdayne. ¶ If ye of force, will vs persewe Onely through your ingratitude Blame vs nothyng, your wordes exchewe Beware hurte not, a multitude Lest some perchaunce, with sentence rude Iustely again, like your offence Euen with the same, will you recompence. ¶ We speake to you, Master Polidorus Whose ingratitude, we greatly complain Ye go aboute, to rase out the floures Of our parentes, as thynges in vain And yet of truthe, ye cannot refrain But generally, vs to accuse No indifferency, herin ye vse. ¶ We Welshemen saie for our defence That ye Romayns, surmountyng in pride With your Imperiall magnificence Supposyng therby, the heuens to deuide Came long after, our noble tribe So that we maie, write of your estate Not ye of vs, ye came all to late. ¶ How should ye knowe, our antecessours Our stocke, our line, our progeny Our moste mightie conquerours
Sithe ye bee of muche lesse memory Writyng nothyng, almoste plainly But what doth rebounde, to your estate Magnifiyng the pompe, of your Senate. ¶ By cause your auctoure, Titus Liuius Of noble Brute maketh no mencion Beyng perchaunce, somewhat obliuius Or knewe not, of that succession Therfore ye make no discripcion But onely of your kynges of Italie Whiche reigned there, successiuely. ¶ As appereth, by storie euident Called Fasciculus Temporum Where litle is, to vs pertinent But to the first, of your succession Hauyng the regall possession Breuely doth passe, all other thynges Onely doth write, but of a fewe kynges. ¶ Though he forgate, this noble prince Or listed not, his fame to conuaie Yet shall he not his name conuince Nor this his honor, to pulle awaie Fasciculus Temporum, plainly doth saie That Brute beganne, first to excell Whē Heli was prieste, and Iudge of Israel ¶ Holy Eusebius, doth testifie Also sainct Bede, maketh mencion That noble Brute of the age, fiue and thirty Entered first into this region
Whiche was before Christes incarnacion A thousand. i. C. twenty and twayne And after Troye. xliii. yeres playne ¶ Galfridus affirmeth assuredly That noble Brute, in his yeres grene Like Marce for strength, fearce and hardy In Grece moste princely was sene Wan there croune, ceptre and diademe From Panderus, of Achilles blud His doughter, his treasure, with all his gud. ¶ And further the Grekes to deface That daie he did, the felde recure Moste princely, met them in the face Whose knightly strokes, thei might not in- A shilde he bare, the felde of asure (dure hree crounes of gold, sumteously wrought A Lion sette, on his helmet a lofte. ¶ Also Gydo, do Collumpnia Doth verifie, this to be trewe That he did honor the goddes Diana Passyng the seas, fortune to insewe Where he had answere, his ioyes to renewe Beyng right yong, should supply the place with scepter & croune, his enemies to inchase ¶ Ranulphus, a manne of perfeccion Writeth right playne, as in this case How noble Brute, within this region Landed first, by a speciall grace Predestinate before, was that place
As Diana the mightie Goddes Had promised, namyng it Totnesse. ¶ Also the Floure, of histories Named Peter Pactauiences With many noble writers Alloweth the verie same sences To muche of truthe, are their offences Whiche will alone, suche thynges deny That auctours olde, do write and verify. ¶ Martinus super Cronicas Vtropius, and Sabellicus Affirmeth playne, how all thyng was In the tyme of Brenne and Belenus Of the discent, of noble Brutus How thei entered, first into Italie Hauyng at Rome gates, a noble victorie. ¶ This story to amplifie and augment The sixt yere of Artaxarses the kyng As Iacobus Phillippus doth assent Ouer the Persians, that tyme reignyng These princes. ii. with standerdes displaiyng As brother with brother, of one minde & assēt Again you Romains, with hert most veruēt ¶ Had a battaill strong, as is expressed Where your Senate, Tribunes & Dictators By knightly force, wer clene oppressed Your Pretours, Consules and gouernors Your lusty manfull, young soldiors Your valiant knightes, in stele armed bright
All wer taken, slain or put to flight. ¶ Ye cannot well, these auctours deny For all your vain, stentacion Your citee spoyled, all went a wry Make therof a true declaracion Ye wer right faine, by composicion A peace to take, ths is no naie Els to yelde vp, or sone flie awaie. ¶ Noble Arthur the famous Brute Of thesame line, and true succession Whiche by his cōquest, and princely pursute Uanquished full many a region Sonne of Uter, called Pendragon Chronicles, plainly doth it specify Yet ye Romaines, this prince will deny ¶ Loke in Fasciculus Temporum The tyme of Bisshoppe, Hilarius In lina Christi, accomptyng the sum Foure hundred sixty & foure, truly to discus Then florished Arthur, that was victorious With his owne hande, in one daie he slewe Foure hundred & sixty, if that story be true. ¶ Also beholde Poli cronicon The▪ xxiii. Chapiter, the seuenth boke There maie ye se, by plain discripcion The yere of our Lorde, who list to loke A xi hundred foure score, his body vp toke Translated into Glastinbury By the famous kyng, the second Henry.
¶ In the thirtie yere, or there aboute Of our soueraigne, kyng Henry theight Ye blinded Romains, to put out of doubte The cause made plain, perfect and streight A crosse was founde, of full greate waight In Glastenbury, with letters of golde Grauen full depe, with this sentence olde. ¶ Here lieth Arthur, the worthy kyng Depe in the grounde, his body to hide Sometyme in Britaine, famously reignyng God of his mercie, for hym prouide His solle vnto rest, to be his guide For a more concordaunce of yearthly fame For euermore, florishe mought his name. ¶ But ye Romains so full of pride Will in no wise, to this assent In couerture, all thynges to hide Of ambicion, and froward intent In all your stories, this is full ment Nothyng to touche, or matter to frame Whiche should rebounde, to your rebuke or (shame ¶ Youre olde enmite, rancor and debate Will not permit, the Brutes to aduaunce By cause your noble Imperiall estate By theim was brought, vnto vtteraunce At your hard walles, suche was your chaūce The honor ye lost, your knightes māly slain By princes notable, kynges of Britain. ¶ For shame a wake, beginne of newe
Recante your fayned fantasie To Master olidorus. Confesse your faulte, all is vntrewe Make some excuse, with honestie Affirme the slepe, was in your iye Feble with watche, heuy was your hed Ye wist not well, what ye wrote or said. ¶ And thus maie ye, your self excuse Referryng it, vnto ignorance Your old errours, clene to refuse Resityng playne, as matter insubstance All that ye did, was of inconstance Affeccion moued so muche your intent For to write trewe, ye could not assent. ¶ Sithe ye so largely, in your pretence Here tofore; haue vs frequented Ia amplifiyng, your cruell insence Again vs moste fraudently inuented Though herin my spirites be incensed You to requite, in writyng so large Take it a worth, myne is the charge. ¶ For he that will, causeles procure Or it inuent, thynges of defame He maie well iudge, beyng right sure Men will requite hym, euen with the same Likewise again, in borde or in game As the cause is, seke out the grounde Slandered report, clene to confounde ¶ Ye are vnueritabl, in your reporte Unshamefast, auctours to deny
And we very lothe, for to supporte Fables vntrewe, to inuent a lye Let Boccas by iudge, if ye will apply Whiche of vs twaine, moste haue offended Or in this case, worthiest to be commended. ¶ Where ye alledge, and vs accuse That we in battaill, are feble and faint No fetes of armes, that we can vse But must of force, of very constraint Intreate of peace, as towardes attaint Your slandered reporte, to your infame Shall euer increase, in hinderyng your name ¶ I will appeale, as in this case Recorde to take, of Titus Liuius Let hym verify, how all thynges was In the tyme of noble Camillus Dictatour of Rome with famous Lucius Consuls electe, as for that yere With Emilius, the story is full clere. ¶ Eutropius an auctoure full trewe Likewise plainly, doth defyne As in the story, before doth insewe The famous Brutes, as in their tyme Beyng of discente, bloud birthe and lyne Of noble Brute, their fury to withstande. Rome inclosed, with moste mighty Englāde ¶ If ye list by clere, computacion Plainly to knowe, the yeres and the tyme How long it was, after Romes foundacion
Three hūdred thre score, puttyng therto nyne The first fall, the wofull ruyne Of Rome that euer, I did of rede Neuer before, standyng in suche feare & drede ¶ Oh ye Romains, full of presumpcion Remembre your birthe, stocke, and your line And of your citee, the first foundacion Accomptyng A milius your parentyne With Rea his sister, the feminyne And Aldre last, truly to discus The two brethren, Remus and Romulus: ¶ Ye beganne with robery and pilage And we by marciall dissipline Ye froward of birthe, bloud and linage And we right noble, famous of line Accompt bothe male, and feminyne Ye in fayned, fables to inewe And we in forced, to stories trewe. ¶ Thynges grounded on wrong maie not Scripture therof, maketh mencion (indure An euill beginnyng, who maie assure Therof to make, a good foundacion For where nothyng is, but fraude & treason Murdre riote, with foule aduoutry The ende must nedes, be full of misery. ¶ Though fortune fauor, a tyme to aduāce In her assence, climyng a lofte With a pretence, of faire countenance As hath been proued, in tymes full ofte
In her returne, fallyng unfte She hath agayne, with wnyng there Dusked the weather, before pure and clere: ¶ Where ar no we, your famous Emperors Your triumphant knightes, stately ridyng Your notable wise Senatoures Your Consers, your Citie guidyng Your prctes Dictatours, clerely shining Are they not onsumed, frusrate and gone And ye from fauoure, almost left alone▪ ¶ Your noble Mache called Aurelius Which was of Rome, the famous Emperor Marcus Aurelius Criyng out, with voice most piteous Cursyng the tyme, the day and houre When Rome beganne, fir for to flowre Triumphyng in pompe, also in pride Which caused vertue, from Rome to deuide. ¶ Did not he also, piteously complayne Saiyng of truthe, Rome shal be cōfounded Of very Justice, the Goddes cannot refrain But of equitie, must be condempned For like he said, as Rome was commended Aboue all other, most worthiest of name The time shall come, of reproche and shame. It must procede, by iustfull sentence Consideryng al thynges of ryght Where oppssion is done by violence It may not indure, by force of myght Example good, to euery wight
Beholde ye Romains, this present tyme Are ye not almost, brought vnto ruine. ¶ Considre well, your first begynnyng Of Remus and Romulus, brother & brother Remus and Romulus An accident, of very euill liuyng If ye note well, Rea their mother Sacred to Uesta, it was no other Professed there, onely to Chastitee Hir lyfe duryng, to liue in virginitie. ¶ The Temple by her, defiled was The story playne, beareth full witnesse And she againe, for her trespasse By her brother, cruell and merciles Uoyde of all succoure, beyng remediles Died in prison, recure was there none Her chyldren sole, left alone. Their father not knowen, for birth or linage Fostered they were, without al reuerence Of a shee Wolfe, full wilde and sauage The children froward, cruell of corage Of very hatred, ire and disdayne The elder brother, the yonger hath slayne. ¶ Lyke as their vncle, named Emilius His brother slewe, with fraude and treason So in like case, most cruell Romulus Against all kynd, and naturall reason His brother slewe, for his possession Thus of Rome, was the Antiquitie Murdre vpon murdre, voyde of all pitie.
¶ Remembre Rome, thy olde abusion Thy infamed, and cursed gouernance Thy tiranny, and falce extorcion Thy great adultrie, and foule daliaunce Way these together, al in one balaunce And thou shalt not fynd, any rightful sētence Against the Brutes, to geue euidence. ¶ Who began fyrst, the Ciuill warres Discord, discencion, troble and stryffe The proud Romains, surmoūting the sterres Whiche was the losse, of many mannes life Marius & Silla, began the myschefe Marius and Silla. Foure thousand lay deade and slayne Six hundred knightes, the story is playne ¶ Likewyse most dredefull and piteous For to reherse, the woful distruction Betwene Pompey, and Ceasar Julius Thre hundred M. brought to confusion Murdred & slain, through falce abusion Ceasar Ju∣lius Pom∣peius. Thus of the Romains, was ye gouernaunce Let Boccas be iudge, of al their mischaunce. ¶ Who were the cruell, persecutours Who subplanted, Christes religion Who were the falce, conspiratours Who were the traytours, to euery region Who, wrought fraud, who wrought treasō Who slewe the Appostles, Peter and Paul Who martered, all most the sainctes all. ¶ Who inuented, falce conspiracie
Who oppressed, the pore Innocent Who slewe the worthy, Scipions thre Oh cursed people, without al reuerence Who conspired against the magnificence Of Ceasar, most mightiest of estate  Scipions By treason slaine, among your Senate. ¶ Oh cruell Rome, confesse thy outrage Thy shameful murdre, thy foule abusion Cry out and cōplaine, with al thy surplusage Alacke alacke, through falce contradiction In the was slayne, by cruell treason The lantern the light, the prince of eloquence Among you Romains, most of excellence. ¶ Of Rethorique, the famous oratour In his daies, called sage Tullye ully Chosen to be a gouernoure Your common weale, onely to guyde By meane of knighthode, also of Cleargy Defended you, from proude Cataline Which wold haue brought your citie to ruine ¶ With all his falce conspiratours which to his treason, were fully consented Punished those rebelles, and traitours By prison strong, their bodies turmented By force wherof, the commons assented The prison to call, after his owne name Tullian, the more to encreace his fame ¶ What shuld I say, of your treasons all To amplify them, and set them at large
In murdre and riote, like fendes infernall So monsterous ye are, of mind and corage Of customes olde, as beastes full sauage Innocentes to kill, vertue to confound Of all sorowes, the rote and the ground ¶ Fourtene Emperours, in stories I fynde One after other, there did insewe To Christes faith, cruell and vnkynde Innocent bloud, causelesse to pursewe Onely twayne, no mo was founde trewe All the rest, as tirantes inflamed Woldin no wise, Christ to be named. ¶ Recorde I take, of that cursed man To God alway, founde contrarius Ualarian Called in his day, cruell Ualerian Uoide of all fauoure, most impiteous Of Emperoures all, none more vngracious Against Christes faithe, of mind and will By persecucion, his sainctes to kyll. But god of his grace, his power to wtdrawe Sapor Caused Sapor that time kyng of Perce For all his froward, and cursed lawe His imperiall powre, sone to suscesse Toke him prisoner, in middes of the Prece Made a fote stoole, of his cursed Corse When euer he lyst, to mount on his Horsse. ¶ Likewise the tiraunt, named Domician Proudest of all, recken any one Domician Persecuted many a Christian man
Into Pathmos, exiled Sainct Ihon Thought him selfe, most worthiest alone In his estate, proudly vp stalled A God abrode, for to be called. ¶ Made a decree, of very presumpcion In paine of death, no man to deny But God aboue, knowyng his intencion To punishe his pride, in his owne army Caused his knightes, to wounde his body With vnware death, the story to expresse Denied of buriall, was his Carcasse. ¶ Most cruell infamed Maxence Maxence Likewyse our Faith, he did pursewe Causeles with most cruell violence Hauyng no respecte, to Christ Iesu Slayne as a traytour, to God vntrewe Of very disdayne, his life once past His cursed troncke, into Cybre was cast. ¶ Galerius falseste of assent Against Christes Faith, sought occasion Galerius Them to destroy, by furious iudgement Whiche was at length, to his confusion With sicknesse take, thus in conclusion The Ayre corrupted, gan to putrify Onely by stincke, of his carren body ¶ Also valence, the prowes Emperou Whiche in his rage, was so mercylesse Ualence. Against Hermites, them to deuoure Liuyng in desert, and wildernesse
Slewe them all of very wilfulnesse Consumed he was, by brennyng of Fyre By the Gootes, which his death dyd conspire ¶ Most cursed of all, that I rehearse can Among all your falce conspiratours Iulian A∣postita. Was your Emperour, named Iulian Whiche wrought by crafty inuencions Called sprytes, by his Coniuracions Did them worship, by way of sacrifice Unto God most hatefull, in such maner wise ¶ With them he had, suche conuersacion That they to hym, were fauourable For his Ceremonies, and falce oblacion Promisyng him, to be veritable That he shoulde passe, in deedes honorable Great Alexander, in triumphant victory As in excellyng, his state and glory. ¶ Thus fell he into fayned fantasy Trusyng to Pluto, the God infernall But then the Lorde most mighty Disdayned his pryde, Imperiall Send vnto him a knyght Immortall Most Angelicke, in stele armed bryght Roue hym to the hearte in his most myght. ¶ Among all other, that I can rede Most vicious, and odiu to heare Was cursed Nero, without feare or drede Uicius Nero. Whose shamful story, plainly doth appere Consydre it well: ye Romains drawe nere
Suche do ye foster, nurrishe vp and bryng Hatefull to God, most fro ward in liuyng ¶ Who was more vicious of nature By constraint of his disposicion Who was more vnsure, grace to recouer Then was Nero, by inclinacion More prouder of port, with fraude & treason His wife his brother, causelesse he slewe No matter of right, them to pursewe. ¶ This story right sore, doth him accuse With his mother called Agripine Like a ribauld her body shuld mysuse In carnal knowlage, filthy as a swine And further playnely to defyne His mothers wombe, he corue vpon a day To se the place, nine monethes where he lae. ¶ This proud tirant, vnfortunate man Morall Sene, causeles he slewe . Which was his maister when he began Uirgins profest, he dyd pursewe Beyng right chaste, stedfast and true His Lecherus lust, onely to fulfyll Rauished them of force, against their wyll ¶ Yet moreouer, this Fend infernall Against Christes faithe, most dispiteous eter and aule Slewe the Apostles, Peter and Paule For which vengeance, & deedes most lecherus God gaue him ouer, as man vngracious With a dagger, roue him selfe vnto the hert
Died for payne, anguishe and deadly smarte. Thus God of his righte, tirātes can chastyce Which wil rebell, against pore innocencie Them to murdre, and will not aduertise In Christ to haue, trewe confidence They must of force, without assistence Remayne with Cerberus, the Hell hound Linked with Tātalus in chaines fast bound. ¶ Of our Emperours, a ful great number I coulde resite froward of courage Christes faithe, causeles to incumber I will let pas, all the surplusage No more to speake, of fraude and pyllage Neither murdre, treason, with their infame Set them together, with rebuke and shame. ¶ Can ye deny, but this is trewe Why do ye then, vs Brutes accuse We are right lothe, our faultes to renue But sithe ye causeles, do vs misuse As in report, ye cannot refuse Grosse is his witte, worthy of infae That will not defend, his countrey & name. ¶ If ye loke well, and iudge a ryght Ye ought not vs, Welshmen disdayne Sith we with all our force and might Your holy men did entertayne From your exile, and cruell payne When that they durst, no where abyde For their refuge, we did prouide.
¶ For in the time, of your great outrage When no man myght, your malice intreate So wilfull were ye, of minde and corage Christ and his lawes, sone to forget His electe to kyll, malice and threate Of very constraint, inforced to flee So cruell and merciles, that time were ye. ¶ Helpe or redresse, none could they finde Their carefull life, for to assure Their inspyred heartes, their constant minde Inforced were, lacke of recure To seke abrode, their harde aduenture Where that they might, with pure intent Christes religion for to augment. ¶ Then into Wales, they dyd approche Through Goddes prouidence, his myght to Under many a strōg mighty roche (shewe Builded their Chappels, in desertes lowe In sondry places, as men doth knowe As at this day, plainely doth appere The places olde, euident and clere. ¶ This is no fayned inuencion Neither yet no curious fable Who lyst to loke, without suspection Shall fynde it trewe, and veritable Written by fathers, honorable For a more concordant of Godly fame Our Churches at this day, reth their name ¶ Loke vp your stories, and sentence olde
Accompiyng the tyme, yeares and season I dare affyrme, Beyng so bolde To make herein, a comparison With any Christen religion For lengthe of time, bearyng good name Concernyng out fayth, for any infame ¶ A thousand. 300. fowre score & twayne Sithen it floryshed, fyrst with vs In the time of many a proude Romayne Martered was holy Euleutcrius In whose tyme raigned Lucius In Britaigne, the famous region Then entered forth Christes religion ¶ This was in the yere of our Lorde An hundred six and fiftye playne After his byrthe, stories doth accord Sithin the faythe, came fyrst into Britaygne Among vs Brutes there to remayne As at this day, ye may well see Neuer accused, of Infidelite ¶ What place so constant, sure and stable As at that tyme, myght there be founde Like vnto Wales, none so veritable No tiranny with vs, there did abounde The Faith remayned, full hole and sounde Accordyng to Christes religion Without spot or gall, of infection. To what place shuld they haue resorted To haue had redresse, in this misery
Or where shuld they haue ben supported Nether in Rome, neither in Italy Nether in Spaine, Fraunce, or Germany Brefely to conclude, this is manifest From the sonne risyng, doune to the Weste. Such tirantes that time had the gouernaūce That no man durste Christ to confesse Dispysed his lawes, and in that instaunce In. xxx. daies, as Scripture doth witnesse Twenty thousand slayne this is doutlesse clecian ximian By Dioclesian, raigning in the Easte And Maximinian, do wne in the west. ¶ Who euer harde, of suche a sorte So vngracious, and so vntrewe As were the Romaynes, in their report To blaspheme our Lord, Christ Iesu Affirmyng plaine, this to be trewe That Rome neuer ioyousely prospered Sithin the faith, among them entered ¶ Loke in the time, of Arcadius There may ye se, their false opinion Beyng Emperour, with Honorius aidus h hono∣s. Unto their Idolles hauyng affection As sainct Austine, maketh relacion In his boke called Ciuitate Dei Where he confoundeth, their false Heresy. ¶ My hand quaketh, for fere and drede My heart of truthe, beginneth to shrinke When I beholde, this story to rede
The teares weate, distilleth my incke Oh Lorde, to remember and thincke The crueltie, mischefe, and endles paine Among the Romains, that time did raigne ¶ Who shuld but morne, lament and wepe Consideryng all thynges of ryghte The vertuous with grace then replete Put in exile, cleane out of syght The tirauntes great, by force of myght Persecuted the innocent bloudde Thus with the Romains, that time it stode. To brefe my sentence, the truthe to tel With vs in Wales, none were opprest No tirauntes great, with vs did dwelle There was the place, of peace and rest Christ and his lawes, for to degest None durst approche, that to deny Agayne our faithe, once to reply. ¶ How may ye then, with vs compare Or why do ye, Welshmen defame Let your owne stores, the truthe declare Ye are defectiue, euen in the same As in reproche, worthy of blame Innocentes, gyltlesse to accuse In that your selfe, most dothe abuse. ¶ Of your nobles, and Emperours all With Constantine, make no comparison For his magnificence Imperiall Borne in Britaygn, that famous region
He was the fyrste, of hearty affection That dyd decree, al men to dye Christ and his lawes that wolde denye. ¶ Unto the Churche, for Christes sake Excelled all other, before his time The Romayne Temples, newely did make Dedicated them by sentence deuine To the honor of God, and the orders nyn With most mere and pure deuocion Gaue to the Church, the fyrst possession ¶ To that intent, from all indigence The ministers, shuld stande at reste God for to serue, with due reuerence All worldly thoughtes to be represt Uertue to increace, this is manifest All solitary, there for to abyde For the loue of Chryst, this did he prouide. Gaue goodes & treasure with ornamēts large Amplifyde all thynges, with great expence Made a decree, and gaue in charge That all men shuld, with due reuerence To Christes crosse, kepe his obedience And was the fyrst, in Banner and Shylde Crosses to peynt, that bare in felde. ¶ Oh most famous Coustantine To whom no Romayne might attayne Whose goodnesse the worlde did inline Borne in England, then called Brytaygne Sonne of S. Helin, the story is playne
From Troy linially, downe discended In Christes Churche, most to be commeded. ¶ But nowe a lacke, all is reuersed Onely through fayned perfection For doubtles, vertue was repressed When Constantine, first of affection To Peters Churche, gaue such possession Then obedience, beganne to rebell Whiche caused pride, Humilitee to expell ¶ O Rome Rome, chāge thi soil, remoue thy Barrē & bare, fruteles is thy groūd (place The bish of Rome Yet vnto this day, for lacke of grace Littell vertue, in the there doth abound I dare alledge, this world so rounde May not suffyce, this present houre So satisfye thy head and gouernoure ¶ The cruell Emperours, by force of warre Myght neuer suche ryches attayne Kingdomes to spoile, countreis to marre As at this time the cause is playn With so smal trauayl, and so great gayne Suche Policie there is inuented By seale and wax, and parchment indented ¶ Solles for to saue, ded gone and past But God alone no wight can tell Whether they be free, or in payne caste In Paradice, Heauen, or in Hell Yet for money, those solles wil they sell By auctoritee of Peter and Paule
Pardon forgeue, and release them all ¶ Thus Lord thy might, thei wold draw To whom mercy, onely doth appertaigne As though they might, in heuen make a lawe At their pleasure, solles to detayne Some to release, and some to remayne Like as they wolde, for mede or hyre Some to acquite, some leaue in the fire. ¶ Oh Lorde aboue, a damnable offence Among thy people, suche erroures to bryng Against all trewthe, and godly reuerence . . To haue a trust, in any other thyng There is no helpe, no other meanyng Let this in our heartes, fast be graued Onely by Christes blud, our solles ar saued. ¶ And yet (O Lord) how farre do they erre Thy maiesty is all full of mercy No sinner doutles, wilt thou debarre Being penitent, contrite and sory These couetous heades, cleane contrary The poore solle, wrapped in woo and payne Without money, shal lie still and complaine. ¶ What Charitee herein is extended When two solles in paine, lieth together Perchance both in one case haue offended The one for money, his ioye shall recouer The other for lacke, shal lye styll for euer Suche is their Charitee, in time of nede Their wordly pompe, to set forth and fede.
¶ If cruell Nero, had now afrende That would disbource, and paie at large So to compounde, and make an ende For all his synnes, and fell outrage I thinke his solle, might walke at large Consideryng perdons, are so plentie By meane wherof, hel is emptie. ¶ Oh Lorde God, what wondrefull pride Is it on yearth, goddes to be called Equall with thy grace, solles to deuide As though thei wer, in heuen stalled Thy enemies Lorde, thei maie be called Whiche will thy people, suche errors bryng For their profite, our solles deceiuyng ¶ Is there any other, maner of mean Then in the bloud, of Christ Jesus The immuculate lābe, moste pure and cleane The sonne of God, whiche doth forgeue vs If we knowledge, our deedes vicius Christ it is, that geueth remission By the mercie, of his blessed passion. ¶ The Apostle blessed sainct Peter Nether yet inspired holy sainct Paull The very trewe, and sincere preacher Euer pardoned any solle at all The spirite once past, the body mortall That onely to God, reserued is His deuine power, consisteth in this. ¶ O glorius God, how muche are we
Unto thy deuine maiestie These errors greate for to confounde Auoydyng the danger, of this infirmitie In the tyme of our necessite Like as sometyme, surely it befell Unto thy electe, of Israell. ¶ Whiche so tenderly, hast cared for vs That nothing mought be, for our saluacion But by thy pitie, moste glorious Thou hast of thy godly affeccion Prepared the same, for our redempcion As in the olde lawe, apereth full well By Iosi, then kyng of Israell. ¶ For when thy lawes, wer clene suppressed By the space of many hundred yeres By Iosia again wer redressed Dedicated to thy heuenly speres Abholished their frounyng cheres In worshippyng their false Idolatry Thy glorious name, newly to magnify. ¶ By reason wherof, this prince deserued A name of renowne, to hym most excellent By thy grace Lorde, onely reserued Whiche to his name, shalbe permanent Neuer none to hym, equiuolent Reignyng as kyng ouer Israell Lorde vnto thee, this is knowen right well ¶ So in likewise, moste mercifull Lorde This present houre, of thy tender loue
Thy olde mercie, newly to recorde Our princes herte, inwardly doth mou Suche abusions, to reiecte and reproue Thy lawes, Lorde, long out of remembrāc Are now reduced, to thy godly ordinance. ¶ By our moste noble, Henry theight Through thy incomperable goodnesse All thynges Lorde, is made pure and streight Aholished is all wickednesse In especiall Lorde, this is doubtlesse The power of Rome, so long misused Our kyng hath now vtterly confused. ¶ Now to returne, where I began So to conclude, and briefe my stile Betwene the Brute, and the Roman No termes to seke, my tong to fyle No matter more, now to compile The tyme to tracte, do I intende But close vp my boke, and make an ende. ¶ But first to you, master Polido Your conscience, onely to discharge Whiche of long tyme, hath been obliui Against vs Brutes, in writyng so large Your spirites incensed, all in a rage By your yeporte, vs to infame Your pen to rashe, your termes out of frame ¶ Where is become, your bounden deutie Our antecessours, this to deface Sithe it pleaseth, the high Maiestie
Of our moste noble, the kynges good grace. Not to disdaine, as in this case To be compted, of the same stocke and lyne Doune by dissent, to this present tyme. Who wer more worthy, then wer these three Hercules, Hector, and Arthur the kyng For their princely Magnanimitee Was neuer none, to them resemblyng In bodely strength, all other surmountyng Lions, Dragons, monsterous and wild By manly cōstraint, made them tame & milde ¶ These princely men, these worthies thre Whose knightly force, for to preferre Poetes do fayne, a singularitee For their manhode, and strength in warre Should be transformed, into a starre As it wer, by a deuine grace In the Cristall sky, to take their place. ¶ To bryng you, from all ambiguitie Unto the truth, of this succession By a dissente, and a genelogie Without any vain, ostentacion I purpose with an honest emulacion Here to conclude, who so list to loke Set together, at the ende of my boke. ¶ But yet because, I haue expressed As here to fore, somewhat al large Our old abuses, newly redressed Perchance ye will ley, theim to my charge
Saiyng therin, ye haue aduantage So that we cannot, the thyng deny But with the Prophete, to saie peccaui. ¶ We do confesse, our simplicite Like as it was, in tyme of Israell To liue with milke, yerbes and hony For greate excesse, we take no trauell Nether for pompe, or riche apparell We Welshemen plaine, that do deny Whiche is oft, muche vsed in Italie. ¶ But as Dauid, with grace replete In tyme of Saull, the famous kyng Disdained not, his shepe to kepe Aboute the feldes, them pastoryng Likewise do we, our selfes conferryng Disdaine not, herdmen to be Whiche is aparte, of our ciuilite. ¶ We vse no figges, in pees tage or meat Which in Italy, is oft frequented Without suspecte, together we eate No poysons with vs, is there inuented And ye again, contrary incensed With poyson strong, this is insubstance The greater estate, the lesse of assurance. ¶ Withdrawe your pen, Master Polidorus Your vain reporte, and fliyng fantasy Your termes grose, and matter slanderus No more in this, to amplify But what maie stande, with honesty
Wordes of defame, ye maie well thinke Men will requite, euen to the pittes brink ¶ Herin to make, a degression After the mynde, of Iosephus In the yeres, and computacion Betwene noble Brute, and Romulus And of their citees, stately and sumpteous Which of thē twaine, should other surmoūt Of antiquitee, their yeres to accompt. ¶ Also their stocke, birthe, and their lyne As usebius, and also sainct Bede Plainly doth define and determyne Brute to bee, moste auncient in dede Foure hundred and twenty yeres as I rede So that London, was a citee of fame When Rome, nor Romulus beare no name. ¶ Loke vp your stories, and marke thē well When Brute began, his foundacion Ely was Iudge, and prieste in Israell Nexte insuyng, after Samson As holy scripture, maketh mencion Whiche was before Christ, M. C. xxii. yere As in the stories, more plainly doth apere ¶ And thus Eusebius, also sainct Bede Affirmeth plain, in euery thyng How Rome was made, the iiii. yere in dede Of Acham that tyme, of Italy kyng Whiche doth agre, the yeres accomptyng That Londō before Rome, was raised first
Foure hundred and twenty yeres iust. ¶ Also Galfridus, reherseth plain How many kynges, successiuely One after other, here did remain Of one dissent, lyne and progeny Fully an hundred, as he doth specifie Recon from Brute, doune to Cadwaladre And thus of the kynges, was the hole nūbre. ¶ From Cadwalader, the yere accomptyng As diuerse auctours, doth specify Untill this tyme, doune dissendyng Till our moste noble, theight kyng Henry Of thesame stocke, lyne and progeny As by dissent, the yeres doth appere Fully eight hundred fiftie and eight yere. ¶ Then to accompt, the yeres & the numbre Sithen Brute, toke his first possession Equally deuide, them asunder Recordyng to the computacion And ye shall finde, by plain discription Two thousand sixe hūdred. lxvi. yeres plain Sithin Brute began, the yere of his reigne ¶ Thus for yeres, tyme and continuaunce For bloud, birthe, and high parentage For nobilitee, and mightie puissaunce For vigoure, strength, and manfull corage Let vs compare, with Rome and Cartage With all other, notable citees For our renoumed, olde antiquitees.
¶ What should I more, of this report Sithe stories olde, doth it renewe Whose list therto, hymself resorte As I haue saied, shall finde it trewe Set out at large, as it is dewe Honor reuerence, with all other thynges As doth appertayne, to worthy kynges. ¶ Wherfore let vs, Integratly intende Our moste famous kyng, for to aduance Like his desertes, his grace to commende In his high and mightie gouernance Blessed are we, happy his ou chance To be borne vnder, so noble a kyng To se his grace, ouer vs reignyng. ¶ Whiche hath prouided, for our redresse Neuer none like, before this daie Let vs in Wales, the truth confesse And for his grace, moste hertely praie Long to continewe, God graunt he maie With rest and peace, emongest vs here Saue our Quene, our prince, & his doughter (dere. ¶ The Autour. COnsideryng, fortunes mutabilitee Now vp now doune, as ye whele goth a C To day a prince, of muche nobilite (bout To morowe in dāger, stādyng in great doubt This hath happened, the worlde throughout Well moste none, of the first bloud and lyne In any region, reigneth at this tyme.
¶ Emong all princes, of excellence Foength of tyme, bloud and progeny Let vs preferre, the highe magnificence Of our moste royall, theight kyng Henry Whiche at this houre, by grace of the deity Possesseth the same, kyngdome and powre Like as did Brute, his first progenitoure. ¶ Though doble fortune, in tyme long past His noble bloud, for to incumbre Her traiterous traynes, a brode did cast With foren kynges, to kepe them vnder In diuerse places, sente in an numbre Yt God would not, of his deuine grace The Troyans bloud, should lose their place. ¶ As shall appere, by this dissente Brifely set out, this present tyme By auctours good, famous and excellent As stories olde, doth determine Though for a tyme, thei wer in ruine Not possessyng their in heritaunce God of his might, hath now made assuraūce ¶ But sithe it wer, all to tedious Their auncient names, for to prescribe I will be briefe, and compndious By numbre, to accompt this tribe All foren kynges, fo to deuide Onely a fewe of the Brutes to name As thei wer worthy, of laude and fame. FINIS.
¶ A Genelogie of the Brutes. Osiris Diodorus Secu∣ls, Birosus the Laldy in the. v. boke of his anti quities, Busebius Tibule, and Boc cas affirmith O∣siris, was called Sipis the God in Egipte. the firste kyng of Egipt, in Genesis called Misraem Also kyng of Italie. Hercules sonne of Osiris Labus or Samct Iherom in ther of Gen is, Diodorus Bi∣rous, affirmentl this Hercules to do the. rii. nota ble labores. And not Hercules Al cides whiche the Grekes affir∣meth to be their Lhampion. Libus called gra Hercules Kyng of E∣gipte, Italie, Almayne, Phenice, Prigie, Li∣bie, Argis, Grece, Af∣fricke, Gall Sel∣tike and Tu∣scan. Tusus the sonne of Hercules Kyng of Italie.
¶ Atheus the sonne of Tuscus Kyng of Italy. ¶ Blascon the sonne of Al∣theus kyng of Italye. ¶ Lombla∣blascō Birosus in his. v boke of antiqui∣ties. I hō de Utter by com∣mētator of Biro∣s{us}, saieth he had. 3 sonnes, Iaseus, Darda∣nus & Ar monia. the sōne of Blascon Kyng of Italye. Iaseus Kyng of Italy. Armonia the third brother.
Dardanus Eusebius saith that Dardan{us} began too reigne, the yere of the worlde. iii. thousande seuen hun dred. xxiii. the age of Moses. i. hundred and. xiiii. the secōd sonne of Lōbloblascon kyng of Dardine in Phrigie. Erictonius Loke in Diodorus seculus the fifte boke for Eric∣tonius. the sōne of Dar dayne the second Kyng of Dar∣dayne. Troos ye sōne Diodorus writeth ex pressely yt Troye, e∣xiled Tan talus out of hyghe Phrigee, beyng kig there. Ili{us} Assaracus & Ganim des, sōnes of Trois. of Eryctonyus, changed the name of Dardaine and called it Troy. The yong sonne Gani∣mides whiche Tantalus be∣trayed. Ilion sonne of Trois kyng of Troye.
Laomedon sonne of Ilion kyng of Troy. Priamus Hector the va∣liāt the sōne of priam{us} the sonne of Laomedon the laste Kyng. Assaracus the seconde soonne of Troys. Lapis te soonne of As∣sararus a Prince of Troye. Anchisis the sonne of Lapis a prince of Troy.
¶ Eness the Looke in sainct Au en the twentye Chapiter of the se∣uentene booke of the Litee of God. sonne of Anchisis kyng of Italy. ¶ Ascanius the Loke in Eusebius and Sa∣bellicus. sonne of Eneas and of Lheusa dou ghter of Priamus Kyng of Italy. Kyng of roy. ¶ Siluius brother of As∣canius sonne of Kyng of Italy. Eneas, and of Lauina.
¶ Brute the Brute of the noble bloud of roye loke i Fa∣sciculus Temporū  lia Chri st when Hel was prieste in Israell & also loke Galfride, firste Kyng of Britayne sonne of Siluius Po∣sthumus. Lambre Prince of Wales. banactus of Scotland. ¶ Lotrynus the sonne of Brute the seconde Kyng of Britayne. Betwene Lo∣trsnus and Bellinu w viii king. ¶ Belinus Belinus wt helpe of his brother Br ouercame ye Bom Loke  A ye xx. bo▪ the soonne of Donwallo the twentie and one Kyng of Bri∣tayne. ¶ Betwene Belin{us} and Lassibelan were ▪ ▪ ge.
Lassibelan In Lassi∣belās time Iulius Le far came into this lande with his Ro∣mayns. soonne of Hely the three score and seuen Kyng of Brayne. Next Las∣sibelan was Tinencius kyng. mbelyne the In  time IESVS CHRIST was borne of the glo∣rious vir∣gyn Mari soonne of Timen cius the. . and nyne Kyng of Britayne. Betwene im∣belyn and Lu∣cius was foure Kynges. ¶ Lucius the ¶ Lucius was the first Chri∣sten Kyng in the yere of our lord an hūdred fiftye and fiue yere. Looke in Gyldas. soonne of oel∣les the seuenty and foure Kyng of Britayne.
Cōstantine the great sonne of S. Emperoure of Rome Monarche and presy∣dente of e∣uery region of Christē∣dome. Helin, the iii. score kyng of Bri∣taygne. Betwene Cōstan∣tine the Emperour and Constantyne the third, was four kynges in Britayne. Constantine th This Con stantine daue oute of Britany the Scotts Danes. Norweges Pictes, and hunes with the Ro∣mains, whi the sore op∣pressed Bry taygne. third of that name the. lxxiiii. kyng of Britaygne. Betwene Constan∣tine the thyrde and Arthure, was but foure kinges in Bri∣taigne. Arthur the gret Of Arthur the greate loke in Fa∣sciculus Tē∣porum in Li nea Christi iiii. hūdrede lxiiii. in Po∣liconicon xxiii. Chap∣ter, and in Galfride. in the yere of our lord. 400. lxxx was yt lxxxxii. kig of Britayne. Betwene der was. ix. Arthur and kynges in Cadwala-Britaygne.
Tadwallader the Loke in Fa∣bian whych affirmeth he slew Lotha ri{us}, his bro∣ther Edry∣us, and I∣thelwolde, three of the Saxons kiges: Loke also of Gal fridus. hunderde kynge of Britaygne, and the last kyng of Bry∣tayne. The mortal plages infectiō of pestilence and scarsnes of vi∣ctaylles draue Tad∣wallader to Rome. Idwall sonne of Idwall came into Wales by commande∣mēt of Tad walader to defende the Brytons a∣gaynste the Saxōs. Of this Idwal Walshmen had their name. Tadwallader, prince of Northe Wa∣les. Betwene Idwal & Twdwr Mawr was there eyght princes successiuely Tewdwr Mawre This price chased the Saxons, Danes and Pictes, frō the borders of Wales with all o∣ther foreyn enemyes. the great Prynce of Wales, was the ten the Prynce. Betwene Tewdwr Maure and Edmonde Earle of Richmond wer of line∣all discente fully, xi. be∣twene Tad∣waller and Edmōd. xxi
Edmond Ear∣le This fam{us} Edmond of the veraye true lyne of Tadwala∣der dyrectly half brother to kig Hen∣ri. vi. whose mother was doughter to the French Kyng and wyfe to the famous Kyng Hen∣ry the fifth. of Richemonde sonne of Owen and Quene Katherine. Henri the seuenth This noble Kynge was called the second Sa∣lomon. sonne of Edmond Earle of Rich∣mond. Henry the eyghte Henry the eyght moste christēking, King of En glād, Frāce and Ire∣land, and of the Church of England and Ire∣lād, the first supreme Heade, sonne of Henry the seuenth Edwarde the sixt sonne of Hen ry the eight whom Eod preserue.
THese Auctours olde, with one accorde This famous line, cōueigheth streight To ou most drad, soueraigne Lorde By the grace of God, Henry the eyght▪ To Edward our price, our tresure of weight Whom God aboue, their enemies represse Send them long life, with plenteous successe. FINIS.
¶ Imprinted at Lon∣dō in the parishe of Chri∣stes Church within new gate by Richard Graf∣ton, Prynter to our soueraigne lorde Kyng Edward the. VI. 1547. Cum priuilegio ad impri∣mendum solum.
