17386.5 33143331 28386
¶A Schoole for young Souldiers, Containing in breife the whole Discipline of VVarre, especially so much as is meet for Captaine to teach, or the Souldior to learne, that is, to trayne or to bee trayned. Fit to be taught throughout England. Reader for thy better direction obserue the course of the figures as they stand in order. To Cap∣taines are refer¦red two things. 1 Sorting of armes which should be 2 Halfe pikes, And halfe sho And the shot: Halfe muskets, Halfe harque¦busses. 3 Strongest for pikes, Squarest for muskets, Nimblest for harque∣bus. The armours they shall weare shalbe these following; 4 For the pike, a morian, cura∣ces, gorget, pouldron, taces, sword, girdle, hanger and pike; The musket, a morian, ban∣dileir, sword girdle, hanger, bullet, bagge and rest; The harquebus, a morian, ban∣dileir sword, girdle, hanger, and bullet bagge: Or two parts muskets, and one part harquebus; The men for the weapons, 5 Formes of trayning, dividing e∣uery compa∣ny into. 6 Squadrons, Files, Fellowships: and then teaching 7 Carriage of armes, which must be, 8 Most comely, euery seue∣rall weapon, learning these Postures following. Postures of the Pike 15 9 Order your pike, Aduance your pike, Set down your pike, Shoulder your pike, Leuel your pike, Slope your pike, Port your pike, Charge your pike, Check your pike, Traile your pike, Charge against the right foote and draw your sword, Charge your pike backeward. Right to your first or∣der, Lay downe your pike, Take vp your pike. Postures of the Musket 40 March with the Musket-rest in the right hand. March, and with the Musket carry the rest. Sinke your rest, and vnshoulder your musket. Hold vp your musket with the right hand, and let it sincke in the left: In the left hand hold your musket, and carry your rest with it. Into the right hand take your march: Hold well your match between your fingers, and blow it: Cocke your match, Try your match: Blow your match, and open your panne: Hold vp your musket, and present: Giue fire, Take down your musket, and cary it with the rest: Vncocke your match, Ioyne your match againe betweene your fin∣gers, Blow your pan: Proine your panne, Shut your panne: Cast off your pan, Blow off your panne: Cast about your musket: Traile your rest: Open your charges: Charge your musket: Your scowring-sticke draw out: Take your scowring sticke shorter: Ramme your powder, Your scowring sticke draw out, Take your scowring sticke shorter: Put vp your scowring sticke home: Bring forward your musket with the left hand, Hold vp your musket with the right hand, and recouer your rest: Shoulder your Musket, March and carry the Rest with it: Vnshoulder your musket: Lay your Musket on the Rest: Hold your Musket on the Rest: hold your Musket in the Rest, and with the left hand only balance. Take your match into the right hand: Guard your panne, and stand readie. Postures of the Harquebuse 42 Shoulder your piece and march: Vnshoulder your piece: With the right hand hold it vp: In the left hand take the piece: In the right hand take the match: Hold well your match and blowe it: Cocke your match: Trie your match: Blow your match: Open your panne: Present your piece: Giue fire: Take downe the piece, and in the left hand holde it: Vncock your match: Ioyne it againe twixe your fingers: Blow your panne: Proyne your panne: Shut your panne: Shake off your pan: Blowe off your loose cornes: Turne about your piece: To your left side let it sinke: Open your charges: Charge your piece: Your scowring sticke draw out: Take your scowring sticke shorter: Ram your powder: Your scowring sticke draw out: Take your scowring sticke shorter: Put vp your scowring sticke home: With the left hand bring forward the piece: With the right hand hold it vp: Shoulder your piece: Hold your piece well on your shoul∣der, and march: Vnshoulder your piece: In the left hand let it sincke: With the left hand alone holde the piece: In the right hand take the match: Cocke your match: Trie your match: Blow off your match: Guard your panne and stand ready. 10 Vse of armes, which must be the 11 Vse of the pike, in recei∣uing or giuing a charge, the first beeing pike against horse, the second, pike against pike; vse of shot, is how to present his piece, take his leuell, and giue his voce. 12 March, in which 13 Euery man shall obserue his Leader, and them of each hand, mouing as they moue: 14 Moion is mouing 15 Without marching, 16 As turning on any hand, 17 Changing of place, 18 As doub∣ling of rankes or Files. 19 All mouing, yet none mar∣ching, as 20 Opening or closing of Ranks or Files. 21 Sounds of the drumme, which is to know, 22 A march, A troope, A charge, A retreit, A call, The watch, going to the mine, 23 Words of direction which are, 24 Leaders, stand forward with your Files, Rankes, open forward, 5 paces: Faces to the right hand, turne, Faces to the left hand, turne, Faces about: turne, Open your files, Close your files, Open your files to the right hand, Open your files to the left hand; Close your files to the right hand, Close your files to the left hand; Double your file to the right hand Double your file to the left hand; Double your ranks to the right hād Double your ranks to the left hand. As you were: Rancks from behinde close: Ranckes open backward, paces 5. Files on the right hand turne: Rancks on the right hand turne, Front passe thorow, Followers passe thorow, Front as you were, Files, as you were, Counter-march to the right hand, Counter-march to the left hand; Cast off your files to the right hād. Cast off your files to the left hand; Double your front to the right hād. Double your front to the left hand. Double your reare to the right hād. Double your reare to the left hand. FINIS. LONDON Printed for Iohn Trundle dwelling in Barbican at the signe of Nobody.
