17391.5 24707987 27862
THE SOVLDIERS GRAMMAR: Containing, The High, Necessarie, and most Curious Rules of the Art Militarie: As first, Whether it be in Great Motions in Generall? Or Foote Motions Especially? Or Motions of Horse, Generall, or Speciall? The Ranges of Foote, or Horse? The Ranges of Officers. The Seuerall Imbattailings of Foote, and Horse. The Imbattailing of a Regiment. The Ioyning of many Regiments. Or the Forming of Maine Battailes, of any extent, or Number; With their Formes, and Figures, in liuely Demonstration. &c. By G. M. Gent. Vnto which, is added the Booke of Postures, according to that which is Ordered by the Lords of his Maiesties most Honorable Priuie Counsell. Printed at London, for William Shefford, and are to be solde at his Shop in Popes head Alley, going into Lumbard Street. 1626.
A Table of the Speciall Thinges contayned in this Booke. CHAP. 1. Of Great Motions in generall. Pag. 1 The Contents. Motiues vnto the Worke. The 19. Motions vsed in the olde Warres, and their Interpretations. 1 Of Clisis, and the signification. 2 Of Melabole, and the signification. 3 Of Perispasmos, &c. 4 Of Epistrophe, &c. 5 Of Anastrophe &c. 6 Of Ecperispasmos &c. 7 Of Plagiophalanx &c. 8 Of Orthiophalanx &c. 9 Of Phalange Loxe &c. 10 Of Parembole, &c. 11 Of Protaxis, &c. 12 Of Epitaxis, &c. 13 Of Prostaxis &c. 14 Of Entaxis. &c. 15 Of Hypotaxis, &c. 16 Of Induction, &c.
17 Of Paragoge, or Deduction, &c. 18 Of Amphiltomus, &c. 19 Of Antistomus, &c. Of diuers other Motions. The intent of the Authors Plainenesse. CHAH. 2. Of the particular Motions belonging to the Foote Armie. Pag. 8 The Contents. In what all Motions consist. Of distance in Files and Rankes. A Reconcilement between the Antients and the Moderne Customes. A Reconcilement of Differences in our Moderne Ex∣ercises. The Ground of Military Motions. The drawing of Rude Grosses, into an orderlie Bodie. Of single Files. Of Files in a Bodie. Of Closing and Opening Files and Rankes. Of Files Vndoubled. Of Files Doubled. The manner of performing the Motion. The Aduancing of Files. Files Vnaduanced. Files Aduanced. The Reducing them to their first Forme. The Battalia of odde Number vndoubled. The Battalia of odde Number doubled.
Of Countermarching Files Of the Persian, Choraean or Cretan Countermarch. The Battalia in Countermarch. The Battalia after Countermarch. The Lacedemonian Countermarch. The Battalia before Countermarch. The Countermarch performed. The Macedonian Countermarch. The doubling of Rankes. Rankes vndoubled. Rankes doubled. Halfe Files vndoubled. Halfe Files doubled. Halfe Files reduced to their first forme. Bringers vp, doubling the Front. Bringers vp, as they were. Of Wheeling. The seuerall kinds of Wheeling. The Battalia vnwheeled. The Battalia wheeling. The Battalia halfe wheeled. The Battalia wheeled round about. Of casting off Files. Files cast off in Flanke. Files cast off in Winges. Files cast off before the Front. Of Opening and Closing of Rankes and Files. Of Opening and Closing, according to the Word giuen. Files Opened or Closed from the Middle men. Files Opened or Closed, to the one or the other Hand. Of diuers other Motions.
CHAP. 3 Of the seuerall Motions which belong vnto Horse, or Horse Troopes. The Contents. The vse of Horse Motions. The Composition and Extent of a Horse File. The drawing vp of an Horse Troope. A Troope of an 100. Horse, Trooping into the Field with all their Officers. A Troope of Horse, drawne vp into a firme Bodie, for Ser∣uice, or Exercise. The benefite of the square Bodie of Horse. The Horse-mans Wedge. The benefite of the Wedge, and the Foote Battle to Encoun∣ter it. The Horse-mans Rhombe, and the foure Commanders. The Foote Battaile, to oppose the Rhombe; And the Halfe Moone or Cressant. Another Rhombe of fiue square. Of the Foote Battaile Epicampios Emprosthia, to oppose the Rhombe of fiue. Of the Tetragonall Horse Battaile. Of the Foote Battaile Embolas, to oppose the Tetragonall Horse Battaile. The forming of the Foote Wedge. CHAP. 4. Of the seuerall Ranges of the Foote, and how they are Ordered, and Compounded. The Contents. The Ground of Ranging of Battailes.
Our Moderne obseruation in Ranging. How the Auntients did Range Battailes. Of the Number Dilochie, and the Leader. Of the Number Tetrarchy, and the Leader. Of Taxis, and the Leader. Of Syntagma, and the Leader. Of Pentecosyarchy, and the Leader. Of Chiliarchy, and the Leader. Of Merarchy, and the Leader. Of Phalangarchy, and the Leader. Of Diphalangarchy, and the Leader. Of the Foure fould Battaile. The Moderne Range of Battailes. Of the halfe File, and the Leader. Of the whole File, and the Leader. Of a Squadron, and the Leader. Of a Sergeancre, and the Leader. Of a Centurie, and the Leader. Of the fourth part of a Regiment, and the Leader. Of halfe a Colonie, and the Leader. Of a Colonie, and the Leader. Of a full Battalia, and the Leader. Of a double Battalia, and the Leader. Of the Vantguard, and the Leader. Of the Reare, and the Leader. Of the Maine Battaile, and the Leader. The Range of Weapons. The Range of the Light Armed. The Range of the Armed. The Moderne Range of Weapons. How Regiments are Imbattailed. How the Horse doe Troope. The place of the Great Ordnance. The Guard belonging to the Great Ordnance.
CHAP. 5. Of the seuerall Ranges of the Horse, and how they are Ordered, and Compounded. The Contents. The Ranges vsed in old Times. The Ranges of Horse vsed at this Day. The Range of Curasheires. The Range of Curasheires in Trooping. The Generalls Range. The Lord Marshalls Range. The Range of the Colonells, and Captaines. The Range of the Curasheires in Battaile. Distances obserued in Battaile. The Forme of Horse Battailes. The Generalls Range. The Lord Marshalls Range: The Colonells, and Captaines Range. The Quarter Masters Range. The Dignity of Place, betweene the Horse Man, and the Foote Man. The Range of Harquebusheirs, or Dragoones. The Range of Harquebusheirs in Trooping. Their Range in Battaile. Their Range in Campe. Their Range in Garrison. Of their Scouting and Watching. Where they take Directions.
THE SOVLDIERS GRAMMAR. CHAP. 1. Of Great Motions in generall. HAuing in a former short Dis∣course, or small Booke,Motiues to the Worke. Inti∣tuled, The Soldiers Accidence, (being an Introduction or first Guide into the Art My∣litary) shewed all those first Precepts and Rules which necessarily belong to the knowledge of euery young Soldier, so farre forth as concernes the Manage and gouernement of his owne particular person; As also those foure principall Grounds, from whence all the rest of
this famous Art taketh its deriuation and per∣fection, that is to say. First, the Carriage and vse of Armes, contey∣ned in diuers Postures or Stations, expressing the Forme, Comlinesse and Readinesse of Men in Armes. Secondly, Distance or Seperation of place, whereby Battayles are formed, changed, and pro∣portioned, according to the will and pleasure of the principall Commanders. Thirdly, March and Motion, which procee∣ding from certaine peculiar words of Command, and generall direction, the Soldier applieth him∣selfe to performe euery command in the fullnesse of perfection. And Fourthly and lastly, the knowledge of the Beatings of the Drumbe, by which the Soldier taketh notice of euery Command, when the sound of Mans voice is drowned or obscured. It now seemeth good vnto me (and I hope it will yeeld a generall profite to the whole King∣dome) to fixe vnto the aforesayd Accidence a Grammar or Introductiō into more higher, neces∣sary and more subtile and curious Rules of the Art Mylitary, whereby the younger Schollers may be enabled to proceed and goe forward in the greater and more hidden secrets of the Arte, and the elder or better experienced Men of Warre, may eyther finde Solutions for such doubtes as shall incumber them; Or else matter whereon to worke, and make their owne more singular Inuentions and Applications more
wholesome for the common vse, and more plea∣sing to their owne Studies and Labours. The first thing therefore which I hold most ne∣cessary to Intreate of in this Grammar, is of Great Motions in generall; Because according to the Opinion of the Auncients, These Military Moti∣ons are the Life of an Armie, and only giue meanes of Victorie; and without which, all preparation of Forces are vaine, and auaileth nothing in the Field, nor to the end for which they were Leuied. Since then, Motion is of this inestimable reputation, the labor cannot be misimployed, which bringeth any luster or explanation vnto the same. Of the Smaller Motions, I haue spoken some∣what already in the Accidence; As of Fileing, Rancking, Returning to the first Posture, Counter∣marching, Doubling, and such like, so far foorth as they appertayne to euery single Person, or to the parts and members of a priuate Companie, which we call Squadrons or Camerados. But now I am to intreat of the Greater Motions, which belong to Regiments, Battalias, and the whole Bodie of an Armie: Neyther in the discourse of these things, are you to expect much alteration of wordes, or sence, but only the application of them vnto the Greater and more infinite Bodies, from whence they take the denomination of the Greater Motions. The Gretians (as Aelian and his Schollars) doe reckon vp nineteene seuerall Great Motions,Motions vsed in the olde Warres. to which they giue especiall Names and Titles.
The First, they call Clisis, which is a Turning to eyther Hand. The Second, Metabole, which we call Tur∣ning about. The Third, Perispasmos, which we call Whee∣ling about. The Fourth, Epistrophe, which we call a Whee∣ling, eyther to the one, or the other Hand, but not entire, or about. The Fifth, Anastrophe, which we call a Retur∣ning of the Wheele vnto the First Posture or Sta∣tion where it stood before it was mooued, or Wheeled to eyther Hand. The Sixth, Ecperispasmos, which we call a treble, or threefold Wheeling, carrying the Battalia three parts about, but not wholy and entire. The Seuenth, Plagiophalanx, or the Broade Fronted Phalange, which we call the Broad Fron∣ted Battalia, which hath the Length much excee∣ding the Depth. The Eight, Orthiophalanx, which we call the Deepe Battalia, or Herse Battayle, which is a Bat∣tayle drawne out in Wing, and hauing the Depth much exceeding the Length. The Ninth, Phalange Loxe, which we call an Vneuen Fronted Battalia, because one of the Winges (which is thought fittest) is euer drawne forth before the other, and as a Forlorne begin∣neth the Fight against the Enemy, till opportunity serue that the whole Battayle may Ioyne with greater aduantage and assurance. The Tenth, Parembole, which we call Insertion,
being a Drawing vp of the Souldiers before, then taking off the Hindermost, we Ranke them within the distances of the First. The Eleuenth, Protaxis, which we call Fore-Fronting, as when we place eyther the Light-Ar∣med or other Loosse Shotte before the Front of the Battayle, and make them Fore-standers or be∣ginners of the Skyrmish. The Twelfth, Epitaxis, which we call an After  placing or Attending on the Reare, so that if the Enemie shall Charge behind, yet are the Light-Armed in readinesse, and prepared to giue their Volleys, being placed so behind the Reare (as the other before the Front) for a singular helpe and anoyance. The Thirteenth, Prostaxis, which we call a Ioy∣ning  of Bodies together, by adding to eyther of the Flankes, or to both entirely, any new Supply of Men, eyther from the Reare of the same Bat∣talia, or otherwise, from any other remooued Bodie or Regiment, whereby the Front of the Battayle is increased. The Fourteenth, Entaxis, which we call Insi∣tion, or Inserting, as when we draw the Light-Armed, or Loose vnguarded Shotte, within the spaces of the Fyles and Rankes of the Armed Battalia, so as they may be free from danger, and yet notwithstanding, euer readie to deliuer their Vollies in the face of the Enemies, be they Foote or Horse, as they shall giue their aproaches. The Fifteenth, Hypotaxis, which we call Dou∣ble  Winging, as when we draw the Light-Armed
or Loose Shott, only within the Armed Winges of the Battalia, and not into the Entire Bodie, and placing them in such an Embowed forme, that the whole forme or figure thereof may resemble a threefold Gate or Doore. The sixteenth, we call an Induction, or a Right Induction, as when one Bodie or Battalia of one and the same kinde, in forme and proportion, fol∣loweth one another, and so the March of Motion stretcheth out it selfe into the manner or forme of a Wing, hauing the Depth much exceeding the Length; And this kind of Battayle or Right In∣duction, may consist eyther of a Single Bodie, as when but one Enemie is feared, or of a Double Bodie, as when two are expected, or of a Treble, when three are on foote, or of a Quadruple, when the Enemie purposeth to giue on all sides. The Seauenteenth, Paragoge, which we call Deduction, is when a Battalia mooueth in a Wing, not by File, but by Ranke, hauing the File-leaders on the Right-hand, which is called a Right De∣duction, or on the Left Hand, which is called a Left Hand Deduction; And this Bodie or Batta∣lia also Marcheth (as the former) eyther in a Sin∣gle, Double, Treble, or Quadruple Deuision, according to the feare they apprehend of the E∣nemie, and the aduantage of the place & ground, vpon which they march and mooue. The Eighteenth, Amphistomus, which we call the Two Fronted Battayle, and looketh vpon the Enemy two seuerall wayes, that is to say, by an euen and lust Deuision, in the midst of an equall
conuersion of the two parts; The Middle-men or Halfe-fyle men are turned back to back, and those in the Front and Reare make two equall Fronts, and brauely Aduance against the Enemie, and this kinde of Motion is excellent against Horse. The Nineteenth, Antistomus, which wee also call a Two Fronted Battayle, and differeth only  from the former but in this, that as the Two Fron∣ted Battayle Amphistomus is Fronted by the Front and the Reare, so this Two Fronted Battayle Antistomus, is Fronted by the two Flanks, the Right flanke, and the Left, and the Motion hath the like vse and perfection which the former hath, being generally applyed for the Encounter of Horse. Diuers other particular Motions they haue, both for Armies and Battalias,Diuers other Motions. as that which they call Diphalange Peristomus, Diphalange Homoiosto∣neus, Diphalange Heterostomus, the Rhombe, the Heteromekes, the Epicampios Emprosthia, the Cyrte, the Tetragonall, Ploesium, and diuers others, of which I shall haue occasion to write hereafter: For this present, and for the generallity of Moti∣on, these already shewed and expounded are suf∣ficient; Of all which, you shall in the ensuing Chapters (as particulars shall arise) receiue both full Demonstrations and Examples, whereby the dullest vnderstanding shall be enabled to con∣ceiue, and carry away those Mysteries of Art and Science, which hetherto haue layne hidden and obscured;The Authors plainenesse Nor haue I any intention in this Worke, so to tye and conforme my selfe to the
Auncients, eyther Gretians, or Romans, that there∣by (knitting my selfe to their Words and Phrases) I might bring a cloude of darkenesse ouer my La∣bours, which I haue only dedicated to Trueth and Plainenesse: But I doe freely intend to set downe euery thing, in those plaine, moderne, and vsuall formes of Direction, as may be auaileable for the simplest capacity, and profitable for all those that haue bound themselues Prentises to this Noble Art, and glorious Aduancement. CHAP. 2. Of the Particular Motions belonging to the Foote onely. ALL manner of Marches and Motions whatsoeuer,In what, Mo∣tions consist. belonging to a Foote Com∣pany (as I haue touched before in my Accidence) must of necessity, be eyther in Distance, or Forme; & eyther of these must be, eyther in Fyles or Rankes, seuerally, and of them∣selues, or else ioyntly, both together. Of Distances.Of Fyles and Rankes, what they are, what their extents ought to be, what effects, vertues, and vses are wrought by them, I haue sufficiently shewed in my Accidence: Only, because there is a little difference betwixt vs and the Auncients, and be∣twixt the Schollers of these Moderne times, and the Schollers of the Elder World, I will as neere
as I can, reconcile them, or at least, bring them to shake hands, and agree together. The first Receiuers of Millitarie Discipline (and those which are at this day their Schollers, and profest Imitators) would haue a File to consist of Sixeteene Men in depth, successiuely one after an other: Others would haue it consist of Eight; And others (which are our latest and best appro∣ued) would haue them consist of Ten. The reason why the first would haue it consist of sixteene,The Ancient and the Mo∣derne Author reconcil'd. is because it is an euen and proporti∣onable number, which may bee doubled to the last man; as from sixteene to eight, from eight to foure, from foure to two, from two to one; and so backe againe reduced to the first forme or Station. This I confesse beares a faire shew of much probability, and was doubtlesse in the first Age, of singular vse and benefit, both for the forming and proportioning of Battailes; as also for the readinesse of Marching, and the mixing or ioyning of many Grosses, or great Bodies, in one square, Round or Triangular fashion. But it is to be vnderstood, that in these former dayes, there was no vse or knowledge of Shot, because the inuention of Fire lay then vnknowne; their Darts, Slings, Crosse-bowes, Long-bowes, and the like, which passed vnder the Light-armed, held then no method or prescript forme in giuing their Volleis, but deliuered them one ouer an∣others head, without danger: so that the dee∣per the File was, the greater the Volley was, and the Enemy the more indangered; besides
the drawing and nocking of the Arrow, the La∣ding of the Sling, the bending of the Crosse-bow, and the charging of the Dart, are Motions so soddaine, so quicke, and so secure, that there is no necessity of alteration of place; for in as much as not any of these Volleis are deli∣uered vpon the Leuell, but vpon necessity on the Mounture; therefore the forestanders, or leaders of Files, and their followers are not in∣dangered by the Reare: so that in this case, the deeper the File is, the more hands are brought to fight, and the victory the sooner obtained. But with vs now in these moderne and latter times, wherein the Inuention of Shott and Pow∣der is founde out; and the danger, Sodainnesse and Violence of the Fire is knowne: in so much that it is euer deliuered in Leuell, seldome or ne∣uer at Random (for that is vselesse and to no con∣stant purpose). In this case there is great respect to be had to the alteration and change of place, for (as I haue sayd before) to deliuer Short one behinde another (and that also in Leuell) is for the hindmost to Kill the formost, if they Shoot in Leuell (as they ought) or otherwise Shooting at Randome, to spende their Bulletts to no purpose and leaue the Enemie vnauoided; Therefore in this true and certayne Discipline, Fier is onlye to be giuen in the Front, and so by succession of Ranks, one Volley after another, euery hand is in his due time and place brought to Fight, and the Volley hath no intermission or respeit. Now it is to bee considered in what space of
time a man may Charge and Discharge his Peece mouing from the Front to the Reare, and so As∣sending vp to the Front againe; and it is found by the experience of all well Iudging Souldiers, that the depth of Tenn men is the absolute best Num∣ber, For the first man Discharging in the Front, in the space that nine more shall come and doe the like: The first shall make his place good againe, & so continnue the Volley ad infinitum. Now there are some which strongly hold opinion, that Eight in depth of File shall doe as much as ten, and with as litle Difficultie make readie and Present; which no question, may be possible, in expert, old, and readie Soldiers and so a competent and sufficient File; But in raw, Ignorant, and half exercised men it cannot be so, Neither can it be hoped that du∣tie shall so sudainly be performed, And if there be losse of dutie in one man, there will be losse of duty in more, and so the Volley will be weakned & the Battalia put in danger; To add a man and make the File nine, is no good Extent, because that odd Number comming to be doubled, there will be a weaknesse either in the Front, or in the Reare; And that wekenesse may ouerthrow the whole Battalia; So that for a conclusion of this point, I cannot but disallowe Sixteene in File as be∣ing to great a Number, in which no lesse then Six men are lost in euery File so oft as they shall Sal∣lie vp or make their aproaches, eight I feare is two men to litle, the Skill and Dexteritie of the Soul∣diers being doubtfull; and Nine, for the odds may not be admitted, So that it resteth that Tenn men
in File is the olde cettaine, and alowable Num∣ber. I doe not denie but that in Exercising of the Souldiers, the Number Eight is very alow∣able and will bring them to a great quicknesse and readinesse, but when they shall be brought to to fight, and mixe with other Regiments; Then you are to obserue the generall forme of the Armie, and what Extent of File the whole Ar∣mie Marcheth in, the same Number and Propor∣tion you shall keepe in your priuat Companie, Which questionlesse at this day is the Number Tenn, and no other: both for the fittnesse of the Number in Discharging Dutie, as also in that by the Number Tenn, Euery Hundred Men make a perfect Square, and so are the soonest and with the least trouble drawne into any Forme of Bat∣taile that the prncipall Commander can desire. Thus I haue shewed you the trne Extent of a File,The ground of all Motions. and the Impediments which hang vpon the alteration of Opinions; wherein you are to vnder∣stand that in all Millitarie Motions there must be euer a certaine and Infallible grounde whereon to Builde the greater workes; For where euerie thing is vncertaine there all things must needes be Confused, Now in the Artt of Warr, Rankes are vncertaine, and doe consiste of Numbers accord∣inge to pleasure? Companies are Imperfect, Oc∣cationed by imployment, Sicknesse, Death, or other Dissasters: Regiments are more or lesse ac∣cording to the goodnesse, or badnesse of the Offi∣cers, only the File is certaine and without Alte∣ration, So that from that Ground, euerie good
and great Commander (vpon the first view) can tell howe to shape and proportion any Battaile whatsoeuer. This being then the concluding Maxime tou∣ching the true Extent,The drawing of Grosses in∣to order. and Quantitie of a File, which is the Grounde or Foundation where vpon all great Battailes are Built. We will now proceede to the seuerall Motions belonging to the Foote Companies, of which the first and Pri∣ncipall, is the drauing of Rude, and Indigested Grosses, into a faire, orderlie, and well proporti∣oned Bodie; and this must not in anie wise be done by Rankinge, and Drawinge forthe of Rankes, for that is rude, and vn-souldier like, be∣cause Ranks haue no certainty, nor hold any cons∣tant Number: So that no man taking a rude heape of confused men (which number he knoweth not) can tell how many Rankes they will con∣taine, and keepe the Files certaine: therefore to put these men in Order, it must be done by Filing, and not Ranking; euery File of one and the same Weapon, being drawne out File after File, and then ioyned and formed into one grosse Bo∣dy, according to the pleasure of the Com∣mander. And in this drawing vp of Bodies, is to bee considered the composition, or parts, whereof euery File must consist; that is to say, the principall and first man of euery File, is cal∣led the Leader, or Captaine of the File, hee leadeth; then followeth him three of In∣feriour degree; the first man is called the mid∣dle man to the Reare, or a Leader of halfe files
to the Reare; the sixth man is called the mid∣dle-man to the Front, or leader of the halfe file to the Front; then after them, three other inferiour followers; and lastly, the Reare, or Bringer vp: So that euery File consisteth of foure men of eminence and desert, as the Lea∣der, the Bringer vp,Of single Files. the Middle-man to the Front, and the Middle-man to the Reare, and sixe inferiour followers or attendants, as by this example you shall see more plainely. Single Files. Files in a Body.
The next Motion after the drawing vp of con∣fused Numbers into an vniforme,Of closing and opening. is the closing and opening of Fyles or Rankes, or both Fyles and Rankes at one instant; And in this Motion, is to be obserued, true Distance, or seperation of Place, according to the will of the Commander, because it is a Motion that only consisteth in distance. The next, is a Motion in Forme, and that also consisteth of Fyles or Rankes seuerally, or of both Fyles and Rankes ioyntly, in one instant; And this is doubling of Fyles, or Rankes: If doubling of Fyles? it is according to this example. Fyles vndoubled.
Fyles dubled to the Right Hand. These Fyles being eight in Number, are dou∣bled to the Right Hand,The manner of performing the Motion. the outermost or corner Man of the Rght Hand standing still, and making good both his owne Place, and all the rest of his Fyle, and the next Man on his Left Hand passing behind him, and so successiuely the whole second Fyle passing (as the first) behind the first Fyle, the fourth Fyle behind the third Fyle, the sixth behind the fifth, & the eight behind the seuenth;
and so they stand doubled, as in the Example be∣fore shewed; where eight Fyles are brought into foure, and the depth of ten brought into the depth of twentie: And in this doubling, is to be obser∣ued, by those which remooue and passe behind the other, that if it be to the Right Hand, then he is first to come about round with his Left Foote, then step forward with his Right Foote behind his Leader that must be, and then bring on his Left Foote, and place his Body euen; so that by these three Motions, the action shall be performed in perfection: And thus as you double Fyles to the Right Hand, so you may also double them to the Left Hand, vsing euerie Motion in a contrary manner; that is to say, where the Right hand Man did before stand firme, and the Left hand Man did moue; now the Left hand Man must stand firme, and the Right hand Man must remoue; and as before, the Left foote did first come about, so now the Right foote must, and when they shall be reduced back againe to their first Place or Stati∣on, then it is to be obserued, that they must in three Stepps or Motions, recouer their former Places, remouing first the Left foote, if the dou∣ble were to the Right hand, and the Right foote, if the double were made to the Left hand. The next Motion,Aduancing of Files. being also a Motion in Forme, is the aduancing of Fyles, which is also a doubling, though after another manner: For in this aduancing of Fyles (if it be to the Right hand) then the Right hand File standeth still, and the Leader of the next file vnto it, doth advance be∣fore
the Right hand file, and his whole file fol∣lowing him in true order and distance, they all aduance, till the Bringer vp, or Reare Man, stand iust before the Leader of the Right hand file, which standeth still, and moueth not; then the fourth file aduanceth before the third, the sixth before the fifth, and the eight before the seauenth, and so forth, till euery other file haue aduanced in the whole Battalia: And in like manner, if the Aduancement be made to the Left hand, then those which stood still, when the Aduancement was to the Right hand shall moue, and they which did moue shall now stand still, as by these Examples doth more plainely apeare. Fyles Vnaduanced.
Fyles Aduanced. Thus you see how Fyles are to be Aduanced, eyther to the Right hand, or to the Left, wherein is to be obserued; that howsoeuer I speake of files to be aduanced distinctly, one after another; yet the Motion is to be don entirely, of one mo∣uing file at one instant: And thus, if you please, you may Aduance so oft, that you may bring a
whole Battalia into one single file.Reducing thē to their first forme. Now for re∣ducing them into their first forme or body againe, the Word (As you were) being giuen, euery mo∣uing file that did Aduance, shall turne Faces a∣bout, and so march back to their first places; and as thus, you aduance eyther to the Right or Left hand at one instant; So you may also at one in∣stant aduance both to the Right and Left hand by deuision, making the second file aduance be∣fore the first, the fourth before the third, the se∣uenth before the eight, the fyfth before the sixth: And as thus in aduancing, so also in doubling of files, as you double to the Right or Left hand; so you may double to both the Right and Left hand at one instant by deuision, the second file passing behind the first, the fourth behind the third, then the seuenth behind the eight, and the fifth behind the sixth. Now here by the way there may a scruple a∣rise, that for as much as numbers may vary, and that all bodies hold not one euen or iust content or Number; that then in case there be an odd file, how then shall the bodie be doubled? To this I answere, that if you happen to haue an odde file, then looke to what hand you double vnto, then the outmost file to the contrary hand shall stand and keepe his place firme, without doubling at all; as if you double to the Right hand, then the Left hand file stands fast and vndoubled; or if you double to the Left hand, then the Right hand file stands fast and vndoubled, as by these exam∣ples plainely apeareth.
The odde Battalia Vudoubled. The odde Battalia Doubled. Thus you see how the odde Fyle standeth, and is still preserued in euery Motion, being still kept in its order, both by the Leader and the Side∣man; and when so euer the Bodie is reduced into its first forme or Station, then is it full and perfit, as any other file what so euer.
The next necessary Motiō vnto the doublings, and aduancing of files,Of Counter∣marching. is the Countermarching of files, which is also another Motion in forme; And of Countermarching, there are diuers kindes; as first, the ordinary Countermarch, which is daily vsed amongst vs, when so euer we march or turne the bodie of the Battalta too or fro; and this Countermarch, is called of some, The Persian Countermarch, because it was first in vse amongst them; others call it the Cretan, as taken from the Immitation of those Souldiers; & others call it the Choraean, from Chorus, which signifieth a Companie, of which Companie, there were certaine Dancers, who in a Warlike Dance were the first beginners of this Motion; This Motion is performed of the whole Battalia all at one instant; the Leaders of the Fyles (vpon the word giuen, to which hand they shall Counter∣march) beginning the motion, as thus, If the Word be giuen to Countermarch to the Right hand, then shall the Leaders of the Fyles, at one instant steppe one steppe forward with the Right foote, then bringing the Left foote and the Bodie round about to the Right hand, and so march downe through the distance betweene the Fyles, till they come to the Reare, where the Bringer∣vp stood, and there they shall make a Stand; And in this Motion, euery Leader shall obserue his Right hand Man, that they may keepe their Front whole and vndismembred, because the least disorder in this Motion, is the ouerthrow & disgrace of the whole Bodie; and as these Lea∣ders
begin and conduct in this orderly manner; so shall all the rest of euery File, obseruing true Place and Distance, follow with as great care and seuerity, euery Man obseruing his Leader and his Right hand Man, and that by no meanes they offer to turne, till they haue made good the first place, where the Fyle Leaders did turne, and so keeping their Rankes euen and iust, the Motion will be exceeding comely, as by this Example apeareth. A Battaila in Counter∣march to the Right Hand. The Battalia after the Counter march.
Now as they doe thus Countermarch to the Reare, so they may if the Commander please, countermarch backe to the Front againe without intermission, and so as oft and as farre as the Commander pleaseth. Now in this Coun∣termarch, it would bee obserued, that the Files should euer be well opened; as at the open Or∣der of sixe foote at the least; as for the Ranks they may be either at Order, or close Order, vn∣lesse they consist of Shot, and then they may not march straighter then the Order of three foot; because otherwise it will incumber them, and take from them the vse of their Weapons: and as thus the Countermarch is made to the right or left Hand entirely; so it may bee made both to the right and left Hand by diuision, as hath beene shewed before in other motions. And this Countermarch is of singular vse, for it chargeth the Enemy standing, it chargeth him Marching, and it chargeth him retyring; be∣sides it bringeth euery hand to fight and suffereth none to loose duty. The Lacede∣monian coun∣termarch.The next Countermarch is that which is cal∣led the Lacedemonians Countermarch, as being first receiued from their example, and it is of singular vse in charging of the enemie, in ma∣king of approaches, and in gaining of ground of aduantage; and though at first the Ancients found it out for their light Armed, which were their Slings, Darts, Crosse-bowes, and Long-bowes. Yet now with vs it is found of most ex∣cellent vse for our Shot, and not vnnecessary
for the Pikes, and other short Weapons for exe∣cution, because it bringeth forward euery hand in the Charge, and suffereth none to loose duty, neither doe they at any time stand or slacke in their Charge, but still aduance and goe forward, till they haue attained the ende of their pur∣pose. The manner of this Nation is thus, the first Ranke or Leaders of the Files of Shot, doe pre∣sent and giue fire, then stand; and the second Ranke passing either to the right or left Hand (according to commandement) aduance before the first Ranke, couering them both in order and distance; then the third Ranke aduanceth and couereth the second; the fourth, the third; and so foorth in an orderly charge, till the Bringer vp or Reare be brought and made the Front; and so as occasion shall serue to conti∣nue still, till the ende of Commandment. Now for the Pikes or short Weapons, they shall not need to aduance one Ranke before another, but shall keepe their constant March (with their Pykes aduanced, ported, or shouldered) euen still with the first Ranke of Shot, till they come to encounter and charge the Enemy, and then at pleasure, and as occasion shall serue, they may couer one another, and bring euery se∣uerall hand to the pushe, till the last be first, and the first last, as by this Example doth plainely appeare.
The Battalia before the Countermarch. The Countermarch performed.
There be others which would haue this Lacede∣monian Countermarch in an other maner, which is for the first Ranke to Face to the Reare, then the second Ranke, and so all the rest of the Bo∣dy, to march vp and turne behinde their Lea∣ders; but they are mistaken, and conceiue not rightly of the Author from whence they take their Instruction: for this Motion rather looseth then gayneth ground, and seemeth rather to re∣tyre, then charge; But I leaue the reconcile∣ment of the doubt to those of better Iudge∣ment. The Macedo∣nian Counter∣march.The next Motion is called the Macedonian Countermarch, but from what ground, it is not yet discussed. As for the manner of the Motion, it is in this wise; The File leaders all turne a∣bout their Faces, and all the rest with the Bring∣ers vp, goe against them on the right or left hand, and passing on to the Ground before the Front of the Battalia, place themselues in order one after another, according as the File-leaders haue turned their Faces, making a shew vnto the E∣nemy as if they were retyring, or running away; which inticing the enemy to pursue, is of most singular vse to make him leaue and forsake any place or ground of aduantage. Others take this Motion to bee the Macedonian Countermarch, when the File-leader turneth about his face, and the rest passing by him on the right or left Hand, place themselues orderly, one be∣hinde another. And here is to be noted, that all these Countermarches already spoken of, may
as well be done by Ranks, as by Fyles, and both to the right or left hand entirely, or to both by deuision, or both by Conuersion; as in the for∣mer Examples. Doubling of Rankes.The next Motion, is the doubling of Rankes either to the Right or Left Hand intirely, as when the second Ranke marcheth into the first, the fourth into the third, the sixt into the fift, and the eight into the seuenth; and this Motion must be done very orderly, beginning with the left foote, and at three steps making perfect the doubling; then when they are to be reduced to their first Forme againe, to obserue that if they doubled to the right Hand, then they must turne on the left hand, to come to their first places a∣gaine, and so contrary to the other, as occasion shall serue; or this Motion may be done to both hands by Deuision, or to both hands by Conver∣sion, and to either Open Order, Order, or Close Order: according to these examples. Rankes vndoubled.
Rankes Doubled. Thus you see Rankes doubled and vndoubled, now there is another manner of doubling of Rankes, and that is by the Middlemen, or halfe Files, when they Aduancing and leading vp their halfe Files brings the fift Ranke on which hand they are commanded (being Middlemen to the Front) into the first Ranke, the sixt into the se∣cond, the seuenth into the third, and the eight in∣into the fourth, which are Middlemen vnto the Reare: as you may see in this example. Halfe Files vndoubled.
Halfe Files Doubled. Halfe Files as they were.Now to reduce, or bring these into their first place or forme, the halfe Fyles which did ascend, shall turne their Faces about, and following the Reare, or Bringer vp, euery Man shall descend, and come into his first place, as he was before. Bringers vp, Doubling.There is also yet another manner of Doubling of Rankes; and that is, when the Reare, or Bring∣ers vp, which is the last Ranke, aduanceth into the first, then the seuenth Ranke following them, commeth into the second, the sixth into the third, and the fifth (which are Middle men to the Front) into the fourth (which are Middle men vnto the Reare,) and so the Battalia standeth like vnto the last forme, or Example; only the Figures which signifie the Rankes doe vary, and are now,
And when this Bodie shall againe be reduced into his first place,Bringers vp, As they were. then shall the Bringers vp, or Reare, with their halfe files, turne their Faces a∣bout, and the Ranke 5 shall fall behinde the Ranke 4 the Ranke 6 behind 5 the ranke 7 be∣hind 6 and the ranke 8 (being the Reare, or Bringrs vp) behind the ranke 7 and so euery Man is in his first place againe. The next motion vnto these, is Wheeling,Of Wheeling. or Turning the whole Bodie of the Battalia, to one, or the other Hand, or entirely round about, or otherwise by Deuision, to Wheele it to both Hands at once, eyther in part, or else Round a¦bout; the generall manner of the Motion is thus; First close your Files to the Right hand, and your Rankes to the Swords poynt; then make the Corner file Leader to the Right hand stand fast, and then all the whole Bodie of the Battalia to mooue or Wheele about him, as about a Center, eyther halfe about, or three parts about, or else wholy and fully round about: Now to reduce it to the first Posture or Station, you shall com∣mand euery Man to turne his Face to the Left hand, then Wheele the Bodie back againe, till it come to its first Place, and then open the Rankes downeward, and the Fyles eyther to one, or the other Hand, at pleasure: As thus you Wheele the whole Body to the one, or the other Hand, or entirely round about, so you may wheele it to both Handes at once, by Deuision, eyther in part, or round about, according to pleasure; And this is of singular Vse, when the Horse shall come to
Charge the Foote; for by this Wheele, you shall couer your Shotte safe, and leaue your Pikes out∣most, to receyue the Charge: Now this Wheele is to be made after an other manner; for where before, eyther the corner Man of the Right hand file, or the Corner Man of the Left hand file, was to stand fast and firme, now all shall moue, and onely the Middle Man in the Reare, to the right Flanke, and the middle Man in the Reare, to the Left Flanke, shall stand fast, and vnmoued, and all the rest of the two Deuided Bodies shall moue about them, according to these Examples following.
The Battalia Vnwheeled.
The Battalia Wheeling. The Battalia halfe Wheeled. The Battalia Wheeled round about.
Thus you haue seene the manner of Wheeling, with the seuerall Motions, and Vses thereof. The next Motion, whereto foote Companies ought to be applyed, is the Casting off of files,Casting Files. or, as some call it, the Giuing of Fire, by Flanke, or in the Flanke; and this motion of casting of Files, is done diuers waies; as first, in Flanke, then in Wing, and lastly, before the Front: If you cast off files in flanke to the Right hand, then the right hand file (being readie to giue fire) standeth still, till the Bodie of the Battalia be marcht so far for∣ward, that the Reare, or Bringers vp, become euen with the Leader of the right hand file; then that file so standing, and prepared, giueth fire al∣together; then presently march vp betwene the outmost file of Pikes, on the right hand, and the inmost file of Shotte; then the second file of Shotte, as the first, doth stand still, till the Bodie be marched by, and then giue their Volley, and then march vp as they first did, betweene the out∣most file of Pikes, and the inmost file of Shotte, as aforesaide; And thus successiuely, euery file of Shotte giueth their Volley, that are conteyned in that right Wing, which done, wheele the whole Bodie about, and bring the Left Wing, to doe as much as the Right Wing, and so Wing after Wing, according to pleasure; And this man∣ner of casting of Files in Flanke, is of excellent vse for the beating of Paces in Woods, or Bogges; also, for the mayntaining of straight and narrow Waies, for defence of Bridges, and the like; and that you may haue a better vnderstanding there∣in,
behold the figures following. Files cast off in Flanke to the Right Hand. Here you see the File 1. standeth still, and ha∣uing giuen their Volley, are to retreat betweene the File 4. and the file 3. then the file 2. standeth still and hauing giuen their Volley, retreat be∣tweene the file 4. and the file 1. then the file 3. standeth still, and hauing giuen their Volley, re∣treate betweene the file 4. and the file 2. and
then the whole wing is as it was at the first, 1.2.3 now as thus you may cast off the files to both Hands, making the file 10. to stand, and the Volley giuen to retreate betweene the file 8. and the file 7. then the file 9. to stand, and the Vol∣ley giuen to retreate betweene the file 7. and the file 10. then the file 8. to stand, and the vol∣ley giuen, to retreat betweene the file 7. and the file 9. So then the body is brought againe to his first forme, 8.9.10. Now for the casting of Files in Wing, you must draw foorth the File 1. on the right hand, and the file 10. on the left hand in the manner of Wings, and hauing giuen their Volley, shall stand still till the reare bee aduanced, and then the file 1. shall retreat betweene the file 4. and the file 3. and the file 10. shall retreat between the file 7. and the file 8. as in the former exam∣ple, and so the rest of the files one after another, this example appeareth.
Files cast off in Wings. Lastly, there are Files cast off before the Front of the Battalia, after this manner. Files cast off before the Front.
Here as you see the file 1. to the right Hand is drawne before the Front, who as soone as they haue giuen fire, shall turne their faces to the right hand, and following the Bringer vp, shall make retreate betweene the files 4 and 3. and there couer themselues till they haue made rea∣dy againe. Then shalbe drawn forth before the Front, the file 10 to the left Hand, who after they haue giuen fire, shall turne faces to the left Hand, and retreat betweene the files 8. and 7. then shall bee drawne out the file 2. to the right Hand, which hauing giuen fire, turne faces as before to the right Hand, and then retreate betweene the files 4 and 1. Likewise in the same manner the file 9 is drawne out to the left Hand, and hauing giuen fire, turne their faces, and retreate between the files 7 and 10. and thus successiuely one after another you shall drawe foorth euery file of Shot, first on the right Hand, then on the left, till the seruice be accom∣plished, and thus much of the casting off the files. There is yet an other Motion of the foote, which is worthy obseruation,Of Opening and Cloasing. and that is ope∣ning and closing of Rankes and Files: wherein is to be noted, as I haue shewed in the Accidence, that Rankes when they open to any Order what∣soeuer, ought, for the most part, to open downe∣ward, by turning Face about, and descending till they come to the distance commanded, and then to turne Faces as they were, but when they close to any Order, it must euer be done vpward, to∣wards the Front.  Files when they open
or close must euermore doe it to the right or left Hand, or to both, in this manner. If you giue the word of Command plainely, and barely,Files opened or closed by the Middle-men. without any implication, or addition thus, Open your File to Open Order, &c. or to any o∣ther Order; then shall the two Middle Men to the two Flankes standing in the middest of the Front, open the one from the other according to the di∣stance appointed, and their whole Files shall fol∣low them in an euen line; then the rest of the File-leader shall open from these Middle men, one halfe to the right hand, the other to the left, till the whole Battalia bee opened, according to Commandment, as you may see by this example. Files opened from the Middle-men.
And as thus you open, (if the Word be giuen in one and the selfe same manner:) so likewise you must close your Files, the Middleman first ioyning with their Files; then after all the rest of the File-leaders, with their files to both hands, till the Commandment be fulfilled. But if the Word of Command bee giuen,Files opened, or closed to any hand. Files to the right hand open to open Order, &c. or to any Order else, then shall the right Hand File-leader with his file, and so successiuely eue∣ry other File-leader (with their files) shall open after the Right Hand Man, till the Command be perfited; and as thus you open, so you must also close; and as you open or close to the right Hand, so you must open or close to the left Hand, when the Word of Command is giuen to that purpose. Diuerse other Motions there be belonging to the Foote Companies,Other Moti∣ons as the turning of Faces to ei∣ther Hand or about; the forme whereof is ex∣press almost in euery figure before shewed: Al∣so the Charging to any Hand, to the Front, to the Reare, or to all at an instant; of which I shall haue cause to speake more amply in ano∣other place: Therefore at this time, these al∣ready expressed, shall serue for the Motions of the Foote Company.
CHAP. 3. Of the seuerall Motions which belong vnto Horse, Or, Horse Troopes. The vse of Horse Moti∣ons.THe Motions of Horse are diuers, ac∣cording to the opinion of the Aunti∣ents, and to these Moderne times also, as you may perceiue by my Accidence, wherein I haue set you downe the seuerall words of command, belonging to euery Motion of Horse now in vse; all which, are so neere a kinne to the Foote Motions, that I hold it needelesse to repeate them ouer heere againe, but referre those which desire to learne those generall Motions, to the Accidence, and to those Motions of Foote which are already specified and set downe in this Grammer: I will now proceed to those other Motions and Imbattaylings of Horse, which being more difficult and strange, doth more amase the minde of the industrious Learner, and are harder attayned vnto by Discourse, without some play∣ner Demonstration. First therefore, the generall Motions of Horse at this day (wherein the Launce the Light Staffe, and the Snort Pistoll are taken away, and onely the Long Pistoll and Dragoone in vse) are contey∣ned in Trooping, Discouering, Charging, Whee∣ling, and Retyring; and all these are done, eyther by whole Bodies, by Parts, or Deuisions, by
many files, few files, or single files: And herein you are to call to minde (as I haue shewed in the Accidence) that as the Rankes of Horse are com∣pounded of vncertaine Numbers; so the file must euer be constantly sixe Deepe, being compoun∣ded of a Leader, a Follower, two Middlemen, a Follower,An Horse File. and a Bringer vp or, the Reare Man, ac∣cording to this demonstration. 0 Leader. 1 Follower. 0 Middle Man. 0 Middle Man. 1 Follower. 0 Bringer vp. Thus you see the Contents and forme of a Horse file, from which certainty, and true knowne Ground, euery skilfull Commander may builde vp any Bodie that he pleaseth; whereas, if both Ranke and Fyle should be incertaine, and at plea∣sure, there would then be no Ground for any thing, but euerything would be confused, accor∣ding to the phantast quenesse of Opinion. When you haue therefore drawne your Horse Troop into Rankes and Files,Drawing vp of a Horse- Troope. which you must doe file after file, till euerie Man be placed accor∣ding to the order, & not according to the fashiō of our ignorant Commanders, whom I haue heard (at the first gathering of a Bodie together)
to command the Men to Ranke three, fiue, seuen, or as fancie leades them, for this is most absurde, and vnproper, because Rankes are, and may be of vncertaine Number; so that ranking at hap ha∣zard, it is almost impossible that the files should fall out euen, whose Number must not be chan∣ged; and so a new worke to begin, which at the first might better haue bene finished. But to my purpose againe; When you haue drawne vp the Bodie of the Horse in true Files and Rankes, and hauing euerie Officers readie for his due Place, as Captaine, Liuetenant, Cornet, Trumpets and Corporalls: You shall then (accor∣ding to the Figure or Example following in the next Page) Troope into the Field, eyther for Ser∣uice, or other Exercise.
A Troupe of an Hundred Horse, Trouping into the Field, with their Officers
The Former Troope drawne vp into a firme body either for Seruice or Exercise with all the Officers. Thus you haue seen the maner of Trooping in∣to the Field, with al the Officers of a priuat troop, and how they are deuided into foure Deuisions. The first, or head, being lead by the Captaine; the second Diuision by the Cornet; the third, by the eldest Corporall; the fourth, by the second
Corporall; the Reare or hindmost being brought vp by the Lieutenant, the two yongest Corporalls are extrauagant, and ride vp and downe on both sides, to see the whole Body keepe their true Order. The Trumpets (if their bee more then one) the Edest troopes vpon the Head next after the Captaine, and the second troopeth in the Reare, two Rankes before the Lieutenant; if there bee three, the third soundeth before the Cornet. Now for the drawing of this Troope into a firme Body, for Seruice, or Exercise, the Cap∣taine hauing found conuenient ground, maketh a stand with his Deuision; and the Cornet bringeth vp his Deuision, on the left Hand the Captaines, placing himselfe vpon the left File of his owne Deuision; then the eldest Corporall bringeth vp his Deuision on the left hand the Cornet, and as soone as they are ioyned, hee de∣parteth himselfe to the outside of the right Wing, to see that true Order and Distance bee kept; then the second Corporall bringeth vp his Deuision on the left Hand the eldest Corpo∣ralls, and himselfe departeth to the outside of the left Wing, to see that true Order and Distance be kept; For now all Corporalls are extraua∣gant; and all the Trumpets ascend to the head and Troope next behinde the Captaine, and be∣fore the Cornet; the eldest Trumpet taking the right hand, and so the rest according to anti∣quitie. This Body, or Square Battalia is of all other
the best,The Benefite of the square Bodie. and most sure for all manner of Seruice, and may the easiliest be reduced, and brought to any other forme, that Inuention can finde out; and with this Body, you may eyther Charge entirely and wholy at once, or you may deuide it, and Charge sundrie waies, or else by drawing out two, or three, or more Fyles, skirmish on euery side the Foote Battaile, and put them to much anoyance. There is another forme of Imbattailing the Horse, which is called the Horsemans-Wedge, and it is drawne vp into the forme of this Figure, or Example following. The Horsemans Wedge.
This Wedge, Charging poynt-wise vpon the Foote, seeketh to disfeue: and breake the Front, whereby, getting an entrance, they put all into Route and confusion, which the Footemen per∣ceiuing, they haue no meanes of safety, but eyther by maine strength to repulse them, or else to de∣uide their Body in the midst into two parts, and to giue the Horse a free and thorow passage; which foote Battaile so deuided, is called the Bat∣talia Antistomus. There is an other Battalia of Horse, which is called the Rhombe of Horse, and it is proportio∣ned according to this Figure, and is of great vse, hauing in euery corner a Leader. The Rhombe. This Horsmans Rhombe was first found out in Thessalia, and thence brought in great practise, through the benefite thereof, being able to passe through, and to peirce any Foote battaile what∣soeuer; and is only to be opposed, by that Foote
Battalia which is called Menoides or Cressent, and in forme of an Halfe Moone, whose Winges be∣ing stretched out by the Leaders, the middle part is imbowed, and bent to inuyron and wrappe in the Horse Men as they Charge, and so put them to Route and Disorder, and therefore in this case are to keepe aloofe off, and not to come in, but to plye their Pistolls, till they see the Foote Battaile stagger, and fall into disorder: Another Rhombe of fiue Square.
This Rhombe of fiue in Square, doth not Ranke, but onely Fileth, and is of equall vse with the former Rhombe, and is as necessarie for our Pisto∣lers in these daies, as it was in times past for the Crossebow Men, and other Archers, and Dart Cast∣ers on Horse backe. There is no Foote Battaile more excellent to oppose, then as that which is called of the Aun∣tient Epicampios, Emprosthia, which as the Halfe Moone carrieth a circular hollownesse, so this carrieth a square hollownesse, as you may see in this Figure. The Foote Battaile, Epicampios.
The end or purpose, to which this foote Bat∣taile is framed, is to beguile and ouerreach the Pistoleirs, eyther by inticing them into the voyd or emptic place of the Battalia, as they Charge in furie, and vpon the Spurre, or else, by disordering their Horses with their Winges, and so driue them into an vtter confusion. This Battalia makes shew but of a small num∣ber, because the Deuisions lie hid and couered, and so much apter to be mistaken; for, the Winges which are the least number, are only ap∣parent to the eye, the Bodie (which is three times more) is hardly discerned; so that if the Winges preuaile, the Conquest is sure; if they faile, they may easily retire into the maine Bodie, and make a powerfull resistance. There is another Horse Battaile, which is square in Figure, but not in Horse, being eleuen in Ranke, and but sixe in file, which is called of the Auntients a Tetragonall Horse Battaile; this is a very strong Battaile, as all square Battailes are, and our Fore fathers did affect it much, and we at this day finde it of great vse for our Pisto∣leirs, both for the strength, and the ready fra∣ming thereof, there is no Battaile on foote to op∣pose it, but that which is called Embolos, or the Wedge of Foore, which is framed of Foote Men, as the former Wedge was made of Horse Men, all the outsides consisting of Armed Pikes, and the Lynings within of Shotte: Also the front of this Foote Wedge, consisteth of three Armed Pikes, as the Horse Wedge did consist of one sin∣gle
Armed Pistolier. Many other Motions and Imbattaylings of Horse there be, but none more vsefull then these already expressed; and he that is able to draw Horse and Man, into these formes and figures all readie expressed, may without any difficultie or amazement, draw vp any other Bat∣taile at the first sight, be the Inuention neuer so deepe, obscure, and curious. CHAP. 4. Of the seuerall Ranges of the Foote, and how they are Ordered, and Compounded. GEnerally, all Foote Battailes, or Bat∣tailes of the Infantrie, are Ranged in∣to Rankes & Files; now the Rankes are vncertaine, therefore from them no true Ground can be taken; but the Files are certaine, therefore from them must arise the Ground of well Ranging of Battailes, for these files are ordered into Bodies, and those Bodies haue euery one a seuerall name, or deno∣mination, by which the Auntients did distinguish them; But we lesse curious, and finding that play∣ner Demonstrations, and Names of lesse difficul∣tie, were sooner apprehended, and conceiued of the Ignorant Souldiers, haue neglected those hard and vnacquainted Names, and haue reduced
them to Termes of greater familiarity, and much lesse trouble and vexation to the me∣mory: Yet because I know that Noueltie is plea∣sing vnto many; some, desirous to know what they neuer intend to practise; others, willing to satisfie their mindes, least Questions of this nature might be vnseasonably brought vpon them; and others, for Argument sake, to fill vp Discourse, with those Knowledges which they imagine are obscured to others: For these Reasons, I thinke it not amisse, to shew how the Auntients did Range their Battailes, and what Names they gaue to their seuerall Numbers; and then, to shew our owne manner of Range, and the easy apprehension thereof, that being compared to∣gether, Iudgement may soone finde out, which is most auaileable. And heerein, you must first vnderstand, that the Auntients did range their Battailes into Files, euery single file contayning in depth or number, full sixteene Men, and so called a File; a Bodie compounded of two files, they termed a Dilochie, of two and thirty Men, and the Leader, or Cap∣taine of those two and thirty Men, was called Dilochita; foure files, contayning threescore and foure Men, they called a Tetrarchy, and the Cap∣taine or Leader thereof Tetrarcha; eight files, a Taxis, and the Captaine Taxiarcha; then is six∣teene files, a Syntagma, and the Captaine thereof Syntagmatarcha, which indeed, is that Man which we call a Captaine in Chiefe, for euery Syntag∣matarcha had vnder him, fiue Inferior Comman∣ders,
that is to say, a Reare Commander, which we call a Liuetenant, an Ensigne, a Trumpeter, which in our foote Companies is the Drumbe, a Sergeant, and a Cryer, which we call a Corporall: Now two and thirty files (which is two Syntag∣mas) they call a Pentecosiarchy, and contayneth fiue hundred and twelue Men, which with vs is called a Colonie or Regiment, and the Captaine thereof is called Pentecosiarcha, which we call a Colonell, now two of these Pentecosiarchies being a thousand and twenty foure Men; and three score and foure files, they call a Chiliarchy, and the Captaine thereof Chiliarcha, which indeed we call a Colonell Generall; two Chiliarchies amoun∣ting to two thousand and forty eight Men, they call a Merarchy, being a hundred and twenty eight files, and the Captaine Merarcha, which is with vs the Sergeant Maior Generall; two Merarchies they call a Phalangarchy, and the Captaine Pha∣langarcha, which is as much as the Master of our Ordnance; two Phalangarchyes they call a Dipha∣langarchy, and the Captaine Diphalangarcha, which is with vs as Liuetenant Generall; and two Diphalangarchies make a foure fold Battaile of Phalange, consisting of a thousand and twenty foure files, and sixteene thousand three hundred and eighty foure Men, whose Cap∣taine is the King, or his Generall. Thus you haue the Range of a Foote Battaile, according to the Custome of the Auncients, from the first file (which is the lowest) to the full ex∣tent of a Maine Battaile. It now resteth that I
shew you our Moderne or late manner of Range, by which all our Battailes are Compounded, Gouerned, and Conducted; and in this Discrip∣tion, I must varry much from the Auntients, and begin a steppe lower in degree; but two stepps (at least) lower in number. And here I must haue you first remember, that as the Auntients began with whole files of 16. in number, so I must now begin with halfe files, being but fiue in number; for in this Range (of which now I write) no file must ex∣ceede the number of 10. fiue then, which is the Roote or beginning of this Range, is called halfe a file, or halfe a Decurio, and the Leader or Cap∣taine thereof is called Lanspesado, or Middle Man; Two halfe files make a whole file of ten, and the Leader or Captaine thereof is called Decurio, or the File Leader. Two whole files and a halfe, which is 25. Men, we call a Squadron or Square of Men, being fiue euery way, and the Leader or Captaine thereof is called the Corporall: Two Squadrons, being 50. Men, and fiue files, is called a Sergeancie, and the Chiefe or Leader thereof is called a Sergeant. Two Sergeancies being 100. Men, and ten files, is called a Centurie, and the Chiefe or Leader thereof, is called the Captaine, which Captaine hath vnder him 11. superordinary Men, that is to say, a Liuetenant, an Ensigne, a Drumbe, two Serge∣ants, foure Corporalls, a Surgion, and a Clarke. Two Centuries and a halfe, being 200. Men, and 15. files, is called the fourth part of a Regiment, and the Chiefe or Leader thereof, is called the
Sergeant Maior of a Regiment. Two fourth parts of a Regiment being 500. Men, and 30. files, is called halfe a Colonie or Regiment, and the Chiefe or Leader thereof, is called the Liuetenant Colonell. Two halfe Colonies, being 1000. Men, is called a Colonie or Regiment, and the Chiefe or Leader thereof, is called a Colonell, which Colonell hath also vnder him in his Regiment (besides the Captaines and Officers before named) one that is called the Quarter Maister, whose Range is inferior to euery Captaine, but before euerie Liuetenant, and the Officers that are vnder them; As for the Range of the Captaines which are vnder these three grea∣ter Officers, they shall take precedencie of Place, according to their Antiquitie in Cōmand, and the Eldest Captaines Collours shall Flie first, the Second next, and so of the rest; and the Colo∣nells Liuetenant shall take his Place as the Young∣est Captaine of that Regiment. Two Colonies or Regiments, is called a Bodie, or full Battalia, consisting of 2000. Men, and the Chiefetaine or Leader thereof, is called Colonell Generall. Two Battalias consisting of 4000. Men, is cal∣led a Double Battalia, and the Chiefe or Leader thereof is called the Sergeant Maior Generall. Two double Battalias, containing 8000. Men, is called a Vantguard, and the Chiefe or Leader thereof, is called the Lord Marshall, Commanding the first third of the Battaile or Army. Two Vantguards being 16000. Men, is called
the Reare, and the Chiefe or Leader thereof is called the Liuetenant Generall. Two Reares being 32000. Men, is called the Maine Battaile, and the Cheife or Leader thereof is called the King, or Generall, who hath also su∣preame Authoritie ouer all the whole Armie, how great or puissant soeuer. Thus you haue seene the true Range of Foote∣men, and their Leaders, according to their Num∣bers: It now resteth, that I shew you the true Range of their Weapons. In the Auntient Times the Light Armed (which were Bowmen, Darters, and Slingers) had the Vant∣guard, and were the first beginners of Fight and Skyrmish, for by their Darts and Arrowes, they prouoked the Enemie to breake their Rankes, and ouerthrew and killed many in their approaches, they galled and repulsed the Horse much, and in∣deede, were euer the first Authors of Victorie; and as thus they sometimes placed them in the Front, so at other times, they had their places in the Flankes, and sometimes in the Reare; But the generall and most certaine Range which they held, was euer betwene the Armed Pikes: The first file of the Light Armed, behinde the first file of the Armed; the second file of the Light Ar∣med, behind the second file of the Armed; and so consequently, to leuie all the Armed Menne through the whole Batttalia; yet the file of the Light Armed, shall be but halfe the number of the Armed; and these Battailes shall be drawne into diuers Deuisions.
But this Range of Weapons agreeth not with∣out Discipline at this day, for our Battailes consi∣sting only of armed Pikes, Muskatiers, and a fewe short weapons, they are raunged in this manner, when they march into the Field, they march Company after Company single of themselues without any mixture: and in this march of single Companies, the Muskatiers are deuided into two parts; the one part hath the Vanguard, the other hath the Reare, and the Pikes march in the midst; vpon the head whereof is the Ensigne, and about it the short weapons, as Halberd, Partizans, or the like, (if the Company haue any) when they are come into the Field, then is euery Regiment drawn vp into a Body by it selfe, whereof all the Pikes are drawne into an entire body by them∣selues, and the Shott deuided into two Bodies, whereof one halfe Wingeth vp the right Hand of the Pikes, and the other halfe wingeth vp the left hand of the Pikes. The Ensignes stand still on the head, or within a Ranke, and the short weapons of execution about them for guard. These Regiments are drawne into the Battaile, according to the pleasure of the Lord Marshall, or Serieant Maior Generall. The Horsemen are the Wings which troope on each side of the Bat∣taile, keeping the distance of halfe a Furlong at least from either side of the Shot. The great Or∣dance, or Artilery are drawne from the two out∣most poynts of the Battaile, a pretty distance from the Vantguard, and extend themselues wider and and wider frō the Battaile, being drawe at length
in a single File, their Carriage, prouision, and Mu∣nision being drawn neere vnto them, and the Re∣giment belonging to the Master of the Ordnance, following closse about them as a sure Defence, wall, or guard. And thus you haue the full Range of the Foote Battaile, and how it is disposed. CHAP. 5. Of the seuerall Ranges of the Horse, and how they are Ordered and Compounded. THe Horse-Troopes in the Ancient and first times had no one certaine Range, or place in the Battaile, but according to the humors and opinions of their Generals, so they were altered and carried vp and downe to seueral places of Commandment. Aeli∣an saith, that in some Battailes within his own me∣morie and knowledge, the Horse Troopes were Ranged after the light Armed, yet doth not con∣stantly stand vpon the allowance of that Range; but saith, that although they were ranged after the Light-armed, yet other places might be more conuenient, and this range might be altered at the pleasure of the General, or vpon any necessary oc∣casion, where Victories stood doubtfull: others of the Ancients, as at sometimes the Macedonians, now and then the Romans, but many times the Thebans & Thessalians haue ranged their Troops of Horse in the Reare of the armed Battailes, and good successe hath many times issued thereof, & the Rangers of such Battailes haue returned Vic∣tors:
Others of the Auntients, and especially Alex∣ander himselfe, Craterus, and most of the worthiest Macedonians, haue ranged their Horse Battailes vp∣on the right and left Winges of the maine Armie; and indeed, these Places are most probable and best agreeing with our present Discipline. To come then to the Range of the Horse Battaile, as it is vsed at this day, you must vnderstand, that it varyeth foure seuerall waies; two in the Range of the Curaseires, two in the Range of the Harquebu∣seires or Dragoones. The Curaseires haue two seuerall Ranges, the one in ordinary trooping, the other in a formed Battaile. In an ordinary Troope where the whole Battaile mooueth, the first day, the Troope and Regiment be∣longing to the Generall, troopeth formost, and hath the leading of the Poynt; After him, troopeth the Troope and Regiment of the Lord Marshall; and after him, euery Colonell, and his Regiment, according to his Antiquitie: The next day, the Lord Marshall, and his Regiment, hath the leading of the Poynt or Vauntguard, and the Generall hath the Reare; the El∣dest Colonell succeedeth the Lord Marshall, and so the rest of the Colonells, and their Regiments after him, according to Antiquitie: The third day, the Eldest Colonell hath the Poynt or Vantguard, and the Lord Marshall hath the Reare after the Generall; and thus alternately euery Colonell shall change his Place, & haue the leading of the Poynt or Vauntguard, ac∣cording to the seuerall daies of trooping (there be∣ing no intermission or stay of many daies betweene the seuerall remooues: And as thus the Chiefe and Superior Cōmanders doe remooue and alter their
Places, so shall the Inferior Commanders of euerie Regiment doe the like; the Colonell hauing the prin∣cipall place the first day, the Liuetenant Colonell the second day, the Sergeant Maior the third day; and so euery Captaine after, according to his Antiquitie; in which order, no Commander looseth Dignitie, but hath his seuerall day of Glory, and as much prehe∣minence as the Generall, or any other Commander, whatsoeuer. Now if it come to a formed Battaile, then the Ranges change, and the Regiments are drawne vp in∣to one whole and entire Bodie, in which drawing vp of Regiments, this order is to be obserued, that e∣uery perticular Troope shall duely keepe their two distances, that is to say, Open Order in their Rankes, and Close Order in their Files, then betwixt Compa∣ny and Company, in euery Regiment, shall be the space of 25. foote, that thereby they may be the bet∣ter distinguished, and the sooner drawne foorth, and imployed in any needefull place, as the Superior Commanders shall thinke good. This Order and Distance being obserued, Regi∣ments are to be brought into maine Bodies, eyther Square, Long, Tryangular, or Dyamond, according to the nature of the ground, and the fashion of the Enemies Battaile, for therein is the aduantage. Now for the true Range, the Generall hath euer the Vauntguard, which is the right Wing of the Bat∣taile, and the Lord Marshall hath the second Vaunt∣guard, which is the Poynt of the left Wing of the Battaile; For here is to be vnderstood, that when Battailes of Foote are drawne vp and formed, then the Battaile of Horse is deuided, and extended forth
in length, acording to the number of the Regiments, which as Wings stretching themselues foorth from the two points of the right and left hand battaile of Foot; are as a Wall or de∣fense betwixt the Enemy & the Foot Army, being to Charge vpon all aduantages, to defend the Ordnance & great Artille∣rie when it shalbe Assaulted or ingaged; or otherwise to keep the Carriage, Munition and baggage, from the pillage of the Enemy, or other defeiture. For the range of the Colonels they take their places accor∣ding to Antiquity; the eldest Colonell secondeth the Generall the third, the Lord Martiall, and so according to Antiquitie their Regiments doe troope, either on the one or the other hand, all things being ordered according to Dignitiy and Antiquity. Now whereas a question may be demanded touching the place of the Quartermaster, were he shall range himselfe; I thus resolue it. That if the Quarter-master, who is a neces∣sary dependant vpon euery Horse Regiment, haue no troope of Horse, as seldome or neuer they haue, then his range or place is euer to troope with the Collonels Lieutenant, and the Commissary or Prouost of euery Regiment with the Liuete∣nant Collonels Liueteuant, or otherwise (at his pleasure) ex∣trauagantly in any other inferior place of the Regiment. Againe, here is to be noted in the generallitie of the Army where Horse and Foote are mixed together, or whensoeuer they shall meet either in publicke Court or priuate Counsell, that the Commander of Horse hath priority of place before the Commander of Foot. And howsoeuer some opinions would sway to the contrary, preferring Number before Ver∣tue; yet it is most certaine, that in all Courts of Warre, the Horseman hath the first place, a Collonell of 500. Horse pre∣ceeding a Collonell of 1000. Foot. A Captaine of 100. Horse takes place before a Captaine of 200. Foot, &c. Antiquity in
this place being no let, but the Dignity carried according to the Honor of the Command, & the Nobility of the number. Now next vnto these Curasheirs are the Harquebusheirs, who at this day, and in this present Discipline, stand for the Light Horse; these likewise haue two seuerall Ranges, the one in their ordinary Trooping; and the other, when they come to be drawne vp into ordinary or extraordinary Bodies: For the ordinarie Trooping, it is eyther when they Troope into the Fielde to receiue Directions, or else troope forth as Vantcur∣reers and Dicouerers of all Impediments that may happen to the Army, for these are they which Scower the Coast, and preuent Ambuscadoes, they make good Ryuers, Bridges, and all straight Passages, and albe their trooping is loose and dis∣banded, holding no strickt or curious forme, eyther in Ranke or file, nor any certainety in Pace or Motion, but sometimes galloping, sometimes trotting, & sometimes standing still, (as danger or discouerie shall giue way to their proceedings) yet doe they troope most commonly in Regiments, the Vaunt∣guard being led eyther by the Colonell himselfe, or some o∣ther Officer in Chiefe, who being better acquainted with the places they goe to discouer, hath this Authority cast vpon him, and Rangeth himselfe in the Front, which is the greatest Place of eminence: As the Colonell or chiefe Officer thus ta∣keth the First Place, so the Liuetenant Colonell taketh the Se∣cond, and so the rest of the Captaines successiuely, according to their antiquity: These are the ordinary Scoutes, Watch∣men, and Sentinells, and if it be in Campe, their guard is euer without the Verge of the Campe, and if it be in a Walled Towne, Citty, or Garrison, their guard is without the walles of the Citty, and their Quarter in the Suburbes; there are Dependants on the Lord Marshall, and take directions from his Commands; and thus much for the Range of Horsemen. FINIS.
