17574 99847633 12683
A Booke of the Arte and maner, howe to plant and graffe all sortes of trees, howe to set stones, and sowe Pe∣pines to make wylde trees to graffe on, as al∣so remedies and mediicnes. VVith diuers o∣ther newe practise, by one of the Abbey of Saint Vincent in Fraunce, practised with his owne handes, deuided into seauen Chapters, as hereafter more plainely shall appeare, With an addition in the ende of this booke, of certaine Dutch practises, set forth and Englished, by Leo∣nard Mascall. In laudem incisionis distichon, Hesperidum Campi quicquid Romanaque tellus, Fructificat nobis, incisione datur. ❧Imprinted at London by Henrie Denham, for Iohn Wight.
The booke vnto the Reader. EChe wyght that willing is to knowe, The way to graffe and plant: May here finde plentie of that skill, That earst hath bene but scant. To plant or graffe in other tymes, As well as in the spring: I teach by good experience, To doe an easie thing. The pleasure of this skill is great, The profite is not small: To such men as will practise it, In things méere naturall. The poore man may with pleasure finde, Some thing to helpe his méede, So may the riche man reape some fruite, Where earst he had but wéede. The noble man that néedeth naught, May thereby haue at will: Such pleasaunt fruit to serue his vse, And giue eche man his fill. The common weale cannot but winne, Where eche man doth entende: By skill to make the good fruites mo, And yll fruites to amende. Weigh well my wordes, and thou shalt finde, All true that I doe tell: Mine Authour doth not write by gesse, Practise made him excell. If thou wilt practise as he did, Thou mayst finde out much more: He hath not sound out all the truth, That nature hath in store. Farewell.
To the right honorable and my very good Lorde, Syr Iohn Pawlet Knight, Lorde S. Iohn, Leonarde Mascall wisheth prosperous health, with conti∣nuall encrease of honour. RIght honorable, among all sciences that may bee lightly obtayned, and among many goodly exercises and experiences for men, there is none (among the reast) more meete and requisite, or that more doth refresh the vital spirits of men, nor more engender admiration in the effectes of nature, or that is cause of greater recreation to the wearie and traueyled spirite of man, or more profitable to mans life, than is the skil of planting and graffing, the which not only we may see with our eyes, but also feele with our handes in the secret workes of nature: yea, nothing more discouereth vnto vs the great & incomprehen∣sible worke of god, that of one litle Pepin sede, Nut or small plant, may come the selfesame herb or tree, & to bring forth infinite of the same fruit, which also doth shine and shew forth it selfe vnto vs, especially in the spring time, by their diuersitie of shootes, blossoms & buds, in diuers kindes of nature, by the goodnesse and mightie power of the great Lorde and Creator to∣wardes his people, in such thinges as commeth forth of the naturall earth, to nourishe, to sustayne and main∣taine our lyues. What greater pleasure can there be, than to smell the sweete odour of herbes, trees, and fruites, and to beholde the goodly colour of the same, which in certaine tymes of the yeare commeth foorth of the wombe of their mother and nourse, and so to vnderstande the secrete operation in the same. And to be short, of this labour (in our lyues) we do take part therof with great gaines and reuenues that come ther∣by, where as through ydlenesse there commeth none:
therefore to augment the same, it shall be good to ap∣pease and mittigate all fond delightes and vaine plea∣sures, with such lyke vanities, and cleane put out and abolish the delightes of all vices. Wherefore the Poet sayth: let vs prayse the true labouring houre of the true labourer. Therevpon many great Lordes and no∣ble personages, haue left their theatres, pleasant stages, goodly pastimes, forsaking and despising their plea∣sures, not much regarding rich Diademes, and costly perfumes, but haue giuen themselues to Planting and Graffing, and such like. In such sort, that if we should diligently search, and recite all the discourse of aunci∣ent Histories, as of late dayes we should finde, that the most noble personages through their vertue, hath she∣wed many goodlye examples, as in one Theatre a su∣preme degree honorable: nor haue had nothing more deare, more requisite, or more greatly in cōmendation, than Planting & Graffing of fruit. Cyrus a great king of the Persians (as witnesse Xenophon,) did so much delite in the Art of planting & graffing, (which did shew a great prayse and glorie vnto his personage,) that he had no greater desire or pleasure, than when he might occupy himselfe in Planting & Graffing to garnish the earth, to place and order thereon certaine number of trees. The Emperour Dioclesian, (as doth recite, Sextus Aurelius Victor,) of his owne good will without any constraynt, did leaue the scepter of his Empire for to remain con∣tinually in the fieldes. So much pleasure did he take in planting of fruit, in making of Orchardes & Gardens, which he did make, garnish, and finishe with his owne handes. The Senatours, Dictatours, and Consuls of the Romaynes, among all other things haue commended Planting and Graffing to bee one of the most flouri∣shing labours in this worlde for the common wealth, the which was celebrated and counted a great vertue:
yea, they did so much esteeme it, that they did hang ta∣bles thereof in diuers places, neuer thinking the tyme more aptly spent, than in Plāting & Graffing, nothing more contenting themselues, nothing more deligh∣ted in any other affayres for the common wealth, than in setting, sowing or planting on the earth. How much we may prayse of late dayes and commend our trauai∣lers from other countreys, it is easie to be perceyued and knowne, but of Lords, Gentlemen, & Merchants, which haue had (as it doth appeare) a great regarde in these latter dayes, howe they might folow the example of others: Wherby it hath replenished this our realme with diuers straunge Plants, Herbes, and Trees, very good and necessarie for the common wealth, not here∣tofore commonly knowne. And beholde, aboue all la∣bours (for the common wealth) we ought to giue a sure and certaine iudgement, that Planting and Graffing is more highly to be commended and praysed, than ma∣ny other worthie and noble things in this worlde: for this Art hath not onely from tyme to tyme, beene put in vse and practise of labour through kings and prin∣ces: but also it hath bene put in writing of many great and worthie personages, in diuers kinde of languages, as in Greke by Philometor, Hieron, Acheleus, Orphe∣us, Musceus, Homer, Hosiode, Constantine, Cesar: and in Latin, by Verron, Caton, Columella, Paladius, Vir∣gill, Amilius Macer, and in the Portingall tongue by king Attalus and Mago, (the which reciteth the Histo∣ryes) that after their death, the bookes of planting and graffing were brought to Rome, soone after the de∣struction of Carthage. Likewise howe many since haue written onely of zeale and loue for their countrey and common wealth, of the fruitfull arte of planting and graffing: yea of late dayes howe many worthie men by their learning haue written likewise thereof, shoulde
seeme that it hath come from their auncesters, as the greatest honour, through the noble inuention of the same. Lykewise I dare boldely affirme, not onely the learned haue written, but also haue bene practisers and inuenters of the same, (as witnesseth diuers hystories) in diuers and many secrete thing, wherein I dare bold∣ly say, they haue not so learnedly, nor so exactly writ∣ten, but they haue more exactly taught and left in wri∣tyng things so certaine, that their successours may ea∣sily marke, obserue, and keepe the same: for euery one hath written according to the nature of his countrey. The Greekes for Greece, the Barbarians for Barbarie, the Italians for Italy, the French men for Fraunce▪ &c. which writing without the order and practise, doth very small profite for this our Realme of England, the which I can blame nothing more than the negligence of our nation, which hath had small care heretofore in planting and graffing, in some places of this realme (as I haue knowne) where as good and well disposed haue graffed, the euill and malicious person hath sone after destroyed them againe: but if we would endeuor our selues thervnto (as other countreys doe,) we might florish, and haue many a straunge kinde of fruit (which now we haue oftentimes the want thereof) that might greatly pleasure and serue manye wayes both for the rich and poore, as well as in Grece, Barbarie, Italy, or Fraunce, if our nation were giuen so well that way as they are. Right honourable, for so much as I haue bene long in declaring of our predecessours, I will nowe leaue, (troubling your honour any further) and rest from the other things accomplishing my desire, beseching your Lordship to take this my simple traueile in good part, requesting no other recompence for my paine herein, but wishing it might be put in a generall practise tho∣row
this realme, whereby in small tyme it would grow vnto a great profite and commoditie both to the riche and poore, wherein I should thinke my selfe not onely happie, but also to haue a iust tribute for my desertes, and also this Realme might thereby receyue no small benefite, with prayse of other countreys, in folowing our predecessours in this arte of planting and graffing: some places of this Realme are greatly commended and praysed among others, as Kent for the chiefest, which vertue (notwithstanding) can not be cleane put out or forgoten, specially, when such as your honour shall seeme to fauour the same, and also to see the for∣warde doyngs thereof, in such groundes and Lordships as ye doe possesse, the which at this time hath onely mooued me to attempt vnto your honor this my sim∣ple trauaile, which is not the only dutie that I owe vn∣to your honour, but as a dewe desert, not thinking my selfe halfe able to recompence your vertuous liberali∣tie, nor shewing otherwayes howe to recompence the same, hath boldned me at this time to commende this my simple and rude worke vnto your Lordship, not according vnto your estate and honour, the which had bene more mete & requisite to haue had the finishing of some better worke. Therfore beseching your honor to wey and accept this mine intent & good will here∣in, which thing so doing, I shall thinke my selfe not onely happie, but it shall encourage me the more hereafter to take in hande the like or better worke. Thus I beseech the al∣mightie God and creator, to en∣crease your prosperous ho∣nour, with long lyfe in health. FINIS.
To the Reader. GEntle reader thou shalt vnderstande, I haue taken out of diuerse Authors this simple worke, into our Englishe tongue, praying thee for to accept it in good part: in so doyng thou shalt bolden me to trauail further therin: & thus shew∣ing my good will in declaring of diuers wayes of planting and graffing, & how in the meetest times of the yeare, with shewing of diuers commodities and secretes herein, howe to set or plant with the roote, and without the roote. Howe to sow or set Pepines or curnelles, with the ordering thereof. Also howe to clense your graffes and cions, howe to helpe barren and sicke trees, howe to kill wor∣mes and vermin, and to preserue and keepe fruit: how to plant and proyne your Vines, and to ga∣ther and presse your grape: how to clense & mosse your trees, how to make your Syder and Perry, howe to set, choose, order and kepe Hoppes, with many other secrete practises, which shall appeere in the table following, that euery person may ea∣sily perceyue in these our dayes more largely of the art of planting and graffing than heretofore hath bene shewed. Which thing is not an exercise only to the minde, but likewise a great profit ma∣ny wayes, with maintenaunce of health vnto the bodie. Therefore spare not the bodie to shewe so great goodnesse therevnto, & also to the common wealth. In these dayes (among the rest) ye may see many, whiche be of the base and abiect sort of
the common wealth, as those which wil not stick to say. Fie on thee slaue, what thing is now coun∣ted more filthy in these days (amōg faire persona∣ges) than labooring of the earth which we must al liue by. Wel, these be dainty persons: yet thervn∣to, what thing is more beautifull to the eye, more profitable to the purse, or more healthful vnto the body? & herein to put away all nourishing of vice and idlenesse, it is easie to recite infinite & many worthy Lordes and Gentlemen, which haue had a greate care to followe the example of others. Wherefore gentle Reader, let vs nowe leaue of from al wanton games and idle pastimes, and be no more as children whiche seeke but their owne gaine and pleasure, let vs therfore seeke one of vs for another in all good woorkes for the common wealth, whereby those that doe come after vs may so enioye our workes and trauell herein, as we haue done of our predecessours, that therein God may be glorified, praysed and honored in all our workes of planting and graf∣fing: and we therefore maye be thankefull, from age to age, during this mor∣tall lyfe. Amen.
The Table of all the principall thinges contayned in this booke, which ye shall hereafter finde by number & leafe. Of the seauen Chapters following. The first Chapter treateth of the setting of curnelles, of Ap∣ple trees, Plum trees, Peare trees, and Seruice trees. 1 HOw to choose your Pepins at the first pressing. 1 How to vse the earth to sowe your Pepynes on. 2 How to sée vnto pultrye for marring your beddes, and How to wéede or clense your beddes or quarters. 2 How to plucke vp the wylde cyons. 3 The seconde Chapter treateth, how to set your wilde trees come of Pepynes, when they be first plucked vp. 3 HOw to dung your wilde trées come of Pepines. 3 How to cut the principall rootes in setting againe. 3 How to set your trées in ranke being yung. 4 How to make a space from one ranke to another. 4 How to water your plantes being drye. 4 How in remoouing your trées, to plant them againe. 5 The best time for to remooue. 5 Of negligence and forgetfulnesse. 5 Not so good to graffe the Seruice trée, as to set him. 6 Some trées without graffing haue good fruite, and other some being graffed, haue but yll fruite. 6 For to augment and multiply your trées. 6 The maner to chaunge the fruite of the Pepin trée. 7 How to make good Cyder. 7 To make an Orcharde in fewe yeares. 7 The thirde Chapter is, of the setting of trees which come of Nuttes 8 HOw to set trées that doe come of Nuttes, and the tyme to plant or set them. 8
For to set them in the spring time. 8 Of the dung and déepe digging thereof. 9 Of Nuttes and stones lyke the trées they come of. 9 Of planting the sayde Nuttes. 9 Why fruite shall not haue so good sauour. 8 To set the Pine trée. 10. To set Cherry trées. 10 Trées of Bastarde and wylde Nuttes. 10 To set Filbardes and Hasell wandes. 10 To set Damsons and Plum trées. 10 To graffe cyons of Plums, on the lyke. 11 To set all sortes of Cherry trées. 11 How to order Plum trées, and Cherry trées. 11 How to graffe Plum trées, and Cherry trées. 11 How to proyne or cut trées. 12 How to clense and dresse the rootes of trées. 12 To helpe the stocke, being greater than the graffes. 13 The Remedy when a bough is broken. 13 How to enlarge the hole about the rootes. 14 To set small staues to stay your cyons. 14 What trées to proyne. 15 Why the sowre Cherrye dureth not so long as the great healme Cherry. 15 To graffe one great Cherry with a nother. 16 Of déepe setting or shallowe. 16 ¶The fourth Chapter sheweth how to set other trees, of great cyons prickt in the earth without rootes, wyth the proyning of lesser Cyons. TRées taking roote prickt of braunches. 16 How to set them. 16 How to binde them that be weake. 17 How to digge the earth to set them in. 17 Of Cyons without rootes. 18 To plant the Figge trée. 18 How to set Quinces. 18
The way to set Mulbery trees. 18. A Nutte therof. 19. The time to cut cyons. 19 To set bushe trée, as Gooseberies and small reysons. 19 Of setting Oziars. 19 The fyft Chapter treateth of foure ma∣ner of graffings. 19 OF diuers wayes of graffing. 20 The first way of graffing all sortes of trées. 20 To graffe Apple trées. Peare trées, Quince trées, and Medler trées. 20 The graffing of great Cherries. 20 To graffe Medlers on other Medlers. 20 Of diuers kinde of graffes on one trée. 21 The graffing of the Figge trée. 21 Of graffing the great Abricotes. 22 Of graffing the Seruice trée. 22 The setting of the Seruice trée. 22 Of trées harde to graffe in the shielde. 22 How to sée to trées charged with fruite. 22 Of trées for to choose your graffes on. 23 The cions on the East part are best. 23 To choose your trée for graffes. 23 To kepe graffes a long time. 23 To kepe graffes ere they budde. 23 How ye ought to beginne to graffe. 24 When is good graffing the wilde stockes. 24 To marke if the trée be forwarde or not. 24 When ye graffe, what to be furnished withall. 24 Of graffes not prospering the first yeare. 25 For to graffe well & sure. 25. How to trim your graffes. 25 How to cut graffes, for Cherries and Plums. 26 A note of your incision. 26 For to take héede in graffing ye rayse not the barke. 26 How to cut your stocke. 27
If your wilde stocke be great or slender. 27 Trées as great as ones arme. 27 Of great trées as bigge as ones legge. 27 The graffes being pinched in the stockes. 28 How ye ought to cleaue your stockes. 28 To graffe the braunches of great trées. 28 How to cut great olde braunches. 28 How to binde your graffes against windes. 28 To set many graffes in one cleft. 29 To saue your stocke before ye cleaue him. 29 If the stocke cleaue to much, or the barke open. 29 How graffes neuer lightly take. 29 How to set graffes right in the stocke. 30 Of setting in of the graffes. 30. A note of the same. 30 How to draw forth the wedge. 30 How to couer your cliftes on the heade. 31 How ye ought to sée well to the binding of your graffes. 31 How ye ought to temper your clay. 31 How to bush your graffe heads. 31 The seconde way to graffe hye braunches. 32 The thirde maner of graffing, is betwixt the barke and the trée. 33 Howe to dresse the heade, to place your graffes betwixt the barke and the trée. 33 How to couer the heade of your stocke. 34 The maner of graffing in the shielde. 34 To graffe in Sommer, so long as the trées be leaued. 34 Of bigge Cions are best to graffe. 34 How to take of the shielde. 35 How to know if your scutchion or shielde be good or bad. 35 How to graffe on yoong trées. 36 How to set or place your shielde. 36 How to rayse vp the barke, to set your shielde on. 36 How to binde on your shielde. 37 On a trée ye may graffe two or thrée shieldes. 37 Of the time to vnbinde your shielde. 37
How to cut the braunckes, graft on the trées. 37 The sixt Chapter is of transplanting, or altering of trees. 38 THe soner ye trāsplāt or set them it shal be the better. 38 To plant or set towardes the sowth. 39 How to cutte the braunches before ye set. 39 Apple trées commonly must be disbraunched afore ye sette them againe. 39 All wilde stockes must be disbraunched. 40 What trées doe loue the Sunne, and what trées the olde ayre. 40 Of many sortes and maners of trées. 40 How to plant or set trées at large. 41 Howe ye ought to enlarge the holes, when ye plant your trées. 43 Of dung and good earth for your trées. 43 If wormes be in the earth at your rootes of trées. 44 To digge well the earth about the rootes. 44 The nature of places. 44 Of good earth. 44 With what ye ought to binde your trées. 45 The .vij. Chapter is of medicening and keeping the trees. when they are planted and set. THe first counsell is, when your trées be but plantes (in drye weather) they must be watered. 45 With what dung ye ought to dung your trées. 45 When ye ought (in Sommer) to vncouer your trées. 46 When to cut or proyne your trées. 46 How to cut great braunches, and when. 46 How to leaue your great braunches cut. 47 Of the trées hauing great braunches: 47 Of the barrennesse of trées, of cutting yll braunches and vncouering the rootes. 47
Of trées which ye must breake, or plucke vp the rootes. 48 What doth make a good Nutte. 48 Trées eaten & destroyed with cattell, to be graft againe. 48 How wilde stockes ought not hastily to be remooued. 49 When to cut naughty cions from the heade. 49 How sometime to cut principall members. 49 How to guide and gouerne the sayde trées. 49 A kinde of sickenesse in trées. 50 Trées which haue wormes in the barke. 50 Of snayles, antes and wormes that marre trées. 50 How to take those straunge créeping wormes. 51 A note of yll ayres and weathers. 52 To defende the Caterpiller. 53 ¶ Here followeth the table of Graffing straunge and subtile wayes in vsing of fruites and trees. 54 TO graffe one vyne vpon another. 54 To helpe a trée to long without fruite. 54 To haue Peaches two monethes afore others. 55 To haue Damsons vnto Alhallowtide. 55 To make Medlers, Cheries and Peaches, in eating, to fast lyke spyce. 55 To make a Muscadell taste. 55 To haue Apples & Peares to come without blossoming. 56 To haue Apples and Chestnuttes rathe, and long on the frées to remayne. 56 To haue good Cheries, vnto Alhallowtide. 56 To haue rath Medlers two Monethes before others. 56 To haue Peares timely. 56 To haue Misples and Medlers without stones. 57 To haue other Peares betimes. 57 To haue Mulberies rype very sone, and dure long. 57 To kéepe Peares a yeare. 57 To haue fruite tast halfe an Apple, and halfe a Peare. 57 Tymes of graffing. 58 To destroy Pysmiers or Antes, about the trée. 58 Another way for the same. 58
To haue Nuttes, Plummes, and Almondes, greater and fayrer than others. 59 To make an Oke (or other trée) as gréene in Winter, as in Sommer. 59 The time of planting without rootes, and with rootes. 59 To kéepe fruite from the frost. 59 The chosen dayes to plant and graffe. 60 To haue gréene roses all the yeare. 60 To kéepe Raysons or Grapes good, a yeare long. 60 To make fruite laxatiue from the trée. 60 A note for all plantes and graffes. 61 Here followeth the Table of certayne Dutch practises.62 To graffe one Vine on an other. 62 To helpe trées that doe not prosper. 72 To graffe Apples, to last on the trée to Allhalowtide. 74 To make Cherryes and Peaches smell lyke spyce. 74 To graffe that an apple shalbe halfe swéete & halfe soure. 75 To graffe the Rose on the holly trée. 75 Chosen dayes to graffe in, and to choose cyons. 60 How to gather your cyons. 61 Of wormes in the trées or fruite. 64 The setting of stones, and the ordering thereof. 64 How to gather Gumme of any trée. 65 To set a hole Apple. 65. The setting of Almondes. 65 The watering of Pepines. 66. To plant or set Vines. 66 To set or plant the Cherry trée. 66 To kéepe Cherries good, a yeare. 67 Remedie against Pismaires and Antes. 67 The setting of Chestnutes. 68 To make all stone fruite taste, as ye shall deuise good. 68 The graffing of the Medler or Misple. 69 The bearing of fruite of the Figge trée. 69 The planting the Mulbery and Figge trée. 69
The trées that beare bitter fruite. 70 To helpe barren trées. 70 Another way for the same. 70 To kéepe fruite after they be gathered. 71 The Mulbery trée lyking his earth. 71 Of Mosse on your trées. 71 To kéepe Nuttes long. 72 To cut or proyne the Peache trée. 72 To colour Peach stones. 73 If Peach trées be troubled with wormes. 73 To haue the Peache without stones. 73 Another way for the same. 74 The kéeping of Plums. 75 The altering of Peares. 76 The making of Cyder and Pirry. 76 To helpe frosen Apples. 76 To make Apples fall from the trée. 77 To cherrish Apple trées. 77 To make an Apple grow in a glasse. 77 To graffe many sortes of Apples on one trée. 78 To colour Apples, what colour ye list. 78 To graffe, to haue Apples without core. 79 The ordering of the Wyne and grape. 79 To haue Grapes without stones. 83 To make the Vyne to bring a grape to tast lyke Clarret Wyne. 83 The gathering of your grapes. 83 To know if your Grape be rype or not. 84 To prooue or taste wyne. 84 Of the ordering, setting, and planting of Hops 85 To choose your Hop. 86 Howe to sowe the séedes. 86 Of the setting of poles. 87 Howe to proyne the Hoppe. 87 How to gather your Hoppes. 87
What poles are best for your purpose. 88 How to order and dresse your hilles. 88 Of the best grounde for your Hoppe. 88 A note of all the reast aboue sayde. 89 And howe to packe and kéepe your Hoppes. 89 Prayses be to God on hye, In all our vvorldly planting: And let vs thanke the Romaines also, For the Art of Graffing. FINIS.
An Exhortation to the Planter and Graffer. ALwayes before ye do intend to plant or graffe, it shal be meete to haue good experience in thinges meete for thys Arte, as in knowing the Natures of all trees and fruites, and the diffe∣rences of Clymates, which be contrarie in euery land: also to vnderstand the East and West win∣des, with aspectes and Starres, to the ende yee maye beginne nothinge that the winde or rayne may oppresse, that your labour be not lost, and to marke also and consider the disposition of the ele∣ments that present yeare, for all yeares be not of lyke operation, nor yet after one sorte, the Som∣mer and Winter doe not beare one face on the earth, nor the spring time alwayes rayny, or Au∣tumne alwaies moyst: of this none haue vnder∣standing, without a good and liuely marking spi∣rit, fewe or none (without learning) may discerne of the varieties & qualities of the earth, & what he doth aske or refuse. Therefore it shall be good to haue vnderstanding of the ground where ye do plant, either Orchard or gardē with fruite, first it behooueth to make a sure defēce, to ye end, that not only rude persons and children may be kept out, but all kinde of hurtfull cattell indomaging your plantes or trees, as Oxen, kyne, Calues, Horse, Hogges & shepe, as the rubbing of Sheepe doth greatly burne the sappe, and often doth kyll yong
trees and plantes, and where they are broken or brused with cattel, it is doubtful to grow after. It shal be good also, to set, plant or graffe trees all of lyke nature and strength togither, that the great and hye trees, may not ouercome the lowe and weake, for when they be not lyke of heyght, they growe, nor rype not your fruit so wel at one time but the one before the other: that earth whiche is good for Vynes, is good also for other fruite. Ye must digge your holes a yeare before ye plant that the earth may be better seasoned, mortifyed and waxe tender, both by rayne in Winter, and heate in Sommer, that therby your plants may take roote the sooner, if ye will make your holes, and plant both in a yeare, at the least, ye ought to make your holes two monethes before ye plant, and as soone as they be made, then it shal be good to burne of strawe or such lyke therin, to make your grounde warme: the further ye make them asunder, the better your trees shall beare: make your holes lyke vnto a fornayce, that is, more straight in the mouth than beneath, whereby the rootes may haue the more roome, and by straight∣nesse of the mouth, the lesse raine or colde shal en∣ter by in Winter, and also lesse heate to the roote in Sōmer. Loke also that the earth ye put to the rootes, be neyther wet, nor layde in water: they doe commonly leaue a good space betwixt euery tree, for the hanging bowes, for being nyghe to∣gyther, yee cannot set rootes, nor sowe nothing so well vnder your trees, nor they wyll not beare
fruite so wel: some loweth fourtie foote, some thir∣tie betweene euery tree: your plantes ought to be greater than the handle of a shouell, and the lesser the better: see they be straight, without knot∣tes or knobbes, hauing a long straight graine or barke, which shall the sooner be apt to take graf∣fes, and when ye set braunches or boughes of old trees, choose the yongest and straytest braunche therof, and those trees which haue borne yearely good fruite before, take of those which be on the sunny side, soner than those that grow in the court or shadowe, and when ye take vppe or alter your plantes, ye shal note to what winds your plant is subiect, and so let them be sette agayne, but those which haue growne in dry groundes, let them be set in moyst ground: your plantes ought to be cut of three foote long. If ye will sette two or three plantes togither in a hole, ye must take heede the roote of one touche not one another, for then the one will perishe and rot the other, or dye by wor∣mes or other varmen, and when ye haue placed your plantes in the earth, it shall be good to strike downe to the bottō of euery hole two short stakes as great as your arme, on either side your hole one, & let thē appeare but a little aboue the earth that ye may (therby in Sommer) giue water vn∣to the rootes if neede be. Your yong plantes, and rooted trees are commonly set in Autumme, from the first vnto the .xv. of October, yet some opini∣on is, better after Alhollowtide vnto Christ∣masse, than in the spring, bycause the earth wyll
dry to soone after, and also to set plantes wythout roote after Michaelmasse, that they may the bet∣ter mollifie and gather roote against the spring, wherof ye shall finde hereafter more at large. Thus much haue I thought meete to de∣clare vnto the Planter nd Graf∣fers, whereby they may the better auoyde the occa∣sion and daungers of planting and graffing, which may come oftentymes through ignoraunce. 1572.
Staffe with vice aboue, to set in what instrument yee lyst, to clense your mosse trees. Graffing Chesill Avvin∣ble byt. A Chesill A ssing knife. A proyning knife A Vine knyfe A graffing knyfe with each, a ring or butten to hang at their girdell. Chesill heade. A great Knyfe A Hammer with a File & Percer. A Mallet. A Sawe.
¶The Arte of Planting and graffing. The first Chapter. ¶This chapter treateth of the setting of Curnels, yong Plum trees and Peare trees, of Damsons and Seruice trees. FOr to make young trees of the Pe∣pins, of Apples, Peares, Plummes & Ser∣uice. First ye must prepare & make a great bedde or quarter well replenished, blend or mixt with good fat earth, and placed well in the Sunne, and to be well laboured & digged a good time before you do occupie it: and if ye can by any meanes, let it be digged very déepe the Winter before, in blending or mixing it well togither with good fat earth, or else to be mixed almost the halfe with good dong: and so let it rot and ripe togither with the earth. And sée alwaies that plot be cleane vnto the pressyng of Syder, that no wilde cions or plantes do spring or grow thereon. Then in the moneth of September, December, or thereabouts, take of the pepins or pomes of the saide fruite at the first pressing out of your licour, before the Curnels be marred or brused: then take out of them, and rub a few at once in a cloth, and dry them betwixt your handes, and take so many therof as you shall thinke good: then make your bed square, faire and plaine, and sowe your séedes thereon, then take and couer them with a rake lightly, or with earth, not puttyng to muche earth vpon them. This done, deuide your beddes into qua∣drantes or squares of foure foote brode or thereabout, that when ye list ye may cleanse them from the one side to the other, without treading thereon. Then shal ye couer your séedes or pepins with fine earth, so siftying all ouer them, that then they may take the déeper and surer roote, and
wyll kepe them the better in winter folowing, and if ye list ye may rake them a litle all ouer: so that ye raise not your Pepins aboue the earth. Another way howe one may take the Pepins at the first comming of the licour or pressing. WHich is: ye shal chose the greatest and fairest curnels or pepins, and take them forth at the first brusing of your frute, thē drye them with a cloth, and kepe them all the winter vntill S. Andrewes tide: then a little after sowe them in good earth, as thynne as ye do sowe Peason, and then rake them ouer as the other. How one ought to vse his earth to sowe Pepins without dunging. BVT in this maner of doing (in the spring) it is not so great néede for to rayse or digge the earth so déepe as that which is dunged in Winter: but to deuide your quarters, in couering your pepins not so much with earth as those which be sowne with good dung, but when ye haue sowne them, a litle rake them all ouer. How ye ought to take heede of pultrie for scraping of your beddes or quarters. AS soone after as your Pepins be sowne vpon your beddes or quarters, let this be done, one way or other, that is, take good héede that your hennes do not scrape your beddes or quarters, therfore sticke them all ouer light and thinne with bowes, or thrones, and take good héede also to swine, and other cattell. How to weede or cleanse your beddes and quarters. ANd when the Winter is past and gone, and that ye sée your Pepins rise and growe: so let them encrease the space of one yere, but sée to cleanse wéedes, or other things which may hurt them, as ye shal sée cause. And in the Som∣mer when it shal waxe dry, water them hardely in the eue∣nings.
How one ought to plucke vp the wilde cions. AND when these wilde cions shall be great, as of the growth of one yere, ye must then plucke them vp all in the winter following, before they doe beginne to spring a∣gaine. Then shall ye set them and make of them a wylde Orcharde as followeth. The seconde Chapter treateth howe one shall set againe the small wilde trees, which come of Pepins, when they be first pluckt vp. FOr the bastarde or little wilde trees incontinent assoone as they be pluckte vp, ye must haue of other good earth well trim∣med and dunged & to be well in the Sunne, and wel prepared and drest, as it is sayde in the other part before of the Pepins. How to dung your bastard or wilde young trees which come of Pepins. ABout Aduent before Christmas, ye must digge & dung well the place where as ye wyll set them, and make your square of earth euen and plaine, so large as ye shall thinke good, then set your wilde trées so far one frō another as ye thinke mete to be graft, so that thei may be set in euē rankes and in good order, that when néede shall require, ye may remooue or renue any of them or any part thereof. How ye ought in replanting or setting to cut of in the middes the principall great rootes. IN what part so euer ye doe set any trées, ye must cut of the great maister roote, within a foote of the stocke, and all other bigge rootes, so that ye leaue a foote long thereof, and so let them be set, and make your rankes crosse wyse one from another halfe a foote, or thereabouts, and ye must also sée that there be of good dung more déepe and lower than ye do set your trées, to comfort the sayd rootes withall.
¶Howe ye ought to set your trees in ranke. YE shal set your small yong trées in rankes, half a large foote one from another: and let them be couered as ye do set them, with good fat earth all ouer the rootes. ¶How to make the space from one ranke to another. YE shall leaue betwene your rankes, from one ranke to another, one foote, or there aboutes, so that ye maye passe betwéene euery ranke for to cleanse them yf neede require, and also for to graffe any part or parcell thereof when time shalbe méete. But ye must note, in making thus your rankes, ye shall make so many allies as rankes. And if ye thinke it not good to make so many allies, then deuide those into quarters of fiue foote broade or thereabouts, and make or set foure rankes (in eche quarter of the same) one foote from another, as ye vse to set great Cabbage. And as soone after as ye haue set them in rankes and in good order as is aforesaide, then shall ye cut of all the sets euen by the grounde. But in thus doing sée that ye do not plucke vp or loose the erth which is about them: or if ye will, ye may cut them before ye do set them in rankes. If ye do so, sée that ye set them in such good order and euen with the erth, as is aforesayde. And it shal suffice also to make your rankes as ye shal sée cause. And loke that ye furnish the earth al ouer with good dung, without mingling of it in the earth, nor yet to couer the sayd plantes withal, but strowed betwixt: and ye must also loke well to the cleansing of wéedes, grasse, or other such things which will be a hurt to the growth of the plantes. ¶How to water plantes when they waxe drie. IT shall be good to water them when the time is drye: in the first yeare. Then when they haue put foorth of newe cions, leaue no more growing but that cion which is the principall and fayrest, vpon euery stocke one: all the other cut of harde by the stocke: and euer as there do grow small twigs about the stocke, ye shall (in the moneth of March &
Aprill) cut them al of hard by the stock. And if ye then stick by euery plant a prety wand, and so binde them with Wil∣lowe bark, brier, or osiers, it shal profit them much in their growth. Then after fiue or sixe yeares growth, when they be so bigge as your finger, or thereaboutes, ye may then remoue any of them whereas ye wil haue them grow and remaine. ¶How one ought to remoue trees, and to plant them againe. THe maner how ye ought to remoue trées, is shewed in the sixt Chapter folowyng: then aboute two or thrée yeares after their remouing, ye shall graffe them, for then they wyll be the better rooted. As for the others which ye leaue still in rankes, ye may also graffe them where as they stand, as ye shal see cause good. When ye haue plucked vp the fairest to plant in other places (as is aforesayde) al∣so the maner howe to graffe them, is shewed in the fift Chapter folowing. But after they shall be so graft, in what place so euer it be, ye shall not remoue or set them in other places againe, vntil the graffes be wel closed vpon the head of the wilde stocke. ¶VVhen the best time is to replant or remooue. WHen the hed of the stock shall be all ouerclosed about the graffes, then ye may when ye wyll, transplant and remoue them (at a due time) where they shal con∣tinue. For with often remouing ye shal do them great hurt in their rootes, and be in daunger to make them die. ¶Of negligence and forgetfulnesse. IF peraduenture ye forget (through negligence) and haue let smal cions two or thrée yeares grow about the rootes of your stockes vnplucked vp, then if ye haue so done, ye may well plucke them vp and set them in rankes, as the o∣ther of the pepins. But ye must set the ranks more larger, that they may be remoued without hurting of eche others
rootes: and cut of all the small twigs aboue as néede shal re∣quire, though they be set or graffed. Order them also in all things as those small cions of a yeres growth. It is not so conuenient to graffe the Seruice tree, as to set him. WHere as ye shal see yong Seruice trées, it shalbe most profite in setting them, for if ye do graffe them, I be∣leue ye shall winne nothing thereby. The best is onely to plucke vp the yung bastard trées when they are as great as a good walking staffe: then proyne or cut of their branches and cary them to set whereas they may be no more remo∣ued: and they shall profit more in setting than graffing. Some trees without graffing bring foorth good fruite, and some other being graffed be better to make Syder of. IT is here to be marked that though the Pepins be sowen of the pomes of Peares and good Apples: yet ye shal finde that some of them doe loue the trée wherof they came: and those be right, which haue also a smooth barke, and as faire as those which be graffed: the which if ye plant or set them thus growing from the master roote without graffing, thei shal bring as good fruite, euen like vnto the Pepin wherof he first came. But there be other newe sortes commonly good to eate, which be as good to make Syder of, as those which shalbe graffed for that purpose. When you list to augment and multiplie your trees. AFter this sort ye may multiplie them, being of diuers sortes and diuersities, as of Peares or Apples, or such like. Notwithstanding, whensoeuer shall finde a good trée thus come of the Pepin, as is aforesayd, so shal ye vse him. But if ye will augment trées of themselues, ye must take graffes, and so graffe them.
Of the manor and chaunging of the fruite of the Pepin tree. WHen so euer ye doe replant or chaunge your Pepin trées from place to place, in so remoouyng often the stocke, the frute therof shal also change: but the frute which doth come of graffing, doth alwayes kepe the forme & na∣ture of the trée whereof he is taken: for as I haue sayde, as often as the Pepin trées be remooued to a better grounde, the frute thereof shall be so much amended. How one ought to make good Syder. HEre is to be noted if ye will make good Syder, of what frute so euer it be, beyng Peares or Apples, but speci∣ally of good Apples, and wilde frute, haue alwaies a regard vnto the riping thereof, so gathered drye, then put them in dry places, on bordes, in heapes, couered with drye strawe, and whensoeuer ye will make Syder thereof, choose out all those which are blacke brused, and rotten apples, & throwe them away, then take and vse the rest for Syder: But here to giue you vnderstandyng, do not as they do in the coun∣trey of Mens, which doe put their frute gathered, into the middes of their garden, in the raine and miselings, vpon the bare earth, whiche will make them to léese their force and vertue, and doth make them also withered and tough, and lyghtly a man shall neuer make good Syder that shall come to any purpose or good profite thereof. To make an Orchard in fewe yeares. SOme doe take yung straight slippes, whiche doe growe from the rootes, or of the sides of the Appletrées, about Michaelmasse, and doe so plant or set them (with Otes) in good grounde, where as they shall not be remoued, and so graffe (beyng well rooted) thereon. Other some doe take and set them in the spring time (after Christmas) in lyke∣wyse, and do graffe thereon when they be well rooted: and both wayes do spring well.
And this maner of way is counted to haue an Orchard the sonest. But these trées will not endure past twentie or thir∣tie yeares. The thirde Chapter is of setting trees of Nuttes. ¶How one ought to set trees which come of Nuttes. FOr to set trees which come of Nuttes: when ye haue eaten the fruite, loke that ye kepe the stones and curnels thereof, then let them be dried in the winde, without the vehe∣mencie of the sunne, so reserue them in a boxe, and vse them as before. ¶Of the time when ye ought to plant or set them. YE shall plant or set them in the beginning of Winter, or afore Michaelmasse, whereby they may the sooner spring out of the earth. But this maner of settyng is daungerous: for the winter then commyng in, and they beyng yong and tender in commyng vp, the colde will kill them. Therefore it shall be best to stay and reserue them til after Winter. And then before ye do set them, ye shal soke or stiepe them in milke, or in milke and water, so long tyll they do stinke therein: then shall ye dry them and set them in good earth in the chaunge or increase of the Moone, with the small ende vpwarde, foure fingers déepe, then put some sticke thereby, to marke the place. For to set them in the Spring time. IF ye will plant or set your Nuttes in the Spring time, where ye wil haue them still to remaine and not to be re∣moued, the best and most easy way is, to set in euery such place (as ye thinke good) thrée or foure Nuts nigh togither, and when they do al spring vp, leaue none standing but the fairest.
Of the donging and deepe digging thereof. ALso where as ye shall thinke good, ye may plante or set all your nuttes in one square or quarter togithers, in good earth and donged in suche place and tyme, as they vse to plant. But sée that it be well donged, and also digged good and déepe, and to be well meddled with good dong throughout, then set your nuttes thrée fingers déepe in the earth, and halfe a foote one from another: ye shall water them often in the Sommer, when there is dry wea∣ther, and sée to wéede them, and digge it as ye shall sée néede. Of nuttes and stones like to the trees they came of. IT is here to be noted, that certayne kindes of nuttes, and curnelles which doe loue the trées, wherof the fruite is like vnto the trée they came of, when they be planted in good grounde, and set well in the sunne, which be: the wal∣nutte, chestnuttes, all kinde of peches, figges, almondes, and abrycotes, all these do loue the trées they came of. Of the planting the sayde nuttes in good earth and in the Sunne. AL the sayde trées do bring as good frute of the sayde Nuttes, if they be well planted, and set in good earth, and well in the Sunne, as the frute and trées they first came of. Why frute shall not haue so good sauour. FOr if ye plant good nuttes, good peaches, or figges in a garden full of shadowe, the which hath afore loued the Sunne, as the vine doth, for lacke thereof, their frute shall not haue so good sauour, although it be all of one frute: and likewise so it is with all other fruite and trées, for the goodnesse of the earth, and the faire Sunne, doth preserue them much.
¶To set the pine tree. FOR to set the Pyne trée, ye must set or plante them of Nuttes, in Marche, or about the shewte of the sappe, not lightly after, ye must also set them where they may not be remooued after, in holes well digged, and well dunged not to be transplanted or remooued againe, for very hardly they will shewte foorth cions, being remooued, specially if ye hurt the maister roote thereof. ¶For to set Cherry trees. FOr to set sowre Cheries which doe grow commonly in Gardens, ye shall vnderstande they may well growe of stones, but better it shall be to take of the small cions which doe come from the great rootes: then plant them, and sooner shall they grow than the stones, and those cions must be set when they are small, yong and tender: as of two, or thrée yeares groth, for when they are great, they profite not so well: and when ye set them, ye must sée to cut of all the bowes. ¶Trees of bastard and wilde Nuttes. THere be other sortes of Nuttes, although they be well set in good grounde, and also in the sunne, yet wyll they not bring halfe so good fruite as the other, nor commonly lyke vnto those nuttes they came of, but to be a bastarde wilde sowre fruite, which is the Fylbert, small Nuts, of Plums, of Cheries, & the great Abricots: therfore if ye will haue them good fruite, ye must set them in maner and forme following. ¶How to set Filberdes or Hasell trees. FOr to set Filberdes or Hasels, and to haue them good, take the small wandes that growe out from the roote of the Filbard or hasell trée, (with short beary twigges) and set them, and they shall bring as good fruite as the trée they came off: it shall not be néedefull to proyne, or cut of the branches therof when ye set them, if they be not great but those that ye doe set, let them be but of two or thrée yeares growth, and if ye shal sée those cions which ye haue
planted, not to be fayre and good, or doe growe and pros∣per not well, then (in the spring time) cut them of harde by the roote, that other small cyons may growe therof. ¶To set Damsons or Plum trees. IN setting damsons or plum trées, which fruit ye would haue lyke to the trées they came off: if the sayde trées be not graft before, ye shall take onely the cyons that growe from the roote (of the olde stock) which groweth wyth small twigges, and plant or set them: and their fruite shalbe like vnto the trées they were taken off. ¶To take plum graffes, and to graffe them on other plum trees. ANd if your Plum trées be graft already, and haue the lyke fruite that you desire, ye may take your graffes therof, and graffe them on your Plum trées, and the fruite that shall come thereof, shalbe as good as the fruite of the cion which is taken from the roote, bycause they are much of like effect. ¶To set all sortes of Cheries. TO set all sortes of great Cheries, and others: ye must haue the graffes of the same trées, and graffe them on other Cherrye trées, although they be of a sower fruite, and when they are so graft, they wil be as good as the frute of the trée whereof the graffe was taken: for the stones are good, but to set to make wilde cyons, or plantes, to graffe on. ¶The maner how one may order both plum trees, and cherry trees. FOR so much as these are two kinde of trées, that is, to vnderstande, the Cherry, and the Plum trée, for when they be so grafte, their rootes be not so good, nor so frée as the branches aboue, wherfore the cions that do come fro the rootes, shall not make so good and franke trées of. It is therefore to be vnderstoode, how the maner and sort is to make franke trées, that may put forth good cions in time to come, which is: when they be great and good, then if ye will
take those cions or yong springes from the rootes, ye may make good trées thereof, and then it shal not néede to graffe them any more after: but to augment one by the other, as ye do the cions from the roote of the nutte, as is aforesayde, and ye shall do as followeth. How to graffe Plum trees and Cherry trees. YE may well graffe Plum trées, & great Cherry trées, in such good order as ye list to haue them, and as here∣after shall be declared in the fifth Chapter followyng, for these woulde be graffed while they are yong and small, and also graft in the grounde, for thereby one maye dresse and trim them the better, and put but one graffe in eche stocke of the same. Cleaue not the heart, but a little on the one side, nor yet déepe, or long open. How ye must proyne, or cut your trees. FOr when your graffes be well taken on the stocke, and that the graffes do put foorth faire and long, about one yeres growth, ye must proyne, or cut the braunche of commonly in winter, (when they proyne their vines) a foote lower, to make them spred the better: then shall ye meddle all thorowe with good fat earth, the which will drawe the better to the place which ye haue so proyned or cut. The conuenientest way to clense and proyne, or dresse the rootes of trees. ANd for the better clensing and proyning trées beneth, is thus: ye shall take away all the wéedes, and grasse about the rootes, then shall ye digge them so rounde a∣bout, as ye woulde séeme to plucke them vp, and shal make them halfe bare, then shall ye enlarge the earth about the rootes, and where as ye shall sée them grow faire and long, place or couche them in the sayde hole and earth againe, then shall ye put the cut ende of the trée where he is graft: somewhat more lower than his rootes were, whereby his
cions so graft, shall spring so much the better. When the stocke is greater than the graffes. WHen as the trée waxeth or swelleth greater beneath the graffing, than aboue: then shal ye cleue the rootes beneath, and wreath them round and so couer them again. But sée ye breake no roote thereof, so wil he come to perfec∣tion. But most men doe vse this way: if the stocke waxe greater than the graffes, they do slyt downe the barke of the graffes aboue, in two or thrée partes, or as they shall sée cause thereof, and so likewise, if the graffes waxe greater aboue than the stocke, ye shall slitte downe the stocke accor∣dingly, with the edge of a sharpe knife. This may well be done at any time in Marche, April and Maye, in the cresce of the Moone, and not lightly after. The remedie when any bough or member of a tree is broken. IF ye shal chaunce to haue boughes or members of trées broken, the best remedy shall be, to place those bowes or members right sone againe, (then shall ye comfort the rootes with good newe earth) and bynde fast those broken bowes or members, both aboue and beneath, & so let them remayne vnto another yeare, till they may close and put forth of newe cions. ¶When a member or bough is not broken, how ro proyne them. WHere as yée shall sée vnder or aboue superfluous Bowes: ye may cut or proyne off, (as ye shall sée cause) all such bowes harde by the trée, at a due tyme, in the winter folowing: But leaue all ye principall branches, and whereas any are broken, let them be cut off beneath, or else by the grownd, and cast them away: thus must ye do yearely, or as ye shall sée cause, if ye will kéepe your trées well and fayre.
How one ought to enlarge the hole about the tree rootes. IN proyning your trées if there be many rootes, ye must enlarge them in the hole, and so to wreath them as is a∣foresayde, and to vse them without breaking, then couer them againe with good fat earth, which ye shall mingle in the sayde hole, and it shall be best to be digged all ouer a lit∣tle before, and sée that no branche or roote be left vncoue∣red, and when ye haue thus dressed your trées, if anye roote shall put forth or spring hereafter out of the sayde holes, in growing, ye may so proine them as ye shal sée cause, in let∣ting them so remaine two or thrée yeares after, vnto such time as the sayde graffes be sprong vp and well branched. How to set small staues by to strengthen your cyons. TO auoyde daunger, ye shall sette or pricke small staues about your cions, for feare of breaking, and then after thrée or foure yeares, when they be  raunched: yée maye then set or plant them in good earth, (at the begin∣ning of winter) but sée that ye cut of all their smal branches hard by the stocke, then ye may plant them where ye think good, so as they may remayne. In taking vp trees note. YE may well leaue the maister roote in the hole (when ye digge him vp) if the remooued place be good for hym cutte of the maister rootes by the stubbe, but pare not of all the small rootes, and so plante him, and he shall profyte more thus, than others with all their maister rootes. When as trées be great, they must be disbranched or bowes cut of, before they be set againe, or else they will hardly prosper. If the trées be great, hauing great braunches or bowes, when ye shall digge them vp ye must disbranch them afore ye set them againe, for when trées shalbe thus proined they
shall bring great Cyons from their rootes, which shall be franke and good to replant, or set in other places, and shall haue also good braunches and rootes, so that after it shal not néede to graffe them any more, but shall continue one af∣ter another to be frée and good. ¶How to couche the rootes when they are proyned. IN setting your trées agayne, if ye will dresse the rootes of such as ye haue proyned, or cut of the branches before, ye shall leaue all such small rootes, which growe on the great roote, and ye shall so place those rootes in replanting againe not déepe in the earth, so that they maye soone growe, and put forth cions: which being well vsed, ye may haue fruite so good as the other afore mencioned, being of thrée or foure yeares growth, as afore is declared. ¶What trees to proyne. THis way of proyning is more harder for the greate Cherry (called Healmier) than for the plum trée. Also it is verye requisite and méete for those cyons or trées which be graft on the wilde sowre Cherry trée, to be proyn∣ned also, for diuers and sundry causes. ¶Why the sowre cherry dureth not so long as the healmier or great cherry. THe wilde and sowre cherry, of his owne nature wil not so long time endure, (as the great healme cherry,) ney∣ther can haue sufficient sappe to nourish the graffes, as the great healme cherry which is graft, therfore when ye haue proyned the braunches beneath, and the rootes also, so that ye leaue rootes sufficient to nourishe the trée, then set him. If ye cut not of the vnder rootes, the trée will profite more easier, and also lighter to be knowne when they put forth cyons, from the roote of the same, the which ye may take hereafter.
To graffe one great Cherie vpon another. YE must haue respect vnto the healme Cherrie, which is gratf on the wilde goynire (which is another kinde of grate Cherrie) & whether you do proyne them or not it is not materiall: for they dure a long time. But ye must sée to take away the cions that doe growe from the roote of the wilde goynire, or wilde Plum trée: bicause they are of nature wilde, and doe draw the sap from the sayde trée. ¶Of deepe setting or shalow, TO set your stockes or trées somewhat déeper on the hye groundes than in the valleyes, bycause the sunne (in Sommer) shall not dry the roote: and in the low grounde more shallow, bycause the water in winter shal not dround or annoy the rootes. Some doe marke the stocke in taking it vp, and so to set him againe the same way, bicause he wil not alter his nature: so likewise the graffes in graffing. The fourth Chapter doth shewe howe to set other trees which come of wilde cyons prick∣ked in the earth without rootes: and also of proyning the meaner cyons. Trees taking roote prickt of braunches. THere be certayne which take roote, being pricked of braunches proyned of other trées, which be, the Mulberrie, the Fig trée, the Quince trée, the Seruice trée, the Pome∣granade trée, the Apple trée, the Damson trée and diuers sortes of other Plum trées, as the Plum trée of Paradise. &c. ¶How one ought to set them. FOr to set these sortes of trées, ye must cut off the cions, twigges or boughes, betwixt Alhallowtide and christ∣masse, not lightly after. Ye shal choose them which be as
great as a little staffe or more, and looke whereas ye can finde them fayre, smooth, and straight, and full of sap wyth∣all, growing of yong trées, as of the age of thrée or foure yeares growth or there abouts, and looke that ye take them so from the trée with a brode chysell, that ye breake not, or lose any part of the barke thereof, more than halfe a foote beneath, neyther of one side or other: then proyne or cut of the braunches, and pricke them one foote deepe in the earth, well digged and ordered before. How to binde them that be weake. THose plantes which be slender, ye must proyne or cut of the branches, then binde them to some stake or such like to be set in good earth and well medled with good dung, and also to be well and déepely digged, and to be set in a moyst place, or else to be well watered in Sommer. How one ought to digge the earth for to set them in. AND when that yet woulde set them in the earth, yée must first prepare to digge it, and dung it well thorow out, a large foote déepe in the earth. And whē as ye will set them euery one in his place made (before) with a crowe of yron, and for to make them take roote the better, ye shall put with your plantes, of watered otes, or barely, and so yée shall let them growe the space of thrée or foure yeares, or when they shall be well branched, then ye may remoue thē and if ye breake of the old stubby roote and set them lower, they wil last a long time the more. If some of those plantes do chaunce to put forth cions from the roote, and being so rooted, ye must plucke them vp though they be tender, and set them in other places.
Of Cions without rootes. IF that the sayde plantes haue of Cyons without rootes, but which come from the trée roote beneath, then cut them not off till they be of two or thrée yeares growth, by that tyme, they wyll gather of rootes to be replanted in other places. To plant the Figge tree. THe sayde plantes taken of figge trées graffed, bée the best: ye may likewise take other sortes of figge trées, and graffe one vpon the other, for lyke as vpon the wylde trées doe come the Pepins, euen so the figge, but not so soone to prosper and growe. How to set Quinces. LYkewise the nature of Quinces is to spring, if they be pricked (as aforesayde) in the earth, but sometimes I haue graffed with great difficultie (saith mine author) vpon a whyte throne, and it hath taken, and borne fruite to looke on, fayre, but in tast more weaker than the other. The way to set Mulberies. THere is also another waye to set Mulberies as follo∣weth, which is, if ye do cut in winter certayne great Mulberye bowes, or stockes, asunder in the bodye (wyth a sawe) in troncheous a foote long or more, then yée shall make a great furrowe in good earth, well and déepe, so that ye may couer wel againe your troncheons, in setting them an ende halfe a foote one from another, then couer them a∣gaine, that the earth may be aboue those endes, thrée or foure fingers high, so let them remayne, and water them (in Sommer) if néede be sometimes, and clense them from all hurtfull wéedes and rootes.
Note of the same. THat then within a space of tyme after, the sayde tron∣cheons will put forth Cyons, the which when they bée somewhat sprigged, hauing two or thrée small twigges, then yée maye transplant or remooue them where they list: but leaue your troncheons styll in the earth, for yée wyll put forth many mo cions, the which, if they shall haue scan∣ty of roote, then dung your troncheons within, wyth good earth, and likewyse aboue also, and they shall doe well. The time meete to cut cions. YE shall vnderstande that all trées the which commonly doe put foorth cyons, if ye cut them in winter, they will put forth and spring more aboundantlye, for then they be all good to set or plant. To set bush trees, as Goose bearies, or small Reysons, THere be many other kindes of Bushe trées, which wil grow of cions pricked in the grounde, as the Goose be∣rye trée, the small Rayson trée, the Barbery trée, the Blackthrone trée, these with many others, to be planted in winter, wil grow without rootes: ye must also proyne them and they will take well ynough, so likewise ye may pricke (in Marche) of Oziars in moyst groundes, and they wyll grow, and serue to many purposes for your garden. The fift Chapter treateth of foure maner of Graffings. IT is to be vnderstoode that there be many wayes of graffinges, wherof I haue here onely put foure sortes, the which hée good, both sure and well prooued, and easy to doe, the which ye may vse well in two par∣tes of the yeare & more, for I haue (sayth he) graffed in our house, in euery moneth, except October & nouember, & they
haue taken well which I haue (saith he) in the winter be∣gun to graffe, and in the Sommer graft in the scutchine or shielde according to the time, forward or slow: for certaine trées, speciallye yong fayre cions haue ynough or more of their sappe vnto mid August, than others some had at mid∣sommer before. The first way to graffe all sortes of trees. ANd first of all it is to be noted, that all sortes of franke trées, as also wilde trées of nature, may be graft wyth graffes, and in the scutchin, and both doe wel take, but specially those trées which be of like nature: therefore it is better so to graffe, howbeit, they may well grow and take of other sortes of trées, but certayne trées be not so good, nor will prosper so well in the ende. How to graffe Apple trees, Peare trees, Quince trees, and Medler trees. THey graffe the Peare graffe, on other Peare stockes, & Apple, vpon apple stocke, crabbe or wilding stocke, the Quince and Medler, vpon the white throne, but most com∣monly they vse to graffe one apple vpon another, and both Peares and Quinces, they graffe on Hawthrone and crab stocke. Another kinde of fruite called in Frenche Saulsay, they vsed to graffe on ye willow stocke, the maner therof is hard to do, which I haue not séene, therefore I will let passe at this present. The graffing of great Cherries. THey graffe the great Cherry, called in French Heaul∣miers, vpon the crabbe stocke, and another long Cher∣ry called Guyniers vpon the wilde or sower Cherry trée, and likewise one Cherry vpon another. To graffe Medlers. THe Misple or Medlar, they maye be graffed on other Medlers, or on whyte throne: the Quince is graffed
on the white or blacke throne, and they do prosper well. I haue graffed (sayde hée) the Quince vpon a wilde Peare stocke, and it hath taken and borne fruite well and good, but they will not long endure. I beleeue (sayth he) it was by∣cause that the graffe was not able ynough to draw the sap from ye Peare stocke: some graffe the Medler on ye quince, to be great. And it is to be noted although the stocke, & the graffe be of contrarie natures, yet notwithstanding ney∣ther the graffe nor scutchin, shall take any parte of the na∣ture of the wilde stocke, so graffed, though it be Peare, Ap∣ple, or Quince, which is contrarye against many whiche haue written, that if ye graffe the Medler vpon the quince trée, they shall ve without stones, whiche is abusion and mockery. For I haue (sayth he) proued the contrarie my selfe. Of diuers kindes of Graffes. IT is very true that one may set a trée which shal beare diuers sorts of fruit at once, if he be graffed with diuers kinde of graffes, as the black, whyte, and gréene cherry togithers, and also Apples of other trées, as Apples and Peares togithers, and in the scutchion (ye maye graffe) likewyse of dyuers bindes also, as on Peares, Abricotes, and Plums togither, and of others also. Of the Graffing the Figge. YE may graffe the figge trée vpon the peache trée or a∣bricote, but leaue a branche on the stocke, & that must bée accordinge for the space of yeares, for the one shall change sooner than the other. All trées aboue sayde, do take very well, being graffed one with the other, and I haue not knowne or found of any others, howbeit (saith he) I haue curiously sought & prooued, bicause they say one may graffe on colewoortes, or on Elmes, the which I thinke are but iestes.
Of the great Abricotes. THe great Abricote they graffe in Sommer in the scut∣chion or shielde, in the sap or barke of the lesser Abri∣cote, and be graffed on Peache trées, Figge trées, and principally on Damson or Plum trées, for there they wyll prosper the better. Of the Seruice tree. OF the Seruice trée, they say and write, that they may hardly be graft on other Seruice trées, eyther on apple trées, Peare, or Quince trées, and I beléeue this to be very harde to doe, for I haue tried (saith he) and they woulde not prooue. The setting of Seruices. THerefore it is much better to set them of curnels, as it is aforesayde, as also in the seconde Chapter of the planting of cions, or other great trées, which must be cut in winter, as such as shalbe most méete for that purpose Trees which be very harde to be graffed in the shielde or stutchion. ALl other maner of trées aforesayde, doe take verye well to be graffed wyth Cyons, and also in the shielde, except Abricotes on Peches, Almondes, Percigniers, the Peache trée, doe take hardlye to be graffed, but in the shielde, in Sommer, as shal be more largely hereafter de∣clared. As for the Almonde, Percigniers and Peaches, ye may better set them of curnels and Nuttes, whereby they shall the soner come to perfection to be graffed. How a man ought to consider those trees, which be commonly charged with fruite. YE shall vnderstand, that in the beginning of graffing, ye must consider what sortes of trées doe most charge the stocke with braunche and fruite, or that doe loue the countrey or grounde whereas you intende to plant or graffe them: for better it were to haue abundance of fruit than to haue very fewe or none good.
Of trees where on to choose your graffes. OF suche trées as ye will gather your graffes to graffe with, ye must take them at the endes of the principall braunches, which be also faire and greatest of sap, hauing two or thrée fingers length of the olde wood, with the newe, and those cions which haue of eyes somewhat nigh togi∣ther, are the best, for those which be long or farre one from another, be not so good for to bring fruite. Those Cions towarde the East are best. YE shall vnderstande, that those cions which doe growe on the east, or Orient part of the trée, are best: ye must not lightlye gather of the euill and slender graffes, which growe in the middes of the trées, nor any graffes which doe growe within on the braunches, or that doe springe from the stocke of the trée, nor yet graffes which be on ve∣rye olde trées, for thereby ye shall not lightly profite to any purpose. To choose your tree for graffes. AND when the trées, where as you intende to gather your graffes, be small and yung, as of fyue or sixe yeares growth, do not take of the highest graffe there of, nor the greatest, except it be of a small trée of two or thrée yeares, the which commonly hath to much of top or wood, otherwyse not, for ye shall but marre your graffing. How to keepe graffes along time. YE may kéepe graffes a long time good, as from all hal∣lowtyde (so that the leaues be fallen) vnto the time of graffing, if that they be well couered in the earth halfe a foote déepe therein, and so that none of them doe appeare without the earth. How to keepe graffes before they are budded. YE shall not gather them except ye haue great néede, vn∣till Christmas or there abouts, and put them not in the
grounde, nigh any walles, for feare of Moles, Mice, and water marring the place and graffes. It shall bée good to kéepe graffes in the earth before they begin to bud, when that ye will graffe betwixt the barke and the tree, and when the trées begin to enter into their sappe. How one ought to beginne to graffe. YE may well begin to graffe (in cleauing the stocke) at Christmasse, or before, according to the coldenesse of ye time, and principally the Healme or greate Cherrye, Peares, Wardens, or forwarde fruite of Apples: and for Medlers it is good to tarry vntill the ende of Ianuarie and Februarie, vntyll March, or vntyll such time as ye shall sée the trées beginne to bud or spring. When it is good graffing the wilde stockes. IN the spring time it is good graffing of Wilde stockes, (which be great) betwixt the barke and the trée, such stoc∣kes as be of a latewarde Spring, and kept in the earth be∣fore. The Damson or Plum tarieth longest to be graft: for they do not shewe or put forth sap so sone as the others. Marke if the tree be forwarde or not. YE ought to consider alwayes whether the trée be for∣warde or not, or to be graffed soone or latewarde, and to giue him also a graffe of the lyke haste or slownesse. Euen so ye must marke the time, whether it be slow or for∣warde. When one will graffe, what necessaries he ought to be furnished withall. WHensoeuer ye go to graffing, sée ye be first furnished with graffes, clay and Mosse, clothes, or barkes of Sallowe to binde the graffes, or clouen briers, or small O∣siers to binde likewise withall. Also ye must haue a small Sawe, and a sharpe knife, to cleaue and to cut graffes with all. But it were much better if ye shoulde cut your graffes
with a great penknyfe, or some other like sharpe knife, ha∣uing also a small wedge of harde wood, or of yron, with a hoked knyfe, and also a small mallet. And your wilde stoc∣kes must be well rooted before ye do graffe them: and be not so quicke to deceyue your salues, as those which doe graffe and plant all at one time, yet they shall not profite so well, for where the wild stock hath not substance in him selfe, much lesse to giue vnto the other graffes, for when a man thinkes some times, to forwarde him selfe, he doth hynder hym selfe. ¶Of graffes not prospering the first yere. YE shall vnderstand, that very hardly your graffes shal prosper after if they doe not profite or prosper well in the first yeare, for when so euer (in the first yeare) they profite well, it were better to graffe then somewhat lower than to let them so remaine and growe. ¶For to graffe well and sounde. ANd for the best vnderstanding of graffing in the cleft, ye shal first cut away all the small cions about the bo∣dy of the stocke beneath, and before ye begin to cleaue your stocke, dresse and cut your graffes somewhat thicke and ready, then cleaue your stocke, and as the cleft is smal or great if néede be, pare it smoth within, then cut your in∣cision of your graffes accordingly, & set them in the cleftes as euen, and as close as ye can possible. ¶How to trim your graffes. YE may graffe your graffes full as long as two or thrée truntchions or cut graffes, which ye may lykewyse graffe withall very well, and be as good as those which doe come of olde wood, and oftentimes better, as to graffe a bough, for often it so happeneth, a man shall finde of oy∣lettes or eyes harde by the olde slender wood, yet better it were to cut them of with the olde wood, and chose a better
and fayre place, at some other eye in the same graffe, and to make your incision therevnder, as aforesayde, and cut your graffes in making the incision on the one side nar∣rows, and on the other side brode, as the inner side thinne, and the outside thicke, bicause the outside (of your graffe) must ioyne within the cleft, with the sappe or barke of the wilde stocke, and it shall so be set in: see also that ye cut it smooth as your cleftes are in the stock, in ioyning at euery place both euen and close, and especially the ioyntes or cor∣ners of the graffes on the heads of the stocke, which must be well and cleane pared before, and then set fast thereon. How to cut graffes for Cherries and Plummes. IT is not much requisite in the healme Cherrie, for to ioyne the graffes (in the stocke) wholy throughout, as it is in others, or to cut the graffes of great Cheries, dam∣sons or plums, so thin and playne as ye may other graffes, for these sort haue a more greater sap or pithe within, the which ye must alwayes take héede in cutting it to nygh on the one side, or on the other, but at the ende thereof chiefly, to be thinne cut and flat. Note also. ANd yet if the sayde incision be more strayter and clo∣ser on the one side than on the other side, pare it where it is most méete, and where it is to straite, open it with a wedge of yron, and put in a wedge of the same woode a∣boue in the cleft, and thus may ye moderate your graffes, as ye shall sée cause. Howe in graffing to take heede that the barke doe not ryse. IN all kinde of cutting your graffes, take héede to the barke of your graffes, that it doe not ryse (from the wood) on no side thereof, and specially on the outside, therefore ye shall leaue it more thycker than the inner syde: also ye must take héede when as the stockes doe
wreath in cleauing, that ye may ioyne the graffe therein accordingly: the best remedie therfore is, to cut it smooth within, that the graffe may ioyne the better, ye shall also, vnto the most greatest stockes, choose for them the most greatest graffes. ¶How to cut your stocke▪ HOwe much the more your stocke is thinne and slen∣der, so much more ye ought to cut him lower, and if your stocke be as great as your finger, or therea∣bouts, ye may cut him a fote, or halfe a foote from the earth and digge hym about and doong him with goates doong, to helpe him withall, and graffe him but with one graffe or Cion. ¶If the wilde stocke be great and slender. IF your wilde stocke be great, or as big as a good staffe ye shall cut him rounde of, a foote or thereaboutes aboue the earth, then set in two good graffes in the head or cleft thereof. ¶Trees as great as ones arme. ANd when your stocke is as great as your arme, yée shall sawe him cleane of rounde, three or foure foote, or thereaboutes, from the earth, for to defende him, and set in the heade three graffes, two in th left, and one betwixt the barke and the trée, on that side which ye may haue most space. ¶Great trees as bigge as your legge. IF the stocke be as bigge as your legge, or thereaboutes, ye shall saw him fayre and cleane off, foure or fyue foote hie from the earth, and cleaue him a crosse (if ye will) and set in foure graffes in the cleftes thereof, or else one cleft onely, and set two graffes in both the sides thereof, and o∣ther two graffes, betwixt the barke and the trée.
¶When the graffes be pinched wyth the stocke. YE must for the better vnderstanding, marke to graffe betwixt the barke and the trée, for when the sap is full in the wood of wilde stockes being great, then they do com∣monly pinche or wring the graffes to sore, if ye do not put a small wedge of gréene wood in the clift thereof, to helpe them withall against such daunger. ¶Howe ye ought to cleaue your stockes. WHen so euer ye shall cleaue your wilde stockes, take héede that ye cleaue them not in the middes of the harte or pithe: but a litle on the one side, which side ye shall thinke good. ¶Howe to graffe the braunche of great trees. WHen so euer ye woulde graffe great trées, as great as your thigh, or greater, it were much better to graffe onely the braunches thereof, than the stocke or body for the stocke will rotte, before the graffes shall couer the heade. ¶Howe to cut brauches olde and great. BVt if the braunches be to rude, and without order (the best shall be) to cut them all off, & within thrée or foure yeares after they will bring fayre newe Cions a∣gaine and then it shall best to graffe them, and cut of all the superfluous and ill braunches thereof. ¶How ye ought to byride your graffes throughout for feare of wyndes. ANd when your graffes shalbe growne, ye must binde them, for feare of shaking of the wynde, and if the trée be free and good of him selfe, let the Cions growe still, and ye may graffe any part or branche ye will, in the cleft, or betwixt the barke and the trée, eyther in the scutchion,
and if your barke be fayre and lose. ¶To set many graffes in one cleft. WHen ye will put many graffes in one cleft, sée that one incision (of your graffe) be as large as the other, not to be put into the cleft so slightly and rashely, and that one side thereof be not more open than the other, and that these graffes be all of one length: it shall suffice also, if they haue thrée eyes, on cache graffe without the ioynt thereof. ¶Howe to sawe your stocke, before ye leaue hym. IN sawing your stocke, sée that ye teare not the barke a∣bout the heade thereof, then cleaue his heade with a long sharpe knife, or such like, and knocke your wedge in the intos thereof, (then pare him on the heade rounde about) and knocke your wedge in so déepe till it open méete for your graffes, but not to wide, then holding in one hande your graffe, and in the other hande your stocke, set your graffe in close, barke to barke, and let your wedge be great aboue at the heade, that ye may knocke him out fayre and easily againe. ¶If the stocke cleaue to much or the barke do open. IF the stocke do cleaue to much, or open the barke with the woode to low, then softly open your stocke with your wedge, and sée if your incision of your graffe be all méete and iuste, according to the cleft, if not, make it vntill it be méete, or else saw him off lower. ¶How graffes neuer lightly take. ABoue all thinges ye must consider the méeting of the two sappes, betwixt the graffe and the wylde stocke, which must be set iust one with another, for ye shall vn∣derstande,
if they do not ioyne, and the one delight with the other, beyng euen set, they shall neuer take togither, for there is nothing onely to ioyne their increase, but the sap, recounting the one against the other. ¶How to set the graffes right in the cleft. WHen the barke of the stocke is more thicker than the graffe, ye must take good héede of the setting in of the graffe in the cleft, to the ende that his sap may ioyne right with the sap of the stocke, on the inside, and ye ought lyke∣wise to consider of the sap of the stocke, if he do surmount the graffes on the outsides of the cleft to much or not. ¶Of setting in the graffes. ALso yée must take good héede, that the graffes he well and cleane set in, and ioyne close vpon the head of the stocke: lykewise that the incision which is set in the cleft, doe ioyne very well within on both sides, not to ioyne so euen, but sometimes it may doe seruice, when as the graffes doe drawe to much from the stocke, or the stocke also on the graffes doe put forth. ¶Note also. ANd therefore when the stocke is rightly clouen, there is no daunger in cutting the incision of the graffe, but a little straight rebated, to the ende thereof, that the sappe may ioyne one with the other, the better & closer togither. ¶How ye ought to drawe out your wedge. WHen your graffes shall be well ioyned within the stock, draw your wedge fayre & softly forth, for feare of displacing your graffes, ye may leaue within the cleft a small wedge of such gréene wood, as is aforesayde, and ye shall cut it of close by the head of your stocke, and so couer it with a barke as followeth.
¶To couer your cleftes on the heade. WHen your wedge is drawne forth, put a gréene pill of thicke barke of willow, crabbe, or apple, vpon your cleftes of the stocke, that nothing may fall betweene: then couer all about the cleftes on the stocke head two fingers thicke with good clay, or nie about that thickenesse, that no winde nor rayne may enter. Then couer it rounde with good mosse, and then wreth it ouer with clothes, or pilles of Willow, Bryar, of Oziars, or such like, then binde them faste, and sticke certayne long prickes on the graffes heade amongs your cyons, to defende them from the Crowes, Iayes, or such like. ¶How ye ought to see to the bynding of your graftes. BVT alwayes take good héede to the binding of your heds, that they waxe slacke, or shagge, neyther on the one side or other, but remaine fast vpon the clay, which clay remaynes fast (likewise on the stocke head) vnder the binding thereof, wherefore, the sayde clay must be modera∣ted in such sort as followeth. ¶How ye ought to temper your clay. THe best way is therefore, to trie your claye betwixt your handes, for stones and such like, and so to temper it as ye shall thinke good, if so it require of moystnesse or drynesse, and to temper it with the heare of Beastes, for when it dryeth, it holdeth not (otherwise) so well on the stocke, or if ye kneade of mosse therewith, or mingle haye thinne therewith: some do iudge, that the mosse doth make the trées mossie. But I thinke (sayth he) that commeth of the disposition of places. ¶To bushe your graffe heades. WHen ye shal binde or wrappe your graffe heads with bande, take small thornes, and binde them within, for to defend your graffes, from Kites, or Crowes, or other daunger of other foules, or pricke of sharpe white stickes thereon.
¶The second way to graffe hie braunches on trees. THe seconde maner to graffe, is straunge ynough to many: this kinde of graffing is on the toppes of bran∣ches of trées, which thing to make them grow light∣ly, is not soone obtayned: wheresoeuer they be graffed, they do onely require a fayre yong wood, a great Cion or twig, growing hyest in the trée toppe, which cions ye shall choose to graffe on, of many sortes of frutes if ye wil or as ye shal thinke good, which order followeth. TAke graffes of other sortes of trées which yée woulde graffe in the top thereof, then mount to the toppe of the trée which ye woulde graffe, and cut of the toppes of all such braunches or as many as ye woulde graffe on, and if they be greater than the graffes, which ye would graffe, ye shall cut and graffe them lower, as ye doe the small wilde stocke aforesayde. But if the cions that you cut, be as great as your graffe that you graffe on, ye shall cut them lower betwixt the olde wood and the newe, or a little more higher, or lower: then cleaue a little and choose your graffes in the like sorte which ye woulde plant, whereof ye shall make the incision short, with the barke on both sides lyke, and as thicke on the one side as the other, and set so iust in the cleft, that the barke maye be euen and close, as well aboue as beneath, on the one side as the other, and so bynde him as is aforesayde. It shall suffice that euery graffe haue one oylet, or eye, or two at the most, without the ioynt, for to leaue them to long if shall not be good, and ye must dresse it with clay and mosse, and binde it as is aforesayde. And likewise ye may graffe these as ye do the little wild stocks which should be as great as your graffes and to graffe them as ye do those with sappe lyke on both sides, but then ye must graffe them in the earth, as thrée fingers off, or there abouts.
The thirde maner of graffing, is of graffes which may be set betwixt the barke and the tree. To graffe betwixt the barke and the tree. THis maner of graffing is good when trées doe begin to enter into their sappe, which is, about the ende of Fe∣bruarie, vnto the ende of Aprill, and specially on great wilde stockes which be harde to cleaue, ye may set in foure or fiue graffes in the head thereof, which graffes ought to be gathered afore, and kept close in the earth till then, for by that time aforesayde, ye shall scantly finde a trée but that he doth put foorth or budde, as the Apple called Capendu, or such like. Ye must therefore sawe these wilde stockes more charily, and more higher, so they be great, and then cut the graffes which ye woulde set togither, so as you would sette them vpon the wilde stocke that is cleft, as is afore rehear∣sed. And the incision of your graffes must not be so long nor so thicke, and the barke a little at the ende thereof must be taken away, and made in maner as a launcet of yron, and as thicke on the one side as the other. Howe to dresse the heade, to place the graffes betwixt the barke and the tree. ANd when your graffes be ready cut, then shal ye clense the head of your stock, and pare it with a sharpe knife, round about the barke therof, to the ende your graffes may ioyne the better thereon, then by and by take a sharpe penknife, or other sharpe poynted knife, and thrust it down betwixt the barke and the stocke, so long as the incision of your graffes be, then put your graffes softly downe therein to the hard ioynt, and sée that it doe sit close vpon the stocke heade.
Howe to couer the heade of your stocke. WHen as ye haue set in your graffes, ye must then co∣uer it well about, with good tough clay and mosse, as is sayde of the others, and then ye must incontinent enuy∣ron or compasse your head, with smal thorny bushes, & bind them fast thereon all about, for feare of great byrdes, and lykewise the wynde. Of the maner and graffing in the shielde or scutchion. THe fourth maner to graffe, whiche is the last, is to graffe in the scutchion, in the sap, in Sommer, from a∣bout the ende of the moneth of Maye, vntill August, when as trées be yet strong in sap & leaues, for otherwayes it can not be done, the best time is in Iune and Iuly, so it is some yeares when the time is very drie, that some trées doe holde their sappe very long, therefore ye must farie fill it re∣turne. For to graffe in Sommer so long as the trees be full leaued. FOr to beginne this maner of graffing well, ye must in sommer when the trées be almost full of sap, and when they haue sprong forth of new shewtes being somewhat hardened, then shall ye take a braunch thereof in the top of the trée, the which ye will haue graffed, & choose the highest, and the principallest braunches, without cutting it from the old wood, & choose therof, the principallest oylet or eie, or bud∣ding place, of eche braunche one, with which oylet or eye, ye shall begin to graffe, as followeth. The big Cions are best to graffe. PRincipally ye must vnderstād that the smallest & naugh∣ty oylettes or buddes of the sayde cions, be not so good to graffe, therefore choose the greatest and best ye can find,
first cut of the leafe hard by the oylet, then ye shall trench or cut (the length of a barly corne) beneath the oylet round about the barke, harde to the wood, and so likewise aboue: then with a sharpe point of a knife, slyt it downe halfe an yuche beside the oylet or budde, and with the pointe of a sharpe knyfe softly raise the sayd shield or scutchion, round about, with the oylet in the middest, and all the sap belon∣ging there vnto. ¶How to take of the shield fro the wood. ANd for the better raysing the saide shielde or scutchion from the wood, after that ye haue cut him round about, and then slit him downe, without cutting anye part of the wood within, ye must then rayse the side next you that is slit, and then take the same shielde betwixt your finger and thumbe, and plucke or raise it softly of, without brea∣king or broosing anye part thereof, and in the opening or plucking it of, holde it (with your fynger) harde to the wood, to the ende the sap of the oylet, may remaine in the shielde, for if it go of (in plucking it) from the barkes, and sticke to the wood, your scutchion is nothing worth. ¶To knowe your scutchion or shielde, when he is good or badde. ANd for the more easier vnderstanding, if it be good or badde, when it is taken from the wood, looke within the sayde shielde, and if ye shall sée it cracke, or open within, then it is of no value, for the chiefe sap doth yet remaine behinde with the wood, which should be in the shield, & ther∣fore ye must choose and cut another shielde, which must be good and sounde, as aforesayde, and when your scutchion shall be well taken of from the wood, then holde it drye, by the oylet or eye, betwixt your lippes, vntill ye haue cut and taken of the barke from the other cion or braunch, and set hym in that place, and looke that ye do not fowle or wet it in your mouth.
¶Of yong trees to graffe on. BVt ye must graffe on such trées, as be from the bignesse of your little finger, vnto as great as your arme, ha∣uing their barke thin and slender, for great trées com∣monly haue their barke hard & thick, which ye can not wel graffe this waye, except they haue some braunches with a thin smooth barke, méete for this way to be done. ¶How to set or place your shielde, YE must quickly cut of rounde the barke of the trée that ye will graffe on, a little more longer than the shielde that ye set on, bicause it maye ioyne the sooner & easier, but take héede that in cutting of the barke, ye cut not the wood within. ¶Note also. AFter the incision once done, ye must then couer both the sides or ends well & softly withall, with a little bone or horne, made in maner like a thin skinne, which ye shall laye it all ouer the ioyntes or closings of the sayde shielde, somewhat longer and larger, but take héede for hurting or crushing the barke thereof. ¶How to lift vp the bake, and to set your shielde on. THis done, take your shield or scutchion, by the oylet or eye that he hath, and open him fayre and softly by the two sides, and put them straight waye on the other trée, where as the barke is taken of, and ioyne him close barke to barke thereon, then plain it softly aboue and at both the endes with the thinne bone, and that they ioyne aboue and beneath barke to barke, so that he maye féede well the braunch of that trée.
¶How to binde on your shield. THis done, ye must haue a wreath of good hemp, to bind the said shield on in his place: the maner to hinde it is this, ye shal make a wreath of hempe togither as great as a Goose quill, or there aboutes, or according to the bignesse or smalnesse of your trée: then take your hempe in the midst, that the one halfe may serue for the vpper halfe of ye shield, in winding and crossing (with the hempe) the saide shield, on the braunche of the trée, but sée that he binde it not to straite, for it shal let him frō taking or springing, and like∣wise their sap can not easily come or passe from the one to the other: and sée also that wet come not to your shield, nor likewise the hempe that ye binde it withall. Ye shal begin to binde your scutchion first behinde in the middes of your shielde, in comming still lower and lower, & so recouer vn∣der the oylet, and tayle of your shielde, binding it nie togi∣thers, without couering of the saide oylet, then ye shal re∣turne againe vpward, in binding it backward to the midst where ye began. Then take the other part of the hempe, and binde so likewise the vpper part of your shield, and in∣crease your hempe as ye shall neede, and so returne againe backward, and ye shall binde it so, till the fruites or cliftes be couered (both aboue and beneath) with your sayde hempe, except the oylet and his tayle, the which ye must not couer, for that tayle will shed apart, if the shielde doe take. ¶On one tree ye may graffe or put two or three shieldes. YE may verie well if ye wil, on euery trée graffe two or thrée shieldes, but sée that one be not right against ano∣ther, nor yet of the one side of the trée, let your shieldes so remaine bounde on the trées, one Moneth or more after they be graffed, and the greater the trée is, the longer to remaine, and the smaller the lesser time.
¶The time to vnbinde your shielde. ANd then after one moneth or sixe wéekes past, ye must vnbinde the shielde, or at the least, cut the hempe be∣hynde of the trée, and let it so remaine vnto the Winter next following, and then about the moneth of March, or Aprill if ye will, or when ye shall sée the sap of the shielde put forth, then cut the braunch aboue the shielde thrée fin∣gers all about all of. ¶Howe to cut and gouerne the braunches graffed on the trees. THen in the next yeare after that the cions shal be well strengthened, and when they do begin to spring, then shall ye cut them all harde of by the shielde aboue, for if ye had cut them so nigh in the first yere, when they began first to spring or budde, it shoulde greatly hinder them a∣gainst their increase of growing: also when those cions shall put forth of faire wood, ye must binde and staye them in the mids, faire and gently with small wandes, or such like, that the winde or weather hurt them not. And after this maner of graffing, is practised in the shield or sutchiō, which way ye may easily graffe the white rose on the red, and likewise ye may haue roses of diuers colours & sortes vpon one braunch or roote: this I thought sufficient and méete to declare, of this kinde of graffing at this present. The .vj. Chapter is of transplanting or altering of trees. ¶The sooner ye transplant or set them, it shall be the better. YEe ought to transplant or sette your trées, from Alhalowtide vnto Marche, and the sooner the better, for as soone as the leaues are falne from the trées, they be méete for to be planted, if it be not in a verie colde
or moyst place, the which then it were best for to tarry vnto Ianuary, or February: to plant in the frost is not good. To plant or set towardes the South, or Sunny place, is best. AFore ye do pluck vp your trées for to plant them, if ye will marke the southside, of ech trée, that when ye shall replant them, ye may set them againe as they stood be∣fore, which is the best way as some doe say. Also if ye kéepe them a certaine tyme, after they be taken out of the earth, before ye replant them again, they wil rather recouer there in the earth, so they be not wette with raine, nor otherwise, for that shall be more contrary to them than the great heate or drought. Howe to cut the braunches of trees before they be set. Whensoeuer ye shall set or replant your trées, first ye must cut of the boughes, & specially those which are great braunches, in such sort that ye shall leaue the small twigs or sprigs on the stockes of your braunch, which must be but a shaftment long or somewhat more or lesse, accor∣ding as the trée shall require which ye doe set. Apple trees commonly must be disbraunched before they be replanted or set. ANd chiefly the Apple trées beyng graffed or not graffed, doe require to be disbraunched before they be sette a∣gaine, for they shall prosper thereby, much the better: the other sortes of trées may well passe vnbraunched, if they haue not to great or large braunches: and therefore, it shal be good to transplant or set, as soone after as the graffes are closed on the head of the wilde stocke, as for small trées which haue but one cion or twigge, it néedes not to cut them aboue, when they be replanted or remooued.
All wylde stockes must be disbraunched, when they are replanted or set. ALl wilde trées or stockes which ye thinke for to graffe on, ye must first cut of all their braunches before ye set them againe, also it shall be good, alwayes to take héede in replanting your trées, that ye doe set them againe, in as good or better earth, than they were in before, and so euery trée according as his nature doth require. What trees loue the fayre Sunne and what trees the colde ayre. COmmonly the most part of trées doe loue the Sunne at noone, and yet the South winde (or vent d'aual) is ve∣ry contrary against their nature, and specially the Al∣mond trée, the Abricote, the mulbery trée, the Figge trée, and the pomgranade trée: certaine other trees there be whi∣che loue colde ayre, as these: the Chestnut trée, the wylde and eager Cherry trée, the Quince trée, and the Damson or Plum trée: the Walnutte looueth colde ayre, and a stony white grounde: Peare trées loue not greatly plaine pla∣ces, they prosper well ynough in places closed with walles or high hedges, and specially the Peare called bon Crestien. Of many sortes and maners of trees, following their nature. THe Damson or Plum trée, doth loue a colde fat earth, and clay withall, the (healme) great Cherry, doth loue to be set or planted vpon clay. The Pine trée, loueth light earth, stony and sandy. The Medlar commeth well ynough in all kinde of groundes, and doth not hinder his fruit to be in the shadowe and moyst places. Hasell nut trées, loue the place to be cold, leane, moyst and sandy. Ye shall vnderstand that euery kinde of fruitefull trée, doth loue, and is more fruitfull in one place, than another, as according vnto their
nature, neuerthelesse we ought to nourishe them (all that we may) in the place where we set them in, taking them fro the place and grounds they were in. And ye must also consider when one doth plant them, of the great and lar∣gest kinde of trées, that euerye kinde of trée may prosper and growe, and it is to be considered also, if the trées haue commonly growne afore so large in that grounde or not, for in good earth, the trées maye well prosper and growe, hauing a good space one from another, more than if the ground were leane and naught. ¶How to plant or set trees at large. IN this thing ye shall consider, ye must giue a competent space, from one trée to another, when as ye make the holes to set them in, not to nie, nor yt one trée touch so ano∣ther. For a good trée planted or set well at large, it profiteth oftentimes more of fruite, than thrée or foure trées, set to nighe togithers. The most greatest and largest trées com∣monly are Walnuttes, and Chestnuttes, if ye plant them seuerally in ranke, as they doe commonly grow vpon high waies, beside hedges in fieldes, they must be set .xxxv. foote a sunder, one from another, or there aboutes, but if ye will plant many ranks in one place togithers, ye must set them the space of .xlv. foote, one from another, or thereaboutes, and so farre ye must set your ranks one from another. For the Peare trées and Apple trées, and other sortes of trées which may be set of this largenesse one from ye other, if ye doe plant onely in rankes by hedges in the fields, or other∣wise, it shal be sufficient of .xx. foote one from another. But if ye wil set two ranks vpon the sides of your great alleyes in gardens, which be of ten or twelue foote broad, it shal be then best to giue them more space, the one from the other in ech ranke, as about .xxv. foote: also ye must not set your trées right one against the other, but entermedling or be∣twéene euery space, as they may best grow at large, that if
néede be, ye may plant of other smaller trées betwéene, but sée that ye set them not to thick. If ye list for to set or plant all your trées of one bignesse, as of yong trées like rods, being Peare trées, or Apple trées, they must be set a good space one from another, as of .xxv. or .xxx. foote in square, as to say, from one ranke to another. For to plant or sette of smaller trées, as Plum trées, & Apple trées, of the like big∣nesse, it shall be sufficient for them .xiiij. or .xv. foote space, in Quarters. But if ye wyll plant or set two rankes in your alleyes in gardens, ye must deuise for to proportion it after the largenesse of your saide alleyes. For to plant or sette eager or sowre Cherry trées, this space shall be suffi∣cient ynough ye one from the other, that is, of x. or .xij. foote, and therefore if ye make of great or large alleyes in your garden, as of ten foote wide or there abouts, they shal come wel to passe, and shal be sufficient to plant your trées, of .ix. or .x. foote space? and for the other lesser sorts of trées, as of Quince trées, Figge trées, Nut trées and such like, which be not commonly planted, but in one ranke togithers. Ordering your trees. WHen that ye plant or set ranks, of euery kind of trées togithers, ye shall set or plant the most smallest to∣wards the sunne, & the greatest in the shade, that they may not annoy or hurt the small, nor the small the great. Also whensoeuer ye wil plant or set of Peare trées, & Plum trées (in any place) the one with another, better it were to set the Plum trées next the sunne, for the Peares wil dure better in the shade. Also ye must vnderstande, when he set or plant many ranks of trées togithers, ye must haue more space betwixt your rankes and trées, (then when ye set but one ranke) that they may haue rome sufficient on euerye side: ye shal also scarcely set or plant Peare trées, or Apple trées, or other great trées, vpō dead, or mossie barrē ground vnstirred, for they increse (theron) to no purpose. But other
lesser trées very well may growe, as Plum trées and such like: nowe when all the sayd things aboue be considered, ye shall make your holes, according to the space that shal he re∣quired of euery trée that ye shall plant or sette, and also the place méete for the same so much as ye may conuenient, ye shall make your holes large ynough, for ye must suppose that the trée ye do set, hath not the halfe of his rootes he shall haue hereafter, therefore ye must helpe him and giue hym of good fat earth, (or dung) all about the rootes when as ye plant him. And if any of the same rootes be to long, and bruysed or hurt, ye shall cut them cleane of, a slope wyse, so that the vpper side (of eache roote) so cut, may be longest in setting, and for the small rootes which come foorth all about thereof, ye may not cut them of as the great rootes. Howe ye ought to enlarge the holes for your trees, when ye plant them. WHen as ye sette the trées in the holes, ye must then enlarge the rootes, in placing them, and sée that they take all downewards, without turning any rootes the ende vpwarde, and ye must not plant or set them to déepe in the earth, but as ye shall sée cause. It shall be sufficient for them to be planted or set (halfe a foote, or there aboutes) in the earth, so that the earth be aboue all the rootes halfe a foote or more, if the place be not very burning and stonie. Of dung and good earth, for your plantes and trees. ANd when as ye woulde replant or set, ye must haue of good fatte earth or dung, well medled with a part of the same earth where as yée tooke your Plantes out of, wyth all the vpper crestes of the earth, as thick as ye can haue it: the sayde earth which ye shall put about the rootes, must not
be put to nigh the rootes, for doubt of the dung being layd to nigh, which will put the sayde rootes in a heate, but let it be well medled with the other earth, and well tempered in the holes, and the smallest and slendrest cions that turnes vp among those rootes, ye may plant therewith very well. If ye haue wormes amongest the earth of your rootes. IF there be wormes in the fat earth or dung, that ye put about your rootes, ye must meddle it well also, with the dung of oxen or kyne, or fleckt sope ashes about the roote, whiche will make the Wormes to die, for otherwyse, they will hurt greatly the rootes. To digge well the earth about the tree rootes. ALso ye must digge well the earth, principally all round ouer the rootes, and more oftner, if they be drie, than if they be wet: ye must not plant or set trées when it ray∣neth, nor the earth to be very moyst about the rootes. The trées that be planted or set in valleyes, commonly prosper well by drought, and when it rayneth, they that be on the hilles are better by watring with drops, than others, but if the place or grounde be moyst of nature, ye must not plant or set your trées so déepe thereon. The nature of places. ON high and drie places, ye must plant or set your trées a little more déeper, than in the valleys, & ye must not fill the holes in high places, so full as the other, to the ende that the raine may better moysten them. Of good earth. YE shal vnderstand that of good earth, cōmonly commeth good fruite, but in certaine places (if that they might
be suffered to growe) they would season the trée the better. Otherwise they shall not come to proofe, nor yet haue a good taste. With what ye ought to binde your trees. WHensoeuer your trées shalbe replanted or set, ye must knocke in (by the roote) a stake, and binde your trées thereto for feare of the winde: and when they do spring, ye shall dresse them and binde them with bandes that may not breake, which handes may be of strong soft hearbe, as Bul∣rushes or such like, or of olde linnen clowtes, if the other be not strong ynough, or else ye may bind them with Oziars, or such like, but for feare of fretting or hurting your trées. The seuenth Chapter is of medecining and keeping the trees when they are planted. The first councell is, when your trees be but plantes (in drie weather) they must be watred. THE yong trées which be newly planted, must somety∣mes (in Sūmer) be watred when the time waxeth drie, at the least the first yeare after they be planted or set. But as for other greater trées which are wel taken & rooted a good time, ye must dig them al ouer the rootes after Alhal∣lowtide, & vncouer them foure or fiue foote compasse about the roote or trée: and let them so lie vncouered vntill the lat∣ter ende of Winter. And if ye do then meddle about eache trée of good fat earth or dung, to heate and comfort the earth withall, it shall be good. With what dung ye ought to dung your trees. ANd principally vnto mossie trées, dung them with hogs dung medled with other earth of the same ground, and the dung of Oxen to be next about the rootes, and ye shall also abate the mosse of the trées, with a great knife of wood, or such like, so that ye hurt not the barke thereof.
When ye ought to vncouer your trees in Sommer. IN the tyme of Sommer, when the earth is scantly halfe moyst, it shall be good to digge at the foote of the trées, al a∣bout on the roote, such as haue not béene vncouered in the Winter before, and to meddle it with good fat earth: and so fill it againe, and they shall doe well. when ye ought to cut or proyne your trees. ANd if there be in your trées certain branches of super∣fluous wood that ye will cut of, tary vntill the time of the entring in of the sappe, that is, when they begin to bud, as in March and Aprill: then cut of as ye shal sée cause, all such superfluous braunches hard by the trée, that therby the other braunches may prosper the better, for then they shall sooner close their sappe vpon the cut places than in the Winter, which should not do so well to cut them, as certain do teach which haue not good experience. But for so much as in this time the trées be entring into the sap, as is afore∣sayde. Take héede therefore in cutting then of your great braunches hastily, that through their great waight, they do not cleaue or seperate the barke from the trée in any part thereof. Howe to cut your great braunches, and when. ANd for the better remedie: First you shall cut the same great braunches halfe a foote from the trée, and after to sawe the rest cleane of hard by the body of the trée, then with a brode Chisell cut all cleane and smooth vpon ye place, then couer it with Oxe dung. Ye may also cut them well in Winter, so that ye leaue the trunke or braunch somewhat longer, so as ye may dresse and cut them againe in March and Aprill, as is before mentioned.
¶Howe ye ought to leaue these greae braunches cut. OTher thinges here are to be shewed of certaine great and old trées only, which in cutting the great braun∣ches thereof truncheon wise, doe renewe againe, as Wallnuts, Mulbery trée, Plum trées, Cherry trées with others, which ye must disbraunch the bowes thereof euen after Alhallowtide, or as soone as their leaues be falne of, and likewise before they begin to enter into sap. ¶Of trees hauing great braunches: THe sayde great braunches, when ye shall disbraunche them, ye shall so cut them of in suche truncheons, of length on the trée, that the one maye be longer than the other, that when the cions be growne good and long there∣on, ye may graffe on them againe as ye shall sée cause, ac∣cording as euery arme shall require. ¶Of barrennesse of trees, the time of cutting yll braunches, and of vncouering the rootes. SOmetimes a man hath certaine olde trées, which be al∣most spent, as of the Peare trées and Plum trées, and other great trées, the which beare scant of fruite, but when as ye shall sée some braunches well charged there∣with, then ye ought to cut of all the other yll braunches and bowes, to the ende that those that remaine may haue the more sap to nourishe their fruite, as also to vncouer their rootes after Alhallowtide, and to cleaue the most greatest rootes therof (a foote from the tronke) and put in∣to the sayde cleftes, a thin slate of hard stone, there let it re∣maine, to the ende that the humour of the trée, may enter out thereby, and at the ende of Winter ye shall couer him againe with as good and fat earth as ye can get, and let the stone alone.
¶Trees the which ye must help or pluck vp the rootes. AL sortes of trées which spring cions from the rootes, as Plum trées, all kinde of Cherry trées and small Nutte trées, ye must helpe in plucking their Cions from the rootes in Winter, assone as conueniently ye can, after the leafe is fallen. For they do greatly pluck down & weaken the said trées, in drawing to them the substance of the earth ¶What doth make a good Nutte. BVt chiefly to plant these Cions, the best waye is to let them growe and be nourished two or thrée yeares from the roote, and then to transplant them or set them in the Winter, as is aforesaid. The Cions which be taken from the foote of the Hasel trées, make good Nuttes, and to be of much strength & vertue, when they are not suffred to grow to long from the roote or foote aforesaide. ¶Trees eaten wyth beastes, must be graffed agayne. WHen certaine graffes being well in sappe, of thrée or foure yeres or thereabouts, be broken or greatly en∣domaged with beastes which haue broken therof, it shal lit∣tle profite to leaue those graffes so, but it were better to cut them and to graffe them higher or lower than they were before. For the graffes shall take as wel vpon the new as olde Cion being graffed, as on the wilde stock: but it shall not so soone close, as vpon the wilde stock head. How your wylde stocke ought not hastily to be remoued. IN the beginning when ye haue graffed your graffes on the wilde stock, do not then hastily pluck vp those Cions or wilde stockes so graffed, vntill ye shall see the graffes put forth a new shewte, the which remayning stil, ye may graffe thereon againe, so that your graffes in hasty remoo∣uing may chaunce to die.
¶when ye cut of the naughtie Cions from the wood. WHen your graffes on the stockes, shall put foorth of newe wood, or a newe shewte, as of two or thrée foot long, and if they put foorth also of other small superfluous cions (about the sayd members or braunches that ye would nourishe) cut of all such yll cions, harde by the heade, in the same yeare they are graffed in, but not so long as the wood is in sappe, till the winter after. ¶Howe sometimes to cut the principall members. ALso it is good to cut some of the principall members or braunches in the first yeare if they haue to many, and then agayne within two or thrée yeares after when they shal be well sprong vp, & the graffes well closed on the head of the stock: ye may trim and dresse them againe, in taking away the superfluous braunches if any there remaine, for it is sufficient ynough to nourishe a yong trée, to leaue him one principall member on the heade, so that he may be one of those that hath ben graffed on the trée before, yea and the trée shall be fayrer and better in the ende, than if he had two or thrée braunches or precidens at the foote. But if the trée haue ben graffed with many great cions, thē ye must leaue him more largely, according as ye shall sée cause or néede, to recouer the cleftes on the head of the sayde graffe or stocke. ¶Howe to guide and gouerne the sayde trees. WHen that your trées doe begin to springe, ye must or∣der & sée to them well the space of thrée or foure yeres, or more, vntil they be well and strongly growne, in helping them aboue in cutting the small twigges, and superfluous wood, vntill they be so hie without braunches as a man, or more if it may be, and then sée to them well, in placing the
principal branches if néede be, with forkes or wandes prickt right and well about them at the foote, and to proyne them so that one braunch doe not approche to nigh the other, nor yet frette the one the other, when as they doe enlarge and growe, & ye must also cut of certaine braunches in the trée, where as they are to thicke. A kinde of sicknesse in trees. WHen certaine trées are sicke of the Gall, whiche is a kinde of sicknesse that doth eate the barke, therefore ye must cut it, & takes out all the same infection with a che∣sil, or such like thing. This must be done at the ende of win∣ter, then put on that infected place of oxe dung, or hogges dung, and binde it fast thereon with clowtes, and wrappe it with oziars, so let it remaine a long time, till it shal recouer againe. Trees which haue wormes in the barke▪ OF trées which haue Wormes within  barkes is, where as ye shall see a swelling or rysing therein, ther∣fore ye must cut or cleane the said barke vnto the wood, to the ende the hm or may also vntill: out thereat, and with a little hooke ye must: plucke or draw out the sayd wormes, withall the rotten wood that ye can sée, then shall ye put vp∣on the sayd place, a playster made of Oxe dung, or of Hogs dung mo and beaten with Sage, and a little of, vnfleckt lime, then let it be all well blende togither, and wrap it on a cloth, and bind it fast and close theron so long as it will hold. The lies of wine shed or poured vpon the rootes of trées (the which he somewhat sicke through the coldnesse of the earth) which lyes doth them much good. Snayles, Antes and wormes doth marre trees. ALso ye must take héede of all maner of yong trées▪ and specially of those graffes, the which many wormes and
flyes doe endomage and hurte in the time of Sommer, those are the snailes, the pismiars, or antes, the field snaile which hurteth also all other sortes of trées that be great, principally in the time yt the Cuckowe doth sing, & betwixt Apryll, and Midsomer, while they be tender. There be little beastes calles Sowes, which haue many legs: and some be of them graye, some blacke, and some hath a long sharpe snowte, which be verie noysome, & great hurters of yong graffes, and other yong trées also, for they cut of in eating the tender toppes (of the yong cions) as longe as ones synger. ¶Howe ye ought to take the sayde wormes. FOr to take them well, ye must take héede and watch in the heate of the daye (your yong trées) and where yée shall sée any, put your hand softly vnderneath, without shaking the trée, for they will sodainely fall, when one thinkes to take them: therefore as soone as you can (that they flie not away nor fall) take him (quickly on the cion) with your other hande. ¶To keepe antes from yong trees. FOr to kéepe the yong trées from snayles and Antes▪ it shal be good to take ashes and to mingle vnsseckt lyme, beaten in powder therewith, then lay it all about the roote of the trée, and when it raineth, they shall be beaten downe into the ashes and die: but ye must renewe your ashes after euerie raine from time to time: also to kéepe them moyst, ye must put certaine small vessels full of wa∣ter, at the foote of your saide trées, and also the lyes of wine, to be spreade on the grounde there all aboutes. For the best destroying of the small snayles on trées, ye must take good héede in the spring time; before the trées be lea∣ued, then if ye shall sée as it were small weartes, knobbes or braunches on the trées, the same will be snayles.
Prouide to take them away faire and softly, before they be full closed, and take héede that ye hurt not the wood or barke of the sayd trée, as little as ye can, then burne those braun∣ches on the earth, or al to tread them vnder your féete, and then if any doe remayne or renewe, looke in the heat of the day, and if ye can sée any, which will commonly be on the cleftes or forkes of the braunches, and also vpon the braun∣ches lying like toftes or troupes togyther, then wrap your handes all ouer with olde clothes, (and bind of leaues be∣neath them & aboue them,) and with your two hands rub them down therin, and strait way fire it, if ye do not quick∣ly with diligence, they will fall, and if they fall to the earth, ye can not lightly kill them, but they will renewe agayne, these kinde of wormes are noysome flyes which he verye straunge, therefore take héede that they doe not cast a cer∣taine rednesse on your face and body, for where as there be many of them, they be daungerous: it is straunge to tell of these kinde of wormes, if ye come vnder or among the trées, where as be many, they will cast your face & hands, (your couered body, as your neck, brest and armes) full of small spottes, some red, some black, some blewishe, which wil so tingle and trouble you like netles, sometimes for a daye, or a daye and a night after: they be most on Plum trées, and Apple trées, nighe vnto moyst places, and yll ayres yet neuerthelesse, by the grace of God there is no daunger (that I vnderstande) to be taken by them. Ye shall vnderstande that if it be in the euening, or in the mor∣ning, when it rayneth, they will remayne about the graf∣fing place of the trée, therefore it will be harde to finde them, bicause they are so small. Moreouer, it such braun∣ches do remayne in the vpper part of the bowes or trée, ye shall bynde of drye strawe about the bowes all vnder, then wyth a wispe on a poles ende, set fyre on all, and burne them.
¶A note in spring tyme of Fumigations. HEere is to be vnderstande and noted, that in the spring time onely when trées doe beginne to put forth leafes and blossomes, ye must then alwayes take héede vnto them, for to defend them from the frost, (if there come any, with fumigations or smokes made on the wind side of your Orchards, or vnder your trées) with straw, hey, dry chaffe, dry Oxe dung, of saw dust dried in an ouen, of tanners oze dryed likewise, of Galbanum, of olde shooes, thatche of houses, of haire and such like, one of these to be blende with another: al these be good against the frost in the spring time, and specially good against the east winde, which brée∣deth (as some saye) the Caterpiller worme. To defend the Caterpiller. AND some doe defend their trées from the Caterpiller when the blossoming time is drie (if there be no frost) by casting of water, or salt water, euerie second or thirde day vpon their trées, (with instrumentes for the same, as with squirtes of wood or brasse or such like) for in kéeping of them , the Caterpiller can not bréede theron: this experience haue I knowne prooued of late to be good. For to conclude, he that will set or plant trées, must not passe for any paines, but haue a pleasure and delight therein, in remembring the great profite that com∣meth therby: against scarcenesse of corne, fruit is good stay for the poore, and often it hath bene séene one aker of orchard ground worth foure akers of wheate grounde. FINIS.
Here foloweth a little treatise howe one may graffe and plant, subtill or artificially, and to make many things in Gardins very straunge. FOr to graffe a subtill way, take one oylet or eye of a graffe, slyt it round, aboue and beneath, and then behind downe right, then wreath him of, and set him vpon ano∣ther cion, as great as he is, then dresse him as is aforesaide, and he shall growe and heare. ¶To graffe one Vyne vpon another. FOr to graffe one Vine vpon another, ye shal cleaue him as ye do other trées, and then put the vine graffe in the clift, then stop him close and well with waxe, and so binde him and he shall growe. ¶If a tree be to long without fruite. YE shall vncouer his roote and make a hole with a pier∣cer or small awger, in the greatest roote he hath, with∣out pearcing thorowe the roote, then put in a pinne (in the sayde hole) of dry wood, (as oke or ashe) and so let it re∣maine in the sayde hole, and stop it close againe with waxe and then cast earth and couer him againe, and he shall beare the same yeare.
For to haue Peaches two monethes before other. TAke your cyons of a Peache trée that doth soone blos∣some in the spring time, and graffe them vpon a frank Mulbery trée, and he shall bring of Peaches two mo∣nethes before others. To haue Damsons or other Plums, vnto Alhallowtide. FOr to haue Damsons all the Sommer long vnto Alhal∣lowtide, and of many other kinde of sortes likewise; ye shall graffe them vpon ye Goosebery trée, vpon the franke Mulbery trée, and vpon the Cherry trée, and they shall en∣dure on the trées till Alhallowtyde. To make Medlars, Cherryes and Peaches in eatyng to taste lyke spyce. FOr to make Medlars, Cherries and Peaches to taste in the eating pleasant like spice, the which ye may also kepe vnto the newe come againe, ye shall graffe them vpon the frank Mulbery trée, as I haue afore declared and in the graffing, ye shall wette them in honie, and put a little of the powder of some good spices, as the powder of cloues, of Ci∣namon or Gynger. To make a Muscadell taste. FOr to make a Muscadell taste, take a gouge or chesill of yron, (and cut your sap rounde about) then put in your gouge or chesill vnder your sap on your cion, and rayse thrée eies or oylettes rounde about, and so take of fayre and softly your barke round about, and when he is so taken of, doe annoynt it all ouer within the barke, with powder of cloues, or nutmegs, then set it on againe, and stop it close with waxe rounde about, that no water may enter in, and within thrice hearing, they shall bring a fayre Muscadell reyson, which ye may after both graffe and plant, and they shall be all after a Muscadell fruite: some slyttes the barke downe, and so put in of spice.
¶To set Apples and Peares, to come without blossoming. FOr to make Apples, and Peares, & other sortes of fruit to come without blossoming, that is, ye shall graffe them (as ye doe other kinde of fruite) vpon the figge trée. ¶To haue Apples and Chestnutes rathe, and also long on the trees. FOr to haue Apples called (in french) de blanc Durell, or de Yroael, & of Chestnuts very rathe, and long (as vnto Alhollowtide) on the trées: and to make such fruit also to endure, the space of .ij. yeres, ye shall graffe them on a late∣warde fruit, as pome Richard, or vpon a peare trée, or apple trée of Dāgoisse. ¶To haue good Cherries on the trees, at Alhallontide. TO haue Cherries on many trées, good for to eate vnto Alhallontide, ye shall graffe thē vpon a frank Mulbery trée, & likewise to graffe them vpon a willow, or sallow trée, and they shall endure vnto Alhallontide, on the trées. To haue rath Medlars two Monethes before others. FOr to haue Medlars two monthes sooner than others: and that the one shall be better farre than the other, ye shall graffe them vppon a Gooseberry trée, and also a franke Mulbery trée, and before ye doe graffe them, ye shall wet them in Honnie, and then graffe them. For to haue rathe or timely Peares. FOr to haue a rathe Peare ye which is in Fraunce, as the Peare Cailonet, and the peare Hastinean. For to haue them rath or soone, ye shall graffe them on the Pine trée: And for to haue them late, ye shall graffe them on the peare called in Fraunce Dangoisse, or on other like hard peares.
To haue Misples or Medlers without stones. FOr to haue Medlers without stones, the which shal tast swete as hony, ye shal graffe them as the other, vpon an Eglentine or swéete Brier trée, & ye shall wet the grafs (before ye graffe them) in hony. To haue Peares bytimes. FOr to haue the peare of Anguisse, or Permain, or Sati∣gle, (which be of certaine places so called) a moneth or two, before others, the which shall endure, and be good vnto the newe come againe, ye shall graffe them vppon a Quince trée, and likewise vpon the franke Mulbery trée. To haue ripe or franke Mulberyes very sone and late. FOr to haue franck or ripe Mulberies very soone, ye shall graffe them vpon a rath Peare trée, and vpon the Gofe∣bery trée, and to haue very late and to endure vnto Alhal∣lowtide, ye shall graffe them vpon the Medler trée. To keepe Peares a yeare. HOw for to kéepe Peares a yeare: ye shall take of fine salt very dry, and put thereof with your peares into a barrell, in such sort that one Peare doe not touch ano∣ther, so fill the barrell if ye list, then stoppe it, and let it be set in some dry place, that the salt do not waxe moyst, thus ye may kéepe them long and good. To haue your fruite taste halfe apples, halfe peares. IF ye wil haue your fruite tast halfe a peare and halfe an Apple, ye shall in the spring take graffes, the one a peare, and the other an Apple, ye shall cleaue or pare them in the graffing ioynte or place, and ioyne halfe the Peare cion, &
strawe, and if the time of winter be colde and very harde, then put of haye aboue them on your straw, and take it a∣waye when as a fayre time commeth: and thus ye shall keepe your fruite fayre and good. The dayes to Plant and Graffe. ALso (as some say) from the first day of the newe mone, vnto the .xiij. day thereof, is good for to plant, or graffe, or sowe, and for great néede, some doe take vnto the .xvii. or .xviii. day thereof, and not after, neither graffe, nor sowe, but as is afore mencioned, a day or two dayes afore the chaunge, the best signes are, Taurus, Virgo, and Capri∣corne. Te haue greene Roses all the yeare. FOr to haue gréene Roses, ye shal (as some say) take your rose buds, in the spring time, and then graffe them vpon the holly stocke, and they shall be gréene all the yeare. To keepe Reysins or Grapes good a yeare. FOr to kéepe Raysins or grapes good all a whole yeare, ye shal take of fine dry sande, and then lay your reysins or grapes therein, and it shall kéepe them good a whole yeare, some kéepe them in a close glasse from the ayre. To make fruite laxatiue from the tree. FOR to make any fruite laxatiue from the trée, what fruite soeuer it be, make a hole in the stocke, or in the Mayster roote of the trée, (wyth a great pearcer sloope wise) not thorow, but vnto the pythe, or somewhat further, then fill the saide hole with the ioyce of elder, of Centori, of Seney, or of Turbich, or such like laxatiues, thē fill the sayd hole therwith, of which of them ye will, or else ye may take
thrée of them togithers, and fill the said hole therewith, and then stoppe the sayde hole close with soft waxe, then claye it thereon, and put mosse very well ouer all, so that nothing may issue or fall out, and all the fruite of the sayde trée shall be from thencefoorth laxatiue. A note for all Graffers and Planters. ALso whensoeuer ye shall plant or graffe, it shalbe méete and good for you to saye as foloweth. In the name of God the Father, the Sonne and the holy Ghost, Amen. Increase and multiplye, and replenishe the earth: and saye the Lordes prayer, then say: Lord God heare my prayer, and let this my desire of thée be hearde. The holy spirite of God which hath created all things for man, and hath giuen them for our comfort, in thy name O Lorde we set, plant, & graffe, desiring that by thy mighty power they maye en∣crease, and multiplye vppon the earth, in bearing plenty of fruite, to the profite and comfort of all thy faithfull people, thorow Christe or Lorde. Amen. FINIS.
¶Here followe certayne wayes of plan∣ting and graffing, with other necessaries herein meete to be knowne, translated out of Dutch by L. M. ¶To graffe one Vine on another. YOu that wyll graffe one Vine vpon another, ye shall (in Ianuary) cleaue the head of the Vine, as ye doe other stockes, and then put in your Vine graffe or cyon, but first ye must pare him thinne, ere ye set him in the head, then clay and mosse him as the other. ¶Chosen dayes to graffe in, and to choose your cions. ALso when so euer that ye wyll graffe, the best chosen tymes is on the last day before the chaunge, and also in the chaunge, & on the seconde daye after the chaunge, if ye graffe (as some say) on the thirde, fourth & fift day after the
chaunge, it wil be so many yeres ere those trées bring forth fruit. Which thing ye may beleue if ye will, but I will not. For some do holde opinion, that it is good graffing from the chaunge vnto the .xviij. day thereof, which I think to be good in all the increase of the Moone, but the sooner the better. ¶To gather your cions. ALso such cions or graffs which ye do get on other trées the yong trées of thrée or foure yeares, or .v. or .vj. yea∣res are best to haue graffs. Take them of no vnder bo∣wes, but in the top vpon the East side, if ye can, and of the fayrest and greatest. Ye shall cut them .ij. inches long of the olde wood, beneth the ioynt. And whensoeuer ye will graffe, cut or pare your graffes taperwise from the ioynt two yn∣ches or more of length, which ye shall sette into the stocke: and before ye set it in, ye shall open your stocke wyth a wedge of yron, or harde wood, fayre and softly: then if the sides of your clefts be ragged, ye shall pare them with the poynt of a sharpe knife on both sides within and aboue, then set in your graffes close on the out sides and also aboue: but let your stocke be as little while open as ye can, and when your graffes be well set in, plucke forth your wedge: and if your stocke doe pinch your graffes much, then ye must put in a wedge of the same woodde for to helpe your graf∣fes: Then ye shall lay a thicke barke or pill ouer the cleft from the one graft to the other, to kéepe out the claye and rayne, and so clay them two fingers thicke rounde aboute the cliffes, and then lay on Mosse, but Wooll is better next to your clay, or else to temper your clay with Wooll or haire, for it shall make it byde closer and also stronger on the stocke heade. Some take Wooll next the clay and wrap∣peth it all ouer with linnen clowtes: for the Wooll béeing once moyste, will kéepe the clay so a long tyme. And other some doe take Woollen clowtes that haue béene layd in the iuyce of Wormewood, or such lyke bitter thing, to kéepe créeping Wormes from comming, vnder to the Graffes.
If ye graffe in winter put your clay vppermost, for sōmer your mosse. For in Winter the mosse is warme, and your clay will not cleaue. In Sommer your claye is colde, and your mosse kepes him from cleauing or chapping. To bind them, take of willow pilles, of clouen briers, of Oziers, or such like. To gather your graffe on the East part of the trée is counted best: if ye gather them belowe on the vnder boughes, they will grow flaggie and spreading abrode: if ye take them in the top of the trée, they will grow vpright. Yet some do gather their cions or graffes on the sides of ye trées and so graffe them againe on the like sides of the stocks, the which is of some men not counted so good for fruite. It is not good to graffe a great stocke, for they will be long ere they couer the heade thereof. Of wormes in trees or fruite. IF ye haue any trées eaten with worms, or do bring wor∣my fruite, ye shal vse to wash al his body and great braū∣ches with two partes of Kowpisse, and one parte of Vine∣ger, or else if ye can get no Vineger, with Kowpisse alone, tempered with common ashes: then wash your trées ther∣with before the Spring, and in the Spring, or in Sommer. Annis seedes sowne about the trée rootes, driue away wor∣mes, and the fruite shall be the swéeter, The setting of Stones, and ordering thereof. AS for Almonde trées, Peach trées, Cherry trées, Plum trées, or others, ye shal thus plant or set them. Lay first the Stones in water thrée dayes and foure nightes, vntyll they sinke therin: then take them betwixt your finger and your thumbe, with the small ende vpwarde, and so set them two fingers déepe in good earth. And when ye haue so done, ye shal rake them al ouer and so couer them: and when they begin to grow or spring, kéepe them from wéedes, and they shal prosper the better, specially in the first yere. And with∣in
two or thrée yeares after, ye may sette or remooue them where ye list, thē if ye do remoue them againe after that, ye must proyne of all his twigges as ye shall sée cause, nigh the stocke: thus ye may do of all kind of trées, but specially those which haue the great sap, as the Mulbery, or Figge trée, or such like. To gather Gumme of any tree, IF ye list to haue the Gumme of the Almond trée, ye shall strike a great nayle into the trée, a good way, and so lette him rest, and the Gumme (of the trée) shall issue thereat: thus doe men gather Gumme of all sortes of trées, yea the common Gumme that men doe vse and occupie. To set a whole Apple. ALso some say, that if ye sette a whole Apple foure fin∣gers in the earth, all the Pepines or curnelles in the same Apple, wil grow vp togithers in one whole stock or ci∣on, and al those Aples shalbe much fayrer and greater than others: but ye must take héede, how ye doe set those Apples which doe come in a leape yeare, for in a leape yeare (as some doe say) the curnelles or Pepines are turned contra∣ry, for if ye should so set, as commonly a man doth, ye shall sette them contrary. Of setting the Almonde. ALmondes doe come forth and growe commonly well, if they be set without the shell or huske, in good earth, or in rotten hogges dung: if ye lay Almondes, one day in vine∣ger, then shall they (as some say,) be very good to plant, or lay him in milke and water vntill he do sinke, it shall be the better to sette, or any other nut.
Of Pepines watered. THe Pepines and curnels of those trées which haue a thicke or rough barke, if ye laye them thrée daies in water, or else vntill they sincke therein, they shall be the better, then set them, or sowe them, as is afore mentioned, and then remooue them, when they be well rooted, of thrée or foure yeares growth, and they shall haue a thin barke. To plant or set Vines. IF ye plant or set Vines, in the first or second yeare they wil bring no fruit, but in the thirde yere they wil beare, if they be well kept, ye shall cut them in Ianuarie, & set them soone after they be cut from the Vine, and ye shal set two togither, the one with the olde wood, & the other with∣out, and so let them grow in plucking away al wéedes from about them, and when ye shall remoue them in the second or thirde yere, being well rooted, ye shal set them wel a foote déepe (in good fat earth) with good dung, as of one foote déepe or there abouts, & kéepe them cleane from wéedes, for then they will prosper the better, and in sommer when ye Grape is knytte, then ye shall breake of his top or braunch, at one or two ioyntes after the grape, and so the grape shalbe the greater, and in the Winter when ye cut them, ye shall not leaue past two or thrée leaders on eche braunche, on some braunche but one leader, which must be cut betwixt two ioyntes, and ye shall leaue the yong vine to be the leader, also ye shall leaue therof thrée or foure ioyntes at al times, if a yong cion do come forth of the old braunch or side ther∣of, if ye doe cut him, ye shal cut him hard by the old branch, and if ye wil haue him to bring the grape next yere, ye shal leaue two or thrée ioynts therof, for the yong cion alwaies bringeth the grape: ye may at all times, so that the grape be once taken and knitte, euer as the superfluous cions doe
growe, ye may breake them of at a ioynt, or hardly by the olde braunch, and the grapes will be the greater: thus ye maye order your Vine all the Sommer long without any hurte. To set or plant the Cherry. CHerry trées, and all the trées of stone fruit, woulde be planted or sette of cions, in colde groundes and places of good earth, and lykewise in highe or hilly places, dry and well in the shade: if ye doe remooue, ye ought to remooue them in Nouember and Ianuary, if ye shall sée your Cherry trée waxe rotten, then shall ye make a hole in the mids of the body two foote aboue the ground, with a digge pearcer, that the humor maye passe forth thereby, then afore the spring, shutte him vp againe with a pinne of the same trée: thus ye may doe vnto all other sortes of trées when they beginne to rotte, and is also good for them which beare scant of fruit or none. To keepe Cherries good a yeare. FOr to kéepe Cherries good a yeare, ye shall cut of the stalkes, and then laie them in a well leaded pot, and fill the sayde potte therewith, then put vnto them of good thinne hony, and fill the saide pot therewith, then stoppe it with clay that no aire enter in, then set it in some fayre Seder, and put of sande vnder, and all about it, and couer the potte well withall, so let it stande or remaine: thus ye may kéepe them a yeare, as freshe as though they came fro the trée, and after this sort ye maye kéepe peares, or o∣ther fruite. Against Pismiars. IF ye haue cherry trées laded or troubled with Pismiars or Antes, ye shall rub the body of the trée, and all about
the roote with the iuyce of Purslayne, mingled halfe with vineger. Some doe vse to annoynt the trée beneath al a∣bout the body, with tarre and birde lyme, with wooll oyle boyled togither, and annoynt the trée beneath therewith, and doe laye of chalke stones all about the trée roote, some saye it is good therefore. The setting of Chestnuttes. THe Chestnutte trée, men doe vse to plant like vnto the Figge trée. They may be both planted and graffed wel, they waxe well in freshe and fatte earth, for in sande they like not: if ye will set the curnels, ye shal lay them in wa∣ter vntill they doe sinck, and those that do sinck to the bot∣tome of the water, be best to set, which ye shall set in the Moneth of Nouember & December, foure fyngers déepe, a foote one from another, for when they be in these two Moneths set or planted, they shall endure long, and beare also good fruite, yet some there be that plant or set them first in dung, like beanes, which will be swéeter than the other sort, but those which be set in the two moneths a∣foresayde, shall first beare their fruite: men maye prooue which is best, experience doth teach. This is another way to prooue and knowe, which Cheffnuts be best to plant or set, that is: ye shall take a quantitie of Nuttes, then laye them in sande the space of .xxx. daies, then take and washe them in water fayre and cleane, and throwe them into wa∣ter againe, and those which doe sinke to the bottome, are good to plant or set, and the other that swim are naught: thus may ye doe with all other curnels or nuttes. To haue all stone fruit tast, as ye shall thinke good. IF ye wil haue al stone fruit tast as ye shal fansie, or think good, ye shall first lay your stones to soke in such licor or moysture, as ye will haue the fruit taste of, and then sette them: as for the Date trée (as some say) he bringeth no fruite except he be a hundred yeares olde, & the Date stone
must soke one moneth in the water before he be sette, then shall ye set him with the small ende vpwarde, in good fat earth, in hote sandy ground foure fingers déepe, and when the bowes do beginne to spring, then shall ye euerie night sprinkle them wyth raine water, (or other if ye haue none) so long till they be come forth and growne. Of graffing the Medlar and Misple. FOr to graffe the Medlar or Misple: men doe vse to graffe them on the white Hathorne trée, they wil prooue well, but yet smal and sowre fruit: to graffe one Med∣lar vpon another is the better, some men do graffe first the wilding cion, vpon the Medlar stock, and so when he is well taken and growne, then they graffe thereon the Med∣lar againe, the which doth make them more swéete, verye great and fayre. Of the Figge tree. THe Figge trée in some country, bereth his fruit foure times a yere, the black figges are the best, being dried in the sunne, and then laid in a vessell in beddes one by another, and then sprinckled or strawed all ouer, euery laye with fine meale, then stop it vp, and so it is sent out of the land. If the Figge trée will not beare, ye shal digge him all about, and vnder the rootes in February, and take out then all his earth, and put vnto him the dung of a pri∣uie, for that he liketh best: ye maye mingle with it of o∣ther fat earth, as Pigeons dung mingled with Oyle and Peper stampt, which shall forwarde him much to noynte his rootes therewith: ye shall not plant the Figge trée in colde times, he loueth hote, stony, or grauely ground, and to be planted in Autumne is best. Of the Mulbery tree. IF ye wil plant the Mulbery trée, the Figge trée or others which bring no séede, ye shall cut a twigge or braunche (from the trée roote) of a yeres growth, with the old wood or barke, about a cubite long, which ye shall plant or set all in
the earth, saue a shaftment long of it, and so let it grow, in watering it as ye shall see néede. This must be done before the leaues begin to spring, but take héede that ye cut not the ende or top aboue, for then it shall wyther and dry. Of trees that beare bitter fruite. OF all such trées as beare bitter fruite, to make them bring swéeter, ye shal vncouer all the rootes in Ianua∣rie,) and take out all that earth, then put vnto them of Hogges dung great plentie, and then after put vnto them of other good earth, and so couer them therewithall well againe, and their fruit shall haue a swéeter taste: thus men may doe with other trées which bring bitter fruit. To helpe barren trees. HEre is another waye to helpe barren trées, that they may bring fruit: if ye see your trée not beare scantly in thrée or foure yeares good plentie, ye shall bore an hole with an auger or pearcer, in the greatest place of the body, (within a yarde of the grounde) but not thorow, but vnto or past the hart, ye shall bore him a slope: then take hony and water mingled togither a night before, then put the sayde hony and water into the hole, and fill it therewith, then stop it close with a shorte pinne, made of the same trée, not striken into farre, for pearcing the licor. Another way. IN the beginning of Winter ye shall digge those trées round about the rootes, and let them so rest a daye and a night, and then put vnto them of good earth, mingled well with good store of watered otes, or with watred barley or wheate, layde next vnto the rootes, then fill it with other good earth, and he shall boare fruit, euen as the boring of a hole in the mayster roote, and strike in a pinne, and so fill him againe, shall helpe him to beare, as afore declared.
To keepe your fruit. ALl fruite may be the better kept, if ye lay them in drye places, in drye strawe or hey, but hey rypeth to sore, or in a barley mowe not touching one the other, or in chaffe, and in vessels of Iuniper, or Sypers wood, ye may so kéepe them well in dry salt or hony, & vpon bordes where as fyre is nighe all the Winter, also hanging nie fyre in the Winter, in nettes of yarne. The Mulbery tree. THe Mulbery trée is planted or sette by the Figge trée, his fruit is first sowre & then swéete, he liketh neyther dewe nor rayne, for they hurt him, ye is well pleased with fowle earth or dung, his braunches wil wax dry with∣in euery sixe yeares, then must he cut them of, as for other trées: they ought to be proyned euery yeare as ye shall sée cause, and they will be the better, and to plant him from mid February, to mid March is best. Of Mosse on the tree. OF the Mosse on your trées, ye must not let it to long be vnclensed, ye must rub it of with a grate of wood, or a rough heare, or such like, in Winter when they be moyst or wet, for then it will of the sooner, for mosse doth take away the strength and substance of the fruit, & makes the trées barren at length: when ye sée your trées begin to wax mossy, ye must in the winter vncouer their rootes, and put vnder them good earth, this shall helpe them and kéepe them long without mosse: for the earth not stirred aboue the roote, is one cause of mossynesse, and also the barren∣nesse of the grounde whereon he standeth, and your mosse doth sucker in winter, flyes and other vermin, and so doth therein hide them in Sommer, which is occasion of eating the blossomes and tender cions thereof.
To keepe Nuttes long. FOr to kéepe nuts long, ye shal dry them and couer them in dry sande, and put them in a drie bladder, or in a fatte made of Walnut trée, and put of dry Iuie beries therin, and they shall be much swéeter. To keepe Nuttes gréene a yeare, and also freshe: ye shall put them into a pot with ho∣ny, and they shall continue fresh a yeare, and the sayd hony will be gentle and good for many medicines. To kepe Wal∣nuts fresh and gréene in the time of strayning of Veriuice, ye shall take of that pommis, & put therof in the bottome of a barrell, then lay your Walnuts all ouer, then pōmis ouer them, and so Walnuts againe, and then of the pommis, as ye shall sée cause to fill your vessell. Then stoppe him close as ye do a barrel, and set him in your Seller or other place, and it shall kéepe your nuts fresh and gréene a yeare. Some vse to fill an earthen pot with small Nuttes, and then put to them dry sande, and couer them with a lid of earth or stone, & then they clay it, setting the mouth of the pot downward, two foote within the earth, in their Garden or other place, & so they will kéepe very moyst and swéete vntill new come. To cut the Peache tree. THe Peache trée is of this nature, if he be cut (as some say) gréene, it will wither and drie. Therefore if ye cut any small braunch, cut it harde by the body: the withe∣red twigges euer as they wither, must be cut of hard by the great braunch or body thereof, for then they doe prosper the better. If a Peach trée doe not like, ye shall put to his roo∣tes, the Lées of Wine mingled with water, and also wash his rootes therwith, and likewise the braunches, then couer him againe with good earth mingled with his owne leaues, for those he lyketh best. Ye may graffe Peach vpon Peach, vpon Hasill, or Ashe, or vpon Cherrie trée, or ye may graffe the Almonde vpon the Peach trée. And to haue great Pea∣ches, ye must take Cowes milke, and put good earth therto, then all to strike the body of the trée therwith both vpwarde
and downewarde, or else open the roote all bare thrée dayes and thrée nightes, then take goates mylke, and wash all the rootes therewith, and then couer them againe: this must be done when they begin to blossome, & so shall he bring great Peaches. To colour Peach stones. TO colour Peache stones, that all the fruire therof shal haue the like colour hereafter, that is: ye shall lay or set Peache stones in the earth seuen dayes or more, vntill ye shall sée the stones beginne to open, then take the stones and the curnelles softly foorth thereof, and what colour ye wil, colour the curnel therewith, and put them into the shel againe, then binde it fast togither and sette it in the earth, with the small ende vpwarde, and so let him growe, and all the peaches which shall come of the same fruite (graffed or vngraffed) wil be of the same colour. The peach trée ought to be planted in Autumne, before the colde do come, for he cannot abyde the colde. If Peache trees be troubled with wormes. ALso if any peache trée be troubled with wormes, ye shal take two partes of Cowe pisse, with one parte of vy∣neger, then shall ye sprinkle the tree all ouer therewyth, and wash his rootes and braunches also, and it wyll kill the wormes, this may ye doe vnto al other trées, which be trou∣bled with wormes. To haue the Peach without stones. FOR to make the Peache grow without stones, ye shall take a Peache trée newly planted, then set a Willowe harde by, which ye shall bore a hole thorow, then put the Peache trée thorowe the sayde hole, and so close him on both sides therof, sappe to sappe, and let hym so grow one yeare,
then the next yeare ye shall cutte of the Peache stocke, and let the Willow féede him, and cutte of the vpper part of the Willowe also thrée fingers hye: and the next Winter sawe him of nigh the Peache, so that the Willowe shall féede but the Peache only: and this way ye may haue peaches with∣out stones. Another way for the same. YE shall take the graffes of Peaches, and graffe them vpon the Willowe stocke, and so shall your Peaches be lykewise without stones. If trees doe not prosper. IF that ye sée that your trées do not waxe nor prosper, take and open the rootes in the beginning of Ianuary or afore, and in the biggest roote therof, make a hole with an anger, to the pithe or more, then strike therein a pinne of Oke and so stop it againe close, and let it be well waxt all about the pinne, then couer him againe with good earth, and he shall doe well▪ some doe vse to cleaue the róote. How to graffe Apples to last on the tree till Alhallowtyde. HOwe ye maye haue many sortes of Apples vpon your trées vntill Alhallowtide, that is, ye shall graffe your Apples vpon the Mulbery trée, & vpon the Cherry trée. To make Cherries and Peaches smell, and taste like spyce. HOw to make that Cherries and Peaches shal be plea∣saunt, and shall smell and tast like spice, & that ye may kéepe them well, till the new doe come againe, ye shall graffe them on the Mulbery trée, as is aforesayde: but first ye shall soake them in hony and water, wherin ye shall put of the pouder of Cloues, ginger and Cinamon.
To graffe an Apple which shall be halfe sweete, and halfe sowre. TO graffe that your Apples shalbe the one halfe swéete, & the other halfe soure: ye shall take two cyons, the one swéete and the other soure, some doe put the one cyon tho∣rowe the other, and so graffes them betwéene the barke and the trée: and some againe doe pare both the cyons fynelye, and so settes them ioyning into the stocke, inclosing sappe to sappe, on both the outsides of the graffes, vnto the out sides of the stocke, and so settes them into the heade as the other: and they shal bring fruite, the one halfe swéete, and the other halfe sowre. To graffe a Rose on the Holly. FOr to graffe the Holly, that his leaues shal kéepe al the yeare grene, some do take & cleaue the Holly, & so grafs in a white or redde Rose budde, and then puttes clay & mosse to him, & lets him growe, & some do put the rose bud into a flyt of the barke, & so putteth clay and Mosse, & binds hym feately therein, and lettes him growe, and he shall car∣rie his leaue all the yeare. Of keeping of Plums. OF Plums there be many sortes, as Damsons, which be all blacke, and counted the best: All maner of other Plums a man maye kéepe well a yeare, if they be ga∣thered rype, & then dryed, and put into vessels of glasse: if ye cannot dry them wel in ye sunne, ye shal dry them on hur¦dels of Oziars made like Lettis windowes, in a hot Ouen after bread is drawne forth, and so reserue them. If a plum trée lyke not, open his roote, & powre in all aboute the dregs of Wine, mixt with water, and so couer him well agayne, or powre on them stale vrin or olde pisse of olde men, mixt with two partes of water, and so couer him as before.
Of altering of Peares, or stony fruite. II a Peare do tast harde, or grauelly about the core, lyke small stones, ye shall vncouer his roote (in the Winter, or afore the spring) and take out all the earth thereof, & picke out all the stones, as cleane from the earth as ye can about his roote, then fift that earth, or else take of other good fat earth without stones, and fil al his rootes againe therwith, and he shall bring a soft and gentle Peare to eate, but ye must see well to the watering of him often. The making of Cyder and Pyrry. OF Apples and Peares, men do make Cyder and Pir∣rie, & bycause the vse therof in most places is knowne, I wyll here let passe to speake anye further thereof, but this (in the pressing your Cyder) I will counsell you to kéepe cleane your vessels, and the places whereas your fruit doth lye, and specially after it is brused or broken, for then they drawe fylthy ayre vnto them, and if it be nygh, the Cyder shall be infected therewith, and also beare the faste after the infection therof: therfore as soone as you can, tunne it into cleane and swéete vessels, as into vessels of whyte wine or of sacke, or clarette and such like, for these shall kéepe your Cyder the better and the stronger, along time after: ye may hang a smal bag of linnen, by a thred downe into the lower part of your vessell, wyth pouder of Cloues, Mace, Cyna∣mon, Ginger and such lyke, which wyll make your Cyder to haue a pleasant taste. To helpe frosen Apples. OF Apples that be frosen in the colde and extréeme win∣ter. The remedy to haue the Ise out of them, is this. Ye shal lay them first in colde water a while, & then lay them before the fire, or other heate, and they shal come to them∣selues againe.
To make Apples fall from the tree. IF ye put of fiery coles vnder an Apple trée, and then cast of the power of brimstone therein, and the fume thereof ascend vp, and touch any Apple that is wet, that Apple shall fall incontinent. To water trees in Sommer, if they waxe dry about the roote. WHereas Apple trées be sette in drye drownde and not déepe in the grounde, in Sommer if they want moy∣sture, ye shal take of white strawe, or other, and euery eue∣ning (or as ye shal sée cause) cast theron water al about, and it will kéepe the trées moyst from time to time. To cherrish Apple trees. IF ye vse to throw (in Winter) al about your Apple trées on the rootes therof, the vrine of olde men, or of stale pisse long kept, they shall bring fruite much better, which is good for the Vine also, or if ye do sprinckle or annoynt your Ap∣pte trée rootes with the Gall of a Bull, they shall beare the better. To make an Apple growe in a Glasse. TO make an Apple growe within a glasse, take a glasse what fashion ye list, and put your Apple therein when he is but small, and binde him fast to the Glasse, and the Glasse also to the trée, and let him growe, thus ye may haue Apples of diuers proportions, according to the fashion of your glasse, thus may ye make of Coucombers, Gourdes, or Pomecitrons, the like fashion.
THese thrée braunches & figure of graffing in the shielde in Sommer is, the first braunch sheweth how the barke is taken off, the middle place sheweth, how it is sette to, and the last braunche, sheweth howe to binde him on, in sauing the oylet or eye from brusing. To graffe many sortes of Apples on one tree. YE may graffe on one Apple trée at once, many kinde of Apples, as on euery braunch a contrarie fruite, as is a∣fore declared, and of peares the like: but sée as nighe as ye can, that all your cions be of like springing, for else the one will out growe and shaddow the other. To colour Apples. TO haue colowred Apples, with what colour ye shall thinke good, ye shall bore slope a hole with an anger, in the biggest parte of the bodye of the trée, vnto the myddes therof, or there abouts, & then looke what colour ye wil haue
them of, first ye shall take water, & mingle your colour ther∣with, then stop it vp againe, with a short pinne made of the same wood or tree, then waxe it rounde about: ye may min∣gle with the sayde colour what spice ye list, to make them tast thereafter, thus may ye chaūge the colour & tast of any Apple: your colours may be of Saffron, tourne soule, brasel saunders, or other what ye shal sée good. This must be done before the spring do come: some doe say, if ye graffe on the Oliue stocke, or on the Alder stocke, they wil bring red Ap∣ples: also they say, to graffe to haue fruite without core, ye shall graffe in both the endes of your Cyon into the stocke, & when they be fast growne to the stock, ye shal cut it in the mids, & let the smaller end grow vpward: or else take a cion & graffe the smal ende of the stock downwarde, & so shall ye haue your apple trée on S. Lamberts day, (which is the .xvij of September) they shal neuer wast, consume, nor wax dry, which I doubt. The setting of Vyne plantes. THese figures doe shewe how ye ought to plant and sette your Vines, in two & two togither, the one to haue a∣parte of the olde trée, and the other maye be all of the last cyon: but when ye plant him with a part of the olde trée he shal commonly take roote the sooner than the new cion: ye must wéede them euery moneth, and let not the earth be too close aboue their rootes at the first, but nowe and then lose it with a spade as ye shall sée a rayne past, for then they shal enlarge, and put forth better. Further herein ye shal vnder stande after.
How to proyne or cut a Vyne in Winter. THis figure sheweth, how all Vynes should be proined and cutte, in a conuenient time after Christmas, that when ye cut them, ye shall leaue his braunches very thynne, as ye sée by this fygure: ye shal neuer leaue aboue two, or thrée leaders at the heade of any principall braunch ye must also cut them of in the mydst betwéene the knots of the yung cions, for those be the leaders which will bring the grape, the rest & order ye shall vnderstand as foloweth. Of the Vyne and Grape. SOmewhat I intende to speake of the ordering of the Vine & grape, to plant or set the Vyne: the plants or sets which be gathered from the vine (& so planted) are best, they must not be olde gathered, nor lie long vnplanted after they be cutte, for then they wyll sone gather corruption, and when ye do gather your plantes, ye must take héede to
cut & choose thē, whereas ye may with ye yong cion, a ioynt of the old wood with the new, for ye old wood wil soner. take roote than the new, & better to grow than if it were al yong cion, ye shal leaue the old wood to ye yong cion, a foote or half a foote, or a shaftment long, the yong cion ye shall cut the length of three quarters of a yarde or there abouts, and ye shall choose of those yong cions that be thickest ioynted, or nigh ioynts togithers, and when ye shal plant or set them, looke that your grounde be well digged in the Winter be∣fore, then in Ianuary ye may both cut and plant, but cut not in the frost, for that is daunger of al kind of trées, or ye may plant in the beginning of February, and when ye do plant, ye shall take two of those plantes, & set or lay them togither, a foote déepe in the earth, for two plants set togi∣ther wil not so sone faile, as one alone, and lay them a foote long wise in the earth, so that there may be aboue the earth thrée or foure ioyntes, ye may plant a yong cion with the olde, so that he be thicke or nigh ioynted, for then he is the better to roote, & also to bring fruite: then when ye haue set or layd them in the earth, then couer them wel therwith, in treading it fast downe vnto the plants, but let the ends of your cions or plantes be turned vpright, aboue the earth thrée or foure ioyntes, if there shall be more when they be set, ye shall cut them of, and ye shall cut them alwaies in the middes, betwéene the two ioyntes, and then let them so grow, and sée that ye wéede them alwaies cleane, and once a moneth loose the earth rounde about them, and they shall prooue the better: if it be very dry and hote in the Sommer after, ye may water them, in making a hole with a crow of yron to the roote, & there ye shal poure in water, in the eue∣ning. As for the proyning of them is, when the grape is ta∣ken and clustered, then ye maye breake the next ioynt or two after the grape, of al such superfluous cions as ye shal sée cause, which wil cause the grape to waxe bigger: ye may also breake awaye all suche superfluous buddes or slender braunches, which commeth about the roote, or on the vnder
braunches, which ye thinke will haue no grape, and when ye proyne or cut them in Winter following, ye shall not cut the yong cion nigh the olde, by thrée or foure ioynts, ye shall not cut them like oziars, to leaue a sort of heads togi∣ther on one braunch, which doth kil your vine, ye shal leaue but one head, or two at the most, of the yong cions, vppon the olde braunch, and to cut those yong cions thrée or foure knottes or ioynts of, for the yong cion doth carry the grape alwayes, and when ye leaue vpon a great braunch manye cions, they can not be wel nourished, & after ye haue so cut them in Winter, ye shal bind them with cziars, in placing those yong braunches as ye shall sée cause, and in the spring tyme, when the braunches are tender, ye shall binde them so, that the stormie tempest or winde do not hurt them, and to binde them withall, the best is, great soft rushes, and when the grape is clustered, then ye may breake of all such braunches as is afore declared, vpon one old braunch thrée or foure heads be ynough, for the more heads your braunch hath, the worse your grape shalbe nourished, & when ye cut of any braunch, cut him of hard by or nigh the old braunch, if your Vine ware olde, the best remedie is: if there grow any yong cion about the rte, ye shal in the Winter, cut of the old Vine hard by the ground, or as nigh as ye can, and lot the yong Vine lead, and he wil continue a long time, if ye couer and fill the place about the roote with good earth a∣gayne. There is also vpon or by euery cluster of grapes, a small cion like a pigges tayle, turning about, which doth take away the sappe from the grape, if ye pinche it of hard by the stalke of your grape, your fruite shalbe the greater: if your Vine waxe to ranke and thicke of braunches, ye shall digge the roote in Winter, and open the earth, and fill it vp againe with sande and ashes blend togither, & where as a Vine is vnfruitfull and doth not beare, ye shall bore a hole (with an anger) vnto the hart or pith, in the bodye or thickest part therof, then put in the said hole a small stone, but fill not the hole close therewith, but so that the sicknesse
of the Vine may passe therby. Thē lay al about the roote of good earth mingled with good dung, and so shal he not be vn∣fruitful, but beare wel euer after: or also, to cast of old mens vrine or pisse, all about the roote of the barren vine, and if he were halfe les or marde, he should grow againe & waxe fruitfull as before: this is to be done in Winter. To haue grapes without stones. FOr to haue grapes without stones, ye shall take yong plantes or braunches, and shall set or plant the toppe or small ende downewarde in the earth, and so ye may set two of them togithers for fayling, as I haue afore declared of the others, and those braunches shall bring grapes with∣out stones. To make your Vine to bring a grape to taste like Claret. TO make your Vine to haue a grape to tast like claret wine, and pleasaunt withall, ye shall bore a hole in the stocke vnto the heart, or pith therof, then shall ye make a lectuary with the pouder of Cloues, of Cinamon, mingled with a little fountayne or running water, and fill the sayde hole therewith, and stop it fast and close with waxe, and so binde if fast theron with a linnen cloth, & those grapes shall taste lyke claret wine. Of gathering your grapes. AL grapes that men do cut before they are thorow ripe, the wine shal not be natural, nor yet shall long endure good, but if ye will cut or gather grapes to haue them good, and to haue good wine thereof, ye shall cut them in the full, or soone after the full of the moone, when she is in Can∣cer, in Leo, in Scorpio, and in Aquarius, the moone being in the waine, and vnder the earth.
To knowe if your Grape be ripe ynough. FOr to know if your grapes be rype ynough or not, which ye shall not onely know in the taste, but in sight and tast togither, as in taste if they be swéete and full in eating, and in sight if the stones will soone fall out being chafed or bruised, which is the best knowledge, and also whether they be white or blewe, it is all one matter: the good grape is he which commeth out all watry, or those which be al clammy as byrdlyme: by these signes shall ye knowe when to cutte, being thorow rype or not, and whereas you doe presse your Wine, ye must make your place swéete and cleane, & your vessels within to be clean also, and sée that they haue strong heddes, and those persons which doe presse the grape, must looke their handes, féete and bodie be cleane washed, when as they go to pressing the grape, & that no woman be there hauing there termes: and also ye shal eate of no Cheboles, Scalions, Onyons, or Garlike, Annyséedes, or such like, for all strong sauours your Wine will drawe the infection thereof, and assoone as your grape is cutte and gathered, ye shall presse your Wine after assoone as ye may, which will make your Wine to be more pleasant and stronger, for the grapes which taryeth long vnprest, maketh the Wine to be smal and yll, ye must sée that your vessels be new fayre and swéete within, and to be washed with swéete water and then well dryed againe, and to perfume them with Masticke and such swete vapour, & if your vessell chaunce not to be swete, then shall ye pitche him on the sides, which pitche will take away all euill and such stinking sauor therein. To prooue or taste Wine. ANd when soeuer ye will prooue or taste any Wyne, the beste tyme is, earely in the morning, and take
wyth you thrée or foure soppes of bread, then dippe one af∣ter another into the wyne, for therein ye shall finde (if there be any) sharpe taste of the wyne. Thus I leaue (at this pre∣sent) to speake any further here of the Vine and grape. If this my simple labour be taken in good part (gentle reader) it shall the more hereafter encourage me to set foorth ano∣ther booke more at large, touching the arte of planting and graffing, with other things necessary to be knowne. Here followeth the best tymes howe to order, or chose, and to set or plant Hoppes. IN this figure ye shall vnderstand the placing and making of the Hoppe hilles, by euery Sipher ouer his heade: the first place is shewed but one pole set in the middes, and the Hoppe beneath, the seconde sheweth howe some doth chap downe a spade in the mids of the hill, and therein layes his Hoppe rootes. The thirde place is shewed, howe other some do set out one pole in the middes, and the Hoppe rootes at holes put in rounde about. The fourth place sheweth howe some choppes in a spade crosse in the top, and there layes in his rootes. The fift place sheweth how some do set foure po∣les therein, and puttes the Hoppe round about the hill. The sixt place sheweth that some vse to make crosse holes in the sides, and there laies in the Hoppe rootes. Thus many prac∣tises haue ben proued good, prouided alwais that your hilles be of good fatte earth, specially in the mids downe vnto the
bottome. This I thought sufficient to shewe by this figure the diuersitie in setting, whereof the laying of the Hoppe is counted the surest way. THe best and common setting tyme of Hoppes, is from mid Nouember, to mid February, then must ye digge and clense the ground of wéedes, and mixe it well with good molde and fat earth. Then deuide your hilles a yarde one from another orderly, in making them a yard asunder, and two foote and a halfe broade in the bottome, and when that ye plant them, ye shall lay in euery Hill thrée or foure rootes, some doe in setting of them lay them crossewyse in the mids of the hill, and so couers them againe, some settes the rootes in foure partes of the hill, othersome doe make holes rounde about the hilles, and puttes of the rootes there∣in, and so couers them againe light with earth: of one short roote in a yeare ye may haue many plants, to set and lay as ye shall sée it good, and it shall be sufficient for euery plant, to haue two knottes within the grounde, and one without, some doe chappe a spade crosse in the hill, and layes in crosse the Hoppe, and so couers it. To choose your Hoppe. YE shal choose your roots best for your Hop, in the Som∣mer before ye shall plant thē, for then ye shall sée which beares the Hop, for some there is that brings none, but that which beares, choose for your plants, and set of those in your hilles, for so shall ye not be deceyued, and they shall prosper well. To sow the seedes. SOme doe holde, that ye may sowe among other séedes, the séedes of Hoppes, and so will encrease and be good to sette, or else to make beddes and sowe them alone, wher∣by they may increase to be set, and when they be strong, ye may remoue and set them in your hilles, and plant them as the other before mentioned.
¶The setting your poles. THe best time is in Aprill, or when your rootes be sprong halfe a yarde long or more, then by euery plant or Hop, in your Hilles, ye shall set vp a pole of .xiij. or .xiiij. foote long, or there aboutes as cause shall require, some doe vse to sette but foure poles in euery hill, which is thought suf∣ficient, and when ye shall set them, sée that ye sette them so fast that great windes doe not cast them downe. ¶How to proyne the tree. YE shal marke when the Hoppe doth blossome, and knit in the top, which shall be perceyued to be the Hop, then take and cut vp all the rest growing there aboutes, (not hauing Hop thereon) hard by the earth, that al those which carrie the Hop, might be the better nourished: thus shall ye doe in Sommer, as ye shal sée them encrease and grow, vntill the time of gathering. ¶To gather the Hop. AT such time afore Michelmas as ye shall sée your Hop waxe browne, or somewhat yellowe, then he is best to be gathered in a drye daye, in cutting your Hop by the ground, then pluck vp your pole therewith for shaking of your Hop, so carrie them into some drie house, and when ye haue so pluckt them, ye shall lay them on borded loftes, or on hurdels of clothes, that the winde may dry them, and the ayre, but not in the sunne, for the same will take away the strength therof, nor with fyre, for that will do likewise, and ye shal dayly tosse and turne them til they be dry: to try them when they are dry, hold them in your hand a space, & if they cleaue togither when ye open your hande, they are not then drie: but if they shatter a sunder in opening your hand, then ye may be sure they are dry ynough. If not, lette them remaine, and vse ye them as is before sayde.
Ye shal vnderstand the drinesse of them is to preserue them and long to last, but if néede be, ye may occupie them well vndryed, with lesse portion to sowe. ¶What Poles are best. YE shal prepare your Poles of such wood as is light and styffe, and which will not bowe with euery winde, the best and méetest time to get them is in Winter when the sappe is gone downe, and as soone as ye haue taken of your Hop, lay your Poles in sundry places vntill the next spring, whereby they may endure the longer. ¶How to order and dresse your hylles. AFter the first yeare is past, your Hop being increased to more plentie of rootes in your hilles, ye shall after Michelmasse euery yeare, open your hilles and cast downe the tops vnto the rootes, vncouering them, and cut awaye all the superfluous rootes, some doth plucke awaye all the rootes that spreades abroad without the hilles, then opens the hils and puts of good newe earth vnto them, and so co∣uers them againe, which shall kéepe them from the frost, & also make the grounde fatte, so shall ye let them remayne vnto the spring of the yere, in February or March, then a∣gaine if ye shall sée anye superfluous rootes ye maye take them awaye, and cup them vp, and your Hop shall be the better, then againe cast vp the earth about your hils, and clensing them from all wéedes and other rootes, which will take away their strength, if the herbs remaine, so let them rest till your Poles may be set therein. ¶Of grounde best for your Hop. THe Hop delighteth and loueth a good and reasonable fatte grounde, not verye lowe, nor yet to moyst, for I haue séene thē prooue wel in Flaunders, in dry sandy
fieldes, the Hoppe hilles being of good fat earth, ye may (as some say for great néede, make your Hoppe growe and beare on any kinde of rockie grounde, so that your hilles be great and fatte earth, but the lower grounde commonlye proueth best, so that it stande well and hotte in the Sunne. A note of the reast abouesayde. YE shall marke and vnderstande, all this order aboue said, is to haue many hoppes and good, with a few rootes and plantes placed in a small plotte of ground. Ye shall vnderstande, the wilde hoppe that growth in the hedges, is as good to occupye as the other, to set or plant in any other place, but loke ye take not the barren hoppe to plant, some hoppe will be barren for want of good earth, & lacke of dres∣sing, which ye shall perceyue (as I haue tolde you) in the Sommer before, that when they shoulde beare they wylbe barren, which is for want of good fatte earth, or an vnkinde yeare, or lacke of wéeding and good ordering. Therefore such as are minded to bestow labour on the grounde, may haue as good hoppe growing in this countrey, as is in other countries: but if ye will not go to the cost, to make hoppe yardes, ye may with a light charge haue hoppes growe in your hedge rowes, to serue as well as the other, and shalbe as good for the quantitie as the other in all respects: ye may (for lacke of grounde) plant hoppe rootes in hedge rowes, when ye doe quicke sette vp poles by them when time shal require in the spring, and to bestowe euery winter after the gathering your hoppe, on euery hill heade, a shouel full of dung to comfort the earth, for thē will they beare ye more plentie of hoppe the next yeare following: to conclude, you that haue groundes maye well practise in all thinges afore mencioned, and specially to haue hoppe in this ordering, for your selues and others, also ye shall giue encouragement for other to followe hereafter. I haue hearde by credyble persons, which haue knowne a hundreth hilles, (which is
a small plat of grounde, to beare thrée hundreth pounde of Hoppe, so that the commodity is much, & the gaynes great: and one pound of our Hoppe dryed and ordered, will go as farre as two pounde of the best Hoppe that commeth from beyond seas. Thus much I thought méete and necessarie to write, of the ordering and planting of Hoppe. ¶Howe to packe your Hoppes, WHen your Hoppes be well tossed and turned on boor∣ded floores, and well dryed (as I haue afore shewed) ye shall put them into great sackes according to the quanti∣tie of your Hoppes, and let them be troden downe hard to∣gither, which will kéepe their strength longer, and so yée may reserue them, and take at your pleasure. Some doe vse, (which haue but small store) to treade them into drie fattes, and so reserue them for their vse, which is counted the better way and the lesse portion doth serue, and will longer kéepe their vertue and strength. Wishing long life and prosperous health, To all furtherers of this common wealth. FINIS.
Here foloweth a necessary table (by Al∣phabete) to finde out quickly all seuerall particulars in thys booke afore mentioned, by the numbers in this table, seeking the lyke number on the pagine or leafe. A ABricotes graffed. 22 Antes or Pismiars on trées. 51 Antes on yong trées. 51 Antes or Pismiars about trées 58 Antes or Pismiars on Cherry trées. 67 An Apple to be set whole in the earth. 67 Apple trées graffed. 20. Altering of harde Peares. 76 Altering or transplanting. 38 Apple trées disbraunched. 40 Apples without blossoming. 56 Apples to be had rathe or late. 56 Almondes to be greater than other. 59 Almondes set of the curnell. 37 Apples to remayne long on the trée. 74 Apples which are frozen to helpe. 76 Apple trées to be cherished. 77 Apples to be made fall from the trée. 77 Apple trées to be set, not to consume. 79 Apples to growe of dyuers fashions. 79 Apples cions to graffe dyuers sortes on a trée. 78 Apples to be coloured. B Barennesse of trées and braunches cut. 47 Barennesse of trées to helpe. 70 Beastes broosing on trées or graffes. 48 Binding of trées being weake. 27 Binding of graffes against windes. 28 Binding of graffes. 31 Binding of trées, and with what. 45
Boughes broken to remedie. 13 Bushes or small trées to be set. 19 Braunches to be set in the earth. 16 Braunches another away. 16 Braunches olde howe to be set. 28 Braunches to be set and gouerned on trées. 38 Braunches to be cut before they be set. 39 Broken braunches to cut of. 13 Bushing of graffe heads. 31 C Caterpillers on trées. 53 Chaunging the fruite of curnels. 7 Chestnuttes to be set. 68 Cole worte harde to be graffed. 23 Chestnuttes in ranke. 41 Chestnuttes to haue rathe and late. 56 Cherry trées to be set. 10 Cherry trées set. 11 Cherry trées graffed. 12 Cherries with the difference. 15 Cherries to be graffed one vpon another. 16 Cherries graffed to be great. 20 Cherries graffed and how to be cut. 26 Cherries to taste like spice. 35 Cherries to haue long on the trées. 56 Cherries to plant or set. 67 Cherries to be kept in good ayre. 67 Choosing your graffes or cions. 23 Cleauing your stockes. 28 Cleauing your stockes of Cherries and Plum trées. 18 Cherry how to be tempered. 31 Couering your cliftes, on the head. 31 Curnelles watered. 66 Curnelles to be set. 2 Curnelles taken out of the pressing of fruite. 2 Cutting of principall members. 49
Cutting of principall rootes. 3 Cutting of great rootes. 43 Cutting of cions with the tyme. 19 Cutting the heades of your stocke. 27 Cutting, proying and when. 46 Cutting great braunches. 46 Cutting of braunches in replanting. 14 D Damson trées to be set. 11 Damsons to last long on the trées. 35 Dayes on the Moone to graffe on. 58 Dayes best to plant or graffe. 60 Date trée set of a stone. 68 Defending your trées from Snayles. 51 Déepe setting or shallowe. 16 Déepe digging and donging. 17 Differences of Cherries. 15 Donging your trées of Pepines. 3 Dong and good earth for trées. 43 Diuers kind of graffes. 21 Digging the earth for slips. 17 Digging the rootes all about. 44 Disbraunching al wild stocks, before they are replāted. 40 Drawing forth of your wedge. 30 E Earth with the vse thereof. 2 Earth to be made good. 44 Earth good for trées. 43 Earth to be digged for slippes. 17 Elmes harde to be graffed. 21 Emettes or Antes. 58 F Fensing your graffe heades. 31 Filbardes to be set. 10 Figge trée graffed. 21 Figge trées to come forwarde. 69 Figge trées to be planted. 18
Forwarde trées to be marked. 14 Foure wayes of graffing. 19 Furnishers to be had. 24 Fruite charging the trée. 22 Fruit to haue the tast of halfe an Apple, & halfe a Peare. 57 Fruite howe to kéepe from the frost. 59 Fruit to be made laxatiue. 60 Fruit to tast as ye shall séeme good. 68 Fruit to be kept long. 71 Fumigations in the spring time. 53 G Graffing all sortes of trées. 20 Graffes of Plumtrées to graffe with. 11 Graffing of Plums and Cherries. 11 Graffing foure wayes. 19 Graffing of Seruice, or sette. 6 Graffes of diuers kindes. 21 Graffing the Figge trée. 21 Graffing all sortes of trées. 20 Graffes to be kept long. 23 Graffing how to beginne. 24 Graffing wilde stockes. 24 Graffing things to graffe with. 24 Graffes not prospering. 25 Graffing well and sounde. 25 Graffes how to be ordered. 25 Graffing howe to take héede of the barke. 26 Graffes pinched in the stocke. 28 Graffing the braunch or great trée. 28 Graffing many cions on one head. 29 Graffes which doe lightly take. 29 Graffes to be right sette in the head. 30 Graffing the second way of braunches. 32 Graffing the third maner, betwixt the barke and the trée. 33 Graffing in the shielde. 34 Graffing in the Sommer. 34
Graffing with great big cions 34 Graffing on yong trées. 36 Graffing thrée or foure heades on a trée. 37 Graffing artificially or subtilly. 54 Graffing one Vine on another. 54 Graffing times, and when. 58 Graffing one Vine with another. 60 Graffes howe to be gathered. 61 Graffing without core. 70 Grapes without stones. 83 Grapes to taste lyke claret. 83 Grapes when to be gathered. 83 Grapes to know when they are rype. 84 Great Nuttes or Plums, sette of curnels. 59 Great Cherryes to be graft. 20 Great braunches howe to be cutte. 47 Gouerning of trées cutte. 49 Ground best for hoppes. 88 Gumme to be gathered on trées. 65 H Hasell Nuttes to be set. 10 Heddes of graffes to be couered. 34 Heddes of graffes to be drest. 33 Howe to graffe the shield. 35 Howe to set trées at large. 41 Helping of trées. 48 Helping of mossy trées. 45 Holes for the rootes enlarged. 43 Howe to remooue trées. 5 Howe to leaue great braunches cutte. 47 Howe to take wormes on trées. 51 Hoppes howe to plant. 85 Hoppes howe to be chosen. 86 Hoppes séedes to be sowne. 86 Hoppes to be proyned or wéeded. 87 Hoppes when to be gathered. 87 Hoppe hilles how to be drest. 88
Hoppe grounde the best. 88 Hoppes how to be packte best. 90 K Keping graffes long. 23 Kéeping Antes from trées. 51 Kéeping yong trées from Snayles. 51 Kéeping yong trées in the Spring. 53 Kanker or worme in the barke. 50 M Making Syder. 6 Making Orchardes in fewe yeares. 7 Marking the stocke in taking it vp. 16 Medlers graft. 20 Medlars bow to be graft to waxe great. 69 Medlars againe to be graft. 20 Medlars or other fruit tasting like spice. 55 Medlars sooner two monethes than others. 56 Medlars without stones. 57 Medicining of trées. 45 Medlars, principall tymes to cutte. 49 Many trées following their naturall earthes. 40 Mosse on trées. 71 Mosse taken from trées. 45 Mulbery trée to be sette. 18 Mulbery trée to come rath or late. 57 Mulbery trée. 69 Mulbery to be planted. 71 Muscadell taste in Grapes. 55 Multiply or augment trées. 6 N Nature of the graffes. 21 Nature of places. 44 Negligence of the planter. 5 Nuttes graft. 59 Nutte in graffing. 26 Nuttes and what doth make them good. 48 Nuttes to be kept long and gréene. 72 Nuttes how to be set. 8
Nuttes and stones which be lyke the trées. 9 Noynting the trées beneath. 68 O Orchardes making in fewe yeares. 7 Ordering your trées in rankes. 42 Ordering Plum trées and Cherry trées. 11 P Packing of Hops. 89. Paynes taking in planting. 53 Peches rathe or timely. 55 Peche trées how to be cut. 72 Peches how to be coloured. 73 Peche trées with wormes. 73. Peches without stones. 73 Peares to be altered. 76 Peares to come rathe. 56 Peares to kéepe a yeare. 57 Pepins to be watered. 66 Pepins taken from the presse. 2 Pyne trée to be set. 10 Pinching of the graffes. 28 Pismiars or Antes. 67 Pismiars to be destroyed. Another. 58 Planting in valleyes. 44 Planting trées at large. 41 Planting without the roote, and also with the roote. 59 Planting of the Vyne. 66 Planting Nuttes. 9 Placing the shielde on the trée. 36 Plums to be graffed. 59 Plums how to be kept. 75. Plum trées if the like not. 75 Plum trées to be set. 11 Plum graffes to be cut. 26 Plums tasting like spice. 55 Poles for Hoppes. 87 Poles which are best. Prayer in graffing and plant Profite that come by Proyning or cutting
Proyning what trées. 15 Proyning Cyons. 16 Proyning of trees and when. 46 Proyning of hoppes. 87 Pultrie to take héede of. 2 Q Quyne Apple howe to be graffed. 58 Quinces for to plant. 18 Quinces to be graffed. 20 Quince againe to be graffed. 21 R Raysons of grapes to kéepe a yeare. 60 Rankes to be set. 41 Remedy against broken bowes. 13 Remoouing or replanting trées. 3 Replanting in the méetest times. 5 Rootes to be clensed. 12 Rootes to be cut. 43 Rootes rebated in replanting. 15 Rootes to be vncouered. 47 Rootes vncouered. 46 S Seruices graffed or set. 6 Seruice trées. 22. Seruice trée set. 22 Sauing the stocke before yée graffe. 26 Setting trées in ranke. 4 Setting of Nuttes. 8 Setting of Filbardes, or hasell Nuttes. 10 Setting toward the South or sunnie place. 39 Setting plums or Damson trées. 13 Setting all sortes of Cherries. 11 Setting of bushe trées. 19 how to be bounde. 36 taken of, to know if he be good or 35 76
Syder making. 7. Sicknesse in trées. 50 Syons when to be gathered. 61 Syons pluckte vp. 3. Syons without rootes. 18 Syons which are best. 23. Slender stockes or trées. 27 Small trées of curnelles. 3. Snayles on trées. 51 Sowing of pepynes or curnels. 2 Space from ranke to ranke. 4 Staues to staye your cions. 14 Stocke heddes to be well cutte. 27 Stocke heds clouen to much, or the barke head do teare. 29 Stockes not hastily to be remooued. 48 Stones of fruite to be sette. 64 Swelling of the stocke or graffe. 13 T Taking héede in graffing. 26 Taking vp of trées. 14 Taking of ye shield from the bark, & to set him on again. 36 Tymes best to graffe in. 60 Tymes and manner of graffing foure wayes. 19 Tymes to cut Cions. 19 Times to sette Nutte trées. 8 Tymes when to vncouer the shield. 38 To kepe yeares a yeare. 57 Transplanting after Michelmasse. 39 Trées graffed or vngrafte, to make Sider. 6 Trées of wilde Nuttes. 10. Trées to be taken vp, 14 Trées of great cions prickte in the earth, without roots Trées harde to be graft, with shielde or scutchion. Trées charged with fruite. Trées to chaunge cions or graffes on. Trées to choose to graffe on. Trées to marke, which be forwarde. Trées as bygge as your legge. Trées hauing great braunchesse. Trées hurt or eaten with beastes. Trées beyng long without frute.
Trées which do not prosper. 74 Trées with wormes or fruite. 64 Trées bearing bitter fruite. 70 V Vines how to plant. 66. Vine or grape. 80 Vse of earth in sowing your curnelles. 2 Vncouering of the trée rootes. 45 W Walnuttes set. 9. Walnuttes howe to be kept. 72 Walnutts trées what they loue best. 40 Watering trées against the Caterpiller. 53 Watering trées or plantes. 4. Watering of trées. 45 Wéeding your beddes or grounde. 2 Wedges in graffing, how to be softely drawne foorth. 30 What trées loueth fayre sunne; & what loue colde ayre. 40 What dong to dong your trées. 45. When to proyne. 46 When to vncouer your trées. 46 Why frute sauor or tast not well. 9 Wylde trées plucked vp. 3 Wylde stockes remooued. 48 Wyne howe to prooue or tast. 84 Wormes among rootes. 44. Wormes in the barke. 5 Wormes that do eate in trées. 51 Wormes of a straunge nature, and how to take them. 50 Wormes in trées of fruite. 64 Wormes in the peache trée. 7 FINIS.
