21444 99841853 6468
A BRIEFE TREATISE AGAINST DETRACTORS OF DIGNITIES. Published BY RA: RVGBIE Esquire. Allowed by Authoritie. LONDON, Printed by George Eld. 1622.
AGAINST DETRACTORS OF DIGNITIES. NImium admiror ve∣stram hanc insolen∣tiam,Tho: Walsingham pag. 21 n. 30. eo quòd sapi∣entium ministerium, & gradus vsurpa∣stis, sapientiae autem studium, & ope∣ram neglexistis; It was a saying of King Aelfrea's vnto certaine per∣sons, which did take vpon them to iudge without learning, and may be well applied to those, who que∣stion Dignities, and presume to censure Statum & Dignitatem Baro∣nettorum, thus without any true Precedent, or ground. It is shewed
in the booke published by his Ma∣iestie touching the Creation of Baronets:The Booke published by his Maiestie, touching the creation of Baronets, pag. 19. printed 1611. That there is nothing of honor, or value, which is sought, or desired (be the motives never so good) but may receive scandall from some, who wanting the same good affection to the publique, or being in other consi∣derations incapable, can be contented out of enuy to those, that are so pre∣ferred, to cast aspersions and imputa∣tions vpon them: And out of which of these, or whether from them all this proceeds I know not: but cer∣taine I am, great was their error, to reach at prerogatives so tran∣scendent, and of this high myste∣rie: when as no Democraticall go∣uernment could ever ascend vnto it, it being an Imperiall right, due onely to Monarchs to dispose of Dignities.Regnerus Sixtinus de Iure rega: ca. 2. Estius Regalium, vel ius Imperij, creandi Magistratus, dandi Insignia Nobilitatis, sive Nobiles cre∣andi,
ad famam & honores restituen di: Regnerus Sixtinus de Iure Rega: And herewith agrees the Act of 31. of King H: 8.Stat: 31. H: 8. cap: 10. That it appertai∣neth to the Kings Prerogative Royall to give such honor, reputation,See also Smiths Common wealth of England, pag: 28. & 48. accord and place as to his most excellent wisdome shall seeme meet. Wherein his Ma∣iestie hath that absolute power, that if it had pleased his Highnes, there might haue beene as well in∣serted the like Clause in their Let∣ters Patents, for the Creation of this Dignity, as was formerly in a Charter made by his Royall Aun∣cester King H: 7. sct.2. Parte Patent: anno 1. H: 7. memb. 21. Quod Rex non vult arguendum, communicandum, aut disputandum, per quoscun{que}. The which followeth the opinion of Bracton, Iustice,Bracton f: 6. & f: 34. in the time of King H. 3. sct. De Chartis Regijs, & factis Regum, non debent, nec possunt priva∣tae personae disputare. And that it is against the duty of a subiect, to de∣teriorate
his Highnes Prerogative. See the Mirror of Iustice,The Mirror of Iustice, cap. 5. that by the auncient Common Law of En¦gland, It was held a crime against Maiestie: And that he was periur'd against the oath of a Subiect,See the Stat: 36. E: 3. cap: 16. The care had for preseruation of the rights of the Crowne. who did any way substract, or diminish the Rights, or Prerogatives of the King: Yet that these neverthelesse will impugne his Maiesties Preroga∣tive, and disable his Highnes in that power his Royall Progenitors had: This shewes they did not as the wise men of the East, (in Math. 2.Math: 2. Dier f: 94. Selden Hon: pag: 208. Co: li: 7. f. 33. Ranulphus of Chester f: 387. Camden Brit: pag: 165. & 167.) follow the right starre. Did not King E: 3. create Dukes, and King R: 2. Marquesses to be he∣reditary Dignities, to precede, and goe before Earles, and Barons, that were farre auncienter? Did not af∣terwards King H:Davis Report: f: 60. Co: li: 9. f: 124. 6. create Vis∣count's to be an hereditary Dignity likewise, and gave them the place and precedency of Barons? Was
not also the Institution of the Or∣der of the Garter,Smiths Common-wealth, pag. 25. Camden Brit. pag. 171. 172. Selden Hon. pag. 353. 359. 362. and Banneret's created by E: 3. and Knights of the Bath by H: 6.Mils pag. 24. to take place of Knights Bachelors? and yet were they subsequent Dignities vnto them. And hath not the place beene ever given at the Prince his pleasure, and sometimes the Pre∣cedencie before them of the same degree, though they were after them created. Vide Rot: Parl; 23.Ch. a. 23. H. 6. memb. 26. n. 24. See Camden Brit. pag. 570. H: 6. where King H: 6. granted to Henry Earle of Warwicke,And it appeares in the Cha. ab anno 27. vs{que} 37. H. 6. n. 24. & Orig. 31. H. 6 Rot. 27. That af∣terwards H. 6. created Edmond Hadham Earle of Richmond, and to take his place as the first Earle of England. this Pre∣eminence to be the first, and chiefe Earle of England, and to carry this Style, sct. Henricus Praecomes totius Angliae, & Comes Warwici, and after∣wards created him Duke of War∣wick, and by these expresse words of his Patent, granted that hee should take his place in Parlia∣ment, and elsewhere,Camden Brit. pag: 570. next vnto the Duke of Norfolke, and before
the Duke of Buckingham:Ch. 25. & 26. H. 6 memb. 31. Vide 25. & 26. H: 6. Humfridus Stafford Dux Buckingham, quod sit primus Ducum in Anglia.Billae signatae anno 21. & 22. H. 8. See 21. & 22. H: 8. a Grante to Anne Rochford of the Dignitie of Marchionesse of Pen∣broke, to take her place before all of her ranck, excepting the Kings Issue: Vide 18.Pat. 18. H. 6. parte 2. memb. 20. & 23. H. 6. This was the first honorary, and hereditary Viscount after the Conquest. H: 6. Rex 120 die Februarij concessit Iohanni Domino de Beau∣mont, nomen Vicecomitis de Beau∣mont, cum 20. marcis percipiendis annuatim sibi, & haeredibus suis ma∣sculis; & quod habeat locum ante, & supra omnes Vicecomites fiendos, sive creandos, & haeredes, & filios omnium Comitum, ac sedem, & hono∣rē immediate, & proxime Comitibus regni Angliae, in Parliamētis: &c. Vide a:2. Parte Pat. an. 1. E. 4. memb. 13. 1. E: 4 Robertus Botill Prior Ho∣spitalis sancti Iohannis Ierusalem. in Anglia,See also Selden Hon. pag. 283. primus Baro Regni Angliae, &c.Pat. anno 5. H. 3. memb. 5. Et vide a: 5. H: 3. Rex &c. sa∣lutem: Obtentu dilecti Militis nostri
Domini Rogeri de Leyburne, volen∣tes ipsum propter ipsius grata merita, & accepta servitia culmini nostro gratanter impensa benigno favore prosequi, & dilectione; vniversitatem vestram affectuose rogamus, quate∣nus ipsum vbicun{que} locorum, de cae∣tero tanquam nostrum Militem ob no∣stram reverentiam honore debito velitis prosequi, & gratia speciali, &c. Hath not his Maiestie the like po∣wer? And wherein is this creation of Baronets more grievous, and hurtfull, then those former here∣ditary Dignities were? Was there ever any exception taken to them? No not any. It is said onely that King R: 2.Camden Brit. pag. 165. &. 217. made Iohn of Beaufort sonne to Iohn of Gaunt,Selden Hon. pag. 217. and Earle of Somerset Marquesse of Dorset; of which hee was afterwards depri∣ved by King H: 4. And when a Petition was in Parliament by the Commons for his restitution, hee
most humbly prayed the King, that in regard the name of Mar∣quesse was a strange name in this Kingdome, that hee would not restore him to it, neyther would hee willingly accept thereof: which for your better satisfaction herein, there is here exemplified the Record it selfe, in haec verba, sct. Rotulo Parliamenti,Parl. 4. H. 4. memb. 18. Art. 18 a: 4. H: 4. n: 18. Le lundy lo 6. jourde Novemb. les Commons viendrent devant le Roi, & les Snrs. en Parlement, & entre autres choses, et matires illonques monstrez, et parlez; Mesme les Com∣mons humblament recomendantz les bone, et honorable port, et governance del Conte de Somerset, prierent au Roi, que mesme le Conte, purroit estre restore a ses nosme, et honour de Marquis, queux il avoit per devant, de quel prier, le Roi, et le Snrs. enun∣tierent les dits Coēs. Et le Roi lour desoit quil voiloit estre avise, et ent
faire ceo que luy sembleroit pur le mieux touchant cel matire, Et sur ceo le dit Conte engenulant, mult hum∣blament pria au Roi, que comme le nosme de Marquis feuist estrange nosme en cest Roialme, quil ne luy voiloit ascunement doner cel nosme de Marquis; quar jammais per con∣gie du Roi il ne voiloit porter n'ac∣cepter sur luy nul tiel nosme, en a∣scun manner: mais nient meins le Conte molt cordialment remercia les Snrs. et les Coēs de lour bone coers, et volente en celle partie. And herewithall whosoever will ob∣serve: first how the said Iohn of Beaufort Earle of Somerset obtai∣ned this Dignitie of Marques a: 21. R: 2. Secondly, that in Parliamt a:Rot. Parl. anno 21. R. 2. 1. H: 4. He was there dishonored,Rot. Parl. anno 1. H. 4. & deprived of this Dignity. Lastly, the Kings answer to his said Petiti∣on made by the intercession of the Commons in Parliament, a: 4. H:Rot. Parl. a. 4. H. 4. 4
That hee would be advised, and doe that which should seeme vnto him the best in that behalfe; hee may then plainly discerne, in what manner hee did refuse it. Yet admit he did, what will they conclude of this, that because one hath no stomack, therefore others must fast also: I thinke few will like of this rea∣son. And though in distribution of Honors, his Maiestie is not li∣mited, or tyed to Precedent, but being the fountaine of Honor may create what Dignities he pleaseth, and may as well conferre Honors vpon any man,Davis Reports f. 25. as he may give value, or worth to any mettall to make it of esteeme, and cur∣rent: Yet it is easie to prove (what opinions soever there are to the contrary) that the name of Baronet is no strange name in this King∣dome.Camden Brit. pag. 171. Selden Hon. pag. 354. & 355. 13 E. 3. and appeareth, clans. de anno 15. E. 4. memb. 11. pro Willō. Norreys Milite liberate. Vide temp. E. 3. Thomas de Bradeston per Regem E: 3. 15. Octo∣bris
anno regni sui 13. factus Baro∣nettus; cui, vt ipse statum Baronetti eo decentius manutenere queat, Rex dedit 500. marcas annuas habendas sibi, &c. See also the printed Stat: of 13. R: 2. ca: 1. & 14. R: 2. ca: 11.2. Stat. 13. R. 2. cap. 1. & 14. R. 2. cap. 11. for Baronets, & vide anno 24. H: 6.Originale de anno 24. H. 6. Rot. 31. Aquiten. Rex 18. die Septembris concessit Rai∣mundo de Pys Baronet Capitan: & balliagium de Sauvetere, habend' pro termino vitae suae ad valorem 4. li. per annum. See also the booke case of 35. H: 6. for Baronet.35. H. 6. f. 46. It ap∣peares also by certaine Court-rols, and Evidences in E: 4. time,Temp. E. 4. These remaine in the hands of one Mr. Gittins of Burntwood in Essex. that one Sir William Craiford of Mun∣gham in Kent, had then, and there∣in, the title, and addition of Baro∣net Vide 4. & 5. H: 8.Billae signatae annis 4. & 5. H. 8. Rex Omni∣bus ad quos, &c. salutem.See also Holinshed Chron. pag. n. (his 3. volume for 322. 40. a. Baronets. 331. 30 b. Baronets. 359. 60. a. Baronets. 373. 60 a. Baronets. 384. 10. a. Baronets. 865. 10. b. Baronets. Sciatis quod nos defidelitate, providentia, strenui∣tate, et industria, diligentia{que}, et ex∣perientia, ac integritate charissimi Consanguinei, et Consiliarij nostri
Georgij Comitis Salop: Senescalli Ho∣spitij nostri, ac Militis Ordinis nostri Garterij plurimum confidentes: cun∣dem locum tenentem nostrum genera∣lem, Ducemque primarium, & guber∣natorem totius primae acici, et exer∣citus, ac Armatae nostrae, favente al∣tissimo, ad partes exter as profecturae, ac omnium, et singulorum Capitane∣orum, vicecapitaneorum, et locate∣nentium, Baronum, Baronettorum constituimus,Billae signatae anno 4. E. 6. & O∣riginale de eodem anno, Rot. 20. & 9. parte Paten. 4. E. 6. &c. vide 4. E. 6. Rex &c. Cum in consideratione fidelis, et acceptabilis servitij nobis per dilectū servientem nostrum Radul: Fane Militem in guerris nostris, quam ali∣ter antehac facti, et impensi, idem Radūs ad Statum, Gradum, Hono∣rem, et Dignitatem Baronetti per nos erectus, suscitatus, et creatus extite∣rit,Billae signata anno 1. Maria Re∣ginae. &c. Et vide 1. Maria; Williel∣mus Howard Miles Dominus Ho∣ward de Effingham, magnus Admi∣rallus Angliae, Wallia, Hiberniae,
Normanniae, Gasconiae, et Aquitaniae fit locum-tenens generalis; Dux{que} primarius, et Gubernator totius Clas∣sis armatae nostrae regiae, in quibuscun{que} partibus super mare, ad tuitionem, et defensionem Amicorum nostrorum pro∣fecturae, ac omnium, et singulorū Na∣vium, Capitaneorum, et locum-tenen∣tium, Baronum, Baronettorum, &c. Yet notwithstanding the testimo∣ny of these, and others, I will not affirme, that the distinct, and here∣ditary Dignity of Baronets was ever knowne vnto vs, before the Crea∣tion of them by our present Sove∣raigne:See 2. Stat. 5. R. 2. ca. 4. in the Abridgements of Stat. for Ba∣ronet, and in the Stat. at large Baneret, and yee shall also finde the same person in one and the selfe-same Record, somtimes written Baronet, and somtimes Baneret. For which see that of Bradeston, 13. E. 3. For I am not ignorant of the opinions of the learned con∣cerning the former, that Baronu∣lus, Baronettus, et Banerettus, were aunciently all one, and were pro∣miscuously vsed for Banerets. Tou∣ching this kinde of hereditary Knighthood,See Mils pag. 24. that there are hereditary Knights at this day in Italy. which (say they) was never before heard of, see the
Patents in 13.Rot. Vascon 13. E. 3. memb 13. For this also you haue an Au∣thor entituled, The Treasury of Times, pag. 527. herewith con∣curring. And it is further proved ex claus. 7. R. 2. memb. 32. in dorso. E: 3. vnto William de la Pole, and the like vnto Bradeston; which sheweth that Banerets were then hereditary, & that for main∣tenance of their Dignity, lands were given vnto them and their heyres. And our auncient feoda∣ry Knights,Math. Paris pag. 1249. Stat. 1. E. 2. 7. H. 6. f. 14. 15. See Camdens Brit. pag. 174. That they fined for not being knighted. See also Selden Hon. pag. 319. 320. Vide Dorso clausarum de anno 3. H. 3. memb. 24. Quisquis Laicus plenae aetatis, qui feodū vnius Mi∣litis tenet, & Miles non est, arma capiat, & se Militem fieri faciat, sicut feodum vel feoda sua diligit. here in England, were in a manner hereditary: For, if a Knights fee which was 20. li. land per annū, had descended vnto one, he was compellable to take, and it seemeth, of right might have de∣manded a Knighthood, and also the armes, & equipage of Knight∣hood, which belonged to a Knights Fee; That is to say, His Horse,Selden Hon. pag 321. 322. Speare, Sword, and Target was to descend vnto the heire, and not to goe to the executors, as it is of other personall things. For this reade likewise Roger Hoveden.Roger Hoveden pag 611. 614. The Constitutions vnder King H: 2. sct. Quicun{que} habet Feodū vnius Militis,
habeat loricam, et Cassidem,See Ranulphus f. 61. and in the end of the old Mag. Char. f. 168. and Selden Hon. pag. 278. That of these Knights fees, there were aunciently in this King∣dome many thousands, and of Baronies 250. at one time. & cly∣peum, & lanceam, & omnis Miles habeat tot loricas, cassides, clypeos, & lanceas quot habuerit feoda Mi∣litum in Dominio suo, & si quis haec habens arma obierit, arma sua rema∣neant haeredi suo, & si haeres de tali aetate non sit, quod armis vti possit, si opus fuerit, ille eum qui habebit in cu∣stodia, habeat similiter custodiam ar∣morum, & inveniat hominem, qui armis vti possit in servitio Domini Regis, si opus fuerit, donec haeres de tali aetate sit,Vide Fleta li. 9. ca. 9. quod arma portare pos∣sit, tunc ea habeat. By which also, as by this that followeth out of Bracton, and others, it appeareth,Bracton fol. 5. that from our auncient Nobilitie arose the principall strength, and fasegard of this Land,Vide Rot. Parl. anno 21. R. 2. viz. Pur ceo que le greinder supporta∣tion de chescun Realme consiste des dignes person's de state, & de ho∣nor que purront enforcer, & forti∣fier le Scepter du Roi, &c. See also the Preambles of Let∣ters Patents for creation of Dig∣nities accord. (who wri∣teth thus of those that were in his time,) Comites, quia à Comitatu, sive societate nomen sumpserunt, qui etiam dici possunt Consules a consulendo,
Reges enim tales sibi associant, ad consulendum,Vide Hotoman, li. 1. Feud. Tit. 1. §. 1. & tit. 7. Alij sunt Capitanei Regni, quo verbo Duces, Comites, Marchiones, intelliguntur. & regendum populum Dei, ordinantes eos in magno hono∣re, potestate, & nomine, quando accingunt eos gladijs: Gladius au∣tem significat defensionem Regni, & Patriae: Sunt & alij Potentes sub Rege,Vide Bracton, li. 2. ca. 34. f. 76. Nisi capitale Mesuagium illud sit caput Baroniae propter ius Gladij, &c. See Camden Brit. pag. 175. Knight aunciently the name of charge, and function. qui dicuntur Barones, hoc est Robur belli: Sunt & sub Rege Milites, sct. ad Militiam exercen∣dam electi, vt cum Rege, & supra∣dictis militent, & defendant Pa∣triam, & Populum Dei, &c. And as you haue heard how by these Dignities, and Persons of Honor, this Kingdome was aunciently fortified, and defended, so shall you likewise finde, that by this encrease of Dignitie, there will be an increase of strength to the Common-wealth; and that these will be eminent, whenas others peradventure of greater abilitie,Vide Iohan. Basanum, li. 2. pag. 125. Sicut Coelum stellis, sic terra Nobilibus, & heroicis personis in∣signitur. will neyther desire, nor deserve
Honor, but rather seeke obscuri∣tie to shunne the charges of the Common-weale; then be disco∣vered, vpon the Act of 33.By this Act of 33. H. 8. ca. 5. Certaine persons nobled are to finde a horse for service, & such whose wives shall weare, any silke, or Velvet, gold, pearle, or pretious stone. of King H: 8. to finde Armes for defence of their Countrie, though it were in time of greatest neces∣sitie. And that the publique good is advanced by this addition of Honor, heare also the opinion of a principall Secretary to King E: 6. who holds,Smiths Common-wealth of Engl. pag. 29. that the more Dignities there are, the better it is for the Common-wealth: For saith hee, the Gentleman is more charged then the Yeoman, which hee beareth the gladlier, and dare not gainesay it, for to save, and keepe his honor, and reputa∣tion, and in any Shew, or Mu∣ster, or other particular Charge of the place wherein hee is resident, as for the poore, or otherwise, hee opens his purse
wider, and augments his portion aboue others, or else he doth di∣minish his reputation. For this you may reade him at large. To returne to the matter, and to an∣swer him who holds that this Dig∣nity of Baronets is against the Law, because no hereditary Dignity (as hee would haue it) can be entailed within the Statute of Westmr. 2.Stat. Westmr. 2 ca. 1. but it must haue relation to a Realtie, and haue lands to goe therewith: I confesse his opinion may well agree with the phrase in our writs; Quod injustè,Register of Writs, f. 196. et sine judicio cepit, &c. And according to this vaine runs his tongue,F. na. br. f. 177. but not with the Law: For vnlesse it were by him,See Co. li. 7. f. 33. it was never so adjudged: And hee may learne thus much, that constru∣ctions of Dignities are not alwaies taken according to the strict rules of the Common-Law: Nor if you are to try the right of a Dignity,
shall it be tryed by Iury;Co. li 11. f. 1. Mils pag. 71. neyther doe the Maximes,Vide Rot. Parl. apud Westmr. anno 27. H. 6. memb. 4. Art. 18. or grounds in Law, hold in matter of Honor, for there is no copercenary of a Dig∣nity;Bracton li. 2. cap. 34. f. 76. Mils pag. 27. See also the Customes of Nor∣mandy, f. 120. Mils pag. 76. nor haue you a Tenant by the courtesie of a Dignity: neyther is there Possessio fratris of a Dignity:Co. li. 3. f. 42. No more can a Dignity be trans∣ferred, though it be given to a man and to his heyres. And whereas it is obiected, that Baronets being an hereditary Dignity, if they fall into poverty, they and their heires shall notwithstanding take the place of Knights. I answer, that this is a chance incident vnto all Dignities, and to Knighthood al∣so: yet that there is a remedy for this, and the like grievance, they may vnderstand, that if the pos∣sessions of any persons nobled are so decayed,Smiths Common-wealth of En∣gland, pag. 21. 22. Mils pag. 29. that they haue not wherewith to support their Dig∣nity, there is a meanes to deprive
them of it.Rot. Parl. anno 17. E. 4. See how in 17. E: 4. Iohn Marques Montague, and George Duke of Bedford, were by Act of Parliament degraded of all hono∣rable Titles in these words, sct. Whereas afore this time, the King our Soveraigne Lord, for the great love, and zeale he bare to Iohn Ne∣vill, late named Marques Montague, and other considerations him mo∣ving, did erect and make George Nevill the eldest sonne of the said Marques, to be Duke of Bedford: And at that time, for the great love, that his said Highnes bare to the said Iohn Nevill, purposed, and intended to haue given to the said George for sustentation of the same Dignity sufficient livelihood: and for the great offences, vnkindnes, and misbehavings that the said Iohn Nevill hath done, and com∣mitted to his said Highnes (as is o∣penly knowne) hee hath no cause
to depart any livelihood vnto the said George: And forasmuch as it is openly knowne, that the said George hath not, nor by inheri∣tance may have any Livelihood to support the said Name, Estate, and Dignity, or any name of E∣state. And oftentimes it is seene, that when any Lord is called to high estate, and hath not liveli∣hood conveniently to support the said Dignitie, it induceth great povertie, and indigence, and cau∣seth oftentimes great extortion, embracery, and maintenance to be had, to the great trouble of all such Countries, where such Estate shall happen to inhabit: Where∣fore the King by the advice, and consent of his Lords, spirituall, & temporall, and of the Commons of this present Parliament assem∣bled, and by the auctoritie of the same, hath ordained, established,
and enacted, that from hence∣forth the said erection, and ma∣king of Duke, and all the names of Dignity given to the said George, or to the said Iohn Nevill his fa∣ther, be from henceforth void, and of none effect: And that the said George, and his heires, from henceforth be no Dukes, nor Mar∣quesses, Earles, nor Barons, for no erection, or creation before made: But that the name of Duke, and Marques, Earle, and Baron, in him, and his heires, cease, and be void, and of none effect (the said Erecti∣on, or Creation notwithstanding. Yee shall also reade in Nevils Case reported of by Sir Edw:Co. li. 7. f. 33. & 34. Quinetiam si posteaquam electus esset Senator Censum labefactasset, Ordinem amittebat. Sigonius de antiquo iure Civiū Rom. li. 2. ca. 2. Coke, that, As in auncient times the Senators of Rome were elected à Censu, of their Revenues: so, in former times in conferring of Nobilitie here with vs; there was respect had vnto their Revenues, by
which their Dignitie and Nobilitie might be supported, and maintai∣ned; through the want whereof great mischiefe may ensue:Britton f. 68. 29, E. 3. f. 42. 11. H. 4. f. 15. 1. H. 5. f. 14. 14. H. 6: f. 2. Co. li. 6. f. 52. For no Capias lyeth against a Lord of the Parliament,Id solum privilegium habent No∣biles a regibus in gratificationem obsequiûm Reipublicae. Molin. Tract. 2. pag. 1456. in that the Law pre∣sumes he hath sufficient freehold ad sustinendum nomen, & onus, and wherewith to satisfie eyther debt, or trespasse; the which wanting, all remedy in such case faileth: Therefore Antiquitie hath set downe a Competencie of liveli∣hood for these degrees following,Co. li. 9. f. 124. sct. 12. Plough-lands for a Knights fee, as sufficient to maintaine the degree of Knighthood: 13.Co. li. 7. f. 33. & 34. Knights fees to be a convenient living for a Baron: 20. for an Earle: 26. for a Marques: 40. for a Duke. Ac∣cording to which, his Maiestie hath likewise beene pleased to set downe the revenue of a Baronet,The Booke published by his Maiestie touching Baronets, pag. 17. printed 1611. to be 1000. li. land per annum de
claro, of Inheritance, whereof two parts at the least to be in posses∣sion, and the third in reversion. And though true it is, that, Vtilior est sapientia cum divitijs conjuncta:Lamb. Peramb. pag. 368. Yet it is not hereby intended,Qui vtiliter, & decenter Magi∣strat fungi debent, sint divites bo∣nis animi, doctrinae, iustitiae, sapi∣entiae, pietatis auro abundent. Plato li. 7. de Repub. that vertue is measured by the acre, or that it consists in riches: For strength is not alwayes found by greatnes,Fulbeck li. vlt. ca. 9. f. 67. nor in multitude, no more is inward ability by outward wealth:See Stat. 18. H. 6. ca. 11. 9. E. 2. 4. E. 3. 9. 5. E. 3. 4. 14. E. 3. 8. 1. H. 8. 8. 3. H. 8. 2. 35. H. 8. 6. 2. E. 6. 32. & Stat. 27. Eliz. cap. 6. Nor were those Lawes which require freehold in Iustices, Shierieves, Coroners, Escheators, Iurors,Register of Writs, f. 178. 12. H. 7. f. 4. and Bailiffes of Liberties, made out of any other respects, then meerly to the end, that if these transgresse in their office, or duty, they should render satisfa∣ction for it, as well by their estates, as otherwise. To conclude, seeing it is his Highnes pleasure to create this Dignity, and in that, it is law∣fully granted, and is no way more
preiudicious in the continuance, then any other former hereditary Dignity is, or hath beene: And it so being, that his Maiestie, who is the chiefe Iudge of vertue, and me∣rit, is pleased to esteeme them worthy of this Dignity, it is not for you nor any then to dispute it. See Sir Drue Duries Case,Co. li. 6. f. 73. 74. that if the King knighteth one within age: who is vnable to doe Knights service, Tout's sont conclude à dira le contrarie de ceo, pur ceo, quant le Roi, que est le sovereigne, & supreme Iudge de Chivalrie, ad dubbe luy Chi∣valer; il per ceo ad adiudge luy able. See likewise the auncient Lawes of this Land, both before,See Ranulphus f. 61. Saxon in his description of En∣gland, cap. 71. Britton f. 49. b. Bal. l. Obser. Petrus Geral. in suis Singular. 33. and since the Conquest; and also the Civill-Law, against traducing of Honor, or Worship. And see 2,2. Pet. 2.10. in the last Transla∣tion. Iude 8. of Peter 2.10. Presumptuous are they, selfwilled, they are not afraid to speake evill of Dignities.Camdens Remaines pag. 138. See Camdens Re∣mains,
or in the Code of Theodosius;Codicis Theodos. li. 6. Tit. 5. Tit. Vt Dignitatum ordo servetur: Si quis indebitum sibi locum vsurpa∣verit, nulla e ignoratione defendat, sit{que} plane sacrilegij reus. FINIS.
