23683 99838223 2590
A prettie newe Ballad, intytuled: The Crowe sits vpon the wall, Please one and please all. To the tune of, Please one and please all. Please one and please all, Be they great be they small, Be they little be they lowe, So pypeth the Crowe, sitting vpon a wall: please one and please all, please one and please all. BE they white be they black, Haue they a smock on their back, Or a kircher on her head, Whether they spin silke or thred, whatsoeuer they them call: please one and please all, please one and please all. Be they sluttish be they gay, Loue they worke or loue they play, Whatsoeuer be theyr chéere, Drinke they Ale or drinke they béere, whether it be strong or small: please one and please all, please one and please all. Be they sower be they swéete, Be they shrewish be they méeke, Weare they silke or cloth so good, Ueluet Bonnet or French-hood, Uppon her head a Cap or call: please one and please all, please one and please all. Be they halt be they lame, Be she Lady be she dame, If that she doo weare a pinne, Kéepe she tauerne or kéepe she Inne, Either bulke bouth or stall, please one and please all, please one and please all. The goodwife I doo meane, Be shée fat or be she leane, Whatsoeuer that she be, This the Crowe tolde me, sitting vppon a wall: please one and please all, please one and please all. If the goodwife speake aloft, Sée that you then speake soft, Whether it be good or ill, Let her doo what she will: and to kéepe your selfe from thrall, please one and please all, please one and please all. If the goodwife be displeased, All the whole house is diseased, And therefore by my will, To please her learne the skill, Least that she should alwaies brall: please one and please all, please one and please all. If that you bid her doo ought, If that she doo it not, And though that you be her goodman, You your selfe must doo it than, be it in kitchin or in hall: please one and please all, please one and please all. Let her haue her owne will, Thus the Crowe pypeth still, Whatsoeuer she command, Sée that you doo it out of hand, whensoeur she dooth call: please one and please all, please one and please all. Be they wanton be they wilde, Be they gentle be they milde: Be shée white be she browne, Dooth she skould or dooth she frowne, Let her doo what she shall: please one and please all, please one and please all. Be she coy be she proud, Speake she soft or speake she loud, Be she simple be she flaunt, Dooth she trip or dooth she taunt, the Crowe sits vpon the wall: please one and please all, please one and please all. Is she huswife is she none, Dooth she drudge dooth she grone, Is she nimble is she quicke, Is she short is she thicke, Let her be what she shall: please one and please all, please one and please all. Be they ritch be they poore, Is she honest is she whore, Weare she cloth or Ueluet braue, Dooth she beg or dooth she craue, Weare she hat or silken call: please one and please all, please one and please all. Be she cruell be she curst, Come she last come she first, Be they young be they olde, Doo they smile doo they skould, though they doo nought at all: please one and please all, please one and please all. Though it be some Crowes guise, Oftentimes to tell lyes, Yet this Crowes words dooth try, That her tale is no lye, For thus it is and euer shall: please one and please all, please one and please all. Please one and please all, Be they great be they small, Be they little be they lowe, So pipeth the Crowe, sitting vpon a wall: please one and please all, please one and please all. FINIS. R. T. ¶ Imprinted at London for Henry Kyrkham, dwelling at the little North doore of Paules, at the signe of the blacke Boy.
