25583 99838727 3115
CANTVS. Of Duos, or Songs for two voi∣ces, composed and made by Thomas Whythorne Gent. Of the which, some be playne and easie to be sung, or played on Musicall Instruments, & be made for yong beginners of both those sorts. And the rest of these Duos be made and set foorth for those that be more perfect in sing∣ing or playing as aforesaid, all the which be deuided into three parts. That is to say: The first, which doth begin at the first song, are made for a man and a childe to sing, or otherwise for voices or Instruments of Musicke, that be of the like compasse or distance in sound. The second, which doth begin at the XXIII. song, are made for two children to sing. Also they be aptly made for two treble Cornets to play or sound: or otherwise for voices or Musicall Instruments, that be of the lyke compasse or distance in sound. And the third part which doth begin at the XXXVIII. song, (be∣ing all Canons of two parts in one) be of diuers compasses or distances, and therefore are to be vsed with voices or In∣struments of Musicke accordingly. Now newly published in An. Do. 1590. Imprinted at London by Tho∣mas Este, the assigné of William Byrd. 1590.
IN VERITATE VICTORIA
To the right worshipfull, mater Francis Hastings, brother to the right honora∣ble, and most noble Erle of Huntington, Thomas Whythorne wisheth all godly felicitie, and life euerlasting, in Iesus Christ our onely Sauiour. HAuing vnderstanding (right worshipfull sir) that neither before, nor since that I published in print Musick for three, foure & fiue voices, which is now almost twentie yeeres past, ther hath not any one of our nation published in print any Musick for two voices (as diuers strangers in forrein countries haue don here∣tofore) And I knowing that many of our nation haue bene very desirous to haue some published, not onely such louers of Musick as doe dwell in and nye vnto the Citie of London, and the other cities and townes within this Realme where conuenient compa∣nies may sone be had to sing songs for more voices then two, but also chiefely such as doe dwell in the countries far from any of those cities & townes, where such company can be had so soone to sing as aforesaid. In consideration whereof I haue now publi∣shed in print these Duos or songs for two voices to pleasure them and all others that be so affected. And now knowing that your worship is a fauorer of Musick, & hath good iudgement therein, I am the more encouraged to present this worke of myne vnto you, I doe confesse that the guift therof is but small and simple, yet such as it is, it is rare in the respect of the noueltie thereof, and therfore I doe the more willingly giue it vnto you, as a token of a zelous affection, and dutifull loue, that I do beare vnto you. And thus dedicating and yeelding this same to your worships Patro∣nage and protection, I doe commit you to the tuition of the Al∣mightie, to whom I dayly pray to giue you, and my very good la∣die your bedfellow, a long and prosperous estate, with the lyke lyfe, and at the ende thereof, to bring and receiue you both into his place of eternal ioy and all true blessednesse. By your worships during lyfe to commaund Thomas Whythorne From London the 19. of Nouember. 1590.
I. CANTVS. BLessed are those, that are vndefiled in the way, and walke in the law of the Lord, blessed are they that keepe his testimo- nies, and seeke him with their whole hart for they which doe no wickednesse walke in his waies thou hast charged, charged, thou hast charged that wee shall diligently, diligently ij. keepe thy commaunde- ments, keepe thy commaūde- ments.
II. CANTVS. O That my wayes were made so di- rect that I might keep thy statutes, that I may keepe thy sta- tutes, so shall I not be so shall I not be confounded while I haue respect, while I haue re- spect vnto all thy commaundements, I will thanke thee, ij. with an vnfayned hart when I shall haue learned the iudgements of thy righteousnesse, I will keepe thy ceremonies forsake mee not vtterly.
III. CANTVS. WHerewithall shall a yong man cleanse his waie euen by ruling him selfe after thy word, with my whole hart haue I sought thee O let me not go wrong out of thy commaunde- ments, thy wordes haue I hid within my hart that I should not sinne, ij. a- gainst thee against the ij. blessed art thou O Lorde O Lorde O Lorde, O teach me thy statutes, O teach me thy sta- tutes.
IIII. CANTVS. WIth my lips haue I beene tel- ling, of all the iudgements of thy mouth, ij. I haue had as great de- light in the waie of thy testimonies, thy testimonies, as in all maner of ri- ches, ij. I will talke of thy commaundements, of thy cōmaundements, and haue res- pect vnto thy waies, my delyght shalbe in thy statutes, ij. my delyght shalbe in thy sta- tutes, ij. and I will not forget, ij. thy word, and I will not forget thy word, and I will not for- get thy word.
V. CANTVS. O Do well vnto thy ser- uant, O do well vnto thy seruant that I may liue and keepe thy word, open thou mine eies that I may see the wondrous things of thy law, of thy law, of thy law, that I may see the won- drous things of thy law, I am a stranger vpon earth, O hide not thy commaundements from me, my soule breaketh out, breaketh out, my soule breaketh out for very fer- uent de- sire, that it hath al- way vnto thy iudgements vnto thy iudgements.
VI. CANTVS. THou hast rebuked the proud, ij. and cursed are they that doe erre from thy commaunde- ments, O turne from me shame & rebuke for I haue kept, for I haue kept, for I haue kept thy testi- monies, Princes, Princes also did sit & speak a- gainst mee, but thy seruant is occupied, ij. ij. ij. in thy sta- tutes for thy testi- mo- nies are my de- light and my counsay- lers. and my counsay- lers.
VII. CANTVS. MY soule cleaueth, my soule cleaueth to the dust, O quicken thou mee accor- ding to thy word, ij. I haue knowledged my waies, and thou heardest me O teach mee thy sta- tutes, make mee to vnder- stand, ij the waie of thy cōmaunde- ments, and so shall I talke ij. and so shall I talke, ij. of thy wondrous works, my soule melteth away for heauy-nesse, ij. for very heauy- nesse, comfort thou mee, comfort thou mee ac- cording vnto thy word.
VIII. CANTVS. TAke from mee the waie of ly- ing. ij. and cause thou me, ij. to make much of thy law, I haue chosen the way, ij. of truth, and thy iudgements, ij. ij. haue I layd, ij. ij. before mee, I haue stick- en ij. vn- to thy testimo- nies, O Lord confound mee not, I will run the way of thy commaunde- ments, when thou hast set my hart at libertie, when thou hast set my hart at liber- ty.
IX. CANTVS. TEach me O Lord the way of thy sta- tutes, ij. and I shall keepe it vnto the end, giue me vnderstan- ding and I shall keepe thy law, shall keepe thy law, yea I shall keepe it with my whole hart, make me to go ij. in the path ij. of thy commaundements, ij. ij. for therein is my desier my desier dekier, for therin is my desier, enclyne my hart vnto thy testimonies, enclyne my hart &c. and not to couetousnesse ij.
X. CANTVS. O Turne away mine eyes, ij. mine eyes, least they behold vanitie and quicken thou mee, ij. ij. ij. ij. in thy way, in thy way, O sta- blish thy word, thy word, ij. in thy seruaunt that I may feare thee, feare thee, that I may feare thee, take away the rebuke, rebuke, ij. that I am a frayd of for thy iudgements are good, be- hold my de- light is in thy commaundements O quicken me in thy righteousnesse.
XI. CANTVS. LEt thy louing mercie come also vnto me O Lord euen thy salua- tion according vnto thy word, so shall I make aunswer ij, ij. vnto my blasphemers, blasphe- mers, for my trust is in thy word, O take not ij. the word O take not the word of thy truth vtter- ly out of my mouth, for my hope is in ij. thy iudgements, so shal I alway keep thy law, ij. yea, for euer and euer, for e- uer.
XII. CANTVS. ANd I will walke at liber- tie ij. for I seek thy commaunde- ments, I will speake ij. I will speake of thy testimonies also euen before kings and will not be asha- med and my de- light ij. shalbe in thy commaunde- ments which I haue lo- ued, ij. my hands also will I lift vp vnto thy commaunde- ments which I haue loued, and my study shalbe in thy sta- tutes. ij.
XIII. CANTVS. To God all honour giue.
XIIII. CANTVS. Thy Parents reuerence.
XV. CANTVS. Loue thou thy neighbour.
XVI. CANTVS. Thy Master feare.
XVII. CANTVS. Be faithfull to thy friend.
XVIII. CANTVS. In counsell be thou close.
XIX. CANTVS. Accompany the good.
XX. CANTVS. The ill doe thou flye.
XXI. CANTVS. Preace not to heare others secrets.
XXII. CANTVS. O Lux beata trinitas.
XXIII. CANTVS. To vse good for ill.
XXIIII. CANTVS. As haughtie pryde oppresseth loue.
XXV. CANTVS. In ouer comming appetite.
XXVI. CANTVS. Who speakes thee fayer vnto thy face.
XXVII. CANTVS. Of all the things that we find best.
XXVIII. CANTVS. When speeches to much and out of frame.
XXIX. CANTVS. If thou, wouldst know the swyftest thing.
XXX. CANTVS. No exercise can hae.
XXXI. CANTVS. Though many iudge and giue sentence.
XXXII. CANTVS. Of needefull things that oft disgrace.
XXXIII. CANTVS. To giue counsell to others is ryfe.
XXXIIII. CANTVS. Auctoritie most doe desier.
XXXV. CANTVS. The great desire to get riches.
XXXVI. CANTVS. Affections strong that doe moue vs.
XXXVII. CANTVS. Who doth not much esteeme of health.
XXXVIII. The 1. Canon. CANTVS. What makes yong folks simple in shew.
XXXIX. The 2. Canon. CANTVS. The mynd of man. XL. The 3. Canon. CANTVS. His mortall lyfe.
XLI. The 4. Canon. CANTVS. For to be borne as Infants be. XLII. The 5. Canon. CANTVS. Lament we should at childrens birth.
XLIII. The 6. Canon. CANTVS. The worldlings iudge that man happie. XLIIII. The 7. Canon. CANTVS. But Solon sayd.
XLV. The 8. Canon. CANTVS. Lyke as the birds that Swallows hight. XLVI. The 9. Canon. CANTVS. So fayned friends.
XLVII. The 10. Canon. CANTVS. This oft is found for to be true. XLVIII. The 11. Canon. CANTVS. The conditions of man.
XLIX. The 12. Canon. CANTVS. A tirannie not lasting long. L. The 13. Canon. CANTVS. Acceptable is nothing more.
LI. The 14. Canon. CANTVS. Two comforts hath the vnhappie man. LII. The 15. Canon. CANTVS. The other if he to mind can call.
A Table wherein you shall finde both the name and number of euery song conteyned in these bookes. BLessed are those that are vndefiled. I O that my wayes were made so di∣rect. II Wherwithall shall a yong man clense his way. III With my lips haue I bene telling. IIII O doe well vnto thy seruant. V. Thou hast rebuked the proud. VI. My soule cleaueth to the dust. VII. Take from mee the way of lying. VIII. Teach me O Lord the way of thy sta∣tutes. IX. O turne away mine eyes. X. Let thy louing mercie come also vnto mee. XI. And I will walke at libertie. XII. To God all honour giue. XIII. Thy Parents reuerence. XIIII. Loue thou thy neighbour. XV. Thy Master feare. XVI. Be faithfull to thy friend. XVII. In counsell be thou close. XVIII. Accompany the good. XIX. The ill doe thou flye. XX. Preace not to heare others secrets. XXI. O lux beata trinitas. XXII. To vse good for ill. XXIII. As hautie pride oppresseth loue. XXIIII In ouercomming appetite. XXV. Who speakes thee fayre vnto thy face. XXVI Of all ye things that we finde best. XXVII When speeches to much and out of frame. XXVIII. If thou wouldst know the swiftest thing. XXIX. No exercise can haue. XXX. Though many iudge and giue sentence. XXXI. Of needefull things that oft disgrace. XXXII. To giue counsel to others is rife. XXXIII Auctoritie most doe desier. XXXIIII The great desier to get riches. XXXV. Affections strong yt doe moue vs. XXXVI Who doth not much esteeme of health. XXXVII. What makes yong folkes simple in shew. XXXVIII. The minde of man doth change hourely. XXXIX. His mortall lyfe doth lyttle see. XL. For to be borne as infants be. XLI. Lament we shold at childrens birth. XLII The worldlings iudge that man happie. XLIII. But Solon sayd. XLIIII. Like as the Byrds that Swalowes hight XLV. So fayned friends. XLVI. This oft is found for to be trew. XLVII. The conditions of man doth change. XLVIII. A tirannie not lasting long. XLIX Acceptable is nothing more. L. Two comforts hath the vnhappy man. LI. The other if he to mynde can call. LII. FINIS. Jmprinted at London by Thomas Este, dwelling in Alders∣gate street at the signe of the black Horse. 1590.
ASPRA MA NON TROPPO.
BASSVS. Of Duos, or Songs for two voi∣ces, composed and made by Thomas Whythorne Gent. Of the which, some be playne and easie to be sung, or played on Musicall Instruments, & be made for yong beginners of both those sorts. And the rest of these Duos be made and set foorth for those that be more perfect in sing∣ing or playing as aforesaid, all the which be deuided into three parts. That is to say: The first, which doth begin at the first song, are made for a man and a childe to sing, or otherwise for voices or Instruments of Musicke, that be of the like compasse or distance in sound. The second, which doth begin at the XXIII. song, are made for two children to sing. Also they be aptly made for two treble Cornets to play or sound: or otherwise for voices or Musicall Instruments, that be of the lyke compasse or distance in sound. And the third part which doth begin at the XXXVIII. song (be∣ing all Canons of two parts in one) be of diuers compasses or distances, and therefore are to be vsed with, voices or In∣struments of Musicke accordingly. Now newly published in An. Do. 1590. Imprinted at London by Tho∣mas Este, the assigné of William. Byrd. 1590.
IN VERITATE VICTORIA
To the right worshipfull, master Francis Hastings, brother to the right honora∣ble, and most noble Erle of Huntington, Thomas Whythorne wisheth all godly felicitie, and life euerlasting, in Iesus Christ our onely Sauiour. HAuing vnderstanding (right worshipfull sir) that neither before, nor since that I published in print Musick for three, foure & fiue voices, which is now almost twentie yeeres past, ther hath not any one of our nation published in print any Musick for two voices (as diuers strangers in forrein countries haue don here∣tofore) And I knowing that many of our nation haue bene very desirous to haue some published, not onely such louers of Musick as doe dwell in and nye vnto the Citie of London, and the other cities and townes within this Realme where conuenient compa∣nies may sone be had to sing songs for more voices then two, but also chiefely such as doe dwell in the countries far from any of those cities & townes, where such company can be had so soone to sing as aforesaid. In consideration whereof I haue now publi∣shed in print these Duos or songs for two voices to pleasure them and all others that be so affected. And now knowing that your worship is a fauorer of Musick, & hath good iudgement therein, I am the more encouraged to present this worke of myne vnto you, I doe confesse that the guift therof is but small and simple, yet such as it is, it is rare in the respect of the noueltie thereof, and therfore I doe the more willingly giue it vnto you, as a token of a zelous affection, and dutifull loue, that I do beare vnto you. And thus dedicating and yeelding this same to your worships Patro∣nage and protection, I doe commit you to the tuition of the Al∣mightie, to whom I dayly pray to giue you, and my very good la∣die your bedfellow, a long and prosperous estate, with the lyke lyfe, and at the ende thereof, to bring and receiue you both into his place of eternal ioy and all true blessednesse. By your worships during lyfe to commaund Thomas Whythorne From London the 19. of Nouember. 1590.
I. BASSVS. BLessed are those that are vndefiled in the waie, and walke in the lawe of the Lord, blessed are they that keepe his testimonies. and seeke him with their whole hart, & seeke him with their whole hart for they which do no wickednesse walke in his waies, thou hast charged, ij. ij. charged, thou hast charged that we shall dilygently, dilygent- ly, keepe thy cōmaunde- ments keepe thy cōmaunde- ments.
II. BASSVS. O That my waies were made so dyrect, so dy- rect, that I might keepe thy statutes, that I might kepe thy statutes, so shall I not, ij. ij. be confounded, while I haue re- spect, ij. vnto all, vnto all thy commaunde- ment, I will thanke thee, ij. with an vnfayned hart, when I shall haue learned the iudgements of thy righteous∣nesse, I will keepe thy ceremonies, O forsake me not vtterlie.
III. BASSVS. WHerewithall shall a yong man cleanse his way, euen by ruling himselfe after thy word, with my whole hart haue I sought thee O let me not go wrong, out of thy commanude- ments, thy words haue I hyd within my hart, that I should not sinne ij. against thee, against thee, against thee, blessed art thou O Lord, blessed art thou O Lord, O teach mee thy sta∣tutes, O teach mee thy statutes,
IIII. BASSVS. WIth my lips haue I beene tel- ling, of all the iudge- ments of thy mouth, I haue had as great delight in the waie of thy testi- mo- nies, as in all maner of ri- ches, ij. I will talke of thy commaundements, ij. and haue respect vnto thy waies, my delight shal- be in thy sta- tutes, ij. my delight shalbe in thy sta- tutes, ij. & I will not forget thy word, ij. and I will not forget thy word.
V. BASSVS. O doe well vnto thy ser- uant, ij. that I may liue and keepe thy word, open thou myne eyes that I may see the wondrous things of thy law, that I may see the wondrous things of thy law, that I may see the wondrous things of thy law, I am a stran- ger vpon earth O hyde not thy commaunde- ments from mee, my soule breaketh out ij. for very feruent desire that it hath alway vnto thy iudge- ments.
VI. BASSVS. THou hast rebu- ked, ij. thou hast rebu- ked the proud and cursed are they that do erre that do erre from thy commaunde- ments, O turne from mee shame and rebuke, rebuke, ij. for I haue kept, haue kept, ij. for I haue kept thy testimo- nies, Princes Princes also did sit and speak against mee, against mee, but thy seruaunt is occupied, ij. ij. but thy seruaunt is occupied in thy statutes for thy testi- monies are my de- light and my counsay- lers, and my counsay- lers.
VII. BASSVS. MY soule clea- ueth to the dust, O quicken thou mee ij. O quicken thou me according to thy word, I haue knowledged my waies, and thou heardest mee, O teach mee thy statutes, make mee to vnder- stand, ij. the way of thy commaundements, and so shall I talke, ij. ij. and so shall I talke of thy won- drous workes my soule melth away for heaui- nesse, ij. comfort thou mee ij. accor- ding to thy word.
VIII. BASSVS. TAke from mee the waie of ly- ing, the way of lying, & cause thou mee and cause thou mee to make much of thy lawe, to make much of thy law I haue chosen the way of truth, of truth, and thy iudgements, thy iudgements, ij. ij. haue I layd, ij. ij. before mee before mee, I haue sticken, ij. vnto thy testimo- nies, O Lord con- found me not, I will run the waie, the waie of thy commaunde- ments, when thou when thou hast set my hart at liberty, my hart at liber- tie.
IX. BASSVS. TEach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, ij. and I shall keepe it vnto the ende, giue me vnderstan- ding, ij. yea I shall keepe it, ij. with my whole hart, make me to go, ij. in the path, ij. of thy cōmande- ments, ij. ij. for therein is my de- sire, desire, desire encline my hart vnto thy testimo- nies ij. and not to couetous- nesse. ij.
X. BASSVS. O Turne away myne eyes, O turne away ij. myne eyes ij. least they behold vani- tie vani- tie and quicken thou me & quicken thou me and quicken thou me, ij. O stablish thy word O stablish thy word ij. in thy ser- uant that I may feate thee that I may feare thee may feare thee take away the re- buke ij. that I am afrayd of afrayd of for thy iudgements are good are good behold my delight is in thy commaunde- ments O quicken me in thy righteousnesse.
XI. BASSVS. LEt thy lo- uing mercie ij. come also to me O Lord euen thy saluati- on according vnto thy word so shal I make answer ij. ij. vnto my blasphemers ij. for my trust is in thy word O take not ij. the word, the word of thy trueth vtterly out of my mouth, for my hope is in thy iudgements ij. is in thy iudgements, so shall I alway keepe thy law yea for euer & e- uer.
XII. BASSVS. ANd I will walke at libertie ij. for I seeke thy commaunde- ments I will speake ij. I will speake of thy testimo- nies euen before kings and will not be asha- med and my de- light ij. shalbe in thy commaundements which I haue lo- ued ij. my hands also will I lyft vp vnto thy commaūdements which I haue loued, and my studie shalbe in thy statutes. and my study shalbe in thy statutes.
XIII. BASSVS. To God all honour giue.
XIIII. BASSVS. Thy Parents reuerence.
XV. BASSVS. Loue thou thy neighbour.
XVI. BASSVS. Thy Master feare.
XVII. BASSVS. Be faithfull to thy friend.
XVIII. BASSVS. In counsell be thou close.
XIX. BASSVS. Accompany the good.
XX. BASSVS. The ill doe thou flye.
XXI. BASSVS. Preace not to heare others secrets.
XXII. BASSVS. O Lux beata trinitas.
XXIII. ALTVS. To vse good for ill.
XXIIII. ALTVS. As haughtie pride oppresseth loue.
XXV. ALTVS. In ouer comming appetite.
XXVI. ALTVS. Who speakes thee fayre vnto thy face.
XXVII. ALTVS. Of all the things that we finde best.
XXVIII. ALTVS. When speeches to much and out of frame.
XXIX. ALTVS. If thou wouldst know the swiftest thing.
XXX. ALTVS. No exercise can haue.
XXXI. ALTVS. Though many iudge and giue sentence.
XXXII. ALTVS. Of needefull thinges that oft disgrace.
XXXIII. ALTVS. To giue counsell to others is rife.
XXXIIII. ALTVS. Auctoritie most doe desire.
XXXV. ALTVS. The great desire to get riches.
XXXVI. ALTVS. Affections strong that doe moue vs.
XXXVII. ALTVS. who doth not much esteeme of welth.
XXXVIII. The 1. Canon. ALTVS. What makes yong folks simple in shew.
XXXIX. The 2. Canon. ALTVS. The mynde of man. XL. The 3. Canon. ALTVS. His mortall lyfe.
XLI. The 4. Canon. BASSVS. For to be borne as Infants be. XLII. The 5. Canon. BASSVS. Lament we should at childrens birth.
XLIII. The 6. Canon. BASSVS. The worldlings iudge that man happie. XLIIII. The 7. Canon. BASSVS. But Solon sayd.
XLV. The 8. Canon. BASSVS. Lyke as the birds that Swallowes hight. XLVI. The 9. Canon. BASSVS. So fayned friends.
XLVII. The 10. Canon. BASSVS. This oft is found for to be true. XLVIII. The 11. Canon. BASSVS. The conditions of man.
XLIX. The 12. Canon. BASSVS. A tirannie not lasting long. L. The 13. Canon. BASSVS. Acceptable is nothing more.
LI. The 14. Canon. BASSVS. Two comforts hath the vnhappie man. LII. 15. Canon. BASSVS. The other if he to mind can call.
A Table wherein you shall finde both the name and number of euery song conteyned in these bookes. BLessed are those that are vndefiled. I O that my wayes were made so di∣rect. II Wherwithall shall a yong man clense his way. III With my lips haue I bene telling. IIII O doe well vnto thy seruant. V. Thou hast rebuked the proud. VI. My soule cleaueth to the dust. VII. Take from mee the way of lying. VIII. Teach me O Lord the way of thy sta∣tutes. IX. O turne away mine eyes. X. Let thy louing mercie come also vnto mee. XI. And I will walke at libertie. XII. To God all honour giue. XIII. Thy Parents reuerence. XIIII. Loue thou thy neighbour. XV. Thy Master feare. XVI. Be faithfull to thy friend. XVII. In counsell be thou close. XVIII. Accompany the good. XIX. The ill doe thou flye. XX. Preace not to heare others secrets. XXI. O lux beata trinitas. XXII. To vse good for ill. XXIII. As hautie pride oppresseth loue. XXIIII In ouercomming appetite. XXV. Who speakes thee fayre vnto thy face. XXVI Of all ye things that we finde best. XXVII When speeches to much and out of frame. XXVIII. If thou wouldst know the swiftest thing. XXIX. No exercise can haue. XXX. Though many iudge and giue sentence. XXXI. Of needefull things that oft disgrace. XXXII. To giue counsel to others is rife. XXXIII Auctoritie most doe desier. XXXIIII The great desier to get riches. XXXV. Affections strong yt doe moue vs. XXXVI Who doth not much esteeme of health. XXXVII. What makes yong folkes simple in shew. XXXVIII. The minde of man doth change hourely. XXXIX. His mortall lyfe doth lyttle see. XL. For to be borne as infants be. XLI. Lament we shold at childrens birth. XLII The worldlings iudge that man happie. XLIII. But Solon sayd. XLIIII. Like as the Byrds that Swalowes hight XLV. So fayned friends. XLVI. This oft is found for to be trew. XLVII. The conditions of man doth change. XLVIII. A tirannie not lasting long. XLIX Acceptable is nothing more. L. Two comforts hath the vnhappy man. LI. The other if he to mynde can call. LII. FINIS. Jmprinted at London by Thomas Este, dwelling in Alders∣gate street at the signe of the black Horse. 1590.
ASPRA MA NON TROPPO.
