3704.7 99855754 21256
THE VNCASING OF MACHAVILS INSTRVCTIONS to his Sonne: WITH THE ANSVVERE to the same. LONDON Printed by E. G. for Richard Higgenbotham, and are to be sold at his shoppe at the signe of the Cardinals Hat without Newgate. 1615.
❧ CONTENTS. MAchiauels rules do whet the purest wits, And doe expell them from their idle fits: To wise men they shew the worlds follie, With notice of preuenting deeds vnholie▪ Which is the true intent of the Authors meaning, How euer fooles their iudgements are bestowing. Though the beginning doe of harshnesse tast, And many things are hudled vp in hast: And though there be instruction to ill, Good vnderstanding the same doth kill, And turnes those words vnto the truest sense, Which for those faults doth make a recompence, As the answere by degrees plainly showes, What dutie to vertue each creature owes, Condemne not all till all be throughly past, If first be worst, the best is kept till last.
THE VNCASING OF MACHAVILS INSTRVCTION TO HIS SONNE. COme hether Son, and learne thy Fathers lore, It is not now as it hath beene before, For in my youth would no man read to me That now in age I can deliuer thee, If thou wilt be a man of much esteeme, Be not the same what euer so thou seeme, Speake faire to all, be gentle, curteous, kinde, But let the world know nothing of thy minde, Let slip no time may be for thine auaile, Nor trust no friend, for faith begins to faile: Refuse no gift to fill thy coffers full, The wisest poore man passeth for a gull. Be temperate in affect, so ber in talke, And often make a solitarie walke, Tickle conceits commit to memorie, For written lines may lie in ieopardie. Affect no follies, do not quarrels moue, And if thou loue thy selfe, fall not in loue, Haue eare for all men, conferre with few, And count faire words to be but as a dew. Follow the time, finde humors, flatter pride, And praise the Croome; but only please the Bride.
Promise enough, but not performe too much: But with thy betters euermore keepe touch. Striue not with great ones, meddle not with small, For trifles trouble not thy selfe with all. Frequent the Church make shew of great deuotion. And be not bashfull to receiue promotion. Looke big at Beggers, weare thy clothes neate. And spend not too much mony at thy meate. Saue thy Horse charges at thy Cozens stable, And take thy trencher at anothers table. Breake iests on Cowards, but take heed of Knaues. And loue no Bawdes, for they are beastly slaues. Be perfect in Arithmeticks close Art, In all accounts to make a sauing part. Stand not to stare vpon a Peacockes taile, Who if he see his legs will stoope his saile. When Iack-dawes chatter, let their language go, Better be silent then to prattle so. Obserue the Lion, but do not sturre the Beare, And loue the Wolfe, but only for his haire, Learne of the Asse to beare, the Dog to wait, And of the Ape to counterfet conceit. Catch not at flies, they are but Swallowes food, But loue the meat that nourisheth the blood. Feed like a Wolfe on blood, while it is warme He is a foole that feeles anothers harme. Yet seeme as kinde, as she that seemes to crie To see him sicke, that she could wish to die. Take heed of interest, gage no land, And from assurance euer keepe thy hand. Take no mans word, for coine is hard to get, And tis a custome now to pay no debt, Learne to get riches by the beggers purse: The Fox fares best when Geese begin to curse,
Worke all the weeke for profit euery way, Keepe conscience only for the holy day. Prie into trades, to traffick, traine and tricke, And liue not by the dead, but by the quicke, And if thou be a Courtier, know thy place: But do not serue for onely shew of grace, But let thy profit answere thy expence, Least want do proue a wofull patience, And thou do proue the prouerbe often told, A carelesse Courtier yong, a Begger old. If that thou be a Scholler and canst preach, And knowest how the vnlearned sort to teach, Let neuer conscience at thy profit knock, But share thy Sheepe, and fleece another flocke, For be thou poore, what e're thy preaching be, Thy Parish will not care a pin for thee. If that thou be a Souldier, serue for fame, But let thy golden pay maintaine the same, For he that spends more then he gets in fight, Will be a begger though he be a Knight. If that thou be a Lawyer know thy right, But keepe thy Client in a cunning plight, For how canst thou a heartie pleading hold, If that thy tongue be not well tipt with gold, And rich attir'd, thou shalt haue roome to stand To plead thy case, what e're thou hast in hand, But barely clad, and in a poore array, Thou maist perhaps haue hearing at doomes day; For though the Law be right, and Iudge be iust, Yet with the rich, the begger must not thrust. If that thou be a Marchant know thy trade, And of thy wares what reckning may be made, And be not lauish in a leude expence, Least bankrupt proue a bad experience.
If that thou be a Crafts-man know thy paines, And let no Alehouse eate out all thy gaines, For if expence aboue thy gettings goe, Thou wilt be quickly in the beggers roe. What saies the craftie Clowne in clowted shooes, Time was ordain'd to get and not to loose. What though the poore lie staruing in the ditch? It is the dearth of corne makes Farmers rich, Weare not thy shooes too short, nor cloak too long, Vse thy friend well, but do thy selfe no wrong. Abandon fooles, make much of cunning wits, But fauour most, that most thy profit fits, Sit not vp too late, except it be for gaine, For want of sleepe is hurtfull for the braine. Go not to Sea, whiles thou maist liue on land, Least scaping rockes, thou fall vpon a sand. Be sociable in euery company. But haue no hand in any villany, "If thou finde humors to passe reasons race, "Depart in time, let others take thy place, "Such companions better lost then found, "Vaine humored wits cannot be very sound, "Though for thy gaine, thou kindly dost intreat them, "Yet know thy time, when and how to reiect them. Be conuersant with strangers, learne languages, Sound their estates, and note their carriages, Know their seuerall warres, their worth and prizes, But trouble not thy head with vaine deuices. "Doe thou seuerely looke to euery action, "And let their errors yeeld thee satisfaction, "That thou by them maist easily seeke to rise, "In doing this the rich will hold thee wise. Aime still at profit, howsoeuer it growes, Make the winde serue wheresoeuer it blowes,
"Then cleerely hoist vp saile, and on apace "Labouring so that thou arriue with grace. "Then welcome home, if crownes thou hast good store, "But wanting that respectlesse euermore. "No pennie no pater noster men crie, "And that pouertie parts good companie. "These prouerbes old, thou seest are very true. "If thou hast wealth, what miserie can insue? "All men will then grace thee with cap and knee, "and praise thy life, who vile so ere it bee, For tis this wealth this profit and this gaine, That dies the colour euermore in graine. Learne thou the Physitian, and the Lawyers fee And for thy profit speake as faire as hee: Promise the one good speede, the other good health, In any course ti's good to gather wealth. "Men must not liue these daies by foolish pittie, "In getting coyne, accounted very wittie, Learne all diseases and their seuerall cures, And care not what the patient heart endures, But giue him one day griefe, another ease, Not as his patience, but as his purse doth please, "It is not sighes, nor sobs, nor pinching paine, "Thou must respect, when that thou seek'st for gaine, "Let them greiue, chase, and euermore be fretting, "So thou by them mai'st happely be getting, Learne cards and dice, and euery cheating play, That may bring in thy profit any way. Learne thou to stop a carde, or cog a die, But shift it clenly from the gamesters eye, At ruffe and trumpe note thou the dealers rubs There is no packe without the Knaue of Clubs. "Pittie not when thou hast caught the connie "Oh! how sweet it is to share the monie?
"It makes good cheere, and welcomes many a guest "Vnto a stately house, a stately feast, "And brings content, whiles pittie sits and pines "In griefe and paine, and many hungrie sines, "When louely wealth in Iouiall spirit sings, "Soring alost with richest golden wings, "Commanding all those vassals poore and base, "And euer seated in the highest place, "With pleasure feeding on the daintiest fare, "And all delights accounted very rare, "With musike sweet, much mirth and iollity, "With gallant sports and merrie company: "Thinke on these, and do but rightly weigh them, "Thrise happie he, so happie hath them. "Be carefull then, that something may come in, "Though some repine thou need'st not care a pin; "For when those meanes vnto thy coffer sends, "A pot or a pinte makes a foole amendes; "Yet bestow not this, nor any else vpon him, "Except to gaine some greater matter by him, "Seeke any meanes or course, that may inrich thee, "The richest sort then kindly will imbrace thee. Dandle the childe, grow inward with the Nurse, And thinke no beggerie base that fils the purse. "Be not ouer nice, nor coy▪ mongst proude ones, "Humor them, and flatter thou the small ones, "That they as instruments may serue thy turne, "Stand farther of when thou begin'st to burne. "Haue conference with as many as requires it, "And be merrie with those that desire it, "But still be sure, to keepe thy tongue from prating, "Which is most base, and breedeth euer hating, "Trust not to farre, though promises be made, "Least that the substance turne vnto a shade.
"Great dangers lie in shewes of seeming kinde, "He is a foole lets all men know his minde: "First trie, then trust, according to thy pleasure, "Be pleasing to all, yet all within a measure. Laugh with the Letcher, at Maidens bashfulnesse, And with the chast, at fleshes filthinesse, And with the Spend-thrift, at the Misers bags, And with the Miser, at the beggers rags. "And with the Glutton, at poore hungrie cheare, "And with the hungrie, at a plenteous yeare. "And with the learned, at a simple wit. "And with the foolish, at a frenzie fit. "And with the crafts-men, when they are deceiuing, "So that something to thee may be sharing, Learne all Religions, be of euery Sect, And chiefly to thy profit haue respect. "Let conscience knock, care not for that at all, "If thou hast coyne, no matter who do fall. For this same conscience is so poore and bare, That most she shifts amongst the beggers share, "Induring hunger, cold, and bitter stormes, "Reprochfull termes, with many hurts and harmes, "Coursely clad, all rags, and worne a sunder, "And worst of all, basely still kept vnder: "In meane estate, help-lesse still remaining, "Of better sorts euermore disdaining. In sum, of what estate so ere thou be, Learne to be rich, for that will hold with thee: "What matter though men point at thy follie, "Thou mai'st with the purest seeme as holie: "With yea and nay, verely and indeed, "With demurest lookes wish them good speede, "Which is a cloake sufficient for thy euill, "Almost able to deceiue the Deuill,
"And accuse them, that say thou offerest wrong, "Such cruell deeds to wicked doth belong. "This is the course, in humoring euery sect, "A better meanes thy profit to respect. "Of these pure-ones, learne to dissemble soe, "Thine shall be the profit whose're the woe, Perswade a Slaue he is halfe a Gentleman, Though he drop out of a dripping pan: It is no matter if his purse can beare it, His rascall pride will neuer blush to heare it. "Extoll a foole, and he will still be grinning, "No matter what, so thou by him be winning. Perswade a Clowne, that he is halfe a Knight, And that his wealth deserues the place aright; And his Maid-marrian with her wain-scot-face, Might be a Lady but for lack of grace, And make her thinke that she is halfe a Queene, Or scarce on earth is such another seene, For vertue, beautie, wit, shape and feature, Though God he knowes that she is no such creature: But if she do applaude it tis no matter, He is a foole, for profit cannot flatter. Time is not now to trifle or dandle: For gaine, fore the Deuill hold a candle: And hold it as a deede that's wisely done, Or as a prize that's brauely wone, Commend a Souldier when he is in crownes, And sware a Knight must gouerne ouer clownes, In many a campe how he is Caske did beare, Although poore Coward he did ne're come there. But yet thy flattery be sure so to frame, Thine may be the gaine, though his the shame. "If thou findest him simple with mony store, "I hope thou wilt finde wit to make him poore.
"Then smiling say, I pittie your estate, "It is not with you now as twas of late: "But be content no doubt but God will send, "With this depart, his monies thine to spend, "Then see thou meete him not in any case, "Nor come not in where he shall be in place, "Least to expence, he after seekes to driue thee, "Or by some meanes borrowes mony of thee, "Tut: let him shift, say thou thy mon'ies gone, "Care not thou at all, though he make his mone: "But wish him well, as most men now do vse, "Finde any meanes that may thy purse excuse: "Let men be lauish, and commend them too, "Say t'is brauely done, but feede on them too. "Be sure of this, and do't in any case. "Looke well about, that thou hast time and place, "Least that some Machiauill chance to spie it, "Discloseth all, to gaine something by it. Commend the Lawier, and his studious reading, Admire his iudgements and extoll his pleading, But flatter so, that if he get a fee, Thou mai'st haue out a share as well as hee. "Be plotting so that still thou mai'st be getting; "Few Lawyers griue at their Clients fretting. "To sue in Forma pauperis t'is in vaine, "When (most Lawyers) poore sutors do disdaine. "They must be humored, sued and sought to still, "And all things else obedient to their will: "That this is true, thou daily mai'st behold, "How deerely they esteeme a fee of gold. Follow a Bishop with a world of praise, And make him as the load-starre of the daies, Admire him, and extoll him to the skies; But so that thou mai'st get a Benefies,
A good Vicarage, Cure or some such As will returne thee profit small or much. "Looke too't in time, strike whiles the iron's hot, "Vse no delay where wealth is to be got. "You know that seruice is no heritage: "What boot's a man to stand on parentage? "But looke to the maine chance, ti's that must hold, "He's accounted well borne, that hath much gold, "To serue in hope, is but a Beggers fee, "And such rewards most Masters vse you see, "Or after two or three yeares seruice turne thee off, "And for thy seruice done, bestow a scoff. "Or if perhaps, thou serue till thou grow old, "Happie if an Almes-house thine age can hold, "This is the flinty course of this our age, "This is the time brings humors in a rage: "Then list in time, serue not except for gaine, "Let Masters feele the toile of seruants paine: "Serue not those, whose senses haue no feeling, "Or those that with leaden hands are giuing, "Applaude them not with courteous reuerence, "When they are so farre from due beneuolence. "Scorne his blew coate, his cogniscence and all, "That shall reioice in a poore seruants fall. Commend a Marchant, honour his aduenture, Who gets his wealth by danger, not indenture. Commend his trade, his traffike and his truth, The honour of his age, and toile of youth: "Say how you haue heard him much commended, "And with worthy art himselfe defended, "Gainst forraine foes, by Land and Seas, "And smoothly slipt it of himselfe to please: But withall be sure to flatter soe, That to thy purse, some piece of monie groe:
Or on his boord, thy trencher to be laid, Or borrowed mony neuer to be paid. And tell (what-lack yee) that he lackes no wit, And for his head that he deserues to sit On higher seates then Church-wardens stooles, For he hath more wit, then a world of fooles; But yet in feeding of his idle vaine, Be sure to pick out some od priuie gaine. "It is a follie then to stand on nicenesse, "For that, at such times is counted basenesse. "Thou must boldly looke vp and seeme merrie, "When profit comes in, who can be wearie? "Refuse nothing that comes in any way, "It is a bad thing serues not another day. A Rapier, Dagger, Stockings, Bootes or Shooes, Somewhat doth well though beggers must not chuse, "If one giue thee Venison, what needest thou care "How he came by it, so it mend thy fare? "Stand not to question in any case, "He may thinke thou mean'st to seeke his disgrace, "By telling abroad to strangers vnknowne, "How he had Venison, though none of his owne: "Alwaies looke to thy tongue, no more but mum, "Euer be silent, so any thing come: "Yet know thy time, when to speake, when to spare, "Keeping this course, accounted very rare. Tell Mistris minkes, shee that keepes the shop, Shee is a Ship that beares a gallant top; Shee is a Lady for her louely face, And her countenance hath a Princes grace, "And that her beautie hath inthrald thee soe, "Except shee yeelds remorse, she workes thy woe: "Then cast thine eye vpon her beautious cheeke, "Protesting that thou neuer saw'st the like:
"Her smooth forehead, and her comely dressing; "Her louely Breasts, cause loues increasing; "Her Iuorie teeth, her lip and chin; "Her snow white hand, the like was neuer seene; "Her leg and foote, with her gate so comely; "Her apparels worne so neat and seemely. "Thus o're worne with care, thou mai'st seeme to be, "Till thou hast made her proude herselfe to see. "Then she nods the head with smiling fauor, "That thou should'st bestow, such loue vpon her; Then bite the lip, winke and hang the head, And giue a sigh, as though thy heart were dead; And shew strange passions of affections sence, That she may pittie loue sirreuerence: "Wishing her selfe worthy of thy fauor, "Which is a meanes to gaine some thing by her. Thus let the issue of this cunning be, That from her purse some profit come to thee, A peece of Sattin, Fustian, or some Stuffe; A Falling-band, or a three Double-ruffe; A Hat, a Shirt, a Cloake-cloath or a Ring, Kniues, Purses, Gloues, or some such prettie thing, Some-what hath some sauour, t'is this gaine, That still inuention giues his sweetest vaine. "It cheares a body weake, and comfort sends, "To any one that's ill or voide of friends, "It brings the infant vp, for want might pine, "Els, Charity small comfort would resigne: "To middle age, it nourisheth the blood, "And giues them all, and all that may be good: "And aged men, it luls them fast a sleepe, "Whose youth tooke care, this pretious gem to keepe. "Be carefull then how thou keepe this by thee, "Least when thou wantest, it quite forsake thee,
"And leaue thee to wander, still reiected; "My Boy looke too't and seeke to preuent it. Why tell a Cobler he is halfe a King, When on his patches, he can sit and sing, And knock his last, and whet his cutting knife, There is no Kingdome to a merrie life. "A light heart lightly beares the bell away, "When mightie men findes cares, though clothed gay: But yet in telling of this idle tale, Be sure at least to get a pot of Ale; "Or something else that hath a feeling sence, "Take any thing as part of recompence: "And seeme very thankfull, till better comes, "Sith many small things ad to greater summes. For this same nothing, brings no world about, Better play small game then be cleane shut out. If that thy Wife be faire, and thou but poore, Let her stand like a picture at thy doore: Where though she do but pick her fingers ends; Faire eies, fond lookes, will gaine a world of friends. "Taske her not to worke, if she be prettie: "Bid her forbeare, her toyle makes thee pittie: "She may with ease, haue meanes for greater gaines, "With rich rewards, and pleasure for her paines. Play at bo-peepe, see me and see me not; It comes off well that is so closely got, And euermore say, aye? well fare the vent, That paies the charges of the house and rent. "Come, come, tis no matter, berul'd by this, "The finest Dames doth some times do amisse: "Yet walke demure, like Puritans indeed, "And early rise to a Sermon for a need; "And make great shew of deuoutest praier, "When she only goes to meete her louer,
"Turning backe, poore foole defires the text, "She tels him any thing that commeth next: "And turning o're the leafe to reade the verse, "Scarse for laughing, one word can rehearse: "But prettily turnes it off with some iest; "He beares with all, he knowes it is his best. "If that thy wife be old, thy Daughters yong, "And faire of face, and of a fluent tongue: "If by her sutors siluer may be had; "Beare with small faults, the good will help the bad. "Be not too seuere, time may mend their faults; "He is a foole before a cripple haults: "Or he that findes a fault where gaine comes in, "Tis pittie but his cheekes should e're looke thin: "What though thou know'st that vice do gaine it all; "Will vertue helpe, when thou begin'st to fall? "This is no world for vertuous men to thriue; "Tis worke enough to keepe thy selfe aliue. "Let Wife and Daughters loue to make thee wealthie; "Thou know'st that gold will seeke to make thee healthie. If thy Maid-seruants, be kinde hearted wenches; And closely make kinde bargins on the benches, "Let them haue libertie, loue and pleasure; "All these are helpes to bring in thy treasure: "Let them laugh and be merrie, it yeelds content; Theil'e humor all, till all their coyne is spent. If by their pleasures, may thy profit grow; Winke at a wanton, who hath not been so. Make loue to twentie wenches in one day; But let no poore lasse leade thy heart away, "For that's in vaine, thy labour then is lost; "Such idle loue, can neuer quit thy cost; "It brings a charge and sends a heauie clog, "And makes thy life, as seruile as a dog;
"From house to house, thou shalt be haunted then, "And cleane exempt, from the Loue of men. "A plague that's worse, shee's iealous euer-more: "This is the true course of a loue that's poore: "Or if by chance, her Husband wealth doth gaine, "Shee straight growes proude, which is a beastly vaine: "Thus wealth and ease, cannot with such agree; "Then let them passe my Sonne, be rul'de by me: But where thou find'st, good store of land or gold; There lay closely to purchase a free-hold. "Clap her a boord, and brauely hoise vp saile, "Shoot her in the poop, Duck haue at thy taile, "The prize is thine owne, thou hast got it faire, "Thou must be briefe then in getting an heire. And be not squemish, at a nice conceipt, That may perswade thee from a pleasing baite. "Stand not like a Woodcocke sneking in the cold, "But set it out, with a grace and be bold: "To make thy selfe simple, with shew of want, "Or that thy meanes at all, grow verie scant, "Godnight Nichole, thy friends will be packing; "Or by vilde disgrace, thy credit racking. "These are the pleasures of a poore estate, "Be rich then if thou can'st possibly hate, "Keep good clothes on thy backe, and neately weare them, "What want soeuer comes, do not pawne them: "For once being gotten in the Deuils iawes, "He will surely keepe them in with his pawes. "If thy Apparell be something clenly: "Though in thy purse thou hast neu'r a penny: "Men may in some measure yet esteeme thee "And a farther grace, happily giue thee. "Doe not seeme base, though penilesse thou art: "But looke about, of whom to get a part.
"Then make much of that, and keepe it closely; "Seeke for treasure, and keep it wisely: Get all contentment that the world can giue, For after death, who knoweth how we liue. Strange things are spoken, and beleeue the best, And leaue the worst, I leaue thee to the rest. "Stumble not at a straw, nor leape o're a block: "Leaue not things at randome, keep all vnder lock: "Things may be missing, but when tis gone, "It is a common speech that they saw none; "Be finding still, but let thy losse be small, "Yet haue respect vnto thy selfe with all. "Be not among'st Theeues, but when thou find'st them sharing: "Nor with a miserable wretch that's sparing. "Come not neere a Brothell house, for letchery, "Those damned Queanes are full of trecherie. "Part not a fray, except thou find'st great reason. "Go not ill shd in a winter season. "Be not to forwards to go in the raine, "Except it be for profit or thy gaine. "When sicknesse comes few friends are euer found; "Looke to thy selfe that thou be whole and sound, "And be not carelesse which way thou dost walke, "Nor care too much with idle braines to talke. Come not within the verdict of a Iury, Nor yet neere a Tyrant in his fury. "Giue faire words to the watch, the'il let thee passe; "Giue the Constable thankes, thinke him an Asse. "Promise mony when thou passest through the Gate; "But on my blessing neuer let him h'ate. "Beare with a Tapster, though his cans be frothie; "But raile on a Broker whose clothes are mothie. "Carmen and Porters are—approued, "And most Watermen are very dogged,
"Yet giue them faire words, if thou canst gaine them, "Else bid Deri—say Lord haue mercy on them. "What though thy Horse, by the Hostler is nipt, "It is a true Hostler, that hath not so been tript. "But to make him amends, run in his score "If thou pai'st him ile counsell thee no more, "Bailiffes and Seriants, keepe without their reach, "And without the verge of a priuie search. "Auoide warrants, they are dangerous things: "Looke to thy profit, that some comfort brings, Plot for a pudding or peece of souce: The slie Cat would not watch but for the Mouse. The Fox would neuer hunt, but for his prey? And work-men but for gaine, would play all day. It is this wealth, this profit and this gaine: That makes the Labourer sing away his paine. "It makes Widowes forget their Husbands lately dead, "It is the cause they so soone againe doe wed. "If thou wo'st a Widow, in time begin: "Or else thy woing is not worth a pin. "If thou be slow to speake, as one I knew, "Thou would'st assure thy selfe, my counsels true, "He (to late) finding her vpon her knees "In Church where yet her Husbands coorse she sees, "Hearing the Sermon at his funerall, "Longing to behold his buriall. "This Sutor being toucht, with inward loue; "Approched neere, his louely sute to moue, "Then stooping downe, he whispered in her eare "Saying he bore her loue as might appeare "In that so soone he shewed his loue vnto her, "Before any else did approach to woe her. "A lasse (saith she, your labour is in vaine "Last night a Husband, I did entertaine.
"Yet your kinde offer, I take in good part, "And had entertain'd you with all my heart, "If you had come, in any time vnto me, "But he at my Husbands death did woe me: "Then speake in time, if profit comes thereby, "Or else many dangers therein may lie. If thou be rich, and hat'st anothers pride: That he may go on foot, while thou do'st ride. Finde meanes to feed, his swelling humor so, That high conceit may aboue compasse go; Till Fortunes frownes, his folly so doth checke; That Male-content may after breake his necke. Then lay in for his Lands, his goods and place; But still be sure to keepe thy selfe in grace. "There are many rubs twixt thee and the Iacke, "Therefore throw home thy cast and be not slacke: "Yet out-throw it not, least thou loose the cast, "So Standers by will reioice at thy hast: "And betting say, that thou shalt loose the game, "Which is to thy disgrace and vtter shame. "Looke to thy selfe, thou be not wrong'd by any. "Promote thy selfe, though thou displace a many: But if thou be'st not vp, but seek'st to rise, Step by degrees, and in thy steps be wise: "Doe not desire to stride two staiers at once, "Diuers men will suffer thee for the nonce, "And will reioice to see thee breake thy shin, "Then thinke how men reioice when that they win: "Standers by, discerne more then gamsters can, "Disdaine not the kindnesse of any man. "Thou maist as easily, speake faire words as foule, not? "Be not a foole, when that thou makest the shot: "Foule words corrupt good manners it is said; "Of backe-biting slaues euer be affraide,
"Regard not their kindnesse, though it be great, "That shall hit thee in the teeth, with a meales meat: "Thinke him not true, that such basenes doth hold, "Who secrets in corners loues to vnfold. "Auoide them in time, their hate is much; "Yet they will seeme, as though they were not such: "And no doubt giue faire words vnto thy face; "Alasse, alasse, it is a heauie case. "Preuent them then, and care not for their hate, "It boots not to see the forme where she sate; "Haddie-wist comes to late, hold time before; "Runne not to deepe in thy Hostesses score: "Depart in time, when she the shot is making, "And faine some businesse at thy departing: "Tis good to offer to pay, when that thou hast it: "If once offered backe, looke that thou keep'st it, "And giue him thankes, vntill the next meeting: "Thus by degrees still thou must be getting. Refuse no seruice be it ne're so base: By any meanes may bring thee into grace, And make no conscience to attend on sin, To keepe the doore, where Deuils dance within, "Mong'st all kinde of people (for gaine) men thrust, "Loue no Iron blades they will but rust, "And turne the edge, when thou should'st vse them, "I prethee be wise, and learne to refuse them. Finde a rich Sier, and note his disposition, How he is giuen to basenesse or ambition; And with thy bending lay his Land aboord, That he may be thy slaue, thou his Lord. "Yet beare in hand as though thou wish't him good: "Ther's more waies then one, to goe to the wood. If that thy friend doe lacke a little wit, And in his humour frame an idle fit.
To take a Wife, and vse thee for his wooing, Speake for thy friend, but for thy selfe be doing: "If thou find'st her worth the catching take her, "If not, let thy friend be sure to haue her. For euery friend, is to his friend a debter: To loue him as himselfe, but not no better, But for thy selfe, if thou hast got a Wife; Make shew to loue her dearely as thy life. Though for thy quiet, thou could'st be content A little monie were at her buriall spent, And let that charge, be of thy griefe the ground, For many wiues, are better lost then found. "Take heed (my Son) how, and where thou do'st woe, "For Widowes are wanton, and Maidens too. "She that hath had many Husbands cannot loue, "She that ne're had none who knowes how she'l proue? "Great chance, but yong wenches are tried before, "And middle age, must needs pay the old score. "Old women hold out whiles a stumpe doth last, "Sweet meates to old folkes haue a gracious tast: "But if thou come vnto the second matching: Haue carefull heed, for feare of conicatching, Who in their hole, will vndermine so fast; The'ill leaue their Lordship like the Land of wast: "For many priuie banquets, must be had, "Which being known, would make a man starke mad. "They must haue pleasure, tut, let the world slide "Sit fast for falling, when thou mean'st to ride, "It is no iesting matter my friend, quoth he, "To ride a gauld Cut, Iaded thou shalt be, "Who will wince and kick, and lie in the dust, "Follow not an old Iade that loueth lust. "That is a plague that's worse then all the rest, "Though she be rich, yet her filth detest,
"Doe not delight, in an old gresie Slut "Whose loue is to fill a greedie gut. "She'll ne're be satisfied, vntill the earth; "Receiues her corps, and stoppeth vp her breath, Suspect thy will be wearie of thy will "Then learne to spare, but neuer learne to spill, Part with no coyne but vpon condition, With humble countenance shadow ambition, "Muffle thy selfe sometimes to keepe vnknowne "For by a knaue thou mai'st be ouerthrowne, "Take heede of the Counters, tis a great greefe "To lie in prison without releefe, "Be not a Pandor, for then thou art sham'd "Take heed of a wild Coult that's neuer tam'd "Yet of all these, if thou canst gaine by them "Haue eare vnto, but be not seene in them "Let simple wits carrie away the blame. "The reproch, the rumours and all the shame, "When thou with slie countenance mai'st be sure "Of some profit let them the paine indure, "Let all be done, with shew of humblenesse: "So shalt thou receiue profit with thankfulnesse. Creep, Crouch, and kneele, vntill thou be aloft. But then, sit fast, for feare thou fall not soft. "The stately Streames that kindly begins to flow "Affords content, in spight of whom sayes no, "The pleasant Spring, faire morn's of pleasure sends "And to each Creature pleasant gifts extends: "The louely Birdes, on branches sits still singing, "Reioicing at those stately flowers then springing, "But see how time turnes backe, and crosseth all "Those dates expir'd, begins a heauie fall, "Those flowing streams, that gaue that kind consent To ebbe is turned, and all their strength is spent.
"Those mornes of May, where Flora shin'd so bright "Are now forlorne, made darke by winters night, "Those Birds whose chearefull tunes did pleasure giue "Are now inforst to seeke them holes to liue, "Where mournfull tunes, records their heauie state. "That enuious time, hath altered thus their fate: "Beloulde in this, and all that's called pleasure, "How it is crost by times euill measure. "Who would seeme rich, although he hath store, "But closely keepe his treasure euermore. "And to himselfe, be euer such a friend: "That to himselfe he may his mony lend, "Be circumspect still, when thou art in grace, "Let not vaine toies, thy honour then disgrace. Be rich I say, nay Boy be rich, and wise: Gold is an actious mettle for the eyes, Why? rich men haue much mony and gay geare: And goodly houses, and most daintie cheare; Faire Wiues, fine pictures, plaies and morris-dances; And many cheates: that come by many chances. Fine Ciuet boxes, sweet perfumes, and waters, And twentie other such kinde of matters. While the poore man, that pines for want of friends: May sit and sigh, and picke his fingers ends, And euery morning wash his face with teares And wipe his blubberred cheekes with sheualed heares, "It is a heauie sence, where coyne is wanting "At such a time of care, friends are scanting, "When needie guests comes to a feast to dine "They must content themselues and drinke no Wine, "Small beere must suffice, aye? and say tis well, "Wine must be kept, for Diues going to Hell, "This slender care of pouertie is had: Which doth inforce them euer to be sad,
And walke abroad, for sorrowes recreation Or starue himselfe, or feed on contemplation: "Sorrowes companion, and all forlorne. "And of euery Creature held in scorne, "His head hanges downe, his armes lockt one in one: "To none but hilles and echoes make his mone. "Resounding care, a heauie dolefull breath. "No better pillow then his mother earth, "Speaking to the aire as to a friend: "That should his miserie some comfort send. Make cursie to the shadow of any food, And glad to get a looke or halfe a word, Blush and fall backe, when gaie folke comes in place And start to looke a Ladie in the face, Talke to the ayre, where no man list to heare him, Or plod alone, where no man will come neare him, "Dispaire is all his food to nourish bloud "A fearefull state, hard to be vnderstood "What grieuous hell is want affecting still: "A hungrie heart, a hungrie soule to kill, "What woe is want, where no man will releeue "A poore distressed soule that still doth grieue. And thus recording of a heauie care, He feeds perhaps vpon a hungrie fare, Till that some good Knight or learned Gentleman That will not be a Machauillian, But can make vse of afflicted braines. And gather profit from their toyling paines, May hap to grace him with his countenance Giue him a blew coate and a cognizance, An old cast doublet, or a paire of boots. Feed him with browne bread small beere hearbes and roots: And now and then perhaps a peece of meate, That scarce a man would giue a Dogge to eate.
Or after happily some good seruice done, Make him Tutor, to his yongest Sonne. Laugh at those Beggers, speake in scorne of pelse: Care thou for nothing but to inrich thy selfe. For truth reports, that dolts of thriftie intreat, If thou be rich, thou quickly mai'st be great, "Why? then thou shalt be sought vnto and praisd', "And many waies to dignities be raisd', "Thy name shall be extold by Poets Pen; "And brauely attended on by Seruing-men. "Bookes shall be dedicated to thy worth: "To aduance thy glorie, thy fame set forth. "Thou shalt be wise, and plac'st in Iustice to, "Though thou want will, all this thy wealth can do. "Thinke no man wise but he that gathers wealth, "And keep the diet that preserues the health. "Doe not with Gluttons feed, though they woe thee, "Nor with Drunkards vse, though they pay for thee, "If thou be with a Glutton at a feast, "He'll wish thee choked, if thou feed on the best, "And eye thee too, and thinke thou do'st him wrong. "To eat one bit, that to his chops belong, "Let Gluttons grease their dogs alone for thee "They are not for thy profit, take that of me, "Drunkards are vilde, but not so ill as those "Hee like a braue Bully cheares vp his nose "With a rich colour, set with pearles and stones, "Whiles Gluttons hungrie chaps make clean the bones. "He'll call his neighbour in, and make him drinke, "A Glutton like a beast, doth beastly stinke, "Of any ill, the least is to be chused: "Yet best of all, when all is quite refused "With good aduice, menage so thy doings: "That thou be not troubled much with loosings.
Trauell with ease, take heede of taking cold, And next to God take comfort in thy gold. Commit no secrets to thy second selfe▪ For neuer yet was Ape but plaide the Elfe: "To womens trust, t'is paine to trust vpon, "Greatest secrets, from them are soonest gone: "Their closets cannot hold a thing forbidden; "Yet desires to know a thing that's hidden: "Their nature's very weake, their frailties much; "Thei'l loue him very well that is exceeding rich. Set snares for Wodcocks, pitfales for small birds, And catch a foole with nothing but faire words. Kill not a flie and let a flea alone, That sucks the blood, and neuer hurts the bone. File not thy fingers with a filthie slut, And ride not often on a gald backt Cut. "Keepe not a Curre, that no good profit yeelds: "A lurching Dog will range about the fields. Feare not a shadow, but auoide a danger: And keepe not a Iade at racke and manger, "Which will quite eat thee out of house & home; "Thy selfe remaine a dunce, a very mome, "With ridiculous termes thou shalt be scoft, "Thy lodging cold, in the streetes very oft. Perswade no Prince, from his choice of pleasure, Nor a rich man from his loue of treasure. "For if thou with Monarkes meddle to farre; "It must perforce procure a mightie iarre, "Or if thou prie but neere a rich mans chest; To him thou shalt be an vnwelcome guest: But if he be rich, whatso'ere he be, Seeme in thine honour, to be iust as he. If he be poore, then let him beg alone, It is a trade that few grow rich vpon.
"The best Beggers are accounted idle; "Riding a stumbler, hold fast the bridle, "A Souldiers wants these daies hath seldome aide: "To follow warres it makes men much dismaide: "Though ventering life and goods, with losse of limmes: "What rich Domesticall a man esteemes, "At this returne, his worth though were so great; "Scarse giue a looke, or scarce a bit of meat, "If such worthy men shall want, deseruing this; "Looke not thou for comfort in distresse. "Keepe thou at home, as home-bred slaues do vse, "Whose cankered hearts, bright honor doth abuse, "And feede on fat, like Lubbers take their ease. "Let those that list attempt to crosse the Seas: "When Diues loue, is only in his wealth: "When toiling Lazers counted nought but filth: Greiuous vnto all horror t'is to see; "Delight in gold as these else shalt thou be. Learne to know Kingdomes, Nations, and their natures, Their lawes, their iudgements, Male and femall creatures, And how their wealth doth grow, by Warre or peace, And how their quarrels grew, and how they seace. How they may be offended or defended; And how their states begun, and which way ended; But in all noates, noate this of all, How thou mai'st rise, whoeuer hap to fall. "Let thy Religion be of what sort it will, "Be thou of that Sect, seeke to humour still. "Do not with a shamefa'st bashfulnesse do it: "But with a manly courage runne through it: "As if to such Sects, thou had'st beene euer bred, "By which meanes thou mai'st be the better fed. If thou hast a partner in thy stock, And both your wealthes, do rest vnder one lock:
And if thy partner ride abroad for pleasure, And put thy faith in trust with all his treasure: At his returne, doe vpon quarrels stand, When thou hast got his wealth into thy hand: Say in accounts, he hath deceiued thee Although thou know'st no such matter be: "Seeme exceeding earnest and speake aloud: "No maruell though of late you were so proud: "Must my purse needs be thus at your command? "Tis very true? you haue made a faire hand: "Thus raile at him that he may shame to heare thee: "Act it well, he may begin to feare thee: When if he will not take what thou wilt giue him; To course of law, for his best comfort driue him; Where whiles he railes on thy ill conscience, Thy patience closely will put vp his pence. "Raile thou still on his ill Husbandrie, "So men may thinke, he spent lasciuiously: "Commending thee that thou look'st to't in time "Raising on him abroad, a grieuous crime. But whatsoeuer honest mindes surmise, Wealth with the wealthy, makes the wealthy wise. Be rich therefore I say, be rich my Sonne For wealth will sway the world when all is done. "If these counsels will not make thee rich "Nor procure thy further profit small or much, "By preuenting mischiefes that may befall thee "What counsell then shall I farther giue thee, "The courses of the world, I shew thee plaine "As in a Mappe, all dangers to refraine, "Which had they beene in time foretold to me "I might auoided that which now I see, "Head strong youth in promotion cannot sit "Their fickle age hath many an idle fit.
"Following those humours that please them best, "Which is a hinderance to their quiet rest: "But things foretold, may easily be past. "It is not good to thrust things vp in hast, "Be happie then in learning of this good: "Want is the meanes that partes kind brother-hood. "Thou seest enough, if reason may suffice, "All is laid open heere before thine eyes, "As in a glasse thou rightly mai'st behold, "How thy state stands, if thou wantest gold: "Then on my blessing learne these rules of mine; "Another day surely it will be thine. FINIS.
THE ANSVVER TO MACHIAVELS vncasing. BVt now my Sonne, that thou hast learn'd this lore, Vpon my blessing looke on it no more, Except it be by ill to know the good: But yet take heede it be misunderstood. Be that thou seem'st to be in word and deed, Least pater noster put thee from thy Creed. Faire speech is good, but keepe not a foule minde, For hollow hearts are of a hellish kinde. "Backbiters and dissembling tongues are vilde, "From heauens happinesse by heauen exilde, "Against such horrid deeds is woe pronounc'd, "A wofull state from blessednesse renounc'd. A good beginning makes a blessed end, And hold him for a Dog that hath no friend, "His case is ill when no man will respect him, "But worst of all, when vertue doth neglect him, Receiue no bribes to fill a rustie chest, A quiet conscience is a kingly feast. "Content doth shine where vertuous men do dwell. "A vicious life deserueth nought but hell. "Labour not by vnlawfull meanes to gaine, "When meanes vnlawfull breeds a wofull paine. And t'is a heauie sence in sorrowes rowle, To saue the body, and to kill the soule.
Affect the wise, and with the learned talke, And with the learned often make a walke. "And such as thy companions shall be, "Euen such rewards shall be bestowed on thee. "Where grauitie remaines, there still resort, "Where modestie doth dwell, with such consort: "So shalt thou be, beloued still of all, No scandals then shall seeke to worke thy thrall. Remember nothing that thou dost not write, For danger doth but fearefull hearts affright: "And with charitie loue thy neighbour so, "That by no meanes thou seekst his ouerthrow: "Haue carefull eare, to euery man giue right, "Regard kinde words, in kindnesse haue delight; In honours cause maintaine thy reputation, And hold loue good for reasons recreation. Sooth no ill eares with idle flatterie, Honor the Bride, but do the Groome no rye. Performe thy word, but promise not too much, With rich and poore, be carefull to keepe touch. With great and small be sure to keepe measure, And scorne no trifle, that may do thee pleasure: "For he that scorneth much, deserueth hate, "An infamie that ne're expireth date; "Such long lasting euils (my Son) refraine, What losse so e're it be vnto thy gaine. Frequent the Church with faith and true deuotion, And do not step too fast into promotion; For farre more griefe is in a headlong fall, Then if thy care, had neuer climde at all. "Be content with such meanes that God doth send, "A patient heart doth gaine a happie end.
"Why should'st thou toile thy selfe for pelth, "When death ends all approaching still by stealth, "And crops the blossomes of our whole delight, "By winter stormes, by time and darksome night? "What bootest then to burthen thus thine age, "With heauie clogs, for which thy soule's at gage, "Where in woe and thraldome still remaining, "Except by Christ thou purchase thy redeeming. Be wisely kinde to euery qualitie, And euer keepe good hospitalitie. "A miserable house is vilde men say, "Ill gotten goods are quickly spent away: "Those that so neerely scrape their wealth together, "Another throwes it about, and cares not whether. At thy owne charge, keepe thy Horses stable, And seeke no banquet at a beggers table: For a true minde had rather starue then eat, Where Churles and seruants grudge a stranger meate. "Come not to a hungrie house for diet, "Where spies and teltales bring all out of quiet; "Rather for thy quiets sake, liue with bread, "Then mogst talemongers seeke to be fed. "What is thine owne to eate, none can grudge, "A backebiter must needes be a drudge, "Whose owne reports disgraceth him at last, "Cause he himselfe hath made the greatest wast. "Be free from this; great danger lies therein, "To men offence, to God a grieuous sinne. Iest not with Cowards, for they will but crie, And, as for Bawdes pitty their beggerie: "Lament the wofull state wherein they stand, "And rightly note, the poison in their hand;
"Which soone breakes foorth, and makes the body foule, "But teene times worse, it putrifies the soule. Arithmeticke is in euery trade, But true accounts are to be made: For when the last count reckning is cast vp, Then shall the craftie take their poysned cup, "And tast the iuyce of that they haue deserued, "For which deeds, by doome it is reserued: "Where no woe or horror shall be wanting, "Though gold to them on earth was not scanting. "Desire no gaine, where vice doth lead the ring, "It is a profit that thy paine doth bring. For Lions, Beares, Wolues, Apes, and Asses, Learne them to figure honors looking glasses, And haue a care to carry so thy selfe, No storme may driue thy ship vpon a shelfe. "Many dangers lies hid to thee vnknowne, "No corne comes vp sometimes where seede is sowne. "Enuious men sowes tares the Scripture saies, "A uoide them then and quite forsake their waies: "Let not earths pleasures lead thy heart away, "Which is transitory, will soone decay, "And still doth passe on earth, from hand to hand, "Neuer constant, nor neuer firme doth stand. Swallowes do feed on flies, but light they flie, Whiles Epicures in too much feeding die, "Wallowing in the sinke of sinnes filthinesse, "Loathsome to behold, o're growne with beastlines: "Spuing out the rankor of selfe delight, "Which hath bred a cankor of endlesse spight. By others harmes seeke not thy priuate good, A bloody feast, is an vnkindly foode.
And to dissemble loue is such an euill, As neerest shewes the nature of the Diuell, "To feede on blood a Murtherers delight, "If thou dissemble, thou yeelds no man right. "To gaine by others fall a curse growes on, "A heauie case when infants make their mone. "The widowes note is heard, reuenge she cries, "For those ill gotten goods, which made thee rise. To help thy friend, do not forbeare thy hand, And for thy credit, sell both goods and land: "For he that helpes his friend in time of neede, "It is in heauen inrold a friendly deede. "When that with truth of heart tis freindly done, "No deed on earth is like to that my Sonne, "Be constant still in friendship euermore, "And of a true friend make thy chiefest store, "What end wert thou inricht, with goods and lands, "But to the end thou shouldst be free from bands: "Respect it not aboue the heauens pleasure, "Which is the chiefest chiefe of all thy treasure. Denie no friend when he doth friendly craue it, For honest mindes will pay when that they haue it. "A small matter sometimes doth help so much, "That by such meanes a poore man may proue rich, "Which else might bring a man vnto despaire, "When for his helpe, he findeth naught but aire, "At wants instant, be helpfull euermore, "And God will-giue a blessing to thy store. "Be doing this, but doe not boast a whit, "For that dimmes all, and shewes thy lacke of wit: "Or how canst thou haue grace, for this thy good, "If thou backbitest in any angrie moode?
"Reporting this thy kindnesse done to any, "It is not worth a pin though nere so many, "And those that heare it will thinke thou mai'st lie, "When that thou whisperest things so priuilie. Let care of conscience guide thee euery way, To giue thee comfort on the holliday. "Prie not at all in trades to offer wrong, "Such basenesse vnto Rascals doth belong: "Those men deseruing it, are fit for gaine, "And fit'st of all to reape the pleasure of their paine; "The dead in peace doth rest, yet liue they may; "In endlesse comfort, and in endlesse ioy. "Kinde charity amongst men, and loue to all, "May make vs readie for this heauenly call: "That liuing here, we die to liue againe; "In heauenly blisse, euerlasting to remaine. And if thou be a Courtier know thy grace, And seeke in heauen to haue a dwelling place. And if on earth, such seruice profit brings, What shall he haue that serues the King of Kings? "Let vertues care, so guide thy conscience still, "Thou neerely looke to all, but none to ill; "What though the prouerbe old be proued true; "Or that some crosses on this earth ensue; "Or that the destinies doe frowne on thee, "Or that no rich reward will come neere thee? "Yet if thou be free from vices folly, "Thou art in heauen as pure a Saint as any. "Which is a Court, where thou shalt haue a place, "Where none shall seeke thine honor to deface. And if thou beest a scholler and canst preach, With simple truth thy simple audience teach:
"With feruencie of heart seeke to wooe them. "To Gods true knowledge, seeke still to bring them: "Be not carelesse of a charge so weightie; "Giuen thee by thy God Almightie. But feede thy flocke, thou hast in hand to keepe, Least that thou proue a wolfe vnto thy sheepe. Feeding on them, that should haue food from thee; "In bad estate their case is like to be. "Attempt not thou at all a labour so diuine, "Except thou canst this earthly state resigne; "And liue to loue thy God, thy flock, thy sheepe; "So will thy care be good thy flocke to keepe. But whatsoeuer heere be thine estate, There is none poore, but he that God doth hate, "Hee's poore indeed, his case of all is worst; "No ill so vile, of all ils most accurst. If that thou be a Souldier sucke no blood, To knightly mindes, vnknightly food; "With conscience let poore Souldiers haue their pay, "Then they will follow thee with loue and ioy: "But if too neerely thou dost pinch or poule, "It may be burdensome vnto thy soule, "And want of pay, is the death of many, "Yeeld them due, and neere accusd' for any. Of honors title, who doth truly hold, Shall finde it in mercie, not in gold. If that thou be a Lawyer iudge the right, And let no briberie blinde a blessed sight, For thou shalt finde it written in mercies roule, Better a thredbare gowne, then a thredbare soule. "Tis pittie that right should be ouercome, "Or pouertie to pleade to want a roome:
"Alas how heauie is their case in this, "For want of fees, a rightfull case to misse? "Yet haue (thou) some conscience, be rul'd by mee, "Pittie poore Sutors in necessitie. "Let not mightie men oppresse their right, "Nor ouerthrow their states by power and might. "In doing this, thou shalt haue double fee, "A heauenly Paradice thy reward shall bee. "Besides on earth thy fame shall spread abroad, "What curtesie to poore thou did'st afford, "This cannot chuse, but bring thee into grace, "And by desert obtaine a higher place, "The law is iust, on reason wisely grounded, "Wanting it our state is soone confounded. And if thou be a Marchant, know thy cares, And do not wound thy conscience with thy wares, Least in repentance all too late thou finde, The gaine is lost that feedes a greedie minde. "What bootes thy toile and trafficke on the Seas, "Thy hazard of life, disturbing of thine ease, "Thy boisterous blasts, and stormes so cold, "Which thou indur'st, thy selfe by time made old, "Thy riches, when happy returnes are made, "Those pretious pearles, whose colours neuer vade, "When that thy conscience shall be working so "How thou maist worke thy brothers woe, "By thy ill wares, trusted at such a rate, "By which meanes his paiment oft proues late. "Then to suit of law thy conscience cries, "Hee's in a heauie case in such danger lies. "But far more worse is thine in time to come, "When that thou dost cast vp the totall summe.
"When all deceiptfull gaines to losse shall turne, "Where vicious pleasures shall haue time to mourne. "A measure in gaine with Quiet truly got, "Is a perfect treasure that faileth not. "For truth: light gaines doth make a heauie purse, "Vnconscionable gaines a heauie curse. "Then take thy choice, but wisely chuse the best: "Corrupted hearts euermore detest, "Their wares are braide, yet fairely shewes to th'eye; "But he that's rotten at the heart must die. In briefe of what estate so ere thou be, Let truth and conscience euer gouerne thee. Let Clownes clap on their clowted shooes, Seeke thou no earthly gaines the heauen to loose. Let garments fit thy body, not thy minde, And to thy friend, as to thy selfe prooue kinde, "Looke so wisely to euery action, "That it may be thy soules satisfaction. "And doe not seeke to rise by others fals, "Be well prepared when the Angell cals; "Doe not thou stand on rich mens fauours here, "But loue thy Christ, his loue is passing deare; "And make the winde serue to a good intent, "And know to what end thy riches are sent. "Hoyse vp saile to heauens happinesse, "Where thou shalt arriue with great blessednesse; "There thou mai'st be welcome though wanting gold: "And not by earthly wants thy ioyes controld: "No pouertie shall part thee from that societie, "But bring thee to thy ioyes eternitie: "Though wealth doth die the colour here in graine, "In heauen t'is held most base in great disdaine.
"Phisitians and Lawyers are men of fame, "And experience doth auer the same; "Whose labors doth deserue their proper gaine, "No patient can be cur'de without some paine, "If thou dost learne diseases and their cures; "Be carefull what thy patient endures: "Haue due respect vnto thy cures and be free, "From corrupted thoughts, then happie shalt thou bee. "Delay no cures, but doe thy best for ease, "Which both thy patient, and thy God doth please: "Pittie the heauie cares of those in paine, "And be not too greedy to seeke thy gaine: "Let measure guide thy hand in all thy deeds, "Thinke on the greeued heart with paine that bleeds. "Thinke vpon his case, say that it were thine, "How hard it were, for want of helpe to pine. "Learne no vnlawfull games thy state to raise, "That by deceipt may profit thee any waies, "What though thou shift it from the gamsters eye? "It is beheld by him that sits on high: "He doth behold your dealings euery way, "How securely so ere you thinke you play. "Goods gotten by deceipt, is quickly gone, "By getting so, better nere get none: "But rather well to keep thine owne first learne, "The better how to gaine thou mai'st descerne, "What though this vicious gaine, so vainely got, "With plentie seemes to replenish the pot? "It is but a feast, or sport that's passing away, "And the least crosse of all brings it to decay. All Cards and dice, and all such idle play; From thy delight, discard and cast away:
For deale or rub, whose hap so ere it be to haue The knaue of Clubs will euer be a Knaue. Flatter no Mistris Fubs, or Ione a nods Nor honor golden calues nor wodden gods: Nor puffe a pesant vp with rascall pride, A rascall will but like a begger ride. Be carefull of the words that thou dost talke, "And be not desirous with a Knaue to walke: "Be carefull how thou dost thy secrets disclose, "Backbiters are full of wrong thou mai'st suppose: "Doe not with the Letcher seeme to reioyce, "It is but a loathsome and hatefull voice: "But rather perswade them from their follie, "And from the loue of a deed so vnholie. "Do not with spend-thrifts smile at pouertie, "Least thou thy selfe come to necessitie. "Doe not with Epicures reioice and say, "With meaner fare thou couldst not well away. "Nor do not triumph ouer simple wits, "And lament the state of those franzie fits. "Doe not by any meanes learne to deceiue, "That will but vertue from thy conscience driue, "And disanull-thee of thy quiet rest, "Exceeding ioyes, of all things else is best. Aime at no profit with a poisned breath, Left it be paid thee in the second death. "Though conscience here be poore and meanly clad, "No meanes but from the Baggers to be had; "Yet time shall come, it shall be well respected, "When prodigalitie shall be neglected. "There shall she finde a house adorn'd with state, "When Diues repents but all too late.
"There shall she finde fine and daintie cheare, "When Gluttons in horror shall appeare, "Her raiment then shall be euerlasting, "When her foes their bitter cup are tasting; "Then let conscience gouerne thy state aright, "That thou mai'st behold this euerlasting sight. An honest minde in euery trade doth well, The winde blowes ill that blowes the soule to hell. "Doe not before the Diuell a candle hold, "Seeke no corrupt meanes for siluer or gold. If that thy Wife be faire, be thou not foule, To let her play the Ape, and thou the Owle. "Winke at no faults, it is but miserie, "By bestiall meanes to releeue necessitie; "If thou be a Husband gouerne so thy Wife, "That her peeuish meanes worke not thy strife; "Giue her not too much law, to run before, "Too much boldnesse doth bring thy ouerthrow: "Yet abridge her not too much by any meane, "But let her still be thy companion. And to thy Daughter proue a better Sire, Then like a hacknie let her out to hire. "What a greiuous case were this for thee, "To extoll thy selfe to prosperitie, "By such insatiat meanes, a heauie sense, "Deseruing nought but hell for recompence. "Like a kinde father loue thy children deare, "Yet to outward view let not loue appeare, "Least too boldly they presuming on thy loue, "By audacious meanes doe audacious proue, "Seeme not a companion in any case To thy children, learne them know who's in place;
"That due obedience to thee be done, "The end must needs be good, that's well begonne. "Thus may thy children be at thy command, "With willing heart, still helpfull at thy hand, "Familiarity contempt doth breed. "By no meanes do thou stoope vnto thy seede: "While the twig is yong, bend it as thou list, "Once being growne, they'll stubbornely resist; "Caring not for parents nor their talking, "Commending their owne wits, age is doting. "Looke well to youth, and how their time is spent, "Least thou by leasure afterwards repent: "What though thy childe grow rich, thy selfe grow poore, "Wilt thou afford him reuerence therefore? "Imperfection to thine age that doth show: "Let children expresse what duty they owe, "And not be blinded with a selfe conceipt; "To wise men hate, to fooles a pleasing bait. "Let thy care be great, for Childrens good, "It is a charge that's hardly vnderstood: "Vse no corrections in an angrie vaine, "Which will but vexe thee much, increase thy paine: "And rashnesse euermore repentance cries, "Giue due correction, therein be wise: "The griefe is thine, when children goe astray: "Giue them not too much libertie to play, "Least that they doe to a custome bring it; "And euer after forbeare to leaue it. "Vrge not with violence thy childrens woe, "As cruell parents many times doe so; "Which to despaire may careleslie driue them, "When that their care doth carelesly leaue them,
"To run at randome shifting as they may, "Alas, it is a heauie case I say. "Let not children vrge their parents vnto ire, "But with duty do what they shall require. "With obedient hearts obedience show, "Such true obedience to them you owe. "Thinke it not a trifle to forbeare it, "When Gods commandement doth require it. "A blessing great, besides he hath reserued, "Whose dutie hath this due deserued. "Honor thy parents, long may be thy daies, "Happie in all, and blessed are thy waies. "Be not stubborne at all, it breeds disdaine, "That which they forbid thee that refraine. "This is the course, that thou their loue mai'st haue. "Wise parents, childrens hurt will neuer craue. "But with fatherly care admonish them so, "That selfe conceipt, worke not thy ouerthrow: "Which now adaies doth raigne too much in all, "No maruell then so many youth doe fall, "When parents counsell is thus reiected, "And their hourely care so much neglected. "Salomon saies, smile not on thy daughter, "Least thou repent it euer after. "Then to sonnes and daughters let care be such, "That thou and they in vertue may be rich. "Seeme not to laugh at any vnseemly iest, "A meane in all, in all is euer best. "And for thy seruants, let no Belly swell, "A baudie house is but an earthly hell. "Keepe not an eye seruant within thy doore, "Which will but seeke to vexe thee euermore.
"And scoffingly answere with taunting words, "A beastly tricke is all a Iade affords. "If that thou find'st a tell tale in thine house, "Be watching still as a Cat for a Mouse. "Such seruants can neuer be true nor iust, "Who backbites in secret, such neuer trust. "Much discord by such is bred oft times, "When most themselues deserueth greatest crimes. "Be not familiar with seruants in any case, "But let them with dutie respect their place. "Giue but an inch, they'll quickly take an ell, "A wise tale to a foole, tis vaine to tell. In Law and Phisicke haue a conscience, In making gaine of thy experience. Least that thy Clients crie and Patients death, Doe make thee crie out in the hell beneath. "Where grieuous horrors shall still affright thee. "Let vertues loue euermore delight thee. "Which is a gaine sufficient for thy store, "A perfect ioy delightfull euermore. By wicked plots doe not proule for pelfe, Let thy soules care be neerest to thy selfe. "So shall all thy waies prosper and be free, "From thraldome want and great necessitie. "No woe shall once approch where vertue shines, "What needes thou care, though vicious men repines. "Their blasts as bubbles, soone doth passe away, "Themselues in little time comes to decay. "If thou be rich abandon wicked pride, And doe not on the horse of Enuie ride, "Least he carry thee with an easie way, "Vnto thy ouerthrow and great decay,
Seeke not the well-deseruing to disgrace, Nor put the vertuous spirit out of place. And sooth no humors in an euill minde, For poisned breath is of a poisned kinde: And though to hurt a few to hurt a manie, Be good, yet better not the hurt of any. "What bootes small gaines when greater losse doth fall? "By such measure, seeke not to get at all. "Be patient and wise in extremity, "Thou mai'st the sooner come to prosperitie. "As gentle dewes, kindly cause flowers to spring, "Patience gaines content, though misery be long. "Let truth in euery thing be thy companion, "And vice ore thee shall neuer get dominion: "Thou hast a bulwarke that defends thee, "And a trustie friend that treasure lends thee: If that thy friend doe trust thee with his loue, Vnto his trust doe not a Traitor proue; Least he that seeth thy ill gotten treasure, Do pay thee home with an euill meaten measure: "Though thy gaines be small and trauell great, "Thou art certaine to come to iudgement seat, "To receiue a guerdon due to thy deeds, "A blessed food, that blessed creatures feeds: "Neuer wanting but still possest with store, "Which makes thee rich, though seeming ne're so poore, Be faithfull to thy Wife, firme to thy friend, And constant in Religion to the end. "Doe not humor euery Sect for priuate gaine, "It is a greiuous sinne, a greeuous paine; "Against the holy Ghost a sinfull deed, "Then vse it not, what euer be thy need:
"Religion is sacred pure diuine, "It is a heauenly map, a heauenly signe. "It is that burning lampe that shines so bright, "Being with truth receiued, a true delight. "Seeke not thou to depraue religious truth, "Least thou increase thy paine and endlesse ruth. "For chiefest learning thereon is grounded, "And all errors from thence quite confounded. Be rich and wise, in this good wit my boy, That death nor hell, nor Diuell can destroy. "Let thy chiefest pleasure be to seeke that gaine, "That afterwards may neuer turne to paine. "Who so, but for the present time doth care, "Oft times is inforst to be poore and beare, "And when those present pleasures past and gone "As much the nere, if he had ne're seene none. "Then Time to accompt doth call that folly, "Checking him for all those deeds vnholy. "How he his time, so loosely spent in vaine, "Which being spent, can ne're be had againe. "Then with ifts and ands he begins to say, "Had I knowne this, fore time had past away, I had preuented that which now I finde, But time is past, and thou tookst hold behinde. "Where nought remaines but a scull death portraiture, "(As Time doth passe,) it is of all most sure. "To spend this precious time it is a woe, "Without regarding how the houres do goe. "When time makes full the houres of times accompt, "Asking how much the totall doth amount. "Then all ill times by time vntimely spent; "Shall by that time, haue time then to repent.
"But all too late, sith time was once refus'd, "And time so deerely lost, so much abus'd. "The date is out, 'tis true: the Clocke hath strooke, "Time kindly offered all when all forsooke. "This gem of worth most pretious is to youth. "But their selfe-wils hates knowledge of the truth, "Which should bring their tender age vnto blisse, "The right way to that perfect happinesse. "Which would shew then how they should spend the day, "With due respect, how to spend the time away; "Not by idlenesse, or foolish fansies, "Subiect to many vicious mischances. "Which luls their age with pleasure fast asleepe, "Such pleasures they were better loose then keepe. "Tell thou the Clocke, as houres doth passe away, "And thinke how time doth turne all flesh to clay. Serue God, thy King, be to thy countrie true, Liue till thou diest, then bid the world adue. "But liue in that sort, that thou diest with fame, "That after death men giue thee a good name. "Which as Cronicles may last for euer, "In liuing thus thy life endeth neuer. "Ifto thy King thou prouest vntrue, vniust, "Who will afterwards giue thee any trust? "Then to thy Prince, giue due obedience, "And to thy betters seemly reuerence. "So shall thy fame on earth be had in store, "And heauenly blessings giuen thee euermore. "Ifto Countrie thou hast a tretchers heart, "Thy words are worse then a deepe venom'd dart. "Swine eates the flowers, then nusles vp the roote, "And none but beastly mindes will surely doo't.
"Or offer to spoile that, by which they'r bred, "Or betray the Country, in which they'r bred. "How manifest it is, of such mens liues, "How their courses euermore basely thriues. "Some themselues vntimely death doth bring, "Others, in griefe of conscience still mourning. "Some wandring heere, some there in wofull griefe, "Others pining in streetes, and wants releife. "Some starke mad doth run, quite distract of all, "Others, in vaine, for comfort out doth call. "Some, in forraine Countries desires a place, "But gnawing conscience brings them to disgrace. "Some with audacious face doth faine excuse, "But God cries vengeance gainst so vilde abuse. "Some to Magistrates will sue for fauour, "But poysned hearts doth of poyson sauour. "And all that to such vildnesse bends their courses, "Are left comfortlesse without remorses. Machiauels rules let Machiauels read, Loue to thy God, his spirit be thy speede. "His loue is richer then siluer or gold, "His home is Paradice the surest hold. "His promise is sure, for euer iust, "And t'is the surest hope that thou canst trust. "Thy Ancor being cast vpon that shore, "Thy cable will hold fast for euermore. "Loue not the world, to leaue true vertues loue, "Least to thy destruction, it after proue. "The worlds loue, is but faire fansies flower, "Though seeming rich, yet wanting richest power. Taxe no mans name in any euill matter, But like a Christian pray for euery creature.
"Charitably wishing well to men, "The like rewards shall come to thee againe. "Let no mans name at all be wrong'd by thee, "The worsest euill, euer thine will be. "When infamies thou raisest on thy brother, "Be sure, gainst thee thou shalt receiue none other. "Such measure as thou meatest to thee is giuen, "He liues vprightly that keeps all euen. "But by good indeauour it may be gain'd, "Hate Vice, the only meanes it is obtain'd. "To be free from euill speech, a Christians care, "Be a louer of Vertue, Vice forbeare. Be sorrie for the euill thou hast done, And go on with the good thou hast begunne. "A heart that's penitent true comfort findes, "To finde remorse, the heauenly Lawes it bindes. "If thou beginnest any good, then proceed, "Thou shalt finde it to be a blessed deed. Pray for thy faith, that it may faile thee neuer, So if thou diest, yet shalt thou liue for euer. "Then shalt thou be brough to vertues pallace, "To receiue the true comfort of thy solace. "And for thy paine thou didst indure heere, "Thou euermore shalt finde a plenteous yeere. "Where neither hunger cold nor any want, "Shall hinder ioyes, or make thy pleasures scant. "This is the benefit of a vertuous life, "This is true vertues force, to end all strife. "This is vertues garden full of flowers, "Though on earth she had many pinching houres. "This is vertues path, rightly leades to blisse, "This is vertues gift, his friends doth neuer misse.
"This is vertues harbor voide of cares, "This is vertues bountie who neuer spares, "This is vertues pallace, adorn'd with state, "This is vertues gift, neuer comes too late, "This is vertues Parke, infoulds her Deare, "This is vertues care, who will not loose a haire, "This is vertues armes, incircling round, "This is vertue, which now her right hath found, "This is vertues walkes, whose aire's euer sweete, "This is vertue her friends doth kindly greete, "This is vertues Citty, whose gates are fast "Gainst all that of her name made spoile or wast, "This is vertues banket house, feeding all, "This is vertue that heares the poore mans call, "This is vertue that lou'd her parents kind, "This is vertue that loue to all resign'd, "This is vertue, releeuing friends in want, "This is vertue whose loue was neuer scant, "To any one that pouertie did respect, "Who neuer will such kindnesse once reiect, "But kindly seeke, such kindnesse to requite, "And all her friends shall haue their due and right, "No cankered churles shall seeke to crosse her of her will "But in her place, she remaines as Empresse still. "Then seeke (my Son) to serue this Goddesse pure diuine, "Be houerly offring gifts vnto her sacred Shrine, "Doe not leaue her seruice, for the worlds treasure, "Esteeme her paine aboue the chiefest pleasure, "Her paines are short, her ioyes for euer lasting, "Her loue is deare, her hate to sorrowes hasting, "With reuerence (my childe) kneele for her grace, "Sue by petition in any case.
"And neuer rest till thou hast got her fauour, "And it will be double worth thy labour; "For thou such a Mistris shalt haue of her: "That for her seruants good none comes neere her: "She giues her Seruants old good meanes to liue, "When Vice her seruants out of doores doth driue, "She helps her Seruants in sicknesse and in health, "On such preferments she bestowes her wealth. "Then be true Seruant to such a Mistris, "Who at all times with willing heart releeues distresse. "Be mindefull of my words, giuen out of loue, "And happy to thy Father thou wilt proue. "What in the beginning I did declare, "Was but to shew thee what vaine courses are, "That by the knowledge of them thou mightst beware "How thou art caught in any vicious snare. "Make vse of them, and wrest them to the best, "And thou shalt finde it yeelds thee quiet rest. "By any meanes do not to vaine humours grow, "Least that it quickly seeke thy ouerthrow. "Yeeld praise to God, in his Lawes seeke to liue, "And at his pleasure he will all things fitting giue. "If thou find'st any thing written heere "That may to thy comfort any way appeare, "T'is all that I craue, or heart requireth, "Who only for thy chiefest good desireth. "If thankes thou wilt bestow thou seemest kinde, "If vnthankfull, thou hast a churlish minde, "Sith all my labour is only for thy good, "Desiring that it be well vnderstood: "Which if thou doest, thou shalt be still my Sonne, "Be true of heart what misery soeuer come.
"First to God giue praise, to Prince and Country true, "Thy Parents reuerence, and so my Sonne adue. "Machiauels rules deny, yet vse them as thy pleasure, "False hearted friends defie, in all haue equall measure. "Vse all these to good intent, and boldly say, "Thou maist with Vertue, euermore keepe holiday. FINIS.
