6444 99848713 13825
DEAT DANCE. To be sung to a pleasant new tune, cal Oh no, no, no, not yet, or, the meddow brow. If Death would come and shew his face, as he dare shew his power, And sit at many a rich mans place, both euery day and houre. He would amaze them euery one, to sée him standing there, And wish that soone he would be gone, from all their dwellings faire. Or if that Death would take the paines, so goe to the water side, Where Merchauts purchase golden gains to pranke them vp in pride. And bid them thinke vpon the poore, or else Ile sée you soone, There would be giuen then at their doore, good almes, both night and noone. Or walke into the Royall-Exchange, when euery man is there, No doubt his comming would be strange, to put them all in feare. How they do worldly buy and sell, to make their markets good, Their dealings all would prosper well, if so the matter stood. Or if Death would take the paines, to go to Pauls one day, To talke with such as there remaines, to walke and not to pray. Of life they would take lasting Lease, though nere so great a Fine, What is not that, but some would giue, to set them vp a Shrine. If Death would go to Westminster, to walke about the Hall, And make himselfe a Counseller, in pleas amongst them all. I thinke the Court of Conscience, would haue a great regard, When Death should come with diligence, to haue their matters heard. For Death hath béen a Checker man, not many yéeares agoe, And he is such a one as can, bestow his checking so. That neuer a Clarke within the Hall. can argue so his case, But Death can ouerrule them all, in euery Court and place. If Death would kéepe a tipling house, where Roysters do resort, And take the cap, and drinke, carowse, when they are in their sport. And briefly say, my Masters all, why stand you idle here, I bring to you Saint Gibs his bowle, twold put them all in feare. If Death would make a step to dance, where lusty Gallants be, Or take Dice, and throw a chance, when he doth gamesters sée. And say, my Masters, Haue at all, I warrant it will be mine. They would in amazement fall, to set him any Coyne, If Death would Gossip now and then, amongst the crabbed Wiues, That taunts and railes at their good men, to make them weary lines. It would amaze them, I might say, so spightfully to boast: That they will beare the swing and sway, and ouer-rule the roast. If Death would quarterly but come, amongst the Landlords crue, And take a count of euery sum, that rises more than dee. As well of Income, as of Fine, aboue the old set Rent. They would let Leases Without Coyne, for feare they should be shent. If Death would take his dayly course, where Tradesmen sell their Ware, His welcome sure would be ma worse, then those of monyes bare, It would affright them for to sée, his leane and hollow lookes, If Death should say, come shew to me, my reckoning in your bookes. If Death would thorow the Markets trace where Conscience vs'd to dwell, And take but there a Hucksters place, he might do wondrous well. High prizes would abated be, and nothing sound too deare, When Death should call, Come buy of me, would put them all in feare. If Death would prooue Gentleman, and come to court our Dames, And do the best of all he can, to blazon forth their names. Yet should he little welcomes haue, amongst so fayre a crew, That daily go so fine and braue, when they his face do view. Or if he would but walke about, our City Suburbs round, There would be giuen him out of doubt full many a golden pound. To spare our wanton femall crew, and giue them longer day: But Death will grant no Leases new, but take them all away. For Death hath promised to come, and come he will indeed, Therefore I warne you all and some, beware and take good héed. For what you do, or what you be, hée's sure to find and know you, Though he be blind, and cannot see, in earth he will bestow you. FINIS. Printed at London for H. Gosson.
