7888 99847284 12313
By the Queene. WHereas by diuerse and sundrie proclamations heeretofore pu∣blished, set forth and proclaimed, in the time of the excellent Prin∣cesse Queene Mary, late of famous memorie, restraint was giuen and made, that no Shippes, Crayres, Uessels, Shipmasters, Ma∣riners or sea-faring men whatsoeuer, of this Realme of England, or the Teritories of the same, should without speciall licence first obtained and had, vnder the great Seale of Thadmiraltie, passe vnto the Seas, either on ventring, marchandizes, or otherwise, or should by any wayes or meanes misuse, euill intreat, robbe, spoile or hurt any subiect of this Realme or Stranger, being friend with the said late Queenes Maiestie, vnder certaine penalties and paines in the foresaid proclamations expressed and contained: Which procla∣mations, are by reason of the said Queenes highnesse death determined, and of no force. The Queenes Maiestie being presently enformed, that sithens the same, diuerse & sundry her highnesse subiects of this Realme, going vnto the seas (aswell vnder licence as without) by color & pretence to represse, apprehend, & annoy the enemie without regarde of dueties be∣longing to good subiects, haue inuaded, spoiled, iniured and robbed, aswell her Highnes sub∣iects as Strangers, being friends and alied to her Maiestie, contrary to her Highnes expec∣tation, and the good league and amitie of friends. Her Highnesse therefore minding the re∣dresse and reformation of the premisses, doeth by this her Maiesties proclamation expressely charge and command, that from hencefoorth no subiect of this her Highnes Realme whatso∣euer, other then such as haue alreadie obtained and gotten licence vnder the seale of her Ma∣iesties court of Thadmiraltie, vpon paine of confiscation and forefeyture of their shippes and goods, and of imprisonment of their bodies, & indignation of her Highnes, do by any wayes or meanes attempt to set forth vnto the Seas, any ship or vessel, either on warfare, marchan∣dize or otherwise, without speciall licence and grant be first obtained vnder the saide great Seale of her Maiesties high court of Thadmiraltie. And that no person or persons aforesaid vnder the like paines, do presume or attempt to spoile, robbe, euill entreate, or hurt any of her Highnes said subiects being at the Seas, nor any other strangers, being friendes confede∣rates, and in league with her Maiestie, their ships or goods, by any wayes or meanes. And furthermore, her Maiestie doeth straightly and expressely charge and command, all Uiceadmirals, Maiors, Sheriffes, Bailiffes, & other head officers and gouernours of Cities, Counties, Boroughs, Townes & Places, by the Sea coastes of her Highnes said Realme of England and Wales, that euery of them all respects set apart, and as they tender her Maie∣sties fauor, do effectually foresee that this her Maiesties proclamation, may be with all expe∣dition duely published, and also truely obeyed, kept and obserued, as euery of them will an∣swere for the contrarie at his extreme perill. Yeuen at Strond place the xxi. day of Decem∣ber, the first yeare of our reigne. God saue the Queene. ¶ Imprinted at London by RICHARD IVGGE, Printer vnto the Queenes Maiestie. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
