8044 99847596 12635
¶The fourme of the Proclama∣tions to be published in the port townes, and market townes, or other publique places, within the limittes of the Commission geuen by the Queenes Maiestie, the first of March, 1571. to sundry persons of credite, for reformation of disorders vpon the sea coastes. THe Queenes Maiestie doth strayghtly charge and com∣maunde al the Sea Rouers, commonly called Frebut∣ters, of what nation or countrey so euer they be, to de∣part, and auoyde all her hyghnes Portes, Rodes, and Townes, with all speede, and hereafter not to returne to any of the same agayne, vpon payne of forfayture of their shippes and goodes, and imprisonment of their bodies at her Maiesties pleasure. And that no subiect of her Maiestie, nor any other inhabitant of this Realme, do sende or conuey any victuales, munitions, or other necessaries to them, or any of them, or by any wayes or meanes, directly, or indirectly, do traffique with them, or buy any wares, marchandizes, or other thynges of them, vpon payne of death. And her Maiesties pleasure is, that yf any shall do to the contrary in any place, the chiefe officer of the Towne or Port suffryng the same, shalbe committed to pry∣son, to remayne at her hyghnes pleasure, or her Counsel: and yf the Towne be in∣corporate, the same shalbe seased to her Maiesties handes. And whosoeuer shalbe manifestly conuicted to offende, after the proclamation hereof, in the premisses, shall therefore suffer Marshal lawe, as a manifest breaker of the common peace betwixt this Realme, and other Realmes and Countreys. Finally, yf any of her Maiesties subiectes, seruyng with any of the sayd Frebut∣ters, do forsake and auoyde from such seruice, within fyue dayes after knowledge had hereof, they shall haue pardon of their lyues for their former offences. And yf they shal refuse to returne, or not obey the same, they shal suffer death by Marshal lawe, as afore is sayde for the lyke consyderations God saue the Queene. Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde, by Richarde Iugge, and Iohn Cawood, printers to the Queenes Maiestie. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
